THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES. (Revised up to 2nd July 1898.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 8 annas.] 1898.
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND RULES. (Revised up to 2nd July 1898.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1898.
?CONTENTS. PART I.                     PAGE Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897..      ..    ..    ..           5 Government of India, Home Department Notification conferring  powers on Local Governments (No. 302, dated 4th February 1897).   7 Original Mufassal Regulations for District Municipalities and Towns  and Villages (Notification,* No. 897, Fort St. George Gazette, dated  18th December 1897)  ...........            8 Regulations for the City of Madras (Notification,* No. 898, Fort St.  George Gazette, dated 18th December 1897)         22 Additional Mufassal Regulations for District Municipalities and  Towns and Villages (Notification, * No. 169, Fort St. George Gazette,  dated 1st March 1898) ..............           30 Regulations for the Inspection of Inward-bound Vessels (Notifi-  cation,* No. 163, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 31st August 1897).   46 Regulations for the Inspection of Outward-bound Vessels (Notifi-  cation,* No. 181, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd November 1897).   55  PART II.  Rules under the District Municipalities Act, 1884, for combating  plague in Municipalities (Notification,* No. 185, Fort St. George  Gazette, dated 16th March 1897)     ..........         61 Resolution of the Government of India in the Home Department,  Sanitary, No. 227-240, dated 3rd February 1898, and G.O.,  No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898   .........        71 Instructions regarding construction and equipment of Plague Hos-  pitals and Plague Camps             97 Important Rulings              113  N.B.-The Regulations under the Epidemic Diseases Act are quoted by the date of the Fort St. George Gazette in which they were published.  * As amended by subsequent Notifications,
?PART I. EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. ACT No. III OF 1897. PASSED   BY   THE   GOVERNOR-GENERAL   OF  INDIA   IN COUNCIL. (Received the assent of His Excellency the Governor General on the 4th February 1897.) An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Short title, extent and commencement. 1. (1) This Act  may be called  the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897; (2)  It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3)  It shall come into force at once. Power  to  take  special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2. (1) When at any time the Governor-General in Council is satisfied that India or any part there- of is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including compensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe regulations for-
6 (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of per- sons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty. 3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under XLV of section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. 1860. Protection to persons acting under Act. 4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be done under this Act.
?7 (Government of India, Home Department Notification No. 302, dated 4th February 1897.) GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT NOTIFICATION CONFERRING POWERS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, is pleased to direct that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised by Local Governments with regard to their respective terri- tories as follows:- (a) All the said powers by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal and Chief Commissioner of Burma. * * * *
?8 (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897, and Notifi- cation No. 897, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 18th December 1897, Part I, pages 1583-1589.) ORIGINAL MUFASSAL REGULATIONS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897, FOR DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES AND TOWNS AND VILLAGES. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and the Presi- dency of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease, His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, by the Governor-General in Council, is pleased to prescribe, under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, the following revised Regulations to be observed in the district municipalities con- stituted under the District Municipalities Act, 1884, and in other towns and villages in the Presidency:- 1. In every district municipality and every town or village, every householder and every medical practitioner practising therein who becomes cognizant of any case of the bubonic plague or of fever with glandular swellings in his house or in any other private dwelling within the limits of the municipality, town or village, shall be bound to give information of the same, with the least practicable delay, in the municipality to the Chairman of the Council and the medical officer in charge of the municipal dispensary or hospital, and in a town or village, not being a municipality, to the officer in charge of the nearest police station, who shall report the fact at once to the Magis- trate in charge of the division. Every householder and every keeper or person in charge of an hotel, chuttram or other place of public resort, shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at the house, hotel, chuttram or other place, of any person from any area which has been notified by the Governor in Council or the Collector to be infected. The Chairman or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall forthwith send information to the Collector of the district of the occurrence of any such case. 2. On the requisition of the Collector, and to the extent to which he may determine, a Municipal Council or a District Board, if it has not already made the provision, shall provide
?9 and maintain in such localities, which, in the case of a munici- pality, may be within or without the municipal limits, as in the opinion of the District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or a medical officer deputed by him, may be proper for the purpose, suitable and sufficient accommodation to the satisfaction of such medical officer, for the isolation and treatment of persons suffer- ing or suspected to be suffering from the plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, and also accommodation for their detention until they shall be certified by the medical officer in charge to be free from infection. In the places so provided, the Municipal Council or the District Board, as the case may be, shall furnish such hospital establishments, equipment and supplies as the District Collector may determine, and shall also make arrangements for feeding persons detained under the powers conferred by any of the Regulations made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, on payment by them of the cost; but in the case of indigent persons, the Municipal Council or the District Board, as the case may be, shall supply them with food free of charge: provided that any person so detained may cater for himself subject to such rules and conditions as the medical officer in charge may prescribe. The Municipal Council or Dis- trict Board, as the case may be, shall, on like requisition and in like manner and subject to like approval, provide accommoda- tion for persons who may be required to vacate any building or ground under the Regulations set out below numbered 4, 5 and 6, and who may be unable to procure necessary accommodation for themselves. Explanation.-Any certificate given under this Regulation should contain an accurate description of the person named in it to prevent, so far as possible, its being used by another person. 3. When, in any building or place within a municipality, town or village, there is a person suffering or suspected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, or believed to have recently arrived from an infected area, the Collector or any officer appointed by him, generally or specially in this behalf, may enter and inspect such person and building or place, and either- (a) remove such person to one of the places of accom- modation provided under the preceding Regulation 2, and in such place or in some other place so 2
10 provided to which at the discretion of the medical officer in charge he may from time to time be removed, there detain and treat him until he shall be certified by the said medical officer to be free from infection, or (b) take measures for segregating and detaining such person in his own house or in some other suitable place, if, in the opinion of the medical officer in charge, the person can be there treated with no greater risk of spreading the infection, than if he were removed to a place provided under the pre- ceding Regulation 2. Provided that no person segregated or detained under this Regulation shall leave the place of segregation or deten- tion except with the written permission of the officer in charge, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition. 4. Any building or place which is required for and is, in the opinion of the District Medical and Sanitary Officer or the medical officer deputed by him in this behalf, suitable for the purpose of the accommodation to be provided under Regulation 2, may be entered upon and occupied by the Municipal Council or the President of the District Board, as the case may be, or a person deputed by him in this behalf (if untenanted without any notice whatsoever, and if tenanted after twenty-four hours' notice in writing conspicuously posted on such house or build- ing) and may be used for the purposes of the accommodation under Regulation 2; and the owner or the lessee of such building or place shall not be entitled to anything beyond a reasonable rent for the period during which the ground or building may remain in the occupation of the Municipal Council or the Col- lector and President of the District Board, as the case may be: provided that the Municipal Council or the Collector and Presi- dent of the District Board, as the case may be, shall be bound at the cost of the Municipality or the District Board, as the case may be, thoroughly to cleanse and disinfect the ground or building and, if a building, to whitewash it internally and externally before vacating it. 5. When any building or place is, in the opinion of the Collector or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf, so overcrowded as to make the inmates or occupiers specially liable to an attack of the bubonic plague, the Collector or officer authorized as aforesaid may, by a notice posted on some conspicuous part of the building or place, require the owner or occupier, if actually residing in the building or
11 place, or the tenants or the actual occupants thereof, to abate, as prescribed in the notice, the overcrowding within twenty-four hours by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or other occupants of the said building or place, and, in default of compliance with the requisition in the said notice, may sum- marily eject all the inmates or occupants, or reduce the number of the same in such manner and to such extent as may appear necessary; and the owner or occupier or the tenants or the inmates of such building or place shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of such ejection. 6. When a building or place has, in the opinion of an officer appointed in this behalf, been so infected with the plague as to render its further occupation a source of danger to the inmates thereof, the Collector or an officer generally or specially author- ized by him in writing in this behalf may summarily cause such building or place to be vacated and thoroughly cleansed and disinfected; and the said officer may cause the inmates of such building or place to be detained and segregated in such place as he may appoint for a period not exceeding ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague among such persons; and the building or place shall not be re-occupied until, in the opinion of such medical officer, it is safe to be re-occupied. In like manner, if it appears to the said officer that, in view of the prevalence of the plague within his jurisdiction, any building within such jurisdiction, intended or used as a dwell- ing, is in so insanitary a condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may summarily cause the same to be vacated, and prohibit, by a written order, the further use of such building as a dwelling. After such prohibition no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives written permission in this behalf. The owner or the occupier or the tenants or actual inmates or occupants of any building or place dealt with under this Regulation shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of anything done thereunder. 7. The Municipal Council or the Collector, and President of the District Board, as the case may be, shall provide suitable conveyances for the free carriage, to a place provided under Regulation 2, of persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering, from the plague, and for the transport of any clothing, bedding or other articles which have been exposed to infection. 8. If it shall appear to the Collector or an officer deputed by him in this behalf that the water in any well, tank or other
12 place is likely, if used for drinking, to engender or to cause the spread of the plague, he may by public notice prohibit the removal or use of the said water. 9. If the Collector of the district or an officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, the Collector or such officer as aforesaid may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is con- structed; and the Chairman of the Municipal Council or the President of the District Board, as the case may be, may in his discretion grant compensation, but no person shall be entitled to claim it of right, for any loss or damage caused by reason of such destruction, out of the Municipal fund constituted under Madras Act IV of 1884 or the Local fund constituted under Madras Act V of 1884, as the case may be. 10.  No owner, driver or person in charge of a public con- veyance shall carry any person suffering from the plague; nor shall any person suffering from the disease enter a  public conveyance. 11.  No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has been suffering from the plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected to the satis- faction of the medical officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf. 12.  The Collector or an officer generally or specially author- ized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he considers necessary, enter upon  any  premises,  whether  situated in a municipality or not, at any time during daylight and summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in sections 186, 220, 221 and 228 of the District Municipalities Act, 1884, or sections 99 and 101 of the Local Boards Act, 1884. 13.  The Collector of the district may, in his discretion, order the disinfection or destruction of any collection of rags in rag-pickers' houses and rag-stores or of second-hand gunny- bags imported from any part of India infected by the plague; and no person shall be entitled to claim compensation for any loss or damage sustained by him by reason of the disinfection or destruction of such articles under the powers conferred by this Regulation. The Collector of  the district  may also, by  an  order  in writing, authorize generally or specially any Magistrate or any
13 Chairman of a Municipal Council to exercise the power of disinfection vested in the Collector of the district by this Regulation. 14. At or near any railway station appointed by notifica- tion in the Fort St. George Gazette as an inspection station, any medical officer appointed in this behalf may detain any train and may require any person travelling therein to alight and submit himself to medical examination as the medical officer may direct, and may for this purpose, with the assistance, if necessary, of the police, using such reasonable force as may be required, detain such passenger either on the railway premises or in some other suitable place which the Collector shall, if necessary, provide at the expense of the Municipal or Local fund, as the case may be; and, if the said person is suffering from or suspected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, the medical officer may deal with him under the preceding Regulation 3. Any such medical officer or person acting under his imme- diate orders may also demand of any person so travelling, his name, his usual abode and particulars of the places in which he has resided or which he has visited during the preceding fifteen days, and also the address to which he is about to proceed, and any other particulars which the medical officer may think fit, in view of satisfying himself as to the likelihood of the said person's spreading the infection of the plague. A person so interrogated shall be bound to answer truly to the best of his knowledge and belief all such questions and enquiries. If any such person is found to have, within the preceding ten days, been within a part of India believed by such medical officer to be infected by the plague, and is unable to satisfy such officer that he is proceeding to any fixed place of residence, such officer may remove him, or cause him to be removed, to a place provided under Regulation 2, and may there cause him to be detained for ten days, when, if he is certified free from the in- fection of the plague, he shall be permitted to depart therefrom. 14-A. If the place at which an inspection is held under Regulation 3 be a railway station, and if no suitable accommo- dation for plague cases has been provided in the neighbourhood of such station, the officer making the inspection may require that a passenger who is found to be suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, the plague, or to have so lately suffered therefrom as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an
?14 infectious state, be carried on by the railway administration in a railway compartment vacated for the purpose to the nearest inspection station or other place where such accommodation is available. 15. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any Regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such Regula- tion, has been required or empowered to take under any such Regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either descrip- tion for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both. 16. The inspecting medical officer at an inspection station notified under Regulation 14 may require any passenger who may have been medically inspected to deliver up his ticket in order that some mark indicative of his having been inspected may be impressed thereon; and such passenger shall be bound to deliver it up accordingly. * 17-i. Every person arriving from any place declared to be infected with plague shall, before leaving the railway station at which he has alighted, or before disembarking from the steamer, ship or boat in which he has travelled, or in the case of arrival by road either immediately on reaching a Road Frontier Inspection Station or within twelve hours from the time of arrival at any other place, obtain from the officer men- tioned in Regulation 17-ii a passport binding him to present himself for daily inspection for the next ten days before the local authority of the town or village where he may be; and he shall be bound so to present himself. Provided that, where it appears desirable, the Municipal Chairman or any Revenue officer not below the grade of Deputy Tahsildar may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence. Explanation.-By a "local authority" is meant any of the following officers:- (a) The local medical officer; (b) The station-house officer; (c) The headman of the village. * As revised by G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898; and Notification No. 444, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 27th May 1898, Part I-A, page 137.
?15 In places where there is more than one local authority, the duties prescribed in these rules shall be performed by, or with the permission of the Collector under the orders of, the officer who stands first in the order given in this explanation. 17-ii. The following officers are authorized to issue pass- ports:-  (a) To travellers alighting at rail- way inspection stations.          {The medical officer in charge   or other officer acting under his orders. (b) To travellers alighting at rail- way stations included within municipal limits. {Such Medical, Sanitary or  other officer as may be appointed by the   Chairman   with the Col lector's approval. (c) To travellers alighting at other railway stations. {The Stationmaster or other officer appointed by the Collector for the purpose. (d) To travellers arriving by steamer, ship or boat. {The Medical, Sanitary   or other officer appointed to examine (e) To travellers arriving by road.    {The medical, Sanitary or the other officer appointed to examine such travelers, or, if no such officer has been appointed, the local authority of the place arrival.    17-iii. Every person so arriving from a plague-infected place shall declare truly his name, address, and such other parti- culars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport and shall report forthwith to the local authority any change in his place of residence occurring within ten days from the date of arrival. On the expiry of ten days, he shall deliver up his passport to the local authority of the place where he may then be. 17-iv. The issue of a passport, or any change in the residence of the person to whom it has been granted, shall immediately be communicated by the officer issuing it (in the former case) or by the local authority (in the latter case) to the Municipal Chairman or the Local Authority of the place of destination.* If the local authority of the place of destination is not known, the intimation shall be sent to the Tahsildar concerned for transmission to the local officer by whom the traveller has to be observed. The communication may be made by a post card, or by a special messenger, or in any other manner which the Collectors concerned may determine. The telegraph need be used only in urgent cases. * This rule applies whether the place of destination is in British or Mysore territory.
?16 Intimation of departure to   any  railway station  in the Province of Mysore shall, however, be telegraphed to the- (a) Assistant Surgeon on plague duty, Yesvantpur, when the destination is a station on the Mysore State Railway; (b) Residency Surgeon, Bangalore, when the destina- tion is a station within Mysore Province on the Madras Railway. 17-v. The local authority of the place of destination shall see that, on the arrival of the traveller, he is observed daily for ten days. Any case of illness or death in the house in which such traveller is or has been residing shall be forthwith reported to the immediate superior of the local authority with full details. After ten days the passport shall be recovered from the traveller and sent to the Tahsildar. Any officer of the Revenue Department, not below the rank of Deputy Tahsildar, may require that the person or the clothing and other effects of the traveller shall be disinfected in such manner as may be ordered by the Collector. 17-vi. The headman of every village shall keep himself promptly informed of the arrival of every person from an infected area without a passport and shall deal with him as in the preceding clauses of this Regulation to which such person shall be bound to submit himself. 17-vii. A register shall be maintained by each local authority in the following form:- (1)  Date of receipt of intimation. (2)  Name of traveller. (3)  From what infected area arriving. (4)  Date of arrival of traveller. (5)  Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6)  How long kept under observation. (7)   State of health of the traveller and other persons living in the house in which he is or has been residing. (8)  Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9)  Destination. (10)  Date of intimation of departure to the local authority of the place of destination. (11)  Date of despatch of the passport to the Tahsildar. 17-viii. In the case of persons passing through a Railway Frontier Inspection Station, the medical officer in charge shall arrange to record the following information in respect to every traveller from an infected area, who is not detained by him under the provisions of Regulation 14 and to send it without delay-if possible by the railway guard of the same
?17 or next train-to the District Medical and Sanitary Officer of the district * to which such traveller is proceeding:- (1) Date of arrival. (2) Name of traveller. (3) Father's name. (4) Caste. (5) Age. (6) Whence coming. District. Taluk. (7) Destination and residence during  Village. the next ten days.                      Street. Number or name of the    owner of the house. 17-ix. In the case of other persons coming from an infected area, the duty of recording the above information and communicating it to the District Medical and Sanitary Officer shall devolve on the officer issuing the passport. 17-x. The District Medical and Sanitary Officer shall forward the report referred to in Regulation 17-viii and ix to the Tahsildar concerned, whose duty it shall be to see that the persons therein mentioned are duly observed, and that any case of sickness or death in the houses occupied by them is promptly reported, and to bring to the Collector's notice all instances of omission to issue passports or attempts to evade this Regulation. 17-xi. Whenever the deaths reported from any village are found to be more frequent than usual, or when any case of fever with glandular swellings is reported, the Tahsildar with the nearest Medical officer shall at once proceed to the village and make inquiries with a view to ascertain whether plague exists in the village. 17-xii. In municipalities, the Tahsildar's duties under this Regulation shall be performed by the Municipal, Chairman. The term "Tahsildar" includes Deputy Tahsildar. 18. If a passenger from any railway station referred to in the last preceding Regulation appears to be attempting to evade inspection at an inspection station by alighting at a station short of that for which his ticket has been taken, the station- master or railway official in charge shall insist on his continuing his journey as far as the inspection station, either by the same or the next following train, and may, with the assistance of the police, take all such steps as may be necessary to compel him to do so. * Whether in British or Mysore territory. 3
?18 19. Any such passenger alighting at a railway station short of an inspection station, who from his being unable to show any business at the place of alighting appears to have so alighted for the purpose of evading examination at such inspection station, may be detained by the stationmaster at the railway station at which he has alighted and be forwarded by the same or the next train to the inspection station. The railway fare of the person so detained and forwarded to the inspection station shall be paid by the passenger and, if not paid, shall be recovered from him by the railway authorities as excess fare. * 20. When any carriage from the Bombay Presidency or from any infected area is detached from a train at any railway station in the Madras Presidency, it shall be disinfected or ventilated in the following manner as soon as possible and before it is again brought into use:- Third and intermediate class carriages- The interior wood-work of the carriages, especially the floors and seats, shall be thoroughly washed with a solution of perchloride of mercury (1 in 1,000) or with a carbolic acid solution (a wine-glassful to a gallon) applied with a mop; the doors and windows shall be opened, and the vehicle exposed to the air. First and second class carriages- The floors and wood-work shall be treated as above, the cushions being also brushed and thoroughly cleaned. * 20-A. Any railway carriage from which a passenger who is suffering or suspected to be suffering from the plague has been removed shall be detached at the nearest convenient station, and shall be disinfected as follows:- (i) The carriages, after being detached from the train, should be thoroughly washed with soft soap and lime-water. After an interval of two to three hours, this should be washed off with plain water, and then the following disinfecting solution should be thoroughly sprayed all over the interior as well as the exterior of the carriages by means of a syringe:- Corrosive sublimate ...... 1/2 oz. Hydrochloric acid  ... 1 " Water ........... .  ... 3 gallons. This solution should be allowed to dry on the car- riages. Special care must be taken to direct the solution into all the cracks and crevices and jilmills. * As amended by G.O., No. 73-P., dated 22nd February 1898; and Notification No. 170, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 1st March 1898, Part I.A, pages 63 and 64.
19 (ii) After disinfection, the carriages should be kept out in the open for 48 hours. They can then be brought into use again. (iii) In the case of first and second class carriages, which afford greater facilities than third-class compartments for the harbouring of plague germs, it will be necessary, if the carriages are contaminated, to burn the cushions and to disinfect the wood-work in the manner indicated above, and repaint the interior. (iv) Any compartment in which a suspicious case has travelled should be sprayed with the above disinfecting solu- tion before being allowed to proceed. 21. The clothing, bedding and personal effects of all persons detained or segregated under Regulation 3, or removed under Regulation 14 to a place provided under Regulation 2, shall be thoroughly disinfected and may, at the discretion of the medical officer in charge of the place of detention or segregation, be destroyed. The Collector of the district may, in his discretion, at the cost of Local or Municipal funds, award compensation for articles destroyed; but no person shall be entitled as of right to recover any compensation by way of damages or otherwise for the destruction or disinfection of any article dealt with as above. Where the clothes or bedding of a traveller shall have been destroyed as hereinbefore provided, the medical officer may, if the person is poor, arrange for providing other necessary articles in their place, the cost of the same being intimated to the Collector of the district who shall debit it to Local or Municipal funds at his discretion. 21-A. The District Collector or any officer appointed by him either generally or specially in this behalf, or the medical officer in charge of a railway inspection station, may take any measures that he may deem necessary for the disinfection of the clothing of any person found within the limits of his jurisdiction, who, in the opinion of the said officer, is likely to have been infected, or of any articles likely in the opinion of the said officer to carry infection, which are in the possession of such person; and such person shall be bound to submit to such measures, and he may, if necessary, be detained until such measures are taken. 22. The Collector of a district may, in case of emergency or to save delay, provide for the execution of any work or the doing of any act which a District Board or municipality is empowered or required to execute or to do in accordance with these Regulations, and the immediate execution or the doing of
?20 which is in the said Collector's opinion necessary for the service or the safety of the public, and may charge the expense of executing the work or doing the act to the Local Board or municipality concerned. 23. The Collector is empowered to direct the evacuation of houses in the neighbourhood of an infected house or of a block of houses or a particular locality, and to prohibit re-occupation of such houses or locality without permission. The Collector shall give notice for such period as he may deem necessary, and shall provide temporary accommodation for those removed from the houses evacuated. The Collector may require the evicted persons to reside in any place which he may appoint, under such restrictions as he may deem necessary, for a period not exceeding ten days, after which, provided no further sickness has occurred, any one who wishes to depart may, after necessary precautions, be allowed to depart. 24. The Collector of the district or any officer specially authorized by him in this behalf is empowered to close places used for the supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in infected localities or in the immediate neighbour- hood of infected houses, and to direct the removal of all articles of food and drink found in such places. 25. (1) The Collector of the district, when and to the extent he may deem necessary, may make Regulations- (a) for prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the grave-yard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes; * (b) for enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth. (2) He may also prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose. (3) When a person dies of the plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it for the funeral. Such persons shall disinfect themselves accord- ing to the orders which may be issued by the Collector in this behalf. * As amended by G.O., No. 429.P., dated 4th May 1898; and Notification No. 377, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th May 1898, Part I-A, page 124.
21 26. A canal boat shall be subject to all the Regulations applicable to buildings; and passengers by a canal boat shall be subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the same manner as passengers by railway. In order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague either by or to a canal boat, the Collector of the district or any officer generally or specially empowered by him in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. 27. The Collector of the district may prescribe that no dhobies within an infected area to which he may extend this Regulation shall wash clothes except at such places and at such times and under such conditions as may be prescribed. 28. No person employed to do duty in any capacity at a place set apart for the accommodation, examination, isolation, detention or treatment of persons suffering, or suspected to be suffering from the plague or to be infectious, shall withdraw from the duties of his office without permission, or without having given one month's previous notice in writing to the officer under whom he is serving, or shall neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. 29. Officers specially appointed by the District Collector for this purpose are authorized to prevent the passage of suspicious persons from or into, as the case may be, any town, village or local area to which this rule may be applied by the Govern- ment, unless such persons have been detained in a place of observation for a period prescribed by the Government, and, if arrangements for disinfection of their clothing, baggage, &c., have been made under the Collector's orders, unless such dis- infection has been effected. Such officers shall have the widest discretionary power, subject to the general or special orders of the District Collector, to decide what person shall be considered 'suspicious' for the purposes of this rule. So long as he remains in a place of observation under this rule no person shall be allowed to communicate, except with the permission of the said officers, with persons outside the limits of the place. He shall obey such orders as may be issued by the plague authority for the cleanliness or protection from infection of the persons, property or quarters of the persons detained. 30. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these rules a pass or certificate is granted to any person or persons to enable him or them to go from one place to another or for any purpose, such pass or certificate shall not be used by any other person or persons or for any other purpose.
?22 (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897, and Notifica- tion No. 898, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 18th December 1897, Part I, pages 1589-1593.) REGULATIONS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897, FOR THE CITY OF MADRAS. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and the Presidency of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease, His Excellency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council, in exercise of the powers dele- gated to him under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, by the Governor-General in Council, is pleased to prescribe under the said Epidemic Diseases Act the following revised Regulations to be observed in the City of Madras:- 1. Every house-holder who becomes cognizant of any case of the bubonic plague or of fever with glandular swellings in his house or in any other private dwelling within the municipal limits of the City of Madras, or of the arrival thereat of any person from any area which has been notified by the Govern- ment or the President of the Municipal Commission to be infected, shall be bound forthwith to give information of the same to the Health Officer or a Sanitary Inspector of the municipality. Every house-holder and every keeper or person in charge of an hotel, chuttram or other place of public resort shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at the house, hotel, chuttram or other place, of any person from any area which has been notified by the Governor in Council or the Collector to be infected. 2. The President of the Municipal Commission or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any pre- mises at any time during daylight and summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections 313, 314, 321, 322, 326 or 327 of the City of Madras Municipal Act, 1884. 3. When in the opinion of the Health Officer of the munici- pality and of a medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, of the Surgeon of the district, any building or place is so overcrowded as to make the
?23 inmates or occupants thereof specially liable to an attack of the bubonic plague, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, by notice posted on some conspicuous part of the building or place, require the owner or occupier, if actually residing in the build- ing or place, or the tenants or the actual inmates thereof, to abate as prescribed in the notice the overcrowding within twenty-four hours by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or inmates of the said building or place; and in default of compliance with the requisition in the said notice may sum- marily eject all the inmates or occupants, or reduce the number of inmates or occupants in such manner and to such extent as may appear necessary; and the owner or the tenants or the inmates of such building or place shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of such ejection. 4. When any building or place has, in the opinion of the Health Officer of the municipality, been so infected with the plague as to render its further occupation a source of danger to the inmates, tenants or occupants thereof, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may summarily cause such building or place to be vacated and thoroughly cleansed and disinfected; and the said officer may cause the inmates of such building or place to be detained and segregated in such place as he may appoint for a period not exceeding ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague among such persons; and the building or place shall not be re-occupied until, in the opinion of the Health Officer, it is safe to be re-occupied; and the owner or occupier or the tenants or the inmates thereof shall not be entitled to claim any compensation on account of anything done under this Regulation. In like manner if it appears to the said officer that, in view of the prevalence of the plague within his jurisdiction, any building within such jurisdiction, intended or used as a dwell- ing, is in so insanitary a condition as to be unfit for human habitation, he may summarily cause the same to be vacated and prohibit by a written order the further use of such build- ing as a dwelling. After such prohibition no owner or occupier of such building shall use or suffer the same to be used for human habitation until the said officer gives written permission in this behalf. 5. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has been suffering from the plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every
?24 article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected to the satisfaction of the medical officer appointed by the President in this behalf. 6. If, in the opinion of the Health Officer and of a medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, of the Surgeon of the district, the destruc- tion of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of the plague, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and of the materials of which it is constructed; and the President may, in his discretion, give compensation, but no person shall be entitled to claim it of right, at the expense of the Municipal fund constituted under Madras Act I of 1884 for any loss or damage caused by reason of such destruction. 7. The President may, in his discretion, disinfect or destroy any collection of rags in rag-pickers' houses and rag stores, or of second-hand gunny-bags imported from any part of India infected by the plague; and no person shall be entitled to claim compensation for any loss or damage sustained by him by reason of the disinfection or destruction of any such articles under the powers conferred by this Regulation. 7-A. The President of the Municipal Commission or any officer appointed by him either generally or specially in this behalf, or the medical officer in charge of railway inspection station may take any measures that he may deem necessary for the disinfection of the clothing of any person found within the limits of his jurisdiction, who, in the opinion of the said officer, is likely to have been infected, or of any articles likely in the opinion of the said officer to carry infection, which are in the possession of such person; and such person shall be bound to submit to such measures and he may, if necessary, be detained until such measures are taken. 8. The Municipal Commissioners shall provide and maintain in such localities, whether within or without the municipal limits, as in the opinion of the Health Officer of the munici- pality may be proper for the purpose, suitable and sufficient accommodation as approved by the Health Officer and by a medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, by the Surgeon of the district, for the isolation and treatment of persons suffering from or suspected to be suffering from the plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, and for their detention until they shall be
25 certified to be free from infection. In the places so provided, the Municipal Commissioners shall furnish such hospital establishments, equipment and supplies as the Health Officer may require, and shall also make arrangements for feeding persons detained under any of the Regulations now prescribed, on payment by them of the cost; but in the case of indigent persons the Commissioners shall supply them with food free of charge: provided that any person so detained may cater for himself subject to such rules and conditions as the Health Officer may prescribe. The Municipal Commissioners shall also in like manner and subject to like approval provide accommodation for persons who may be required to vacate any building or ground under the preceding Regulations Nos. 3 and 4, and who may be unable to procure necessary accommodation for themselves. Explanation.-Any certificate given under this Regulation should contain an accurate description of the person named in it to prevent so far as possible its being used by another person. 9. Any building or place, whether within or without the municipal limits, which is in the opinion of the Health Officer and of a medical officer deputed by the Surgeon-General or, in the absence of any such officer, of the Surgeon of the district, suitable and required for the purpose of the accommodation to be provided under Regulation 8, may be entered upon and occupied by the Municipal Commissioners (if untenanted with- out any notice whatsoever and if tenanted after twenty-four hours' notice in writing conspicuously posted on such building or place) and used for the purposes of the accommodation under Regulation 8 as aforesaid; and the owner or the lessee of such building or place shall not be entitled to claim from the Municipal Commissioners anything beyond a reasonable rent for the period during which the building or place may remain in their occupation: provided always the Municipal Commissioners shall be bound at their own cost to cleanse and disinfect the said building or place and, if a building, to whitewash it both internally and externally before vacating it. 10. The Municipal Commissioners shall provide suitable conveyances for the free carriage of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from or infected by the plague, and for the transport of any clothing, bedding or other articles which may have been exposed to infection. 11. When in any building or place there is a person suffering or suspected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an 4
?26 infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, or believed to have recently arrived from an infected area, the President or any officer generally or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf may enter and inspect such person or building or place, and either- (a) remove such person to one of the places of accom- modation provided under Regulation 8, and in such place or in some other place so provided to which, at the discretion of the Health Officer, he may from time to time be removed, there detain and treat him until he shall be certified by the medi- cal officer in charge of the place to be free from infection, or (b) take measures for segregating and detaining such person in his own house or in some other suitable place, if, in the opinion of the Health Officer, the said person can be there treated with no greater risk of spreading the infection than would arise if he were removed to a place provided under Regulation 8. Provided that no person segregated or detained under this Regulation shall leave the place of segregation or detention except with the written permission of the officer in charge, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition. 12. At or near the railway station of Perambr any medical officer appointed either generally or specially by the President of the municipality in this behalf may detain any train and may require any person travelling therein to alight and sub- mit himself to medical examination as the medical officer may direct, and may for this purpose, with the assistance if neces- sary of the police, using such reasonable force as may be required, detain such passenger either on the railway pre- mises or in some other suitable place which the President shall, if necessary, provide at the expense of the Municipal Fund; and if the said person is found to be suffering from or is sus- pected to be suffering from the bubonic plague, or to have so lately suffered from the plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely from recent contact with plague cases to have been infected or to be in an infectious state, the medical officer may deal with him under Regulation 11. Any such medical officer or other officer generally or specially appointed by the President in this behalf may also demand of
?27 any person so travelling his name, his usual abode and parti- culars of the places in which he has resided or which he has visited during the preceding fifteen days, and also the address to which he is about to proceed and any other particulars which the medical or other officer may think fit in view of satisfying himself as to the likelihood of the said person's spreading the infection of the plague. A person so interrogated shall be bound to answer truly to the best of his knowledge and belief all such questions and inquiries. If any such person is found to have within the preceding ten days been within a part of India believed by such medical or other officer to be infected by the plague, and is unable to satisfy such officer that he is proceeding to any fixed place of residence, such officer may remove him or cause him to be removed to a place provided under Regulation 8, and may there cause him to be detained for ten days when, if he is certified free from the infection of the plague, he shall be permitted to depart therefrom. 13. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any Regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such Regula- tion, has been required or empowered to take under any such Regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment of either descrip- tion for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both. 14. The President of the Municipal Commission is em- powered to direct the evacuation of houses in the neighbourhood of an infected house or of a block of houses or a particular locality, and to prohibit re-occupation of such houses or locality without permission. The President shall give notice for such period as he may deem necessary, and shall provide temporary accommodation for those removed from the houses evacuated. The President may require the evicted persons to reside in any place which he may appoint under such restrictions as he may deem necessary for a period not exceeding ten days, after which, provided no further sickness has occurred, any one who wishes to depart may, after necessary precautions, be allowed to depart. 15. The President of the Municipal Commission or any officer specially authorized by him in this behalf is empowered
28 to close places used for the supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in infected localities or in the immediate neighbourhood of infected houses, and to direct the removal of all articles of food and drink found in such places. 16. (1) The President of the Municipal Commission, when and to the extent he may deem necessary, may make Regula- tions- (a) for prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the grave-yard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes; * (b) for enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth. (2) He may also prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose. (3) When a person dies of the plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it for the funeral. Such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders which may be issued by the President of the Municipal Commission in this behalf. 17. A canal boat shall be subject to all the Regulations applicable to buildings; and passengers by a canal boat shall be subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the same manner as passengers by railway. In order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague either by or to a canal boat, the President of the Municipal Commission or any officer generally or specially empowered by him in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. 18. The President of the Municipal Commission may, in order to prevent the spread of the infection of the plague, prescribe that no dhobies shall wash clothes except at such * As amended by G.O., No. 429-P., dated 4th May 1898; and Notification No. 377, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th May 1898, Part I-A, page 124.
29 places and at such times and under such conditions as may be prescribed. 19. No person employed to do duty in any capacity at a place set apart for the accommodation, examination, isolation, detention or treatment of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from the plague or to be infectious, shall withdraw from the duties of his office without permission, or without having given one month's previous notice in writing to the officer under whom he is serving, or shall neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. 20. When, in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these rules, a pass or certificate is granted to any person or persons to enable him or them to go from one place to another or for any purpose, such pass or certificate shall not be used by any other person or persons or for any other purpose.
30 (G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898; and Notification No. 169, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 1st March 1898, Part I-A, pages 55-64.) ADDITIONAL MUFASSAL REGULATIONS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897, FOR DIS- TRICT MUNICIPALITIES AND TOWNS AND VILLAGES. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and the Presidency of Madras is threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as bubonic plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease, His Excellency the Gov- ernor of Fort St. George in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, by the Governor-General in Council, is pleased to prescribe, under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, the following Additional Regulations to be observed in the district municipalities constituted under the District Municipalities Act, 1884, and in other towns and villages in the Presidency:- PART I.-MEASURES PRELIMINARY TO THE ACTUAL OCCURRENCE OF PLAGUE. 1. Should it appear that plague imminently threatens to attack any district, Government may declare such district or part of it to be Under Observation. 2. Thereupon the Collector shall establish Frontier In- spection Stations; arrange Observation Circles; organise Sanitary and Cordon Staffs, &c.; and strengthen and train his district establishment; and may require certificates of the causes of death. Frontier Inspection Stations. 3. These shall be established as near as may be to the frontier on roads and at railway stations. 4. At each Frontier Inspection Station shall be erected a sufficient number of sheds for hospital and observation pur- poses; and disinfectants and stores shall be maintained. 5. All persons shall be allowed to pass freely except- (a) those suspected of plague, (b) those suspected of arriving from an infected locality.
?31 * Throughout, the word Tahsildar includes Deputy Tahsildar.  (a) All persons suspected of plague, with their families and attendants, shall be detained, information being urgently sent to the nearest revenue officer of or above the grade of Tahsildar * and the nearest medical officer. Such officers shall inform the District Medical and Sanitary Officer, and proceed to the spot to aid in effecting isolation and disinfec- tion. When the officer in charge of the Frontier Inspection Station may declare such course to be safe, the persons detained may be released with passports as prescribed below.  (b) Persons suspected of arriving from an infected area may be disinfected if the Collector so orders, and also (i) at a Road Frontier Inspection Station shall be provided with passports, which shall bind them to present themselves for daily inspection for the next ten days before the local authority, i.e., the local Medical Officer or Police Station House Officer or village Headman in any village where they may be. As passports are issued, the officer in charge shall inform the Municipal Chairman or the local authority of the place of destination. (ii) at a Railway Frontier Inspection Station shall have their tickets distinctively marked, if not so marked before. On arriving at their railway station of destination, the stationmaster or other officer appointed by the Govern- ment or Collector for the purpose shall provide them with passports and send intimation as required by the preceding clause (i). The officer in charge of a Frontier Inspection Station may also, when specially authorized by Government or the Col- lector, detain all persons from an infected area who appear to be suspicious whether by reason of their appearance, the dirty condition of their clothes, or the fact that they are travelling in gangs, or belong to classes which are likely to disseminate the disease, or cannot be traced on arrival at their destination, or depended upon to give information should plague occur among them after arrival at their destination, or for any other reason. Such officer shall have the widest discretionary power, subject to the general or special orders of the Col- lector, to decide what person shall be considered " suspicious " for the purposes of this rule. Any person refusing to comply with, or attempting to evade, this rule may be detained for ten days at the nearest  As amended by G.O., No. 641-P., dated 2nd July 1898; and Notification No. 582, Fort St. George Gaxette, dated 19th July 1898, Part I-A, page 206.
32 Inspection Station or other place appointed by the Collector for the purpose. Every person passing a Frontier Inspection Station shall be bound to declare his destination truly. Observation Circles. 6. For the taluks necessary in his opinion to be watched, the Collector may appoint the requisite number of Plague Inspectors, who should be given a range with a radius not usually exceeding 5 miles. For non-municipal towns, Assist- ant Plague Inspectors may be appointed. The Collector may also appoint Plague Supervisors to check the work of Inspectors and Assistant Inspectors, who shall report through them to the District Sanitary Officer. 7. This observation staff shall work under the District Medical and Sanitary Officer in subordination to the Collector. Its duty will be to constantly and systematically patrol the circles in order to gain the earliest possible information of a case of plague, so that immediate action may be taken, and to report any pressing sanitary need to the District Medical and Sanitary Officer. It should also check the possession of passports or passes in the case of persons arriving from an infected locality. Should any person so arrive without a passport or pass, or having broken its conditions, any member of the observation staff may detain him and cause him to be produced before a Plague Authority who may subject him to isolation in the nearest proper place. Inspectors and Assistant Inspectors shall keep a record of all persons suffering from continuous fever for more than twelve hours, and shall arrange with the village Headman to have such persons inspected twice daily. If a member of the observation staff shall discover a case of plague, he shall act as is laid down in Regulation 17. Ambulance and Cordon Staffs, &c. 8. The Collector shall keep in readiness in a central posi- tion- Two stretchers with awnings. Medical stores, disinfectants and comforts, hospital furniture and clothing. 9. The Collector shall make all arrangements for being able to concentrate immediately, when desirable, the following Ambulance Staff in the same central position:- Two trained European or Eurasian nurses. Four male ward attendants.
33 Three female ward attendants. Four dhooly bearers. Three male and two female toties. Two dhobies. Two cooks. One certificated Sanitary Inspector. Two Hospital Assistants. One Compounder. 10. When he sees fit, the Collector shall concentrate the Ambulance Staff and hold it in readiness. Their pay shall then be 15 per cent. over ordinary rates, and this shall be increased to 25 per cent. when the staff is on actual plague duty. 11. The Collector shall also arrange through Government for one hundred men of the Madras Infantry, with complete tent equipage, being placed at his disposal under the command of a European Officer. Seventy-five of the men shall remain at their Military head- quarters warned for duty, and the remaining 25 with a Native officer, shall, when required by the Collector, join for duty and training at the locality chosen for assembly of the Ambulance Staff. The detachment shall be at the disposal of the Collector for cordon, guard, disinfection and sick transport duties. N. B.-By the word 'Cordon' is meant a guard posted round a village, camp, hospital or other place so as effectually to prevent the ingress and egress of persons not provided with passes, and not going in or coming out on duty under these rules. 12. The Collector shall also warn for such duty in com- munication with the heads of their respective departments as many Police, Salt and Abkri, and Revenue peons as can be spared. Strengthening and Training District Establishment. 13. The Collector may strengthen his own office and that of the District Medical and Sanitary Officer by the employment of such temporary clerks as may be required. He may also indent upon the Inspector-General of Ordnance, Madras, to supply the District Medical and Sanitary Officer with personal and office tents, for which lascars may be entertained. The Collector may at his discretion temporarily close any existing hospital or dispensary and transfer the whole staff to plague duty. 5
?34 14. He shall see that the rules* framed in G.O., No. 522.M., dated 13th March 1897 (Notification No. 185, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 16th March 1897), have been carried out in every municipality, and also that the whole district establishment knows its duties both while the district is Under Observation and also on the outbreak of plague. He shall especially bring rules 15 and 17 to the notice of village officers. 15. It shall be the duty of Station House Officers and village officers to prevent the entry into their villages of per- sons coming without passports or passes from any infected area, and to inspect daily for a space of ten days persons so arriving with passports or passes. Certificates of the causes of death.  16. When he has a sufficient medical staff at his disposal to secure immediate inspection, so that there may be no chance of funerals being delayed, the Collector may order in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a Medical Officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death. After the issue of such an order, if a burial or cremation takes place without such a certificate having been obtained, the death may be presumed to have been due to plague, and the persons believed to have been in recent immediate contact with the corpse shall be liable to segregation and detention. PART II.-MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED ON THE OCCURRENCE OF PLAGUE. 17. On the occurrence of a suspected or actual case of plague in a village, whether in a district declared to be Under Observation or not, it shall be the duty of the village headman to send intelligence by express to the Tahsildar and (if Plague Inspectors have been appointed) to the nearest Plague Inspector; and meanwhile to isolate the patient and all who have been in attendance upon him or in contact with him, in a hut or shed remote from inhabited houses. 18. The Plague Inspector and the Tahsildar shall inform all superior officers up to the Collector by the quickest possible means, and shall go at once to the village. The Tahsildar shall arrange to be accompanied or followed by the nearest Medical Officer with a supply of medicines and disinfectants, and by a staff of constables and peons. * Printed on pages 61 to 70.  As amended by G.O., No. 641.P., dated 2nd July 1898, and Notification No. 582, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th July 1898, Part I-A, page 206.
?35 19. On arrival at the village, the Plague Inspector (or Medical Officer if there is no Plague Inspector) shall supervise the isolation of the patient and the disinfection of his residence, clothing and excreta; and the person and clothing of his attend- ants, and shall continue such supervision until relieved under the orders of a Plague Officer and sent back to other duty; the Tahsildar shall act as follows:- (a) If the plague patient be a traveller newly arrived at the village, or a resident newly returned to it, from an infected locality, and have been with his attendants put into complete isolation from the beginning of his sickness, the Tahsildar may content himself with continuing such isolation, with pro- viding the patient with medical attendance, and with thorough disinfection as above. But (b) if he thinks it necessary, or is so ordered by superior authority, and provided the attack shall have been declared by a Medical Officer to be probably plague, after first completely isolating the patient and his attendants by a cordon of police, peons and taliaris, &c., he shall construct- a Hospital into which he shall remove the patient and which he shall provide with a guard; a Suspect Camp, where he shall remove, disinfect and detain all persons who have been in attendance on, or in contact with, the patient, and which he shall surround with a cordon; and a Staff Camp, to house the Ambulance and Cordon Staffs on their arrival. 20. On receiving information of a case of plague, the duties of a Plague Officer (defined below, Regulation 26) shall be as follows:- He shall send telegraphic information to the Collector and the District Medical and Sanitary Officer. He shall then go to the scene of outbreak, and shall enforce the measures mentioned above. He may also isolate the whole village or part of it by cordons, patrols, chowkies, gates, or in such other manner as he may deem expedient. He may also, when authorized by the Collector, compel the evacuation of the village or any part of it, and the removal of the inhabitants to a Health Camp, provided sufficient shelter is available, and may isolate the Health Camp with a cordon and may order disinfection in it; and may also cause the village to be disinfected. 21. The Collector, on receiving information, shall tele- graph to Government, the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary
?36 Commissioner, and despatch the Ambulance and Cordon Staffs to the village under the District Medical and Sanitary Officer. He may indent on the Surgeon-General for two Com- missioned Medical Officers, one of whom should relieve the District Medical and Sanitary Officer and the other be held in reserve; may notify by tom-tom (the notification to be as soon as possible published in the District Gazette) that any town or village or group of villages is an infected area, whereupon Part I of these rules shall come into force in the district if they have not been put in force by Government already; may requisition the services of any public servant or, for work connected with a railway, of any railway employe; may authorize a Plague Officer to remove all or part of the inhabitants of an infected area into a Health Camp, provided proper shelter is available; and shall, if possible, go to the village and direct operations. He shall also at once take steps to organize a second Ambulance Staff as provided for in Rules 9, 10, et seq. so as to be ready for despatch to any other locality in which plague may break out. 22. If authorized by the Collector under Rule 21, the Plague Officer may cause an infected area to be evacuated, all inhabitants except patients and suspects being moved into a Health Camp where disinfection may be ordered.  He shall see that the Hospital, the Suspect Camp and the Health Camp are properly organized and cordoned. He shall see that the patrols and guards round the infected area completely isolate it, or such part of it as he deems fit. On the evacuation of houses, he shall cause them to be surrounded by a cordon and to be thoroughly disinfected. If no observation staff has been already appointed, the Collector shall organize one. This must be rendered parti- cularly efficient within a radius of 20 miles round an infected area. It may be necessary to constitute special search parties under European Officers. 23. If a case of plague be detected in a town (including a municipal town) the Collector may not, without the sanction of Government, cause the evacuation of the whole town, but may cause the evacuation of a section containing not more than 200 houses. Such evacuated area may be surrounded by a cordon, if necessary by breaking down walls or houses, but with as little injury to property as possible; and its inhabitants may be removed into a Health Camp.
?37 24. When there is a town or large village in the vicinity of an infected area, the Collector may establish a Camp of Observation at such town or village and may order detention and disinfection in such camp of all suspected persons coming from such area without passes. Dissolution of Hospitals and Camps, &c. 25. No Hospital or Suspect Camp or Observation Camp shall be closed without the special orders of the Collector, Provided there have been no actual or suspected case of plague therein, the Collector shall, in his discretion, allow a Health Camp to be closed after ten days, and a village or town or section of a town to be re-inhabited one month after evacuation. Administrative Staff. 26. For administrative purposes in connection with the plague, the Collector shall have under his orders the follow- ing Plague Authorities:- (a) A Superior Staff consisting of Plague Officers appointed by Government. (b) A Subordinate Staff consisting of Assistant Plague Officers appointed by the Collector. (a) Plague Officers include Divisional-officers, Assist- ant Collectors and the District Medical and Sanitary officer, and also Personal Assistants to the Collector; Special Divisional-officers (either to relieve Divisional- officers engaged in plague operations or to be in plague charge of a division); Extra Assistants to be in charge generally of a Taluk but, if necessary, of a smaller area. (b) Assistant Plague Officers shall be Tahsildars and Deputy Tahsildars (ordinary or special) ex-officio; or persons of known and approved character and responsible position, specially appointed. Assistant Plague Officers shall have the powers given by Regulations 3 and 7 and (in infected areas) 27 of the Regu- lations* published in Fort St. George Gazette Notification No. 897 of 18th December 1897. Plague Officers shall have these powers, and shall also have powers given by Regulations 4 and 5 and (in areas Under Observation) 27, 27. The Collector may, from time to time, assign to Plague Officers and Assistant Plague Officers, jurisdiction over such local areas as he may deem fit. * Printed on pages 8 to 21.
?38 He may also appoint any required number of Superintend- ents of Camps or Gumastas as well as menial servants. * 28. In the case of appointments made in connection with the plague, the cost of which is under the standing orders debitable to the ordinary service heads, the sanction of Govern- ment shall be obtained and proposition statements forwarded in accordance with paragraph 12 of the annexure to G.O., No. 604, Financial, dated 21st September 1896, as amended by G.O., No. 785, Financial, dated 24th September 1897. As regards appointments which are not additions to existing establishments and which have been newly created on account of the plague, the Collector shall forward, for the formal sanction of Government, a monthly return showing the number of such appointments, their designation, salary, date of commencement and the duties attached to each appointment. The return should be divided into two sec- tions to distinguish the appointments paid from Local and Municipal Funds from those paid from Provincial. Passports and Passes. 29. Passports and passes shall be in the forms attached. Passports may be granted as prescribed in Rule 5 to persons entering the district from an infected area; passes, by a Plague Authority or other officer authorized by the Collector in this behalf, to persons leaving an infected area within the district.  30. The Collector may exempt from the necessity of taking out passports or passes any person with regard to whom there are no reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection. 31. The Collector may at his discretion exempt from the necessity of taking out passes persons who are merely returning from an infected area to their own village after bringing to market in such area articles of food or fuel; Provided that such return be within eight hours after arrival and not after sunset, and that such exemption shall not apply to any such person who may have entered a dwell- ing house within the infected area. 32. Passes may be of two kinds, either (1) general, or (2) special. General passes may be given to agriculturists and * As amended by G.O., No. 641-P., dated 2nd July 1898, and Notification No. 582, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th July 1898, Part I-A, page 206.  As amended by G.O., No. 330-P., dated 14th April 1898, and Notification No. 303, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th April 1898, Part I-A, page 92.
?39 others having occasion to make daily or frequent journeys by road, rail or boat from an infected area, and may be given for an indefinite period; but they will not cover residence outside of the infected area, and will not cover journeys by rail unless that is expressly stated on them. In the case of agriculturists, where the officer granting the pass is satisfied that it is necessary for the whole family to go and work in the fields, a single pass may be given for the family, but there must be a separate pass for each person making a railway journey under a general pass. Special passes shall be passes permitting persons to leave the infected area and reside else- where, and may be granted for households, provided that the name and description of each person covered by the pass is entered therein. 33. General passes should be given freely, and in the case of agriculturists working in the fields need not be revoked even should a case of plague occur in the family of the pass- holder. 34. Special passes may also be given freely, especially at the beginning of an epidemic, when a Plague Authority is satisfied that no case of plague has occurred in the house of the applicant, or in any adjacent house or among any of his relations or associates; provided that the Plague Authority may always require the disinfection in a prescribed manner of all clothes and other articles to be taken away before a pass is given. When the applicant is known or suspected to have been exposed to infection, no officer shall grant a pass until the applicant has been kept under medical observation (1) for a period which may extend to ten days, (2) or until the reasons for suspicion have disappeared. In such cases disinfection of clothes, &c., should always be insisted on. In this rule applicant includes all the persons in a household on whose behalf a special pass is applied for. Disinfection. 35. When it is provided in these rules that disinfection may be employed, disinfection as follows, as often as seems to him necessary, may be ordered by any Plague Authority unless where otherwise provided:- Of the person (if specially ordered by the Collector).- In a bathing tub with Jeye's fluid or carbolic acid, strength 1 in 100. Of travellers' bundles (1) if specially ordered by the Collector, to be opened out and steamed for 20 minutes by
?40 steam pressure of 20 lbs. and temperature 250; or (2) other- wise, to be treated as below:- Of clothes, silks, etc.-To be exposed first one side, then the other, for eight hours in a strong sun. Other cloths, etc.-In perchloride of mercury, 1 in 1,000. Of an infected house.-If its value is Rs. 100 or less and there is no danger of the fire spreading, it may be burnt. Otherwise, if a Plague Authority so directs, it may be unroofed and treated as follows after removal of all surrounding obstructions (walls, huts, sheds, pandals, etc.) to ensure a complete perflation of air. Of houses in an infected area.-Each house shall be opened to light and air in its dark rooms. Infected things of small value such as bedding, cots, etc., may be burnt. Everything else, as well as the entire interior of the house, including the floors, shall be sprayed or sprinkled with perchloride of mercury. Rubbish shall be burnt or carted away. Then the exterior and interior of the house shall be limewashed, chloride of lime being mixed with the limewash. Of other places and spaces in such an area.-As any Plague Authority may direct. 36. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any Regulation made under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer appointed under competent authority to carry out such Regu- lation, has been required or empowered to take under any such Regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment of either de scription for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both.
?11 I. [Passport-Regulation 5.] A. (To be retained by the officer issuing the passport.) 1. No. of passport. 2. Date of issue. 3. Name of traveller. 4. Place of destination. 5. When the duplicate of the pass- port sent and to whom. Initials of officer issuing passport.                                                   B.                                    Passport No.                 Original.        (To be issued to a person arriving from a plague-infected locality under Regulation 5 under the Epidemic Diseases Act, published in the "Fort Saint George   Gazette," dated 1st March 1898, and Regulation 17, published in the "Fort Saint George Gazette," dated 27th May1898). 1. District. 2. Station of issue. 3. Date of arrival. 4. Name of person. 5. Father's name. 6. Caste. 7. Age. 8. Whence coming. 9. Destination and residence during the next ten days (give District, Taluk, Village, Street and Number or Name of the owner of the house). I declare the above information to be correct, and I do hereby bind myself to appear for examination, daily, for a period of ten days from this date before the local authority, i.e., the Medical officer, or the Station-house officer or the Village Headman of the town or village where I may be for the time being. Date                                   Signature or mark of traveller.                        Declared, and signed before me.                                                                                             Signature and designation of officer            Date                                                  issuing the passport. (See reverse,)   C.          Passport No.                     Duplicate         (To be ent forthwith to the Local Authority of the place of                                              destination). 1. District. 2. Station of issue. 3. Date of arrival. 4. Name of person. 5. Father's name. 6. Caste. 7. Age. 8. Whence coming. 9. Destination and residence during the next ten days (give District, Taluk, Village, Street and Number or Name of the owner of the house). I declare the above information to be correct, and I do hereby bind myself to appear for examination, daily, for a period of ten days from this date before the local authority, i.e., the Medical officer, or the Station-house officer, or the Village Headman of the town or village where I may be for the time being. Date                                                     Signature or mark of traveller.                                Declared and signed before me.              Forwarded to the                                               Signature and designation of officer  Date                                                                    issuing the passport.                                                                                        (See reverse.) * As amended by G.O., No. 641-P., dated 2nd July 1898, and Notification, No. 582, Fort Saint George Gazette, dated 19th July 1898, Part I-A, page 207.
?42 Extract from Revised Regulation 17 under the Epidemic Diseases Act, published in the "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 27th May 1898. *                      *                      *                      * iii. Every person so arriving from a plague-infected place shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport and shall report forthwith to the local authority any change in his place of residence occurring within ten days from the date of arrival. On the. expiry of ten days, he shall deliver up his passport to the local authority of the place where he may then be. iv. The issue of a passport, or any change in the residence of the person to whom it has been grunted, shall immediately be communi- cated by the officer issuing it (in the former case) or by the local authority (in the latter case) to the Municipal Chairman or the local authority of the place of destination. If the local authority of the place of destination is not known, the intimation shall be sent to the Tahsildar concerned for transmission to the local officer by whom the traveller has to be observed. The communication may be made by a post-card, or by a special messenger, or in any other manner which the Collectors concerned may determine. The telegraph need be used only in urgent cases Intimation of departure to any railway station in the Province of Mysore shall, however, bo telegraphed to the- (a) Assistant Surgeon on plague duty, Yesvantpur, when the destination is a station on the Mysore State Railway ; (b) Residency Surgeon, Bangalore, when the destination is a station within Mysore Province on the Madras Railway. v. The local authority of the place of destination shall see that, on the arrival of the traveller, he is observed daily for ten days. Any case of illness or death in the house in which such traveller is or has been residing shall be forthwith reported to the immediate superior of the local authority with full details. After ten days, the passport shall be recovered from the traveller and sent to the Tahsildar. Any officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank of Deputy Tahsildar may require that the person or the clothing and other effects of the traveller shall be disinfected in such manner as may be ordered by the Collector. vi. The headman of every village shall keep himself promptly informed of the arrival of every person from an infected area without a passport and shall deal with him as in the preceding clauses of this Regulation to which such person shall be bound to submit himself. vii. A register shall be maintained by each local authority in the following form:- (1) Date of receipt of intimation. (2) Name of traveller. (3) From what infected area arriving. (4) Date of arrival of traveller. (5) Number, date and place of issue of passport. (6) How long kept under observation. (7) State of health of the traveller and other persons     living in the house in which he is or has been     residing. (8) Date of departure if occurring within ten days. (9) Destination. (10)Date of intimation of departure to the local autho-     rity of the place of destination. (11)Date of despatch of the passport to the Tahsildar. * This rule applies whether the place of destination is in British or Mysore territory. Endorsement of the Local Authority. Date              { Signature of   }     {local authority.}              Designation. 1st   day 2nd   ., 3rd   " 4th   " 5th   " 6th 7th   " 8th   " 9th   " 10th " FORWARDED to the  Tahsildar  of     Municipal   Chairman the traveller having been duly observed. Date                          Signature and Designation of     local authority. Extract from Revised Regulation 17 under the Epidemic Diseases Act published in the "Fort St. George Gazette," dated 27th May 1898. 17. i. Every person arriving from any place declared to be infected with plague shall, before leaving the railway station at which he has alighted, or before disembarking from the steamer, ship or boat in which he has travelled, or in the case of arrival by road either immediately on reaching a Road Frontier Inspection Station or within twelve hours from the time of arrival at any other place, obtain from the officer mentioned in Regulation 17-ii a passport binding him to present himself for daily inspection for the next ten days before the local authority of the town or village where he may be; and he shall be bound so to present himself. Provided that, where it appears desirable, the Munici- pal Chairman or any Revenue officer not below the grade of Deputy Tahsildar may, by endorsement on the passport, exempt any person from personal attendance and permit him to be inspected at his residence. Explanation.-By a "local authority" is meant any of the following officers:- (a) The local Medical officer ; (b) The station house officer; (c) The headman of the village. In places where there is more than one local authority, the duties prescribed in these rules shall be performed by, or with the permission of the Collector under the orders of, the officer who stands first in the order given in this explanation. *                                       *              iii. Every person so arriving from a plague-infected place shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport and shall report forthwith to the local autho- rity any change in his place of residence occurring within ten days from the date of arrival. On the expiry of ten days, he shall deliver up his passport to the local authority of the place where he may then be.
?43 II. [General Pass-Regulation 32.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by road or boat from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. This pass protects  the person named above and the members of his family mentioned on the reverse, but it does not authorize journey by rail, for which a separate  pass shall be obtained by each individual requiring it, nor does it cover residence outside the village of It will be in force until revoked. Signature. Designation. Date. (Reverse of Form II.) Name.                     How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Date.
?44 III. [General Pass-Subsidiary pass for Railway journey only- Regulation 32.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by rail from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. Signature. Designation. Date. IV. [Special Pass-Regulations 32 and 34.] (To be issued to persons leaving an infected area to reside elsewhere.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Whence arrived. Whither going.
45 This pass covers also the members of the family of the above-named person, whose names and descriptions are given on the reverse. Signature. Designation. Date. (Reverse of Form IV.) Name.           How related to pass-holder. Signature. Designation. Date.
?46 (G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897; and Notifi- cation No. 163, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 31st August 1897, Part 1, pages 1117 to 1119.) REGULATIONS FOR THE INSPECTION OF INWARD- BOUND VESSELS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. IN exercise of the powers delegated to him by the Governor- General in Council under section 2, sub-section (3), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to prescribe, under the said Epidemic Diseases Act, the following temporary Regulations to be observed in all ports of the Madras Presidency. These Regulations will supersede those now in force and which are published on pages 601-604, Part I of the Fort St. George Gazette of the 11th May 1897: - 1. In these regulations- Definitions. (1)  "Vessel" includes anything made for the con- veyance by water of human beings or of property. (2)  "Port Officer" includes any person acting under the authority of Government in charge of port discipline. (3)  "Master when used in relation to any vessel means any person (except a pilot or harbour master) having for the time being the charge or control of the vessel. (4)  " Sanitary authority " means the Collector of the district, and the Municipal Council or Local Board, the area under whose jurisdiction includes or abuts on any part of a customs port.    Where a customs port is included within or abuts on the jurisdiction of more than one of the authorities above-mentioned,   the   Governor   in   Council  shall  appoint which of them shall be the Sanitary authority for the purpose of these Regulations,  or he may distribute among them, in such manner as he may deem fit, the duties imposed by these Regulations.    The jurisdiction of every Sanitary authority shall, for the purposes of these Regulations, extend to sea- ward for a distance of three miles beyond low water mark on all parts of the coast line bounding the area ordinarily under its jurisdiction. (5)  "Port Health Officer" includes any duly qualified medical practitioner appointed by a Sanitary authority or by
47 the Local Government to act in the execution of these Regu- lations. (6)   "Observation" means   segregation    either    on board a vessel, or in an isolation camp or place. (7)   "Surveillance" means that the persons subjected to it will not be isolated; they will at once obtain free prati- que, but will be kept under medical supervision. 2. (1) "Infected" used with reference to a vessel denotes any vessel with plague on board, or on board which one or more cases have taken place within twelve days. (2)   "Suspected" used with reference   to a vessel denotes any vessel on  board which there has been a case of plague at the time of departure, or during the voyage, but on which no fresh case has occurred for twelve days. (3)   "Healthy" used   with   reference   to   a   vessel denotes any vessel which has come from, or which during the voyage has touched at, an infected port, but which has had no death, or case of plague on board, either before departure, during the voyage, or on arrival. Regulations. 3.   The master   of   every   "infected,"   "suspected," or " healthy"   vessel   shall, when   within three   miles  of the coast of any part of the Madras Presidency, cause to be hoisted at the foremast head the Commercial Code flag Q being a yellow flag, and shall keep the same displayed during the whole time between sunrise and sunset. If any person on board such vessel be at the time suffering or suspected to be suffer- ing from the plague, the master shall also hoist the Commer- cial Code flag R below the yellow flag Q. Any such vessel arriving at a port after dark shall hoist on coming to an anchor one white light at the foremast head and one red light at the mainmast head. 4.   The master of any such vessel shall before arriving at an anchorage pump out the bilge water,  if possible after disinfection, and pass fresh sea water over the parts that have been in contact with the bilge water.    The bilge water shall not be discharged within port limits. * No tindal or other person in charge of, or navigating, any registered boat shall attempt to make such boat fast to, or shall take it alongside of, a vessel in quarantine or coming from an infected port, until such vessel has been granted pratique by the Health Officer of the port. * Added by G.O., No. 410, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; and Notification No. 57, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 7th June 1898, Part I, page 514.
48 5. The Port Officer on the arrival of any vessel display- ing the flag or flags or light or lights aforesaid, or if he ascertains from the master of such vessel, or otherwise has reason to believe, that the vessel is infected, suspected or healthy from an infected port, shall detain such vessel, and order the master forthwith to moor or anchor the same in such place as may be fixed by him; and the master shall moor or anchor accordingly. Provided that in the case of any ship which has not communicated with the shore, the master if he objects to submit to the obligations imposed by these Regulations shall be free to put back to sea. In such case the Port Officer shall send immediate information to the Sanitary authorities of the port in India, Burma or Ceylon to which the vessel is bound or at which she is next about to call. 6. While a vessel shall be so detained, no person shall leave the same. 7. The Port Officer, on the approach to the port of any vessel displaying the flag or flags or light or lights aforesaid, or on his detaining any vessel as aforesaid, shall forthwith give notice thereof and of the cause of such detention to the Sanitary authority of the port, and also to the Port Health Officer. 8. The detention by the Port Officer of a vessel under Regulation 5 shall cease as soon as the vessel shall have been, as hereinafter provided, duly visited and examined by the Port Health Officer or, if the vessel shall, upon such examin- ation, be found to be infected or suspected, as soon as the same shall be moored or anchored in pursuance of Regulations 9 and 13. 9. The Sanitary authority shall, as speedily as practicable, with the approval of the Port Officer, fix some place where vessels may be moored or anchored for the purpose of Regula- tion 13; and shall make provision for the reception of plague patients and other persons removed from vessels under these Regulations. The place to be fixed as aforesaid, where any vessel may be moored or anchored for the purpose of Regula- tion 13, shall be some place within the jurisdiction of the Sanitary authority, unless the Local Government otherwise orders, in which case the place so fixed shall, for the purposes of these Regulations, be deemed to be within such jurisdiction. 10. On receiving the notice prescribed by Regulation 7, the Port Health Officer shall forthwith visit and examine the vessel, in regard to which such notice shall have been given, for the purpose of ascertaining whether she is infected,
49 suspected or healthy. He shall also do so if he have reason to believe that any vessel which has arrived or is within the jurisdiction of the Sanitary authority, whether detained by the Port Officer or not, is infected or suspected or has come from or touched at a port where plague prevails. The master of such vessel shall permit it to be so visited and examined and shall afford all reasonable facilities for such examination as the Port Health Officer may deem requisite. 11. For the purpose of ascertaining the state of the vessel as aforesaid, the Port Health Officer may demand from the doctor of the ship or, failing him, from the master a declara- tion on oath whether there has been or has not been a case of plague on the ship since her departure, or whether any person suffering or suspected to be suffering from the plague has left or been removed from the vessel prior to or during the voyage, and all particulars relative to any such circum- stance; and the doctor or the master, as the case may be, shall be bound to make a true declaration to the best of his knowledge and belief. 12. When the Port Health Officer has made such exami- nation as aforesaid, he shall forthwith give a certificate in duplicate in the following form, or to the like effect, and shall deliver one copy to the master and transmit the other to the Sanitary authority. He shall also, if the vessel is infected or suspected, give immediate information of the fact to the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras. Certificate. day of 189 I hereby certify that I have examined the vessel , of , now lying in the port of (or detained at ) and that I find that she is (a) " infected " with plague, (b) " suspected," or (c) " healthy " from an infected port (as the case may be). (Signed) Port Health Officer. 13. The master of any vessel certified by the Port Health Officer to be "infected" or "suspected" shall thereupon moor or anchor her if he has not already done so at the place fixed for that purpose under Regulation 9 where she shall remain until the requirements of these Regulations have been duly fulfilled, and from which she shall not depart 7
50 without the written or, where communication with the vessel is impracticable owing to stress of weather, the signalled permission of the Port Health Officer. 14. No person shall leave any such vessel until the exam- ination hereinafter prescribed shall have been made. 15. (1) The Port Health Officer shall, as soon as possible after a vessel has been certified as infected, suspected or healthy, examine every person on board the same. (2) If any person on board any such vessel is found to be suffering from plague, or from any illness which the Port Health Officer suspects may prove to be plague, the Port Health Officer shall certify accordingly. Every person who shall be so certified by him shall, if possible, be imme- diately disembarked and shall be detained for treatment in a suitable hospital or ward or isolation camp or other place. (3) If the vessel is certified to be infected, all persons on board shall be kept under observation or surveillance, as the Port Health Officer may determine, and shall, if possible, be disembarked for the purpose. (4) All persons kept under observation, whether on shore or on board the vessel, shall be detained for such period as the Port Health Officer shall, in his absolute discretion, pre- scribe with regard to the sanitary condition of the vessel and the date of the last case of plague which has occurred among the crew or passengers, but which shall not exceed ten days from the date of the occurrence of the last case of plague which has occurred on board, or which may subsequently occur among the persons detained in such camp or place as the Sanitary authority shall have appointed for the purpose of their detention or on board the vessel, after which they shall, if certified by the Chief Medical Officer on the spot to be free from the infection of plague, be permitted to proceed to their destination. (5) If the vessel is certified to be suspected or healthy, all persons on board who may disembark shall be subjected to surveillance either at the port or at their destination as the Sanitary authority may direct, in the case of a suspected vessel for a period of ten days from the date of the arrival of the vessel in port, and in the case of a healthy vessel for the period necessary to complete a term of ten days from the date of the vessel's departure from the infected port last visited. * In either case the Port Health Officer may place under observation, * As amended by G.O., No. 823, Marine, dated 21st September 1897; and Fort St. George Gazette, dated 5th October 1897, Part I, page 1231.
51 instead of surveillance (for the above-mentioned terms) any person whom he may consider to be in any way likely to carry the infection of the plague. 16. A clean Bill of Health shall not be granted to an infected vessel until all the requirements of these Regulations have been complied with, nor until ten days have elapsed from the date of the last case of plague which has occurred on board; nor, if the person attacked has been treated on board, until ten days from the death or recovery of such person. * 17. In the case of a vessel certified to be suspected or healthy, a clean Bill of Health shall be given provided the requirements of these Regulations have been complied with and if ten days have elapsed since the vessel's departure from the infected port last visited. If ten days have not elapsed the vessel may be detained in quarantine at the discretion of the Port Health Officer for the time necessary to com- plete the period of ten days, the crew and passengers being placed during such period under surveillance. 18. No port clearance shall be granted to any vessel which has been subjected to these rules unless with the written concurrence of the Port Health Officer. 19. No person detained for treatment or placed under observation shall leave the camp or place or vessel in which he is detained under treatment or observation, until the Chief Medical Officer present at the spot shall have certified that such person is free from the infection of the plague. 20. Every person placed under surveillance shall present himself for examination by the Medical Officer appointed for this purpose, by the Sanitary authority, at such times and places as such Medical Officer may direct. 21. If any person suffering from plague or from any ill- ness which the Port Health Officer suspects may prove to be plague cannot be disembarked under Regulation 15, he may be detained on board the vessel, which shall remain subject, for the purpose of this Regulation, to the control of the Port Health Officer. Such person shall not be removed from or leave the vessel, except with the consent, in writing, of the Port Health Officer; and, if the illness from which such person suffered is, or proves to be, plague, the vessel shall be treated as an infected vessel. * As amended by G.O., No. 493, Marine, dated 15th June 1898; and Notification. No. 68, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 21st June 1898, Part I, page 578.
?52 22. Any person detained under observation or placed under surveillance who is certified by the Port Health Officer or by the Medical Officer appointed under Regulation 19 to be suffering from plague, or from any illness which such officer suspects may prove to be plague, may be taken to such hospital or ward or observation camp or other suitable place as may be appointed for that purpose by the Sanitary authority of the port or place, and detained there until his recovery, or for such period, not exceeding ten days, as may be necessary for ascertaining whether his illness is, or is not, plague. The said person shall be bound to remain in the place where he is detained and to follow such instructions as the Sanitary authority may prescribe. 23. The Port Health Officer shall, in the case of every vessel certified to be infected or suspected, give directions for the disinfection of all parts of the vessel which have been inhabited by plague patients and he may also give such other directions for the more thorough disinfection of the vessel as may appear to him to be necessary for preventing the spread of infection. The master of the said vessel shall forthwith carry into execution all such directions. 24. In the event of any death from plague on board such vessel while detained under these Regulations the master shall, as directed by the Sanitary authority, or the Port Health Officer, either cause the dead body to be taken out to sea and committed to the deep properly loaded to prevent its rising, or shall deliver it into the charge of the Sanitary authority for disposal, if the former procedure be not in accordance with caste or race customs. 25. The master shall cause to be destroyed any articles on board his vessel that may have been soiled with plague discharges and he shall also cause to be disinfected or de- stroyed the clothing and bedding, and other articles of personal use likely to retain infection which are on board his vessel and which have been used by any person who has suffered from plague on board such vessel, or who, having left such vessel, shall have suffered from plague during the stay of such vessel in the port. If the master shall have neglected to do so or have done so ineffectually before the vessel arrives in port, he shall forthwith, upon the direction of the Sanitary authority or the Port Health Officer, cause the same to be disinfected or destroyed to the satisfaction of that authority, and in accordance with the instructions as to disinfection contained in the appendix to these Regulations
53 If the said master neglect to comply with any such direc- tions within a reasonable time, the Sanitary authority or the Port Health Officer shall cause the same to be carried into execution at the expense of the said vessel. 26. Provided facilities exist for obtaining suitable water in the port, the master shall, on the direction of the Port Health Officer, cause all tanks in an infected or suspected vessel to be completely emptied and cleaned and disinfected in such manner as- the Port Health Officer may direct and fresh water to be taken in. The Port Health Officer may also, if he thinks necessary, give like directions in the case of a healthy vessel. The master of the vessel shall forthwith carry any such direction into execution. 27. Any mails or cargo which may be brought by any vessel subject to these Regulations may be landed under such precautions as the Port Health Officer may deem necessary to prevent the spread of the disease. 28. It will be the duty of the Port Officer to facilitate the conveyance to all vessels detained under these Regulations of such supplies of provisions, stores or other articles as may be required by those on board. Such supplies will be placed on the boats of the vessel, to be subsequently removed by the crew. 29. All expenses incurred by any Sanitary authority in carrying out these Regulations shall be defrayed from Muni- cipal or District or Taluk Funds in such proportions as the District Collector may, subject to the orders of the Local Government, direct. 30. Any person disobeying or contravening any of the foregoing Regulations shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable on conviction to be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. APPENDIX I.* Under-clothing, bedding, wearing apparel, mattresses, carpets, &c., which are contaminated or suspected, should be disinfected in stoves at normal pressure, or at a pressure of from one and-a-half to two degrees, with or without the presence of steam. * Added by G.O., No. 493, Marine, dated 15th June 1898; and Notification No. 68, Fort St. George Gaztte, dated 21st June 1898, Part I, page 578.
?54 Before a stove is passed as efficient for the purposes of disinfection, it should be subjected to a test, with the aid of a signal thermometer, showing the moment when the temperature in the middle of a mattress rises to at least 100 (centigrade). To ensure that the disinfection is effective, this temperature must be maintained for from 10 to 15 minutes. Disinfecting solutions- (a) Solution of corrosive sublimate, of 1 part in 1,000, with the addition of 10 parts of chloride of soda. The solution should be coloured with aniline dye or indigo. It should not be placed in metal vessels. (b) A 5 per cent. solution of pure crystallized carbolic acid, or 5 per cent. of crude commercial carbolic acid, in a warm solution of soft soap. The carbolic solutions will be useful, more particularly for disin- fecting articles, such as metals, instruments, &c., which can neither be subjected to a temperature of 100 centigrade, nor placed in contact with corrosive sublimate. They may also be used at ports not provided with a disinfecting stove of the prescribed pattern.
?55 (G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897; and Noti- fication No. 181, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd November 1897, Part I, pages 1382-1383) REGULATIONS FOR THE INSPECTION OF OUTWARD-BOUND VESSELS UNDER THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. IN exercise of the powers conferred by Act III of 1897, the Epidemic Diseases Act, His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to declare that all vessels and persons leaving the undermentioned ports of the Madras Presi- dency for Burma and ports out of India direct, shall be subjected, as a temporary measure, to the Regulations herein- after contained, and that the duties of Health Officers under these Regulations shall be discharged by the medical officers named below, or by such other medical officer as may from time to time be appointed for the purpose by the Govern- ment or " Sanitary authority" as defined in the Regulations* published in the Fort St. George Gazette of the 31st August 1897, the definitions contained in which are applicable to the regulations herein contained. These Regulations will super- sede those now in force for the inspection of outward-bound vessels and which are published in the Fort St. George Gazette of the 14th September 1897, Part I:- Ports.   Health Officers. Gopalpur ... . . .  Civil Apothecary. Calingapatam  Do. Baruva ...   Hospital Assistant, Smpta. Bimlipatam  Civil Apothecary. Vizagapatam ...  District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or,    in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon    of the District. Cocanada . . .  Civil Surgeon, or, in his absence, the    Assistant Surgeon in charge. Masulipatam  District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or,    in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon    of the District. Madras . . .   Port and Marine Surgeon, and Officer in    subordinate charge of the Port and    Marine Dispensary. * Printed on pages 46 to 54.
?56 Ports. Health Officers. Cuddalore . . . District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or, in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon of the District. Negapatam Civil Surgeon. Tranquebar Civil Apothecary. Tuticorin . . . Do. Pmban Do. Kilakarai . . . Hospital Assistant. Calicut District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or, in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon of the District. Cochin Civil Surgeon, or, in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon in charge. Tellioherry ... Do. do. do. Cannanore . . . Civil Surgeon, or, in his absence, the Medical Officer in charge of the Central Jail. Mangalore ... District Medical and Sanitary Officer, or, in his absence, the Assistant Surgeon of the District. Regulations. 1. No person shall be permitted to embark on board a vessel within any such port bound direct for any port in Ceylon who has within the preceding ten days resided in a part of India believed by the Health Officer of the port to be infected with plague. Any port may be declared " infected" by the Government or by the " Sanitary authority." 2. No deck passenger who appears to the Port Officer to belong to the labouring classes shall be permitted to embark on board a vessel at the port of Tuticorin bound for a port in Ceylon, until he or she has satisfied the Medical Officer of the Government of that Colony stationed at Tuticorin that he or she has not within the preceding ten days resided in a part of India infected by the plague and that he or she is free from infection with the plague and until the said Colonial Officer has so certified in respect of such passenger. The Health Officer of the port of Tuticorin shall not deliver a Bill of Health in respect of any such vessel, if there be on board any such passenger in respect of whom the Colonial Officer has not certified as aforesaid. 3. No vessel shall leave any such port for any port * in Burma or * out of India direct, until she has been inspected by the Health Officer of the port, and the master or person in *-* Added by G.O., No. 414, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; and Notification No. 63, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 14th June 1898, Part I, page 549.
?57 charge of such vessel has obtained from such officer a Bill of Health or certificate in the form given below that the officers and crew of, and also the passengers (if any) by, such vessel are free from the bubonic plague. (a)Provided that in the case of passengers a certificate in the form annexed as appendix I, by a Commissioned Medical Officer appointed for this purpose, and dated not more than 12 hours before the de- parture of the vessel, shall be accepted in lieu of examination by the Port Health Officer. Such certificate shall be an- nexed to, and form part of, the Bill of Health.(a) Bill of Health. * Including master, mates, engineers, appren- tices and private servants when the latter are not mentioned in the ship's articles. (b) This is to certify that the ship (or steamer) sailing under the flag and under the command of as master of tons bound for with a crew of persons * and passengers and laden with a cargo of is at the time of leaving this port in a satisfactory sanitary condition, and that no case of bubonic plague exists among her officers, passengers, or crew, all of whom have been inspected by me.  Or as the case may be. It is further certified that the town and port of are at present free  from plague. Provided that- (i) (c) all vessels belonging to the Ceylon Government which may leave ports in the Madras Presidency with emigrants for Ceylon shall be exempted from medical inspection. 4. The medical inspection of passengers and other persons prescribed in these Regulations must be made of each indivi- dual by day, on shore, at the time of embarkation; provided that-  In the case of the officers and crew of a ves- sel being brought on shore for inspection they may come in batches.  (i) in the case of vessels anchored in the Madras roadstead (i.e., outside the enclosed harbour) and at out-ports the inspection of officers and crew may be conducted on board; and (a)-(a) Added by G.O., No. 512, Marine, dated 17th June 1898; and Notification No. 71, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 28th June 1898, Part I, page 602. (b) As amended by G.O., No. 412, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; and Notification No. 58, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 7th June 1898, Part I, page 515. (c) As amended by G.O., No. 414, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; and Notification No. 63, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 14th June 1898, Part I, page 549. 8
?58 (a)(ii) in the case of a vessel starting from Calcutta and calling at Madras or any other port in the Madras Presidency on her way to Europe, neither the crew nor the passengers already on board need be brought on shore and inspected there. The form of Bill of Health under this proviso will be as follows:- Bill of Health. This is to certify that no case of bubonic plague exists among any of the passengers or other persons embarked at the port of on board the ship (or steamer) under the command of as master bound for * Or as the case may be. It is further certified that the town and port of are at present free * from plague. 5. Vessels not leaving port before 6 A.M. of the day following the medical inspection may not leave without re-inspection and the grant of a fresh Bill of Health. 6. Should the Health Officer of the port be of opinion that any person on board of any vessel so inspected is suffering from the bubonic plague or from any illness which he suspects may prove to be plague, he shall refuse to give a bill of health as aforesaid unless and until such person together with his or her attendants and relatives and their baggage and personal effects have been removed from the vessel and such parts of the vessel as have been frequented by such persons shall have been disinfected to the satisfaction of the Health Officer. Such removal and disinfection shall be noted on the Bill of Health. The baggage and effects of such persons as are removed from any vessel under this rule shall be disinfected on shore in such manner as the Port Health Officer directs before such baggage and personal effects are permitted on board any vessel. 7. Should a case of plague be discovered among the persons about to embark on any vessel, the sick person with his or her non-professional attendants shall be prevented from em- barking. The baggage and personal effects of such persons shall also be detained and disinfected on shore. 8. All persons so removed or prevented from sailing shall be detained in a plague hospital or place of observation (a) As amended by G.O., No. 414, Marine, dated 23rd May 1898; and Notification No. 63, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 14th June 1898, Part I, page 549.
?59 appointed by the Sanitary authority, as the case may be; and shall not leave such hospital or place until the Chief Medical Officer present at the spot shall have certified that they are free from the infection of the plague. * Note.-Mail bags are included in " cargo " under this Regulation. 9. After the master or person in charge of the vessel has obtained a Bill of Health under the pro- visions of these Regulations no person or cargo * or goods of any kind shall be embarked or disembarked before the vessel leaves the port unless such vessel is again inspected by the Port Health Officer and another Bill of Health obtained from such officer by the master or person in charge of such vessel. If the necessity of a fresh inspection by the Port Health Officer under this Regulation arises from any default or act of the master or agents of the vessel, of which the Port Officer shall be the sole judge, such fresh inspection shall not take place until after the payment to the Port Officer by the master or agents of such vessel of such fee for such inspection, not being less than five nor more than fifty rupees as the Port Officer in his sole discretion may order.  As amended by G.O., No. 278, Marine, dated 16th April 1898; and Noti- fication No. 44, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 26th April 1898, Part I, page 343. 10.  No port clearance shall be delivered to any vessel bound from any such port to any port in Burma or out of India until the master or person in charge shall produce a Bill of Health obtained as aforesaid, provided that the Customs Officer may entrust the port clearance to the Port Health Officer for delivery by him to the master or person in charge with the Bill of Health if he determines to give one. 11. Any person disobeying or contravening any of the foregoing Regulations shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code and shall be liable on conviction to be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. APPENDIX I. Certificate. I do hereby certify that I have examined who is personally known to me (or, whose identity has been proved to  Added by G.O., No. 512, Marine, dated 17th June 1898; and Notification No. 71, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 28th June 1898, Part I, page 602.
?60 my satisfaction), a passenger on the ship not more than twelve hours before the departure of the ship from the port of , and find him in good health, except as noted in the margin, and free from any symptoms of bubonic plague. Rank. Official Designation. (G.O., No. 283, Marine, dated 18th April 1898; and Notification No. 37, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 26th April 1898, Part I, page 340.) IN exercise of the powers conferred by Act III of 1897 (The Epidemic Diseases Act), His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to declare that the Regulations * for the inspection of outward-bound vessels, published in the Fort St. George Gazette of the 2nd November 1897, pages 1382 and 1383, Part I, shall be brought into force in the under- mentioned ports of the Madras Presidency, with effect from such date as may be settled in each case by the Sanitary authority, who will also appoint the Medical Officers to discharge the duties of Port Health Officers at the said ports under these Regulations: -                                                    Ports. Name. District. Narsapur Gdvari. Porto Novo South Arcot. Tirumulavsal  Tpputturai  Point Calimere  Muttupet Tanjore. Adirmpatnam  Ammpatam  Kttaipatnam  Tondi  Devipatnam Madura. Hangarakatta  Coondapoor South Canara.  * Printed on pages 55 to 60.
?61 PART II. (G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897; and Notification No. 185, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 16th March 1897, Part I-A., pages 67-71.) RULES UNDER THE DISTRICT MUNICIPALITIES ACT, 1884, FOR COMBATING PLAGUE IN MUNI- CIPALITIES. UNDER Section 250 (1) (m) of Act IV of 1884, His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to make the follow- ing rules for combating bubonic plague in municipalities. These rules shall come into force three months after their first publication in the District Gazettes in English and in the Vernacular language of the district:- Rules for combating Bubonic Plague (" Mahammari ") in Municipalities. NOTE. The following is a description of the disease known as bubonic plague:- (a) After date of acquiring infection a period of a few hours to three or, in exceptional cases, even ten days may elapse. There occurs a gradually increasing feeling of lassi- tude, the colour of the skin may change till a yellowish tint is acquired; at times there is much restlessness and drowsi- ness; frontal head-ache of a severe character, attended with darting pains in the back, loins and abdomen, are frequent. High fever is ushered in with shivering and after two or three days of usually continuous fever, glandular swellings may appear in the groins, arm-pits, or neck, or in all three positions. On appearance of the swellings the fever may diminish slightly. The disease may then abate, accompanied by disappearance of the swellings or their breaking down by suppuration. But if the disease continues, the patient may vomit blood, and blood may be discharged from the nose, the mouth, the bowels, and mixed with urine; the swellings may become gangrenous and hmorrhage may occur from their sites; death may be ushered in by convulsions, delirium, insensibility, &c.
62 (b) The prime cause of the disease is believed to be a microbe found in the blood and especially in the neighbour- hood of the enlarged glands. Its mode of dissemination has not been fully ascertained, but there is good reason to believe its propagation is favoured by foul soil, and that not only the bloody discharges, but the excretions, more especially the fcal, demand special care as to disinfection. The rela- tion of infection to water is open to doubt, but certain facts have been observed that point to this being a possible medium. The clinging of the infective agent to clothing and rooms is more certain. Foul soil, crowded and narrow streets, and badly-ventilated dwellings are specially favouring causes. Rats, snakes and cats being liable to infection may act as conveyers of the disease. (c) It is the object of these rules, therefore, to ensure (1) that the earliest possible information of every attack of plague should be conveyed to the authorities, so that the plague microbes may be at once prevented from being con- veyed into situations in which they might spread the infec- tion; (2) that the microbes should be at once completely destroyed; and (3) that medical assistance may be provided for those who, in spite of precautions, are attacked by the disease. They accordingly follow these three divisions. RULES.* 1.  These  rules shall be applicable to all municipalities in the Madras Presidency except Madras town. 2.  Municipal councils shall be responsible for the general carrying out of the scheme, and District Medical and Sanitary Officers for the necessary medical arrangements both in their head-quarters and elsewhere, except in municipalities where there are Civil Surgeons.    In these, the Civil Surgeons shall be responsible.    The preventive staff referred to in Rule 12 shall be under the Medical Officer designated by the District Medical and Sanitary Officer or the Civil Surgeon, as the case may be, to carry out the necessary arrangements, or, in the absence of such designation, under the Senior Medical Officer on the spot, while the observation staff mentioned in Rule 6 shall be directly under the Chairman. 3.  For the purpose of these rules, every municipality to which  they  apply shall   be  divided  into   " circles,"  which should, as far as possible, follow ward divisions so that they * "These rules are ancillary to the Regulations issued under the Epidemic Diseases Act III of 1897, and must be read subject to the Regulations." (G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897, para. 2.)
?63 may be readily comprehended. In municipalities where there are wards containing less than 1,200 houses and a population of less than 5,000 persons each, two or more wards may be comprised in one circle. Three circles shall ordinarily form a division, and in no case shall a division contain more than four circles. Chairmen will at once map out their towns into  circles  and  divisions, and after approval by the Col- lector  record the maps in their offices and send a copy to the Senior Medical Officer of the municipality. 4. For each division, the Chairman shall at once procure and retain in the municipal stores not less than the following apparatus and disinfectants, and will be responsible that these stores are always maintained and in good condition :- 12  portable tin canisters for disinfectants. 9 lb. perchloride of mercury. 9 lb. commercial hydrochloric acid. 60 lb. carbolic acid. 600 lb. of sawdust and 600 lb. of unslaked lime. [Note.-The prices of these articles are approximately as follow :-  Rs.    A.    P. One tin canister 1        8     0 One ounce perchloride of mercury 0        3     0 One ounce commercial hydrochloric acid 0        2     0 One lb. carbolic acid 0        4     0 One lb. sawdust 0        1     9 One lb. unslaked lime ...  I.-Observation. 5.  Should it appear to the Collector of the district that plague  imminently threatens to attack any municipality to which these rules apply,  he shall warn the Chairman of the Council and the District Medical and Sanitary Officer and the Senior Medical Officer of  the town accordingly. 6.  Upon receipt of such warning or otherwise receiving information, the Chairman shall immediately appoint in each circle of the town an observation staff consisting of an In- spector, a peon and a toti, and in each division a Divisional Inspector and an orderly, or such smaller establishment as the Collector may, under the circumstances of the particular occasion, consider sufficient.  The orderly should be allowed a jutka or pony to enable him to carry without delay such orders to Circle Inspectors as may be given. The Chairman shall, without  delay,  report to the  Collector the  date on which these appointments were made.
?64 [Note.-The salaries and allowances of this staff should not ordi- narily exceed the following rates :-  RS. Circle Inspector 15      peon 8     toti 7 Divisional Inspector    ...      35 Jutka or horse allowance 15 Orderly 8 Jutka or pony allowance to orderly    7.] 7.  This staff may consist of temporary hands if available and competent.    Otherwise,  it should be  drawn from the existing  sanitary establishment of the  municipality,  whose local knowledge will be  valuable.    In the latter case, the vacancies so caused should be filled by temporary hands, who should be paid at the rates sanctioned for that establishment. 8.  It will be the duty of the members of the observation staff to constantly and systematically patrol  the whole of their circle in order to gain intelligence of the first case of plague  in it, so that immediate action may be taken.    The members of the observation staff should also  be  employed in removing, with the aid of the ordinary conservancy estab- lishment, all defects in sanitation which would favour the propagation of plague (such as accumulations of rubbish or stagnant sewage, absence of perflation of groups of dwellings and   ventilation   of  individual buildings)  and should report their action to the Chairman. 9.  They should further warn the inhabitants of the circle to adopt the precautions against plague prescribed in the extract from   Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel  King's   Simple Sanitary Rules    which is printed as an appendix to these rules, and should distribute gratis and as widely as possible copies of this, which the Chairman will keep ready printed in the vernacular. 10.  The Chairman and councillors and municipal servants of all ranks should assist the observation staff in every way possible, and the police in every way that is compatible with their  other duties, both in getting information of the  first attack and in removing sanitary defects in the circle. II.- Prevention of Infection. 11.  On receipt of information under the above system of the first attack of plague, the Chairman shall at once employ in  the  circle in which it has   occurred (but not in   other circles) three peons and three toties or such smaller estab- lishment as the  Collector may,  under  the  circumstances of
?65 the particular case, consider sufficient, and shall report to the Collector and the District Medical and Sanitary Officer the date on which he did so. [Note.-The salaries of the peons and toties appointed under this rule should not, respectively, exceed Rs. 8 and Rs. 7 each per mensem.] 12. This staff, like the observation staff, may consist of temporary hands if available and competent. Otherwise, it should be selected from the ordinary existing municipal establishment, the vacancies caused in the latter case being filled by temporary men on the sanctioned rates, and it should be combined with the observation staff of the circle, so that the whole may thenceforth form " a preventive staff" to carry out the duties set forth below. * One part of carbolic acid to ten parts of saw- dust. 13.  The preventive staff shall visit every house in which plague has occurred and shall use the greatest care in seeing that all sputa, vomit, fluid and solid excreta are at once collected in separate vessels, mixed with carbolic sawdust,* paddy husk, or other combustible matter, and, where neces- sary, with kerosine-oil, and thoroughly, completely, and immediately burnt on or near the premises. The burning shall, when possible, be carried out in the presence of the Divisional or Sanitary Inspector, but, in the absence of both, it may be carried out in the presence of the peon-the Divi- sional Inspector, Sanitary Inspector or peon, as the case may be, being responsible that it is thoroughly done. The Chair- man shall delegate to the Senior Medical Officer of the town, and to such others as may have to act under this rule, his powers under Section 231 (1) of Act IV of 1884 of entering and inspecting houses. 14.  Rags,  clothes and   bedding   stained with  vomit or excreta, or blood  passed from  any  part of  the body,   or discharges from the nose, mouth, open sores, boils or wounds should similarly be burnt upon   the spot under the same precautions, the danger of keeping such articles being fully explained to the owners and full compensation in money or kind being offered in the case of the really poor, but, where the owners or other persons concerned so desire,  articles of clothing proved to the   satisfaction of the Medical Officer appointed under Rule  2  to be of great value may be dis- infected in such manner as he may direct.    In  each such instance, that officer, by a certificate signed by him,  shall define the method of disinfection employed and certify to its having been conducted with care. 9
?66  oz. perchloride of mer- cnry. 1 oz. hydrochloric acid. 3 gallons (one small chatty full) of water with a * pinch of aniline blue to colour it to prevent aoci- dents. 15. Floors and furniture stained with vomit or excreta, or blood or any discharge, should be disin- fected by being thoroughly sprinkled with a solution of perchloride of mer- cury made up as shown in the margin. The burning of tar and sulphur in houses and streets should be discon- tinued as it is inefficient as a disin- fectant, but street drains outside the houses attacked and the drains of these houses where possible should be flushed with the above solution. [Note 1.-Wooden buckets or earthen pots should alone he used for carrying about this solution, as it destroys metal vessels, and the packets of the solid perchloride should be labelled " Poison " in English and the vernacular and entrusted only to the Inspectors themselves.] [Note 2.-As the solution is highly poisonous, the greatest care must be taken to see that drains flushed with it are not connected with any tank or well which is likely to be used for drinking purposes.] 16.  The greatest courtesy and  consideration should be used by the preventive staff to all classes in carrying out these instructions, as the exercise of extreme tact is essential to the success of the scheme. 17.  Special measures should be taken to ensure free ven- tilation of the room in which the patient is under treatment. 18.  Removal to isolation   hospitals provided for under Section 233  of Act IV  of 1884 should be freely exercised. If the patient be treated in  his own house,  however,  the utmost care should be taken to strictly limit the number of persons entering the room or house to those absolutely neces- sary for the patient's welfare.    Disinfectants for washing the hands of persons touching  the patient should be available.  Where the attendants are bare-footed, the feet should be care- fully  disinfected at suitable intervals daily. $     Native food vessels used by the  patient would be best  disinfected by heating, till they cannot be touched directly over fire. 19.  After a patient has recovered, the house,  and espe- cially the room which he occupied during the attack, should be thoroughly disinfected.    The floors   should be dug up * As amended by G.O., No. 2373-M., dated 29th October 1897 ; and Fort St. Georg Gazette, dated 16th November 1897, Part I-A., page 286.   " In cases in which it becomes necessary to entrust non-professional persons with perchloride of mercury for use as a disinfectant, the solution should be, as a further precaution, mixed with crude carbolic acid in the proportion of 1 to 100." (G.O., No 1500-M., dated 1st July 1897, para. 2.) -- Added by G.O., No. 1719-M., dated 4th August 1897 ; and Notification No. 560 Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th August 1897, Part I-A, page 176.
?67 wherever stained with plague matter and the earth burnt, or, if this cannot be easily done, the floors should be burnt over. The floor, the walls, the house-drains and the furniture should also be liberally sprayed and washed with the perchlo- ride of mercury solution above described. The walls should subsequently be brushed with a dry broom, and be white- washed with fresh slaked lime in the proportion of one part of lime to five of water. [Note.-It is most desirable that the excreta of a patient for at least ten days after he has recovered from an attack should be carefully collected, disinfected and carried away. These probably still contain plague microbes. For this purpose, a Dindigul bullock lorrie costing Rs. 50 and air-tight iron excreta drums costing Rs. 2-8-0 each may be provided. The purchase of these will, however, be left to the option of the councils.] 20.  Rats, cats and snakes suffer from  the disease.    If found alive in infected localities, these animals should be got rid of as quickly as possible by killing them as a matter of   prevention.     Where  found   dead,   their  bodies  should invariably be burnt. 21.  The Chairman shall provide the Medical Officer re- sponsible for working the rules with a permanent advance of Rs. 50 per division, which shall be recouped from time to time by bills supported by vouchers where possible. 22.  The preventive staff shall continue to be maintained in an affected circle for ten days  after the last attack of plague in it, and the observation staff in all circles or groups of circles as the Collector may approve for twenty-one days after the last attack in the town.    During this time, they should be employed in remedying sanitary defects. III.-Medical Aid. 23.  There shall be a head-quarters in each division at which a medical subordinate shall reside, who shall be supplied with medicines   and medical comforts  from the municipal hospital for the treatment of those attacked, and who shall be available for attendance gratis on the sick in their own houses.    This shall also be the head-quarters of the Divisional Inspector and of the preventive staff on night duty. 24.  In one place at least in each town, there shall be isolation huts with separate accommodation for males and females for the treatment of those who desire it or who are brought there.    These shall be in charge of a medical subor- dinate with the necessary staff, and supplied with equipment,
?68 medicines and medical comforts. This subordinate shall be deputed to no other duty. He shall reside with his staff on the spot and shall be adequately housed. 25.  Charges   for  medical  treatment under  these rules shall be met from the allotment in the budget under Grant 3, Hospitals and Dispensaries. 26.  The head-quarters of the divisions and the sites for the isolation hospitals shall be at once selected, and shall be marked on the maps referred to in Rule No. 3 above. 27.  In order to make provision for meeting the charges under the portions of this scheme relating to observation and prevention, the council of every municipality to which the scheme applies shall be required to allot in every budget under " Epidemic charges " a sum which shall be  in the proportion of Rs.  1,000 to every 25,000 inhabitants in the municipality-provided such provision has not already been made under G.O., No. 1536-M., dated 9th September  1896, when such funds shall also be applicable to the purpose of these rules.     This shall be called the  " Epidemic reserve," and shall not be spent upon any object but the  carrying of this scheme into execution. 28.  The provision of this reserve should not be allowed to disturb the existing percentages to the total municipal income of the expenditure upon communications,   education, sanitation, &c., or to swell the total of the allotment made for sanitary purposes under Grants 1, 3 and 4 taken together, but should be set aside from funds which are  at present annually  expended  upon  sanitary  works  of  a  permanent nature. 29.  Municipal councils are hereby authorized to employ establishments on the scales above laid down as the necessity for them arises, and to defray the charges from the "Epide- mic reserve " in anticipation of the sanction of Government, but this sanction should be obtained without delay. 30.  The Medical Officer responsible for working these rules shall, within seven days of the final withdrawal of the special staff, forward a report on the epidemic and the opera- tion of the rules through the Chairman of the municipality to the  Collector for the orders of Government.    In cases where the Medical Officer in question is subordinate to the District Medical and Sanitary Officer or the Civil Surgeon, such report shall be forwarded through those officers.    In every case, such communications shall be submitted to Gov- ernment through the Sanitary Commissioner.
?69 APPENDIX. [EXTRACT from Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel King's "Simple Sanitary Rules."] Precautions to be observed on the approach of Plague. A.-HABITATIONS. 1.  Each house must be thoroughly cleansed, that is, all manure,  dirty water, washings of cattle stalls and collection of dirt of any description, must be completely removed. 2.  Where the  earth remains damp and foul after such removal,   it should be dug up till dry and clean earth is reached. 3.  The old earth should be taken far from the town and may be used as manure for the fields; new earth from a clean place should be laid down. 4.  The interior and exterior of houses should be white- washed.    If persons cannot afford to   do the outside, the inside at least should be whitewashed. 5.  Bundles of clothing and other materials hanging from the beams, or occupying in any other way the rooms in which persons sleep, should be removed. 6.  Doors and windows should at all possible hours be left open, so that free ventilation be obtained. 7.  If private latrines are used, they must be kept free from fcal matter by removal at least twice daily. 8.  The drains  leading from  houses should be cleansed twice daily. 9.  Cesspools and pits for receipt of urine of cattle should be emptied daily. B.-THE PERSON. 1.  The body and clothing should be kept scrupulously clean.    If delicate, persons should use warm, not cold, baths. 2.  The food should be  plain,  nourishing and of   good quality. 3. All vegetables,  or  leaves,  or  fruits,  likely to  cause diarrha, should be abandoned. 4.  All forms   of drinking   to   excess,   debauchery,   late hours and exposure to wet and cold should be avoided. 5.  Cold cooked food should never be used.    Care should be taken not to allow flies to settle upon food.    Vegetables
?70 and leaves should never be eaten otherwise than after cooking. Before being cooked, they should be well washed in water that has been purified by boiling. Salt should be freely used with the diet; but, on the other hand, it must not be used in such unusual amounts as to excite uneasiness or looseness of the bowels. 6.  An inferior quality of water should not be kept in the house; only the cleanest available should be employed. 7.  Water for drinking purposes   and   for   washing the mouth or eating and drinking vessels, and milk,  should be boiled before use. 8.  * Persons with cuts or abrasions on their hands, feet or other exposed parts of the body should avoid attendance on plague patients.    But if attendance is essential, the wounded parts should be covered, and on occasions of temporary with- drawals from attendance, the parts should be washed with disinfectants which can be obtained from the sanitary staff on application.* *-* Inserted by G.O., No. 1500-M., dated 1st July 1897.
?71 (G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898.) RESOLUTION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA IN THE HOME DEPARTMENT, SANITARY, No. 227-240, DATED THE 3RD FEBRUARY 1898. THE Epidemic Diseases Act (III of 1897) * empowers the Governor-General in Council when satisfied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, to take   special  measures over and above those permissible under the ordinary law, with the object of preventing the outbreak of such disease and the spread of it, and further authorizes the  Governor- General in Council by general or special order to direct that the powers conferred  by the Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories adminis- tered by it.    By the Home Department Notification No. 302,  dated 4th February 1897, the Governor-General in Council directed that the appropriate  powers conferred by the Act might be exercised within their respective territories by the different Local Governments and Administrations in British India,   and by  notifications  issued in the Foreign Depart- ment, the Agents to the Governor-General were also   em- powered to issue Regulations under the Act both in respect of parts of British India under their charge and in respect of territories in India under the Administration of the Governor- General in Council which are not parts of British India.    The Government of India have themselves from  time  to  time issued Regulations under the Act in respect of matters in which Imperial interests were involved or action had to be taken by Departments under their direct control, but their object in delegating the powers conferred by the Act to Local Governments was to  avoid hampering them in action taken by them to prevent the outbreak or spread of the plague, and to admit of the Regulations under the Act being adapted, so far as this is possible without preventing them, from being effective, to local conditions and so as to respect local pre- judices.    Copies of all the Regulations issued by Local Gov- ernments and Administrations have been communicated as they were issued by the different Local Governments and Administrations   to   the  Governor-General   in   Council  for information, and under the orders of His Excellency in Coun- cil these have been examined on their receipt, and in  any * Printed on pages 5 and 6.                                       Printed on page 7.
72 case in which they have been found to be in conflict with the general principles which have guided the Government in dealing with the plague the Local Government or Adminis- tration concerned has been requested to cancel or modify them. Experience in the working of the rules has been mainly obtained in the Bombay Presidency to which, with very few exceptions, plague has been hitherto confined, and, in view of the fact that the Plague Commission under Mr. Wingate accompanied by Dr. Cleghorn, Director-General of the Indian Medical Service, have recently visited all the in- fected areas in the Bombay Presidency and, after examining the arrangements in force in each place, devised a set of rules * of which the Government of India, subject to the remarks made in paragraph 11 of this Resolution as to the principles to be followed by Medical Officers in detaining passengers, approve, the Governor-General in Council proposes to take the opportunity of communicating these rules to the different Local Governments and Administrations with the suggestion that they should be utilized as a model upon which to frame rules for other Provinces. 2. The Government of India desire to express their con- currence in the statement contained in Rule 3 of the rules as to the measures which must be taken to combat an outbreak of the plague. The essential measures to be taken are (1) the early recognition of the disease in a locality, (2) the treatment of the sick in places of segregation, (3) the removal of the other inhabitants from the infected house, locality or area, (4) their segregation for a specific period, (5) the disinfection of their persons, clothing and personal effects, (6) the disinfection of the houses in the infected locality and their contents, (7) the improvement of the ventilation of the houses, the abatement of overcrowding, and the prosecution of general measures of sanitary reform. 3. One of the main difficulties which have to be contended with in dealing with the plague is the absence of any efficient organization for the detection of cases before the outbreak has attained proportions which make it impossible to suppress it for a considerable time. Considering the extent to which fever prevails in the country and the ignorance of the agency responsible for reporting the occurrence and cause of deaths, it can hardly be expected that every case of plague will be brought to notice immediately after it has occurred, and it is very desirable that where there is any reason to suspect the existence of the disease a regular system for the detection of * Printed on pages 80 to 90.
?73 suspicious cases of sickness should be devised. Rules 4 and 9 of the Bombay Rules contain directions designed to secure the detection of the disease by improving the arrangements for reporting sickness and mortality, and the arrangements for rural areas described in Rules 5 and 6 have for some time past been in force in the North-Western Provinces, the Punjab, the Central Provinces and Bengal. The occurrence of cases of plague in villages in the neighbourhood of Kankhal in the Saharanpur District of the North-Western Provinces has also led the Lieutenant-Governor and Chief Commissioner to issue orders for the employment of a special organization for ascertaining whether it has extended to places other than those in which it has been detected. This organization is based upon that which was so successfully utilized in distri- buting relief during the recent famine, and the essence of it is that a sufficient number of European officers should be employed to render the powers of search effective and at the same time prevent the subordinate establishments from abus- ing their authority. A copy of the orders issued by the Gov- ernment of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh to the Commissioner of the Meerut Division is appended * to this Resolution, and the Governor-General in Council desires to commend them to the consideration of other Local Govern- ments and Administrations in case there should at any time be reason to suspect that plague exists and has not been detected. For the purpose of supervising work of this nature, young officers of the Staff Corps will, the Government of India believe, be found to be a most suitable agency should the Civil establishments be insufficient, and though it may not be possible to procure the services of such officers in any num- bers at the present juncture, the Government of India will endeavour, should the necessity arise, to procure them from the Military authorities when the operations at present being carried out on the North-Western frontier have terminated. 4. Another measure which has been put forward as an effective means for ascertaining the existence of plague is the inspection of corpses. The Government of India have con- sulted Local Governments and Administrations as to the question whether corpse inspection is a reliable means of bringing facts to light and whether the feeling of the people is opposed to it or not. The Governor-General in Council has not yet received all the replies to the reference made upon this question and it will be dealt with separately later on. On the information at present before them it appears to the * Not printed. 10
74 Government of India to be doubtful whether the measure is likely to be of great assistance, and they fear that its general introduction would be repugnant to the feelings of the people. 5.  The system prescribed in  Rule 10 and the following rules issued by the Bombay Government for the division of towns, which are infected or liable to infection into quarters or divisions of a size convenient  for  effective  supervision meets with the approval of the Government of India, and in this, as indeed in all the measures taken for the suppression of the plague, it is essential to secure the supervision of an European official who will carry the people with him, and see that their customs and susceptibilities are as far as possible respected.     When search parties are organized to ensure that all cases of the disease are brought to notice, and this measure will, it appears to the Government of India, be found to be a very necessary one at any place where an outbreak occurs, endeavour should be made to associate  respectable native gentlemen with them, and female medical attendants should accompany them for the purpose of examining females. 6.  When plague actually breaks out the segregation of the sick and of the persons who have been in immediate con- tact with them is a fundamental precaution which is essential to   the   successful issue  of any   operations   against  it.    In devising means to secure this object it is necessary on the one   hand to consider the  urgent  necessity   of  preventing sufferers from plague from spreading the infection among their neighbours, and on the other hand the great importance of interfering as little as possible with the customs and the feelings of the community.    The Governor-General in Council considers that experience has shown that in order that segre- gation may be efficacious it must be carried out in hospitals or other suitable places  specially  appointed for the purpose. A measure of this nature can hardly be expected not to cause alarm among a people many of whom regard the privacy of their houses as sacred, and this feeling can only be allayed if those affected by it have confidence in the motives of Govern- ment and believe that it is actuated solely by a desire to stay the pestilence.    The  Governor-General in  Council has been much impressed by the readiness and docility with which the people  in many of the infected areas  have  discarded their prejudices and submitted to removal from their houses, and His Excellency in Council feels confident that, if the neces- sity   for   the   measure is carefully   explained  to  them,   the co-operation of leading men obtained as far as possible, and every consideration shown to the feelings and habits of those to whom the Regulations have to be applied, this measure will
?75 be accepted without objection by the people of a locality in which plague has made its appearance. But it appears to His Excellency in Council that the prospect of such action being required of them in the event of plague appearing in their midst may not unreasonably seem distasteful to them so long as there is no immediate danger of an outbreak, and it is therefore desirable to, as far as possible, remove any cause for discontent by encouraging the people themselves to make arrangements for the establishment of private hospitals and segregation camps for particular castes, classes, joint families and associations of families in anticipation of the necessity for their removal from their own houses arising. The equipment and administration of such hospitals must be approved by duly appointed authority. They should be conveniently placed and it is not necessary that they should be located in remote situations. They should not, however, be situated in houses which are actually inhabited or blocks of houses or streets, for in the event of an outbreak of plague, cases of the disease might occur in the house or block which it would then be necessary to completely evacuate. While His Excellency in Council is strongly of opinion that in carrying out any measures of segregation regard should be had, as in the case of Europeans, to the position in society of those classes of the native community who can be relied on to take efficient measures with the object of preventing the spread of infection, and to other considerations of a like nature, it is not, he fears, possible save in the most exceptional cases (as for instance that of a house located in a large garden, in which a hospital or private camp can be located at a distance from the house actually infected) to permit the residents of an infected house not to evacuate the area in which it stands. His Excellency in Council therefore anticipates that in a crowded city there will be few (if any) houses, which it will be safe to license as hospitals or for segregation purposes. In public as well as in private plague hospitals, all possible consideration should be shown to the feelings of the inmates, and in especial caste distinctions and the privacy of females who do not appear in public should be carefully respected. His Excellency in Council also considers that it is neither necessary nor humane to separate the sufferers from their families and friends, and all plague hospitals, whether Government hospitals or private caste hospitals, should therefore be arranged so as to provide separate accommodation for the immediate family or friends of the patients. For the public hospitals it will be found convenient to utilize schools and other public buildings which are available and suitable.
?76 7. Before leaving the subject of segregation, the Gov- ernor-General in Council desires to say that, while it has not yet been shown that inoculation with prophylactic serum such as has been prepared by Mr. Haffkine, C.I.E., can be relied on as a means to prevent the spread of plague, the results of the experiments made are so distinctly encouraging that he is not without hope that it may be demonstrated that protection may be ensured by means of prophylactic inoculation. It is desir- able that every opportunity should be taken to test the efficacy of inoculation, and the Governor-General in Council will feel obliged if Local Governments and Administrations, within whose territories plague now exists or may appear in the future, will place themselves in communication with M. Haffkine in order to procure a supply of serum for the use of persons who desire to have themselves inoculated. No person should be inoculated except with his express consent. In the event of the efficacy of inoculation being eventually established, it will, it appears to the Government of India, become possible to dispense with segregation in the case of persons who have undergone the process of inoculation. Even in this case it will, however, still be necessary to require the evacuation of infected houses and localities with a view to their thorough disinfection for the purpose of destroying the germs of infection. 8. The rules issued by the Bombay Government for the removal and burning of the clothing of a patient suffering from plague, for the disinfection of all those removed from the infected area whether to the camp for suspected persons or to that for the healthy, and for preventing the re-occupation of houses in the infected area until a certain time after they have been evacuated, cleaned and disinfected, appear to the Govern- ment of India to be full and satisfactory. The Governor- General in Council desires to impress upon Local Govern- ments and Administrations the paramount importance of making efficient arrangements to prevent people from return- ing to occupy evacuated houses before the time specified, and of securing that all articles likely to convey infection are without exception removed from infected houses and immedi- ately destroyed or disinfected. 9. It seems to the Government of India desirable to express their views upon the subject of quarantine in relation to the suppression of plague. Her Majesty's Government and the Government of India have continuously been opposed to the view that the spread of epidemic disease can be effectively checked by the imposition of quarantine so as to prevent the
77 movement of the people to other places from areas in which epidemic disease prevails. The first reason which has led the Government of India to this conclusion is that it is impossible to make any system of land quarantine in India effective. It could, indeed, be arranged that every traveller by railway should on leaving the infected area be placed in a segrega- tion camp for a given time, but any attempt to block all the roads and paths from the infected area must be defeated, firstly, because the Government has not at its disposal the necessary establishments to make such a stoppage of the traffic effective, and, secondly, because the establishments could not be relied on to carry out the duty. But even could it be made effective, a system of land quarantine would, in the opinion of the Government of India, be mischievous in itself and calculated to foster rather than to suppress an outbreak of epidemic disease. It is in appearance so easy a remedy that if adopted it would be apt to distract attention from those surer and most essential measures which, if plague is to be suppressed, must be taken at the place where the out- break occurs. It causes hardship and suffering to the people who have to be detained, and it affords opportunities of every kind for bribery, blackmail and extortion to the subordinate establishments employed to enforce it. The collection in camp of large bodies of people who have previously been subject to the risk of plague infection involves danger of an outbreak of the disease in the camp, and may thus establish fresh foci for the dissemination of the disease. The views held by the British Government and the Government of. India on the subject of quarantine were for a long time resisted on the Continent of Europe, but they have now been accepted by the European powers, and in the Dresden Conference of 1893, to which the Government of India declined to become a party for other reasons, the uselessness of land quarantine was for the first time recognized by them in respect of cholera. Prior to the assembly at Venice in the spring of 1897 of the delegates deputed to concert measures to prevent the introduc- tion and spread of the plague in Europe, the Governor-Gene- ral in Council had considered and rejected a proposal to place in quarantine the whole of the Bombay Presidency owing to the outbreak of plague within it, against the rest of India. In paragraph 3 (iii) of the Home Department letter No. 1623-26, dated June 1st, 1897, addressed to the Maritime Governments, it was noticed that the Venice Convention provided that the modern principles of disinfection should be substituted for the obsolete system of land quarantine, but, with a view to the protection of countries which may find it difficult to thus
78 protect their borders, each of the Governments who are parties to the Convention is at liberty to close its frontiers to travel- lers and merchandise. The Convention also, while condemn- ing land quarantine in general terms, permits Governments to serve to themselves the right to take special measures with regard to certain classes of people specially- A.-Gipsies and vagabonds. B.-Emigrants and persons travelling or crossing the frontier in large bodies. 10. Proceeding on the principles embodied in the Venice Convention the Government of India have from time to time expressed an opinion adverse to the establishment of cordons designed to keep the population within an infected area and have declined to agree to the general prohibition of the book- ing of passengers by railway to or from particular places, or to the prohibition of the booking of passengers travelling by a particular class. The detention of the inmates of an infected locality within the area of infection by means of a cordon is apt to increase the virulence of the disease, and therefore also the danger of its dissemination, by fostering the local conditions which are a main cause of its development. Expe- rience shows that ordinarily on the outbreak of plague in a town of which part is infected and part is not, it is desirable, concurrently with the removal to a segregation camp of the inmates of the infected localities, to encourage the healthy population to leave the infected area before the disease becomes thoroughly diffused through it. But there may be cases in which the area of infection being small it may be possible to entirely evacuate it and to place the inmates of it in isolation at a place in the near neighbourhood. A guard may unobjectionably be utilized to keep the population under medical supervision within the healthy area in which it is determined to isolate them both with the object of prevent- ing their return to the infected houses and also to minimise the possibility of infection being carried elsewhere. In such cases if proper arrangements are made for separate camps for the sick, the suspected, and the healthy, there is little or no danger of establishing a focus for the dissemination of the disease, while the control of the guard can be made effective and malpractices on the part of the subordinate establish- ments be prevented if European Agency is employed on the spot to supervise such establishments, and to check, by a system of registering the inmates of the camps, the attempts which may be made to leave them.
79 11. In accordance with the principles explained above, the Government of India have restricted the interference with the movement of the general public by railway to medical inspection. In the terms of the Venice Convention medical intervention is restricted to the inspection of travellers with a view to the detention of those who show symptoms of plague and to the care of the sick. The Convention also dwells on the desirability of keeping under supervision all travellers from an infected area at their homes for a period of ten days from the date of their departure from the infected area. The Government of India approve of the medical inspection being conducted so as to provide for the detention in the observation camp provided for this purpose not only of persons in whom symptoms of plague or suspicious symptoms are discovered, but of all persons from the infected area who appear to be suspicious by reason of their appearance, the dirty condition of their clothes, the fact that they are travel- ling in gangs or belong to classes which are likely to dissemi- nate the disease or cannot be traced on arrival at their destination or depended upon to give information should plague occur among them after arrival at their destination. All other persons should be allowed to proceed to their desti- nation after inspection, and the rules should not, under any circumstances, exempt from their operation any class of persons as such, or be limited to persons who travel by rail- way by a particular class. 12. While these are the general principles which should guide the different Local Governments and Administrations in their control over the movements of the general public travel- ling by railway from an infected area it may often be advisable to interpose special checks either on the movement of pilgrims from an infected area to a place of pilgrimage beyond that area, or on the movement of pilgrims to a place of pilgrimage at which plague exists. When plague exists at a place of pilgrimage it may indeed be generally the most prudent course as well as the course which will in the end cause least inter- ference with the people to definitely prohibit the religious fair at which the pilgrims intend to collect. But there may be special circumstances in which this course may seem to be inadvisable, and in such cases it appears to the Government of India that the booking of pilgrims to the place of pilgrimage or the neighbouring railway stations may be, without objec- tion, entirely interdicted for the time. Where, on the other hand, the place of pilgrimage lies outside the infected area and it is ordinarily visited by pilgrims from the infected area, it is legitimate and advisable to prohibit for the time the passage
80 by railway of pilgrims from the infected area to the place of pilgrimage, and in accordance with these considerations the Government of India have from time to time, during the out- break of plague, issued orders prohibiting the sale of tickets in the Bombay Presidency to pilgrims desirous of visiting other parts of India. ENCLOSURE. INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING PLAGUE ADMINISTRATION ISSUED BY THE BOMBAY PLAGUE COMMISSION FOR THE GENERAL GUIDANCE OF DISTRICT AND OTHER OFFICERS. 1. Plague is a disease which is essentially associated with insanitary conditions in human habitations, the chief of which are accumulations of filth, overcrowding and the absence of light and ventilation. 2. It is, in the first instance at least, a disease of locality, and is mainly conveyed from place to place by individuals in their person, clothing and personal effects, who have resided in the infected locality. 3. The essential measures to be taken for preventing the spread of the disease are its early recognition in a locality, the removal of the inmates from the infected locality or area, which, in the first instance, may be only a room or house, their segregation for a specific period, the disinfection of their persons, clothing and personal effects and of the houses with their contents, situated within the infected locality. 4. The first steps to be taken are in connection with the sickness and mortality. There are, at present, no methods in actual operation by which these can be accurately ascer- tained. Infectious diseases are not notified, and the registra- tion of deaths is imperfect. Means must be adopted to improve the latter, and check the results by recording in towns all funerals which pass the octroi posts, noting the name of the deceased and the locality of the house in which the death occurred, and by posting trustworthy subordinates, either members of the Police force or of the Revenue Depart- ment, at all burying and burning grounds, noting similar information. These subordinates, not being connected with the municipality, will afford valuable aid in checking the returns, and they will assist the Municipal authorities in arriving at correct results. 5. In villages, the Ptils must submit weekly returns of deaths in each village, within their respective jurisdiction, to
81 the Mmlatdr,* who will forward them to the Collector of the district, after noting on each any peculiarity in the incidence of the deaths, the mortality for the corresponding week during the past three years, and explaining, if he can, any excess. When the Mmlatdr is not satisfied as to the cause of any excessive or unusual mortality, he should cause special en- quiries to be made, and, if necessary, call in the assistance of the nearest medical subordinate. 6. The Ptils should also be required to give notice at the police station of the arrival in their villages of any persons from an infected locality. The names of such persons should be entered in a register at the police station, and they should be kept outside the village under observation for ten days and on no account allowed to sleep within the village site. The cause of the death of any person who has recently been in an infected locality should be investigated. In villages remote from a police station the police Ptil should discharge these duties, but the Revenue Ptil and the Kulkarni  should be held equally responsible. 7. The returns referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 will show, both in towns and villages, any unusual mortality over the average of previous years, and also the occurrence of two or more deaths in one house or localised area when immediate special enquiry is necessary. 8. For the discovery of cases of sickness it will be necessary to obtain the assistance of the more respectable residents in each quarter, street or group of houses. In any doubtful case of sickness they could obtain the services of the medical subordinate attached to the dispensary, or a hospital assistant may be specially deputed to aid the resi- dents in the work of detection. 9. It should be made obligatory under the Epidemic Diseases Act for the occupier of each room or house in an infected town to notify all cases of sickness and death, occurring in the room or house occupied by him, and for every medical practitioner practising in such a town to report all cases of sickness and death coming to his knowledge in the practice of his profession. 10. When there is reason to believe that cases of plague are occurring in a town or are likely to occur, owing to its proximity to an infected area, the town should be divided into quarters or divisions of a size convenient for effective supervision, and each quarter should be placed, as far as * i.e., the Tahsildar.  i.e., the Karnain. 11
82 possible, under the charge of an European official, who may be a civil officer, taken from any department, a military or a medical officer according to circumstances. 11. The quarter under each officer should be sub-divided into defined areas, which might consist of a street, a portion of one, or a group of houses, and each of these sub-divisions should be placed under the charge of a district or local sub- ordinate, who may, for convenience, be called a supervisor. With each supervisor will be associated one or more residents of the sub-division, who will assist the supervisor in obtaining information regarding sickness and mortality in the areas respectively allotted to him. Under each supervisor will be a gang of coolies, varying in number to suit the requirements of each locality. The gangs working in the more populous towns should be divided into three sections, each with defined duties as follows:- (a) for the detection of cases and their removal to hospital; (b) for the evacuation of houses and for the removal of the inmates to camp; and (c) for the disinfection of houses. 12. So long as plague exists in the Presidency, it is advisable that the above organisation should be prepared for each town and district area, Native Superintendents being substituted for Europeans in the latter, and the members should be ready to act when the necessity arises. At each town exposed to danger an observation camp should be pro- vided where all suspicious arrivals from infected areas may be detained for ten days. 13. It is believed that under such a scheme information regarding all cases of sickness will be easily and readily obtained, but should the people be unwilling to assist the authorities, or withhold the necessary information, then it will be advisable to organise search parties under the charge of the Divisional Superintendent. Each search party should be accompanied by a medical officer or subordinate, and by a female, either European or Native. 14. It is absolutely essential to success that all the mea- sures mentioned above for the suppression of the disease should be carried out promptly and effectively. To ensure this being done all the members of the staff engaged in the work should have a clear idea of their duties: the opera- tions will then be conducted in a methodical and systematic manner.
83 15. The Superintendent should be provided with a suit- able office situated in his own division, where he should remain the whole day, except at intervals for meals. The office will be his head-quarters to which all communications should be sent, and at which the Supervisors will make their daily reports. He will exercise a general supervision over all the operations and will issue orders for the necessary action to be taken by each section of the gang of coolies. 16. No house vacated on account of plague may be re- occupied without his sanction, and he may cause a notice to that effect, to be affixed to each vacated house. He should place a seal on boxes containing valuable property left in houses which have been evacuated on account of plague. Such property may be removed by the owner, but if he declines to do so, it will remain at his risk. 17. Property of any value belonging to the poorer classes which it may be considered necessary or advisable to destroy as being infected should be appraised by two or more respect- able natives and the value paid to the owner by the Superin- tendent of the division. Compensation should also be given without delay to the very poor for the destruction of cloths, &c., which although they may be of no market value yet serve a useful purpose to the owners. 18. After a house has been disinfected, the door will be secured by a padlock, of which the Superintendent will retain the key or entrance may be barred by any other effectual method. 19. The stock of disinfectants, padlocks and all surplus appliances for divisional use will be kept in or near the office. 20. Each Supervisor will keep a list of all residents in each house in his sub-division. He will inspect all new arrivals, and will obtain information from them as to their previous place of residence. He will, in company with the local resi- dent appointed to assist him, visit all the houses in his sub- division, and obtain information regarding the health of the different inmates, and will, on the conclusion of his rounds, report verbally to his Superintendent the occurrence of all cases of sickness and death and any information regarding arrivals from infected localities. Any case of plague, and all doubtful ones of sickness should be at once reported to the Superintendent at his office by day, and at his house by night. 21. The Supervisor will be provided with a sufficient supply of disinfectants ready for use, with tubs, buckets, watering pots, one or two hand-pumps, either jet or spray, and imple- ments required for unroofing houses and making holes in the
84 walls. There should also be a dooly, charpoy or bamboo frame for the removal of the sick. It should be thoroughly washed or sprayed with perchloride of mercury solution, either at the hospital or sub-divisional dept after use. This is necessary, as the same dooly may be used for carrying sus- pected cases to the observation ward. All the above articles should be kept in a room or yard near the centre of his sub- division or at the Superintendent's office. 22. On a report being received by a Superintendent, of the occurrence of a case of plague, he should at once proceed to the house, and when he has satisfied himself that the case is one of plague or of a suspicious nature, he will at once give orders for the removal of the patient, either to the Plague Hospital or to the observation ward, according to the opinion he has formed of the case. The other inmates of the house, with their moveable property, should be taken to the segre- gation camp, in charge of one or more policemen or other responsible persons. 23. They will be supplied with passes by the Superintend- ent admitting them into hospital and camp. These passes after countersignature by the medical officer or the officer at the camp will be returned through the policemen to the Superintendent. 24. After evacuation of the house, the walls and floors of all rooms, with their contents, except articles of food which it is not intended to destroy, and of all enclosures, should be thoroughly drenched with a solution of perchloride of mercury, and in the course of two or three days coated with freshly prepared limewash. All rags and refuse found in the house or enclosure should be burned in the presence of the Super- visor. 25. The roof, if not a pucka one, should be removed, and holes should be made in the walls to admit freely air and light to the smaller rooms and enclosures. On the completion of these operations, the door should be secured with a padlock. 26. The coolies engaged in the work of disinfection, &c., should be provided with boots or shoes to protect their feet from the danger of infection through abraded surfaces. 27. It may be necessary, owing to the occurrence of several cases in the one area, to vacate a group of houses or a whole sub-division. Should any necessity exist for the adoption of such a measure, it should be carried out as soon as possible by placing a cordon of police or troops around the area and remov- ing the whole population to the segregation camp. Disinfec- tion and unroofing of the houses to be carried out in due course.
85 28. Experience has abundantly proved that the evacuation of an infected house or houses is seldom in itself sufficient to stamp out the disease. When plague manifests itself in one house, in an indigenous form, those in the neighbourhood have, as a rule, already become infected, and it usually follows that cases subsequently appear in them. It is, therefore, always a wise and prudent course on the occurrence of an indigenous case, not only to evacuate the one house but also all those in the immediate neighbourhood. 29. On the evacuation of the houses in the infected area, all the other inhabitants should be encouraged to leave the town and any obstacles which may tend to delay their depar- ture should, if possible, be removed. The time for prescribing the issue of passes should be carefully considered by the Collector, as, if the rules prohibiting departure without passes are applied prematurely, the exodus of the inhabitants gene- rally will be retarded, more particularly of the poorer classes, who feel diffident about applying for passes or are too apa- thetic to do so. 30. In a large town where the disease has become of general prevalence, every quarter being affected, and the arrangements for dealing with the epidemic are incomplete and defective, measures must be taken to regulate the departure of the population and prevent them carrying infection to healthy areas. Every effort should in the meantime be made to provide sufficient accommodation in huts for a large proportion of the population. 31. In the case of villages badly infected the whole of the inhabitants should be turned out. Villagers are accus- tomed to erecting shelters for themselves, but, if necessary, materials for hutting should be supplied. The sick and suspected villagers should be carefully separated from the healthy, and an officer should be appointed to examine the daily health of the population and prevent migration to other villages. 32. Daily inspection of villages situated in the neigh- bourhood of an infected locality should be instituted and maintained during the outbreak, and continued for ten days after the occurrence of the last case, with special reference to the exclusion of refugees who should be required to camp out. 33. A site for the hospital should be selected as near as possible to the infected population, but a permanent building, suitable in all respects for a hospital, may sometimes be obtained either inside or on the outskirts of the town. It can
86 be easily disinfected when it is no longer required for an hospital, and such a building would be more popular and con- venient than huts erected at a distance from the town. 34. If a suitable building is not available it will be neces- sary to erect huts for plague patients, for convalescents and for the observation of doubtful cases, on the nearest site. The hospital huts intended for females should be some dis- tance apart from those intended for males. The size of each hut will depend on the number of patients expected, but it is advisable not to place a large number of patients in one hut. A series of huts, each capable of accommodating six to twelve patients, will be the best arrangement, and it is one which will admit of the higher and lower castes securing separate accommodation. Moveable mat screens should be provided between the beds to secure as much privacy as is possible to each patient. Every patient should be supplied with a cheap substitute for a spittoon, and both it and the vessels used as bed pans, should contain a sufficient quantity of an effective disinfecting solution. The floor of the hospital huts should be freely watered daily with the perchloride of mercury solution, and vessels containing the same solution should always be available for the disinfection of the hands and feet of the native attendants. 35. One relative or friend may be permitted to attend a patient, and a stated time should be set apart for the visits of relatives and friends of the patients. 36. On the arrival of the patient at the hospital, all his clothing should be removed and burnt in the presence of the medical subordinate. Hospital clothing should then be sup- plied. On recovery the patient may be transferred to the convalescent ward or dismissed. In either case he should be given a warm bath and supplied with new clothes. The hos- pital clothing, on the discharge or death of the patient, should be disinfected, washed and exposed to the sun for a few hours, after which it may be again taken into use. 37. The hospital and observation wards should be sur- rounded with a bamboo or other fence. 38. Huts for the segregation of individuals removed from infected houses, and of all suspected persons, should, if pos- sible, be erected at a convenient distance from the hospital compound, and should be surrounded by a bamboo or other fence. Individuals brought for admission into this camp should, for purposes of cleanliness, be bathed in a solution of carbolic acid, one to a hundred parts of water, and their clothing soaked in a solution of one to twenty; if there are no
87 children, perchloride of mercury solution may be used for the latter purpose. 39. All the inmates should be inspected daily, either by the medical officer or a medical subordinate, and any case of plague detected should be removed at once to hospital, and doubtful cases of fever to the observation ward. If no case occurs amongst them, after an interval of 15 to 30 days, they may be allowed to return to their houses, if such houses have been cleaned and disinfected and if the local authority considers that they are fit for re-occupation, or be admitted into the camp for healthy individuals, after a second disinfec- tion of their clothing. 40. Both the hospital compound and the segregation camp should be guarded by troops or police, to prevent the egress of inmates. 41. The establishment of separate hospitals and segre- gation camps for the reception of members of special castes and religions should be encouraged and every assistance should be given by the local authority for their erection and supervision. The treatment of the patients admitted into these hospitals may, if desired, be placed in the hands of Vaids and Hakims and the internal management of both hospitals and camps may be conducted by members of the caste or religion concerned, subject, however, to the general supervision of a European doctor where possible and control of the local authorities and to the usual arrangements as regards guards. 42. A camp for the healthy, i.e., for the people removed from houses not infected, should also be arranged for. All individuals admitted into it should also be bathed and their clothes disinfected as with admissions into the segregation camp. They should be allowed to pursue their daily employ- ments, on condition that they sleep in camp. The huts should be numbered, inmates registered and a daily inspection made of all the residents. If no case of plague has occurred in a hut for 15 to 30 days, the inmates may, after a second disinfec- tion of clothing, be allowed to return to their houses if such houses have been cleaned and disinfected and if the local authority considers that they are fit for re-occupation. 43. Should a case of plague occur in a hut, the patient should be removed to hospital, and the other inmates to the segregation camp. The hut should be removed, the site disinfected with the perchloride of mercury solution, and the materials of the hut should be similarly disinfected and exposed to the sun for a couple of days, when they can be- utilized in the erection of another hut on a new site,
88 44. The best arrangements should be made for a plenti- ful supply of water to the different camps. If the water- supply to the town is conveyed through pipes, connections should be carried into the camps. Bathing platforms at some distance apart for the two sexes should be constructed, and provided with surface drains for the removal of surplus water. 45. Separate latrines for the sexes should be erected in connection with the two camps and hospital, and they should be well lighted with ordinary post lamps. 46. Bunniahs' shops with all supplies should be provided for each of the camps. 47. Cases of plague imported into towns and villages, if they are not at once discovered and isolated, will, under existing conditions, develop new centres of the disease and thus infect fresh localities. It is a difficult matter to detect such cases in transit from an infected area. 48. Medical inspection of travellers by rail and road is useful in discovering those actually suffering from the disease or affected with the preliminary symptoms of fever, but as the period of incubation may extend to eight or nine days, it is evident that inspection is of no avail in detecting infected travellers, who are in the stage of incubation. Such travellers cannot be discriminated from the non-infected, and it is necessary for their detection that they should be kept under observation for a period not exceeding ten days. 49. Passengers or travellers who can produce satisfactory evidence that they have not been exposed to infection, may be exempted from detention, as it frequently happens that only one or a few places may be infected in the particular district. The local authorities should give certificates to all persons wishing to travel from the non-infected areas in the district, stating that the holders (giving names, &c.,) have not been exposed to infection. 50. The period of observation may, in the case of travellers of ascertained respectability, be converted into one of sur- veillance at places of destination, if they give satisfactory assurance (or furnish security) that they will report them- selves daily to an authorised medical officer. Lists of such passengers should be forwarded either by wire or post to the local authority at place of destination, and any one failing to report may be prosecuted. The medical officer is not at liberty to exempt the individual from attendance without the concurrence of the local authority.
?89 51. The inspecting officer may, however, exercise his discretion as to the necessity of detaining any particular individual. 52. In addition to medical inspection at selected stations a medical officer or subordinate should, if available, be appointed to travel by each train from or passing through an infected district for the purpose of examining passengers booking and alighting at all stations along the line. 53. The object in exercising control over the movements of travellers from an infected area is for the general welfare of the public and not to harass the individuals. It is hoped that by detaining passengers from an infected area, the healthy or non-infected will be eliminated after a few days, and allowed to proceed on their journey. If the preparatory measures as previously detailed for the suppression of the disease are carried out in an efficient manner, there is every reason to believe that restrictions on travelling will be unnecessary. 54. Any arrangement calculated to prevent the exodus of the healthy from an infected locality or area must tend to produce a more virulent form of the disease and its more rapid diffusion among the community. 55. Camps will be established, under the orders of Gov- ernment, at selected stations suitable for detention of pas- sengers and for the disinfection of clothing and baggage. 56. The above rules will also apply to travellers by road. 57. For preparation of the perchloride of mercury solu- tion for disinfection, see Appendix. APPENDIX. The most convenient and satisfactory way of preparing the solution of perchloride of mercury, on a large scale, is that which has been recommended by Dr. Maynard, now on plague duty in Nasik. The ingredients should be mixed in a 50-gallon cask in the following quantities : to 77 lb. of perchloride of mercury and 381/2 lb. of pure salt add 15 gallons of boiling water, stir well with a wooden stick, and then fill up the cask with cold water. The solution contains one part of perchloride to 61/2 of water and one ordinary quart bottle of it, added to 25 gallons of water-the capacity of the ordinary wooden tubs in use- will give a strength of 1 in 1,000. 12
?90 The standard solution can be carried about in quart bottles placed in partitioned boxes, and is always ready for use with- out further weighing or measuring. If the solution is prepared with cold water, the perchloride of mercury must be powdered and two parts of pure salt to one part of perchloride added. The whole should be well stirred until the solids are completely dissolved. It is of advantage, for several reasons, to add one half per cent. of crude hydrochloric acid to the solution. Iron hoops of all casks, tubs and buckets should be dam- mered. If iron receptacles are used they should be dammered inside and outside. If metal pumps are employed for distributing the solution, they should, previous to use, be worked in vegetable oil, and after use thoroughly cleaned in water. This will tend to lessen the corrosive action of the mercury. G.O., No. 396-P., dated 27th April 1898.-Communicated to all Collectors, the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, Surgeon-General, Sanitary Commissioner, and Chairmen of Municipalities for information and guidance. 2. Paragraph 2 of the Resolution.-The measures referred to in this paragraph have been already prescribed in the Madras Regulations as summarized below :- (a) The early recognition of the disease. (1) Rules 5-10 of the Rules (a) printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (2) Mufassal Regulation 17 of the Regulations (b) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897, as revised by G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898. (3) Mufassal Regulations 6 and 7 of the Regulations (c) issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Quarantine Regulation 15 of the Regulations d) issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (b) The treatment of the sick in places of segregation. (1) Rules 18 and 24 of the Rules (a) printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (a) Printed on pages 61 to 70. (b) Printed on pages 8 to 21. (c) Printed on pages 30 to 45. (d) Printed on pages 46 to 54.
91 (2) Mufassal Regulations 3, 14 and 14-A of the Regula- tions (a) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) City Regulations 11 and 12 of the Regulations (b) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (4) Regulations 5, 17 and 19 of the Regulations (c) issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (5) Regulations 15, 21 and 22 of the Regulations (d) issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (6) Regulation 6 of the Regulations (e) issued in G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. (c) The removal of the other inhabitants from the infected house, locality or area. (1) Mufassal Regulations 3, 6, 14, 14-A and 23 of the Regulations (a) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th Decem- ber 1897. (2) City Regulations 4, 11, 12 and 14 of the Regulations (b) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) Regulations 5, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23 and 24 of the Regulations (c) issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Regulation 22 of the Regulations (d) issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (5) Regulation 6 of the Regulations (e) issued in G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. (d) Their segregation for a specific period. (1) Mufassal Regulations 3, 6, 14 and 23 of the Regula- tions (a) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (2) City Regulations 4, 11, 12 and 14 of the Regulations (b) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) Regulation 5 of the Regulations (c) issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Regulations 15 and 19 of the Regulations (d) issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (a) Printed on pages 8 to 21. (b) Printed on pages 22 to 29. (c) Printed on pages 30 to 45. (d) Printed on pages 46 to 54. (e) Printed on pages 55 to 60.
92 (5) Regulation 8 of the Regulations (a) issued in G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. (e) The disinfection of their persons, clothing and personal effects. (1) Mufassal Regulations 21, 21-A and 29 of the Regula- tions (b) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (2) City Regulation 7-A of the Regulations (c) issued in G.O., No. 2830 M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) Regulations 5, 19, 20, 22, 24 and 34 of the Regula- tions (f) issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (4) Regulation 25 of the Regulations (e) issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (5) Regulation 6 of the Regulations (a) issued in G.O., No. 879, Marine, dated 16th October 1897. (f) The disinfection of the houses in the infected locality and their contents. (1) Rule 19 of the Rules (d) printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (2) Mufassal Regulations 6 and 11 of the Regulations (b) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (3) City Regulations 4 and 5 of the Regulations (c) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (4) Regulations 19 and 22 of the Regulations (f) issued in G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898. (5) Regulation 23 of the Regulations (e) issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. (g) The improvement of the ventilation of houses, the abate- ment of over-crowding and the prosecution of general measures of sanitary reform. (1) Rules 8, 9, 10 and 17 of the Rules (d) printed in G.O., No. 522-M., dated 13th March 1897. (2) Mufassal Regulations 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 24, 25, 26 and 27 of the Regulations (b) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (a) Printed on pages 55 to 60. (b) Printed on pages 8 to 21. (c) Printed on pages 22 to 29. (d) Printed on pages 61 to 70. (e) Printed on pages 46 to 54. (f) Printed on pages 30 to 45.
?93 (3) City Regulations 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 of the Regulations (a) issued in G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897. (4) Regulations 4 and 26 of the Regulations (b) issued in G.O., No. 745, Marine, dated 23rd August 1897. 3. Paragraph 3 of the Resolution.-The mortuary returns received from rural tracts are believed to be at present so imperfect that little reliance can be placed upon them for purposes of comparison, so that no object would be gained by making them weekly, supposing this could be done with the existing establishment. For detecting the existence of plague in villages special reports prepared by the local authorities from local knowledge seem preferable and should be submitted accordingly under clauses 5 and 11 of the revised Mufassal Regulation (c) 17 issued in G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898. As regards municipal towns the case is different, and weekly returns will be useful and should be submitted hereafter. The co-operation of the residents in discovering cases of sick- ness (Bombay Rule 8) should be secured as far as possible, and the returns should be checked in the manner suggested in Bombay Rule 4 or in such other ways as Collectors may con- sider preferable with reference to local circumstances. Bombay Rules 6 and 20 correspond to the revised Madras Mufassal Regulation (e) 17 (G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898) which provides for a complete system of observation of persons arriv- ing from plague-infected tracts; but in the event of an actual outbreak of plague the more elaborate procedure prescribed by these rules should be adopted. As regards the legal obligation referred to in Rule 9, the provisions of Mufassal Regulations(c) 1 and 17 (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897), City Regulation (a) 1 (G.O., No. 2830-M., dated 17th December 1897), and Additional Regulation (d) 17 (G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898), seem sufficient. 4. Paragraph 4 of the Resolution.-Original Mufassal Regu- lation 25 (c) and City Regulation 16 (a) deal with the mode of disposal of plague corpses. They in no way interfere with the religious customs of any class of Her Majesty's subjects, but merely authorise the local authorities to insist on certain neces- sary precautions as to the routes to be taken by funeral proces- sions and as to the place and manner of burial. Under the first (a) Printed on pages 22 to 29. (b) Printed on pages 46 to 54. (c) Printed on pages 8 to 21. (d) Printed on pages 30 to 45.
?94 part of Regulation 16 of the Regulations (a) issued in G.O., No. 93 P., dated 26th February 1898, the Collector may require in respect of any particular area that the certificate of a medical officer shall be obtained showing the cause of every death within two hours after such death, but no one will be compelled to allow the inspection of the corpse of a deceased relative. In the event, however, of a certificate not being produced or inspection invited, it may be presumed that the death has been caused by plague and the rules regarding segregation may be enforced. It must be clearly understood that the examination of the corpses of women must be made by women, and that Additional Regulation 16 (G.O., No. 93 P., dated 26th February 1898) should not be put in force unless and until it is found that the people are concealing deaths from plague. 5. Paragraph 5 of the Resolution.-All Collectors will now report whether the instructions contained in rule 3 of the rules (b) printed in G.O., No. 522 M., dated 13th March 1897, for the division of municipal towns into circles have been carried out, and how many European officers and of what classes will be required for each town should plague break out. They should see how far the recommendations regarding the employment of certificated Sanitary Inspectors (G.O., No. 4 M., dated 3rd January 1897) have been complied with in each municipality, and that a stock of disinfectants is maintained as required by rule 4 of the rules (b) printed in G.O., No. 522 M., dated 13th March 1897. The Sanitary Commissioner will report if the quantities of disinfectants prescribed in this rule should be in- creased in any municipal town. 6. Paragraph 6 of the Resolution.-Collectors should take every opportunity of explaining to the people that the segrega- tion of plague-stricken patients and of those who have been in immediate contact with them is found by experience to be a measure absolutely necessary to stamp out the disease, especially in its early stages, and that Government seeks to enforce it only because other measures without it are not of much avail. In doing so, Government desires to meet every reasonable wish of the people and to interfere as little as possible with their habits, feelings and prejudices. They will be permitted, and should be encouraged and aided, to erect their own hospitals and their own segregation huts in sites shown to them or selected by them and approved by the authorities. Friends and relatives will be allowed to visit the patients, and, if desired, to reside near them. They can have their own food and they can bring their (a) Printed on pages 30 to 45. (b) Printed on pages 61 to 70.
?95 own doctors. Every arrangement will be made to respect the privacy of women. No particular mode of treatment will be forced upon any one, and women will, under no circumstances, be required to be examined by men. All that will be required of the people when plague breaks out is that they should vacate the infected houses or locality and reside temporarily at a place shown to them subject to certain sanitary restrictions until the disease has passed away. During their absence their houses and such of their property as may be left behind will be taken care of by Government. Adequate compensation will be paid on the spot in the case of poor people for articles condemned by the sanitary authorities. In exceptional cases, where a house is situated in the midst of a spacious compound and where no sanitary objections exist, the sick and the other inmates of the house will be permitted to be segregated under shelter within the compound, provided they vacate the house to be disin- fected. In the North-West Provinces' districts of Kumaun and Garwhal, where plague has existed for a long time in an endemic form, the villagers have learnt by experience that evacuation of the plague infected locality is their best chance of escape, and it is now their common practice to vacate the village as soon as plague appears and to camp on the hill sides (page 93, Vol. I., Nathan's Plague in India). It is desirable that each class or caste of persons in towns should arrange with the district authorities for sites for hospitals and segregation camps and organize measures at once to keep everything ready for erecting them without delay when necessity arises. Collectors will make it their duty to give them every assistance. G.O., No. 333 M., dated 1st March 1897. G.O., No. 367 M., dated 4th March 1897. G.O., No. 2621 M., dated 26th Nov. 1897.* 7. Paragraph 7 of the Resolution.-The results of inocula- tion with M. Haffkine's prophylactic have been published from time to time and so far have been very encouraging. Not only is the percentage of attacks reduced, but the case mortality is materially les- sened. These facts are for the people themselves to consider. It will be left entirely to them to decide whether they will or will not adopt the system. If they should determine to do so, the officers of Government should afford every facility in their power to those who wish to be inoculated. 8. Paragraph 8 of the Resolution.-The matters referred to in this paragraph are sufficiently provided for in the Madras Regulations, and the Bombay rules dealing with them should be * Vide|also G.O. No. 485-P., dated 16th May 1898; and Notification No. 436, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 27th May 1898, Part I-A, pp. 134-136.
?96 taken as subsidiary suggestions for adoption subject to modifi- cations according to local circumstances. 9. Paragraph 9-12 of the Resolution.-The principles enunciated by the Government of India on the subject of quarantine are those which have actuated the framing of the Madras Plague Regulations. This Government has always endeavoured to substitute observation for quarantine. Under this system all travellers except those found or suspected to be suffering from plague or considered "suspicious" are allowed to move freely, provided they report to the authorities their move- ments for a period of ten days after arrival from an infected area and present themselves daily for examination during that period. 10. The measures explained above apply to all alike with- out distinction of class or rank. Their sole object is to prevent the importation of plague into this Presidency and promptly to check its spread and stamp it out should it nevertheless appear. That object can only be fully attained if the people themselves, for whose benefit the regulations have been framed, loyally accept them and support the action of the authorities. His Excellency the Governor in Council has no doubt that in this respect he can rely on the hearty co-operation of all classes of the community. (G.O., No. 396-P., 27th April 1898.)
?97 INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT OF PLAGUE HOSPITALS AND PLAGUE CAMPS. GENERAL DIRECTIONS. The principle which should guide the choice of sites, the structure, and accessory arrangements of plague camps and hospitals are those dictated by the necessity for preventing the propagation of the plague bacillus. Plenty of sunlight, plenty of air-change due to free ventilation and perflation, dryness of the soil and its freedom from contamination by any organic matter-more especially that derived from human excretions and secretions-conjoined with a pure water-supply, must therefore be important considerations when selecting a site for, and in subsequent management of, plague camps. Conse- quently, having regard to reasonable distances from the village affected, a site should be preferred well elevated, open to free access of wind and sun. The soil should be dry, and have a slope that will readily carry off surface water. 2. People will be permitted, and should be encouraged and aided, to erect their own hospitals and their own segregation huts in sites shown to them or selected by them and approved by the authorities. 3. Patients removed to hospital may use, should they so elect, their own food and medicines. They may also be at- tended by such number of relations and servants as the medical officer in charge may think reasonable. All persons accompany- ing patients for purposes of rendering attendance shall reside within the precincts of the hospital and shall be subject to such rules as the medical officer may, from time to time, dictate. 4. In the interests of the patients, as well as of attendants, a minimum cubic space in closed wards of 2,000 feet is desirable; free ventilation is also necessary. URGENT HOSPITAL HUTTING. 5. In dealing with the temporary isolation of one or two patients in fair weather, pending the erection of a more sub- stantial building, any mode that may, in the judgment of the officer in charge, be considered to afford sufficient protection may be employed for making huts, provided not less than a superficial area of 12 feet square is secured per patient. 13
?98 SEMI-PERMANENT HOSPITALS. 6. In the case of municipalities, and of special castes or classes of persons erecting private hospitals, it is advisable, where funds and time are available, that the floors should be impervious. This can be arranged for by the use above lime concrete of Cuddapah stone-slabs cement pointed, or Portland cement plastering. In the event of impervious floorings being made, a small refuse water cistern should be constructed, in which the washings of the wards can be received in disinfect- ants. 7. The support of the structure may usefully be made of old rails, wooden beams, or rough-hewn jungle wood, according to resources available. The sides may be formed of bamboo matting, or, so long as the weight of the roof is not allowed to be upon it, the sides may be made of screen walls formed of single lines of brick in mud or mortar between the supports, the surface of the wall being maintained well white-washed. The roofing may be formed of corrugated iron covered with thatch to secure coolness, or may be made of thatch, hill grass, paddy or cholam straw, reeds and the like convenient material. The rectangular forms of hospitals described in paragraphs 11 -14 should be followed. TEMPORARY HOSPITALS. 8. A typical plague hospital should have all its surfaces smooth and non-absorbent, with the object of preventing ready adherence of organic matter of any description and of material containing plague microbes in particular, and of facilitating their ready removal by ordinary cleansing and disinfectants. This perfection cannot be obtained in making temporary hos- pitals, but these principles should be held in mind when choos- ing material and directing construction. 9. The basement should be not less than 9 inches in height. The flooring should be formed of gravel, or, failing this, red earth well rammed. Care should be taken to have a store of gravel at hand, so as to replace with facility portions of the flooring fouled by the sick. 10. In the case of rural areas or where hospitals are re- quired quickly, the sides must usually be of bamboo matting. Where this is not available, cholam stalks or reeds run together in parallel lines, or, even small boughs of trees will, if inter- laced, suffice. The roofing should be formed of the material in common use for huts of a superior class in the district concerned, and should be at a pitch of 45 degrees so as to throw off rain.
?99 11. A single building should not be made for accommodat- ing more than 20 patients; preferably, 10 patients should be the standard. Whether or not the patients should be accommo- dated in double rows will depend upon the nature of the material obtainable locally. As the amount of superficial or floor space per patient must not be less than 12 X 12 feet, the breadth of such a ward would be 24 feet, and for ten patients the length would be 120 feet. This would necessitate the use of beams, giving a span of 24 feet. 12. In many temporary rural plague hospitals, therefore, it may be found necessary to accommodate single rows of patients; allowing then sufficient room for convenient nursing, the breadth of the single rectangular ward should be not less than 16 feet, and the length-12 feet multiplied by the number of patients for whom the shed is intended. 13. The eaves should be 9 feet high. The side walls should extend up to 61/2 feet; above this height, the whole length of the shed should be open. The opening of 21/2 feet all round should, however, be protected by a thatched verandah extend- ing to 5 feet from the ward walls, supported on poles 7 feet in height, and with the thatch projecting beyond the 5 feet to the extent of 21/2 feet; at regular intervals between each bed flap windows in each side wall of the shed 3 X 3 feet should be formed, so as to be exactly opposite each other.  14. Where it is difficult to obtain hutting material, and economy must be studied, the verandahs may be dispensed with. In this case, the opening between the eaves and the wall should be protected by flaps formed of matting throughout the length. These flaps should be supported on bamboo, so that, in the presence of rain, the interior shall be protected. The flap win- dows should also be omitted. 15. Circular buildings may also be employed. These are economical, convenient for effective administration, and offer less obstruction to perflation of camps than the rectangular form. The only difficulty in making this form is that the ser- vices of a blacksmith are required for the making of one part of the structure, viz., the bracket, on which rests the roofing. Thus, in making a circular shed of 25 feet diameter which will give 2,000 cubic feet per head for three persons, a palmyra or cocoanut palm tree is selected of 24 feet height. Of the tree, 4 feet may be sunk in the ground surrounded with concrete, or firmly packed with stone. Near the top of the centre pole is placed a circular iron bracket, which is secured by iron bands. On this, bamboos intended for the roofing are placed, each one
?100 having a projecting piece fastened to it at right angles. The bamboo or jungle wood posts used for the side walls supporting the external ends of the roofing should be 8 feet from the ground to the eaves. The walls should be formed of matting; 2 feet from the eaves, a space should be left in the side walls open throughout. Thatched roofing should be used in the ordinary manner. This should project 2 feet beyond the eaves, so as to protect the open space. The entrance door should have a special pent porch roof at right angles to the main roofing. Opposite the main door and at the two sides, the side matting may be made so as to form doors capable of being supported on bamboo props in fine weather, and closed during rain. The opening over the circular bracket should be guarded by a pent roof structure, having a space pro- tected by its projection from entrance of rain. This forms an admirable ventilator. An intelligent village artizan ought also to be able to make two ventilators in the roof itself, which can be protected by bamboo matting flaps from entrance of rain. These can be made moveable by attaching strings, but the formation of these extra ventilators should not be attempted unless the requisite skill is available. 16. The internal surface of mat walls may be, and, after occupation by plague cases, should be, whitewashed. Daubing with earth or cow-dung should be prohibited. 17. In the case of wards intended for Europeans; there should be approached by a small thatched covered verandah, a room having an impervious space of not less than 6' X 10', that may serve as a bath-room. A cistern should be attached to catch waste water. For natives, there should be formed bathing platforms for each sex. Where time will allow, the flooring and the cisterns to which waste water from them is led should be rendered impervious. Where time does not allow of these arrangements, the water should be led into a small excavation, which should be carefully disinfected at intervals. These bathing spaces should be protected so as to provide for decency. 18. A latrine should be provided for each sex. If time allows, the surfaces and receptacles should be of impervious material. 19. Huts at the rate of one for each patient for whom accommodation is provided should be supplied for the relations of the sick, who may choose to reside in the hospital camp, with the object of looking after the patients. A floor space of 10' X 10' will usually suffice; a verandah of 5 feet should be attached. The front should have a blank space for ventilation of 9 inches
?101 breadth at the eaves. The verandah should project downwards sufficiently to allow of protection of the open space. 20. For every ten patients there should be erected huts for the accommodation of four superior and four inferior menial servants. These may be of the same character as for "rela- tions," but without the verandahs. 21. If nurses are attached, quarters must be provided for them with a floor area of 12' X 12' for each, with bath-room and cook-room attached. For each hospital assistant, accom- modation of the same nature must be provided. 22. A cook-room, 12' X 6', should be formed for the sick for the preparation of patients' food. This, as well as those for the hospital assistants and nurses, should be formed of corrugated iron so as to prevent the danger of their catching fire. A dead- house, measuring 20' X 10', should be prepared, the side walls being formed of corrugated iron, if available, or the lower parts may be of wire-netting. In both cases, if corrugated iron cannot be procured, stone slabs or any other device may be used that will diminish in the one case the risk of fire and in the other, of animals entering. 23. Sheds for females should be separated by reasonable intervals from those occupied by males. 24. The general disposition of the hospital and of the buildings attached to it should follow the plan circulated with G.O., No. 256-P., dated 23rd March 1898. EQUIPMENT OF HOSPITALS. 25. If "urgent hutting" or other method of isolation is used pending the arrival of the Ambulance Staff,* the officer in charge should see that tarred mullays containing disinfectants for spittoons are used by the patient, and that solid and fluid excreta are suitably received, that soiled rags are burnt, and that special arrangements are made for the bringing of water to the patient, without the employment of any person likely to have been in contact with plague matter. On the arrival of the Ambulance Staff, all requisites for hospital equipment as per appendix, except bazaar products, will be brought by it. THE SUSPECT CAMP. 26. The object of this camp is to afford shelter to persons who, it is suspected, may be undergoing incubation of plague and whom it is determined to keep under observation so as to secure their isolation at the earliest moment in the event of an * Vide Regulations 9 and 21 of the Regulations printed on pages 30-45.
102 attack. This being so, it is evident that the camp should be arranged so that the shed occupied by a person eventually attacked may be destroyed or disinfected with the least practi- cable disturbance of sheds inhabited by the unaffected, and with the least expenditure. It follows that it is better to make each shed as small as compatible with the comfort of a single family, which may be taken as the unit. The average family consists of five souls. Where this is exceeded and, in consequence, overcrowding occurs, all male adults over 12 years of age should be provided with sleeping accommodation in huts separate from the family. 27.  Each hut should afford an area of 12 feet in length by 10 feet in breadth.    The roofing may be formed of any shape or material that can be conveniently obtained; but a plan having been  adopted, it should be adhered to throughout the camp. Each hut should be 20 feet distant from its neighbour in the same line.    Each line of huts should be 40 feet distant from its neighbour.    Each line should  consist of four huts; four such lines would form a block.    Each block should be 60 feet distant from the neighbouring block.    Blocks may be arranged in lines not exceeding two deep to  any length desirable.    If  it be desired to make a second series of such blocks opposite to one already formed, an interval of 100 feet should be allowed.    The second   series   of  blocks   should  have   huts   en  echelon   with reference to those opposite to it.    Where economy of space is desirable, the intervals may be reduced to one-half the measure- ments here suggested. 28.  In places where, in consequence of want of funds or space, it is found impracticable to construct, in accordance with Rule 27, separate detached huts, they may be replaced by large sheds, each containing twenty rooms in rows of ten arranged back to back.    The rooms may be separated by partitions of matting, 7 feet high, so that the space under the roof slope will be common to all the rooms.    No windows are necessary and it will be enough to provide each room with a single door, 2 feet 6 inches in width. 29.  Blocks should be distinguished by initial letters.    These should be exhibited on boards placed in front of each.    Each hut should have its number and block distinctly painted on a board, in white letters on black ground.    The boards for huts should be large enough to allow the number of inhabitants to be shown in chalk letters. 30. No camp should contain more than 1,000 inhabitants. When more have to be accommodated, a distance of at least a quarter of a mile should be allowed between the camps. In
103 this event, completely separate executive staffs should be pro- vided for the respective camps. 31.  The whole camp should be effectually fenced.    Huts for the police guard should be placed in such position that the whole camp is under view. 32.  Huts should be provided for the menial servants. 33.  Attached to the " suspect " camp should be an observa- tion ward.    This should be built for accommodation of patients at the rate of 1 per cent. of suspects.    The design should be in all respects as stated in paragraph 8 et seq.    In this ward should be placed persons who having fever or other complaints simulating plague must await the decision of the medical officer before transport to the plague hospital. HEALTHY CAMP. 34.  The object of this camp is to provide shelter for the healthy and those not suspected of being subject to incubation. The structure as  stated for the suspect camp would in   all respects suit, except that no fencing need be employed.    It would, however, rest with the officer responsible to use large huts for accommodation of several persons at a time, if it be found impossible to meet the demand for small huts on the family principle, on account of want of labour.    In this case, sheds should be classed for males and females,  respectively. Association in this manner is not likely  to be otherwise than distasteful  except to the poorest classes,   and  should   not be followed unless excessive expenditure or absence of the neces- sary labour at command requires it.    Sheds on this system, preferably of  the circular  form described  in paragraph  15, should be made.    These sheds might be arranged in triangular form, so that the base of the camp is exposed to the prevailing winds. 35.  Persons should be encouraged in the healthy camp to erect their own huts, but care should be taken that old material from unknown sources is not used in their -erection.    When persons build their  own  huts,  the  site  must   be  carefully measured, and any attempt to exceed defined limits should be prohibited. WATER-SUPPLY FOR HOSPITALS AND CAMPS. 36.  The  water-supply   should  be   secured  from  a  source reliable as to its purity.    When open water-sources are used, care must be taken to prevent contamination by plague-infective matter borne on chatties, ropes or hands.    The only way to
?104 secure this is to see that no person connected with the handling of plague patients or the disinfection of material, is allowed to have anything to do with the drawing of water or its distribu- tion. In other words, specially-selected persons should be employed. If a stream or tank, the use of impervious platforms or special lifting apparatus designed so as to prevent contami- nation should be arranged for. Wells should be effectually covered in. Where pumps can be obtained and are suitable in respect to extent of lift required, these should be employed. If pumps are not employed, at least the water-source should have a special guard, and the water should be lifted by use of a metal bucket and light chain reserved for this purpose. The water thus lifted by any of these means should be stored in covered barrels provided with taps, or, still better, in iron cube tanks provided with taps. On no account should the promis- cuous plunging of vessels into water-supplies by persons in camps and hospitals be permitted. At the same time, every facility for the observance of caste sentiments should be afforded by the employment of caste natives, wherever handling of vessels, &c., is unavoidable. In towns having public water-supplies, the extension to hospitals and camps of the supply by means of a temporary line of pipes is advisable. 37.  Where open wells are unavoidably employed, disinfec- tion by means of permanganate of potash at intervals of three days is desirable.    In the case of tanks of such size that expense of using permanganate of potash must be regarded as undoubt- edly excessive, the alum process should be employed either to the bulk if comparatively small, or to the breadth of 25 feet from the edge, if unmanageably large. LATRINES IN CAMPS AND HOSPITALS. 38.   In camps, one  latrine should be provided for every block.    If time permits, the surface should be made impervious. If this is not feasible and earthen flooring is unavoidable, it should be burnt over daily, and the earth should be renewed at intervals.    In hospitals and suspect camps, all excreta should be received in impervious vessels, in which disinfectants are ready placed. DISPOSAL OF CORPSES. 39.  The clothes surrounding the corpse of a person dead of plague should be saturated with coloured perchloride of mercury solution-the  necessity  for  so  doing  having  been carefully explained to the relatives.    Cremation is the preferable method of disposal, but great care should be taken before burning a
?105 corpse to ascertain whether there are caste or race objections to this being performed. If there be reasonable objection, the corpse should be buried not less than six feet deep. It is advisable to select a place for cremation in reasonable proximity to the plague hospital, so as to prevent corpses being carried through inhabited parts. If plague corpses are to be buried, the burial-ground should be specially selected by a medical officer after careful examination. GENERAL SANITARY PRECAUTIONS. 40.  When disinfection of a person is to be  effected, all clothing should be removed in a shed protected from public view.     If women are treated, a female attendant only should be present.    Any useless rags should be burnt.    The clothing should be removed, and be plunged into a wooden tub contain- ing a solution (1-1,000) of perchloride of mercury, and be allowed to soak for 30 minutes.    It should then be removed, washed in the ordinary manner, and dried in the sun with free exposure to the air.    Suitable clothing for temporary use should be provided.    When the disinfected clothing is ready for use, the whole body should be carefully cleansed with soapnut; but preferably,  soft soap should be  employed.    If  the latter be used, it should be explained to the person that soft soap is made from vegetable oils, but its use should  not be  insisted on. Except as to method  of disinfection of clothing, as to which special rules have been issued, the same procedure should be pursued at stations where disinfection by steam is practised. 41.  The treatment of   a   person  before admission  to the healthy camp shall be as laid down in paragraph 40.    But, in the case of the suspect, the persons may be required to throw over the body, after careful cleansing, a solution of phenyle in the proportion 1-100.    A bath of plain water may be used subsequently. 42.  Bathing  of  patients  admitted  to  hospital   should be conducted only under orders of the medical officer responsible. The method of disposal and disinfection of clothing just de- scribed will, however, be applicable. CAMP STAFFS. 43.  Subordinate Superintendents of camps should  be  ap- pointed as held requisite by the officer responsible.    No sub- ordinate charge should be for a larger population than 1,000. 14
?106 CONSERVANCY  STAFF. 44.  One  toti  of  each  sex  and   one  sweeper  should be appointed for every 300 inmates of the suspect and health camps.    For every 12 servants of the menial conservancy staff, one peon should be employed. CONSERVANCY ARRANGEMENTS. 45.  At each camp and hospital, an incinerator should be made.    Any native mason who has seen a country " chunam kiln," will be able to make an incinerator of mud and brick or stone,   sufficiently  well  for   the  purpose.     They  should  be circular structures 4 feet in internal diameter  at the  bottom and 3 feet at the top.*    Openings should be left at the bottom for vents.    In these, all rubbish, rags, and other destructible matter collected from the camp site should be burnt daily.    If the plague hospital is attached to a large town, it is well to obtain a field " Silchar incinerator."    If such an incinerator is possessed, all exereta from the suspect camp and hospital should be burnt in it. 46.  All excreta from the hospital and suspect camp having been received on disinfectants should be buried in pits not less than 5 feet deep in a locality well removed from habitations and water-supplies.    Excreta from the healthy camp should be treated in trenches of the ordinary breadth and depth, that is, not exceeding 18 inches, but quick lime should be added freely to the trench contents. 47.  Care should be taken to see that no slops are thrown on the ground in any camp.    In the suspect camp and plague hospital,   all waste  water other than that from the kitchen should be received in open tarred dhobie tubs, in which disin- fectants are already placed.    Their contents should be removed at regular intervals to trenches at a suitable distance from the camp.    In the case of the healthy camp, the inhabitants should be required to transport all slops to trenches specially prepared for the purpose. BAZAARS. 48.  Arrangements should be made in the proximity of each camp for the maintenance of bazaars.    Only dealers having the written authority of the officer in charge of the camp should * In rainy weather these can be provided with corrugated iron covers with protected smoke vents.  Vide G.O. No. 487-P., dated 17th May 1898; and G.O., No. 636-P., dated 2nd July 1898.
?107 be permitted to ply their trade. It should be seen that these persons are not inhabitants of affected villages. If the number of persons segregated is not so large as to demand the opening of a special bazaar, the officer in charge should make such arrangements compatible with sanitary requirements as will prevent inconvenience to the inmates. PRECAUTIONS IN HOSPITALS. 49. Bottles of lysol or phenyle, and solution of perchloride of mercury should always be placed beside conveniently arranged basins for the washing of the hands of medical offi- cers, nurses and attendants, respectively. It is better not to dry the hands with towels after disinfection. 50. All excretions and secretions and rags soiled with them should be received into vessels already containing disinfectants. Promiscuous spitting in the wards should be specially prohibited -all sputa should be carefully received into small tarred mullays or earthen receptacles having disinfectants in them. Soiled mats should be burnt; soiled clothing should be steeped in perchloride solution directly it is removed from hospital. Soiled patches of flooring should be disinfected with perchloride solution, and be replaced by fresh material. 51. Clothes used during duty in wards and disinfection should be exposed to sun action as soon as the person has ful- filled duty. Before washing, they should be soaked in per- chloride of mercury solution. Menial servants in wards and disinfectors should be provided with shoes during work. APPENDIX. The following equipment should be maintained for a ten-bed hospital. It should be possible to transport all articles with the Ambulance Staff when proceeding to an infected locality:- SANITARY EQUIPMENT. Soapnut lb. 10 Soft soap    10 Perchloride of mercury    100 * Commercial sulphuric acid    30 * Do.   hydrochloric acid    30 Phenyle     60 * Articles marked with an asterisk are intended for ambulance staffs; for stationary hospitals, the amounts should be reduced or the articles be omitted at the discretion of the indenting officer.
?108 * Permanganate of potash   lb. 3 * Chinese pumps                ......    5 * Slippers (native), pairs     50   Tins, kerosine-oil, 125    6   Half-casks (wooden tubs)    8   Galvanized iron buckets    6 * Paint brushes      4 * Black paint (ready made)   lb. 10 * Red paint      5 * Whitewashing brushes, country   50 * Mops        . .         . . ..    20 MEDICAL STORES.  Chentsu cots     No. 15 Date mats      30 Cumblies      15 Pillow-cases      15 Carpets       30 Native clothing, men     15 Native clothing, women     15 Slippers for ward coolies   Pairs. 2 Copper dekchas,large size,for boiling  clothing      No. 2 Frying pan      1 Iron enamel cooking-pots    6 Zinc buckets      3 Firewood axe      1 Kitchen knife      1 Iron kettles      2 Hanging meatsafe     1 Hanging lamps      2 Hurricane lanterns     4 Portable tables      2 Portable chairs      2 Time-piece      1 Folding screens ...     1 Bed-head ticket frames     12 Temperature charts     50 Zinc dressing trays        . .   Set. 1 Large jars (old arrack) for disinfectants.  No. 2 Hand-basins for disinfectants       2 Washstand with basin complete    1 Lotion bowls       . .     4 Bed-pans      7 Ice box       1 Pewter or enamel urinals    6 Earthen pots and mullays as required.  * Articles marked with an asterisk are intended for ambulance staffs; for stationary hospitals, the amounts should be reduced or the articles be omitted at the discretion of the indenting officer.
109 FOR NURSES. Camp portable dining table   No. 1 Camp portable side table             . .        ,, 1 Chairs     ,, 2 Easychairs     ,, 2 Hanging meatsafe    ,, 1 Box with lock and key for stores   ,, 1 Table lamp    ,, 1 Dinner table cloth            . .         . .     ,, 2 Table napkins     . .    ,, 6 Vegetable dishes    ,, 2 Pudding dish    ,, 1 Soup plates    ,, 2 Meat plates    ,, 4 Tumblers     ,, 4 Spoons     ,, 4 Knives     ,, 2 Tea-pot     ,, 1 Coffee-pot     ,, 1  Cups and saucers    ,, 2 Sugar-basin          . .         . .  ,, 1 Butter-pot     ,, 1  Portable  cots   with beds,  pillows  and   curtains             . .        . .         . . ,, 2 Sheets         . .        . .        . .         ,, 4 Counterpanes        . .        . .         . . ,, 2 Blankets     ,, 2 Portable washstands with enamel bowls.  ,, 2 Zinc baths             . .         . .          ,, 2 Commodes            . .        ....  ,, 2 Chamber-pots      .....         ..  ,, 2 Candle-stick         . .        . .      ,, 1 Hurricane lamp   . .        . .        . . ,, 2 FOR MEDICAL SUBORDINATE.   Cots (bed and pillow)    No. 2 Washstand (complete with enamel basin,   &c.)      ......    ,, 2 Towel rack    ,, 1 Table      ...........    ,, 1 Chair     ,, 1 DISPENSARY FURNITURE.   Portable shelf for drugs and appliances.  No. 1 Box with lock and key for poisons        . . ,, 1 Dispensary table    ,, 1 Writing table    ,, 1 Chair     ,, 1 Wash   stand   (complete   with    enamel   basin, &c.)    ,, 1 Towel rack           . .        . .        . .    ,, 1
?110 Towels    . .        . .        . . ..          No. 3 Tin kettle           . .        . .  ..       1 Books and stationery, as required by District Sanitary Officer. MEDICAL AND SURGICAL  APPLIANCES. (a) Appliances.    Small pocket dressing-case         No. 1 Gum elastic catheters                      2 Hypodermic syringe             1 Enema syringes                     2 Two-ounce syringes                2 Sponges       3 Ice bladders                             12 Ice bags                       2 Waterproof sheets                     2 Pestle and mortar                         1 Glass rod                       1 Roll of sticking plaster           1 Bandage cloth       Yds. 6 Flannel                       2 Carbolic soap          Cakes  12 Lint            lb. 2 Cotton wool            2 Tow                                   10 Linseed                              10 Spirit lamp               No.       1 Test tubes                                        6 Urinometer                                       1 Nitric acid           oz. 1 Liquor potass                          2 Fehling's solution           2 Drainage tubing                      Yds. 2 Scales and weights,  with   spare set of  grain weights           Set 1 Dispensing bottles          No.      30 Corks            Gross    1/2 Draught glasses       No.      20 Large pewter measure                          1 One ounce and one minim glass measure                  1 Slab                                              1   Spatulas                                                  2 Large mixture bottles                                           6 Clinical thermometers                          4 Jars for disinfectants                                 6 (b) Drugs.   Acid Boracic          lb. 1    Carbolic                 3 ,,   Gallic                    oz. 4    Hydrocyanic                 1    Sulphuric                   12 Ammonia Bromide                      6
?111 Ammonia Carbonas       .. ..   oz. 2 Aqua Distillata        .. ..    lb. 2 Argenti Nitras         .. ..    dr. 1 Bismuth Subnitras      .. ..   oz. 4 Cafeine Citras         ..       ..      Camphor   ..  ..       ..    ..    2 Cocaine Hydrochloras   ..  ..   dr.  Extractum Belladonna   .. ..   oz.              Ergot Liquid ..    2 Tincture Ferri Perchloridum ..    2 Glycerine             ..        ..    lb.  Gum Acacia            ..        ..      Hydrargyri Perchloridum      ..    1/4 ,,           Subchloridum       ..      Iodoform    ..      ..  ..   oz. 2 Liniment Camphor         .. ..   lb.           Iodi      ..  .. ..   oz. 4 Liquor Arsenicalis       .. ..    2      Ammonia            .. ..   lb. 1      Epispaticus      .. ..   oz.  Oleum Anethi           .. ..           Menth. Pip.       .. ..     1 Potassi Citras           .. ..    2 ,,      Iodid            .. ..     2 Pulvis Ipecac.           .. ..    1 Tincture Digitalis  ..     ..    2 Pulvis Ipecac. Co.       .. ..    1       Jalap Co.  ..     ..     2 Santonine          ..     ..      Soda Bicarbonas          ..     ..    1 Tincture Aconite  ..     ..              Cardamom Co.  ..     ..    2         Cinchona Co.  ..     ..    2 Hammamalis               .. ..    2 Tincture Hyosciami  ..     ..    2 ,,        Iodi          ..     ..     4         Opii          ..     ..     4 Unguentum Hydrargyri  ..     ..   lb. 1/4           Simplex  ..   ..       1 Vaseline          ..     ..      Spirits of Wine, methylated ..      1/2  Zinc Oxide                        Soda Salicylas                         Tincture Nucis Vomic             oz. 4 Liquor Strychnia        ..     4 Liquor Hydrargyri Perchloride  ..    lb. 1 Spirits Ammonia Aromatici      ..     1 Magnesia Sulphatis        ..     4 Spirits ther Nitrosi        ..     1 Quinine Sulphatus        ..    oz. 2 Acid Nitric Hydrochlor. dil.   ..    lb. 1 Ammonia Chloride        ..     ..    oz. 6
112 Potassi Bicarbonas  lb. 1 Spirits Chloroform  oz. 8 Cerri Oxalat   " 2 Liniment Terebinthin  lb. 2 Phenacetin    oz. 1 Lysol     lb. 5 (G.O., No. 629-P., dated 30th June 1898.)
?113 IMPORTANT RULINGS. I-Original Mufassal Regulations of 18th December 1897.(a) 1. Regulation 1.-" The Regulation should be strictly carried out throughout the Presidency as a check on the working of the revised Mufassal Regulation(a) 17 (G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898), and prosecution should be resorted to in places where the duty of reporting arrivals from plague- infected parts is neglected in spite of repeated warnings. If in any municipal town the existing sanitary staff is unequal to the task of properly carrying out the system of observa- tion, it should be strengthened." (G.O., No. 556-P., dated 11th June 1898.) 2. Regulation 3 (b).-" In regard to the question of the segregation of a plague patient in his own house, I am to point out that the cases contemplated in Mufassal Regulation 3 (b) and Madras City Regulation 11 (b) were exactly the cases in respect of which an exception has been admitted in paragraph 6 of the Resolution(b) of 3rd February of the Government of India. In this Presidency, both in mufassal stations and in Madras, it is common for well-to-do Native gentlemen and for Europeans to inhabit detached houses in the midst of spacious compounds. It appears to His Excel- lency the Governor in Council that should an occupant of such a house be attacked with plague, thoroughly efficient segregation could be enforced. This would in no way inter- fere with the ultimate vacation of the house. Meanwhile, the usual disinfecting precautions would of course be taken, and in the case of persons inhabiting such houses, would no doubt be efficient as they would be under professional super- vision. In these circumstances, I am to request that the Government of India may be moved to allow the Regulations in question to stand in their present form." (Letter to Gov- ernment of India, No. 120-P., dated 2nd March 1898.) "I am directed to state that under the circumstances explained in your letter, Mis. No. 120-P., dated the 2nd instant, the Government of India do not wish to urge the modification of the revised Plague Regulations issued by the Government of Madras for the mufassal and for the City of (a) Printed on pages 8 to 21. (b) Printed on pages 71 to 90. 15
?114 Madras in the manner suggested in my letter, No. 270, dated the 8th February 1898. "I am, however, to state that the Government of India consider that when segregation on the large premises of European and Native gentlemen is permitted, the sick person and the other inhabitants of the infected house should be located under shelter in the compound, and that the house itself should be immediately evacuated and disinfected in the manner indicated in paragraph 6 of the Resolution of the Government of India,* No. 227-240, dated the 3rd February 1898." (Letter from Government of India, Home Department, Sanitary, No. 626, dated 23rd March 1898, printed in G.O., No. 303-P., dated 1st April 1898.) 3. Regulation 14.-The   following is   a   list of railway in- spection stations under this Regulation:- (1)  Podanr under a retired Military Assistant Surgeon.   (G.O., No. 261-M., dated 22nd February 1897; and Notification No. 2, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd March 1897, Part I, page 272.) (2)  Arkonam under a temporary doctor obtained from England. (G.O., No. 319-M., dated 27th February 1897 ; and Notifi- cation No. 1, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd March 1897, Part I, page 272.) (3)   Kondapalli under a Military Assistant Surgeon.    (G.O., No. 1639-M., dated 23rd July 1897; and Notification No. 28, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 27th July 1897, Part I, page 958.) (4)  Hospet under a Commissioned Medical Officer.   (G.O., No. 2393-M., dated 1st November 1897; and Notification No. 774, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 2nd November 1897, Part I-A, page 271.) (5)   Tungabhadra under a Commissioned Medical Officer.    (G.O., No. 337-P., dated 16th April 1898; and Notification No. 302, Fort St. George Gazette, dated. 19th April 1898, Part I-A, page 92.) There is also an inspection station at Perambr under Madras City Regulation 12 of the 18th December 1897. 4. Regulation 14.-" With regard to the examination of passengers, the Government considers that all passengers should be required to quit their carriages and be examined on the platform or in some suitable place, cases of suspicion * Printed on pages 71 to 90.  Ordered to be placed in charge of a temporary doctor from England-Vide G.O. No. 637-P., dated 2nd July 1898.
?115 being removed for more careful investigation to a place reserved for the purpose. Care must be taken that the carriages are locked before the arrival of the train at the inspection station and that no passenger is permitted to leave his carriage until in orderly course the arrangements shall be complete for such examination. "The Surgeon-General will keep this department and the Railway Branch of the Public Works Department fully informed of all medical arrangements made in this connection and regarding the strength of the staff at the various inspec- tion stations appointed under the Plague Regulations." (G.O., No. 351-M., dated 2nd March 1897, paragraphs 3 and 4.) 5. Regulation 14.-"The Agent and Manager, Madras Rail- way, will issue instructions to the railway staff to give every assistance to the medical officers conducting the inspection in order to minimise the detention of trains. "The Agent and Manager, Madras Railway, will arrange to detain the trains at Guntakal* until the medical inspection is over and to carry those passengers who have not been detained by the Sanitary officer by the same train. "In order to avoid detention at Perambr of passengers who have already been passed by the Inspectors at Arkonam and Guntakal,* punches with a special device should be supplied to the inspecting officers at Guntakal* and Arkonam who will punch the tickets of all passengers passed by them; passengers producing tickets at Perambr punched with this device should be allowed to proceed at once by the same train." (G.O., No. 128-R., dated 25th February 1897, rules 2, 3 and 6, printed in G.O., No. 332-M., dated 1st March 1897.) "Care should be taken that the punches are not used except by responsible persons, and that they are kept in safe custody when not in use." (G.O., No. 519-M., dated 13th March 1897.) 6. Regulation 14.-"The order prohibiting the locking of carriage doors printed on page 93, paragraph 228 of the Company's working time-table is suspended for stations * The inspection station has been removed from Guntakal to Tungabhadra with effect from the 22nd April 1898.
?116 adjacent to inspection stations." (G.O., No. 132-R., dated 26th February 1897, printed in G.O., No. 345-M., dated 2nd March 1897.) 7. Regulation 14.-"The Government of India are advised that, in the absence of any symptoms showing a passenger to be suffering from fever, it is unnecessary to examine his person for the purpose of finding out whether buboes are present, and I am directed to request that this practice, if it is at present enforced anywhere, may be discontinued." (Letter from the Government of India, Home Department, Sanitary, No. 47, dated 5th January 1898, paragraph 8, printed in G.O., No. 10-P., dated 8th February 1898.) 8. Regulation 14.-"As regards pilgrims in reference to whom the Collector of Madura offers certain suggestions, it seems to Government that a man who arrives at one of the Frontier Inspection Stations and states that he is going to Ramesvaram or elsewhere on a pilgrimage must ordinarily be unable to satisfy the inspecting medical officer in charge of the station "that he is proceeding to any fixed place of resi- dence." A pilgrim thus unable to satisfy the medical officer should be detained for ten days under Regulation 14 of the 18th December 1897, and the inspecting medical officers should be instructed to act accordingly." (G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898.) 9. Regulation 17.-"The proper safeguard against the development of plague, after a person has passed Guntakal * is in the working of Regulations 16 and 17, under which the name and address of every individual coming from an infected area are communicated to the local authorities of the place of his destination, where he is, or should be, kept under observation. If these Regulations are attended to everywhere, there is no need to establish a number of in- spection stations in the interior of the Presidency, and it would, as a rule, suffice to have them on the frontiers." (G.O., No. 98-P., dated 28th February 1898, paragraph 1.) * The inspection station has been removed from Guntakal to Tungabhadra with effect from the 22nd April 1898.
?117 10. Regulation 17-ii.-"There is no doubt that at small rail- way stations the duties connected with the issue of passports under the Plague Regulations can be performed by the Station-masters, while it might perhaps be difficult for them to undertake the task at some of the larger stations. The Collector must settle with the Railway authorities of each district at which stations the railway staff shall be required to do the work and at which stations the Collector should make other arrangements." (G.O., No. 454-P., dated 9th May 1898.) 11. Regulation 25.-"Any regulations that Collectors or the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, may find necessary to frame under clauses (1) (b) of this Regulation and City Regulation 16 should provide that when the burial of a person who has died of plague takes place in proximity to habita- tions or sources of watersupply, the corpse shall be wrapped in a cloth soaked in a solution of corrosive sublimate and be buried 6 feet deep." (G.O., No. 429-P., dated 4th May 1898.) 12. Regulation 29.-This Regulation is in force at the inspec- tion stations in the Bellary district. (G.O., No. 337-P., dated 16th April 1898; and Notification No. 302, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 19th April 1898, Part I-A, page 92.) Also in the Nilgiri district. (G.O., No. 515-P., dated 26th May 1898; and Notification No. 468, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 7th June 1898, Part I-A, page 173.) II-Madras City Regulations of 18th December 1897.(a) 1. Regulation 1.-Vide note under Original Mufussal Regu- lation 1 of 18th December 1897 (page 113). 2. Regulation 11 (b).-Vide note under Original Mufassal Regulation 3 (b) of 18th December 1897 (page 113). (a) Printed on pages 22 to 29.
?118 3. Regulation 16.-Vide note under Original Mufassal Regu- lation 25 of 18th December 1897 (page 117). III-Additional Mufassal Regulations of 1st March 1898.(a) 1. Regulation 1.-" With reference to No. 1 of the Addi- tional Mufassal Regulations, published at pages 55-63 of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 1st March 1898, His Excel- lency the Governor of Fort St. George in Council hereby declares the districts of Bellary and Kurnool to be Under Observation." (G.O., No. 134-P., dated 4th March 1898; and Notification No. 186, Fort St. George Gazette, dated 8th March 1898, Part I-A., page 66.) 2. Regulation 4.-The following articles should be maintained at Road Frontier Inspection Stations. The District Medical Officer may increase the quantities named if he considers the traffic on the road concerned warrants it. The medicines should not be supplied unless a medical subordinate be in charge. The equipment of Railway Frontier Inspection Stations will be the subject of special representation by the officer in charge. Disinfectants.      LB. Soapnut              ....   5 Soft soap            ....   3 Perchloride of mercury   2 Common salt      ....   2 Permanganate of potash  1                                                           Sanitary Equipments. 4 Wooden tubs (25 gallons).      6 Earth chatties.                                                     Hospital Equipment. 2 Bamboo stretchers with awning. Native hospital clothing for six males. 3 Galvanized iron buckets, 8 Cumblies. with two iron hooks. 6 Matrasses. 5 Kerosine hand lanterns. 12 Pillow cases. 5   Country rope charpoys, 24 Mats. or chentsu cots. 2 Camp tables. Native   hospital  clothing 2   Do.   chairs. for six females.  (a)  Printed on pages 30 to 45.
?119 Hospital Comforts.        BOTTLES.  Arrack   . .        . .        . .        . .     4       LB. Arrowroot     2       TINS. Condensed milk (milk maid brand)  6 Bovril      6 Cooking utensils. 2 Two-pint block tin sauce   6 China bowls of sizes. pans.  1  Frying-pan.  Medicines, &c.       oz. Tinctura Cinchon    2 Ammonii Carbonas    1  Spirits Ammon Aromat.    2 Spirits ther Sulph. .........   4 Caffeine      Quinine Sulph.      Acid Sulphuric dil.    2 Hydrargyri Subchloridum   1/3 Pil. Rhea Co.                 ........    Pil. Col. Co.                   .......    Oleum Ricini     2 Tinctura Opii     1 Opium       Tinctura Assaftid    2 Oleum Menth Pip.     Spirits theris Nitrosi    4 Liquor Ammonia Acetatis   10 Antipyrin      Potass Bromidum    2  Scales and weights    1 set. No. Glass mortar     1 Spatula      1 Slab      1 Clinical Thermometer    1 Ounce glass     1 Minim measure     1 Pocket case     1 (G.O., No. 93-P., dated 26th February 1898; No. 257-P., dated 18th April 1898; and No. 602-P., dated 22nd June 1898.) 3. Regulation 5.-The  Medical  Officers  in charge  of   the inspection stations at Hospet and Tungabhadra have been
?120 appointed to act under this Regulation. (G.O., No. 337-P., dated 16th April 1898; and G.O., No. 466-P., dated 13th May 1898.) 4. Regulation 5.-Vide note under Original Mufassal Regu- lation 17-(ii) of 18th December 1897 (page 117). 5. Regulation 16.-"With reference to  the rules regarding 'certificates  of  the  cause of death,' I am to say that the Government of India have no doubt that the  Government of Madras fully realize that recent experience in the Bombay Presidency has shown that any system of corpse examination is dangerous and requires the exercise of great caution and judgment.    The Government of India observe that the Col- lector is not empowered to require the production of the certificate unless  he  has a sufficient  medical  staff at  his disposal to secure immediate inspection, so that there may be no chance of funerals being delayed.    The Government of India consider this to be a very wise precaution, and that it must absolutely precede the consideration of the question whether corpse inspection in any form can be  introduced at all.    They are further of opinion that it is necessary that the Collector should also have a sufficient staff of female assist- ants for the prompt examination of all corpses   of women. The examination of the corpses of women by men should never be required.    In the   second  part of rule 16  of the rules issued by the Government of Madras, it is stated that if  burial or   cremation takes   place without a  certificate of the cause  of death having been obtained, the death may be presumed to have been due to plague and the persons believed to have been in recent immediate  contact with the corpse shall be liable to segregation and detention.    In the event of it ever becoming necessary to enforce the provisions of rule 16 anywhere in the Madras Presidency, the Government of India consider that it should be made clear to the people that the  examination of corpses  will never be compulsory, and that they may always accept the alternative of the enforce- ment of the precautions adopted in the event of ascertained cases of plague."    (Letter from the Government  of   India, Home Department, No. 662, dated 25th March 1898, printed in G.O., No. 330-P., dated 14th April 1898.)
?121 6. Regulation 21.-" This Regulation authorises Collectors to requisition the services of railway employs only for work connected with a railway, and it is not intended to employ them in such a manner as to interfere with their duties as railway servants. Collectors will, however, be instructed that railway servants should not be called upon to do plague duty when it would interfere with their proper avocations or re- quire them to absent themselves from the place where their duty as railway servants has to be performed." (G.O., No. 314-P., dated 4th April 1898.) IV.-Quarantine Regulations of the 31st August 1897.(a) 1. General.-" These Regulations impose upon every 'Sani- tary authority,' within whose jurisdiction a port exists, the duty of providing suitable places for the segregation, obser- vation and treatment of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague." (G.O., No. 1218-M., dated 17th May 1897.) 2. General.-By Notification No. 49 published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 10th May 1898, Part I, page 421 (G.O., No. 328-A, Marine, dated 2nd May 1898), the quaran- tine Regulations have been imposed at all ports of the Madras Presidency against arrivals from Calcutta. On the 10th May 1898, the following telegram was sent to the Port Health Officer, Madras:- "Admit healthy vessels from Calcutta into harbour and "allow them work cargo on following conditions, namely, "ships' crews to be inspected night and morning and not to "leave ship; list with addresses of shore coolies employed to "be maintained and those who do not return to work next "day, to be inspected under orders of Municipal Health Offi- "cer with whom arrange. "Indent on Commissioner, Police, for men to prevent any "but registered coolies from boarding ships, and ships' crews "from landing, and to guard bathing enclosures, and to com- "pel their use by coolies. "All coolies and police who have boarded ships to take "disinfecting bath in enclosure on beach after landing and (a) Printed on pages 46 to 54. 16
?122 "before going home.    Arrange  with Harbour  Board for "enclosure. "Disinfect their clothes also. Examine boats and cargoes "for rats." (G.O., No. 367, Marine, dated 11th May 1898.) 3. General.-"His Excellency the Governor in Council is pleased to extend to all outports of the Madras Presidency, where the Port Health Officer is not below the rank of Apothecary, the provisions of G.O., No. 367, Marine, dated 11th May 1898, in regard to working cargo on healthy ships from an infected port. The requisite police force will be drawn from the District Reserves, and if these prove insuffi- cient, the Inspector-General will apply for sanction to the entertainment of additional men as a temporary measure." (G.O., No. 382, Marine, dated 13th May 1898.) 4. General.-"If the provisions of G.O., No. 367, Marine, dated 11th May 1898, as extended by G.O. No. 382, Marine, dated 13th May 1898, be strictly applied to all outports, medi- cal inspection will, during the ten day period, be necessary at every port at which a vessel touches, however short the interval between inspections. His Excellency the Govern- or in Council is pleased to relax the rule so far as to allow one inspection only in the case of the twin ports at which steamers call on the same day, provided that no sickness shall have declared itself on board after inspection at the first, and before arrival at the second, port." (G.O., No. 432, Marine, dated 27th May 1898.) 5. Regulation 15 (3).-"The Government of India under- stand that Regulation 15 (3) is intended to prohibit the detention of healthy persons on board an infected ship except when, through stress of weather or some other cause, it is absolutely impossible to land them." (Letter from the Government of India, Home Department, Sanitary, No. 2091, dated 8th September 1897.) "The interpretation placed by the Government of India on Regulation 15 (3) is in accordance with the intention of the Madras Government. Under the rule in question, all persons on board an infected vessel are, if possible, to be landed." (G.O., No. 823, Marine, dated 21st September 1897.)
?123 V.-Marine Regulations of the 2nd November 1897.(a) 1. Appendix I-" All Commissioned Medical Officers of the Madras Presidency are hereby authorised to grant the certifi- cate shown in Appendix I." (G.O., No. 512, Marine, dated 17th June 1898.) VI.-Miscellaneous. I. "All communications addressed to Government and to other officers regarding the bubonic plague should be marked with the word 'Plague' in red ink on the outside covers and on the left-hand corner of the papers themselves." (G.O., No. 2414-M., dated 2nd November 1897.) 2. "I am directed to request that, with the permission of the Governor in Council, copies of all notifications issued by the Government of Madras under the Epidemic Diseases Act may be forwarded to all other Local Governments and Administrations. It is desirable that all Local Governments and Administrations should be aware of the measures adopted in other parts of India, and the experience of one province may be of assistance to other provinces." (Letter from the Government of India, No. 6, Sanitary 602, dated 20th Feb- ruary 1897, printed in G.O., No. 294-M., dated 25th Feb- ruary 1897.) 3. "I am to invite the attention of the Govern- ment of Madras to the last sentence of rule 11 of the Resolution (b) of the Government of India in the Home Department, Nos. 227-240, dated the 3rd February last. In that sentence the Government of India expressed the opinion that the rules should not, under any circumstances, exempt from their operation any class of persons as such, or be limited to persons who travel by railway by a particular class. They consider that such class exemptions are open (a) Printed on pages 55 to 60. (b) Printed on pages 71 to 90.
124 to the gravest objection, and that the rules should be gov- erned by the principle that they should apply to all classes alike, but that the precautionary measures should only be enforced against persons with regard to whom there are reasonable grounds of suspicion." (Letter from the Govern- ment of India, Home Department, No. 662, dated 25th March 1898, printed in G.O., No. 330-P., dated 14th April 1898.) 4. "The Government of India consider it will be best that they should continue to issue Regulations affecting sea-borne trade and that Local Governments should not issue such Regulations under Epidemic Diseases Act." (Telegram from the Government of India, Home Department, No. 516, dated 17th February 1897, printed in G.O., No. 142, Marine, dated 20th February 1897.) 5. "I am to request that, with the permission of the Gov- ernor in Council, instructions may be issued that no plague cultures or substances infected, or supposed to be infected, with plague virus should be sent to the Agra Laboratory." (Letter from the Government of India, No. 9, Sanitary 869, dated 9th March 1897.) "Communicated to the Surgeon-General and the Sanitary Commissioner. The Surgeon-General is requested to com- municate this to all District Medical Officers and the Surgeons of Districts in Madras. Experiments with the plague virus being conducted at the Medical College or by the Health Officer of the municipality or elsewhere should be stopped and all cultures carefully destroyed." (G.O., No. 649-M., dated 22nd March 1897.) 6. "Due notice will be given by Government as soon as it is considered safe to relax any of the restrictions now im- posed on trade and on the movement of passengers. Until then, they should be carefully enforced." (G.O., No. 1574- M., dated 9th July 1897.) 7. "Collectors should at once report to Government any action they may take, or propose to take, in the way of applying the Regulations to any area. His Excellency the
?125 Governor in Council would impress on all Collectors and Presidents of District Boards, the necessity of prudence and care in working the Regulations, and of obtaining the best medical, sanitary or other advice available before taking action." (G.O., No. 219A.-M., dated 15th February 1897.) 8. "If difficulty should arise in any district in the working of the Regulations under the Epidemic Diseases Act and the rules * issued in G.O., No. 522-M., dated the 13th March 1897, the Collector of the district is requested to refer the matter at once for the orders of Government. "Collectors are authorized to spend whatever may be necessary for carrying out the requirements of the regula- tions and rules issued under the Epidemic Diseases Act to meet any emergency that may arise." (G.O., No. 2276A.-M., dated 18th October 1897.) 9. "As regards the cost of these inspection stations, the Government considers that all charges incurred on account of the superior medical officers, the magistracy and the police may be met from Provincial funds, while expenditure on account of the subordinate staff, hutting, medical appli- ances and the like should be paid by local boards, the muni- cipalities also sharing the cost where the inspection stations are adjacent to them. The proportions to be paid by these bodies may be settled by mutual arrangement or by the Collector subject to the orders of the Government." (G.O., No. 900-M., dated 13th April 1897, paragraph 2.) 10. G.O., No. 720, Financial, dated 4th September 1897.- "With reference to G.O., No. 411, dated the 19th of May 1897, asking me to maintain separate accounts of plague charges and to submit quarterly statements of such charges to Government, I have the honour to state that the Comp- troller-General has instructed me that special medical expenditure on account of the plague should be debited to new heads specially opened under '24. Medical' in the accounts, but that all expenditure on additional Police or Revenue establishments, as well as the cost of any additional staff for the ordinary hospitals and dispensaries, &c., should * Printed on pages 61 to 70.
?126 be charged to the appropriate service heads, even though the additional appointments may be due to the plague. "I would enquire whether the quarterly statements to be submitted by me should include also the indirect charges debited to the ordinary service heads or whether it will be sufficient if only the direct charges classified separately in the accounts are shown in them. If Government requires the former also, I would observe that information regarding the indirect charges will have to be collected in this office from the paid bills, and that separate registers will have to be maintained for the purpose. If, however, the direct charges alone are required, the quarterly statement can easily be prepared from my books." (Letter from the Accountant-General, No. 2369, dated 3rd August 1897.) " I have the honour to state that in its order No. 411, Financial, dated 19th May 1897, Government has directed that all general precautionary charges incurred in connection with plague should, for the present, be debited to Provincial funds. "In paragraph 2 of G.O., No. 900-M., dated 13th April 1897, recorded in G.O., Mis. No. 370, Financial, dated 4th May 1897, however, it has been ruled, with reference to the incidence of cost of plague inspection stations, that all charges on account of superior medical officers, the magistracy and the police may be met from Provincial funds, while expendi- ture on account of the subordinate staff, hutting, medical appliances and the like should be paid by local boards, the municipalities also sharing the cost in cases where the inspec- tion stations are adjacent to them. "In the later order of 19th May 1897, no reference is made to the order of 4th May 1897, and it is not clear there- fore from what source the charges should be met in the first instance,-whether wholly from Provincial funds, subject to subsequent adjustment of the portion chargeable to Local and Municipal funds or to what particular class of charges the order of 19th May refers. I therefore solicit early orders of Government on the subject." (Letter from the Account- ant-General, No. 2403, dated 6th August 1897.) Order No. 720, Financial, dated 4th September 1897.-"In the orders already passed on the incidence of plague charges in this Presidency, it has been decided that Provincial revenues and Local funds shall, for the present, bear the expenditure as follows:-
?127 G.O., No. 900-M., dated 13th April  1897. G.O., No. 411, Financial, dated 19th May 1897. G.O., No.  900-M., dated 13th April 1897. G.O., No. 1848-M., dated 24th August 1897.  Provincial.-(i) All charges incurred on account of superior medical officers, the magistracy and the police; (ii) Cost of telegrams and all other precautionary charges incurred by Provincial departments. Local and Municipal.-(i) Cost of subordinate medical staff, hutting, medical appliances and the like; (ii) All expenses incurred at plague camps and inspection stations. "As the expenditure from the above sources would appear to be considerably in excess of original expectations and as the question of an eventual contribution from Provin- cial funds remains undecided, the Government considers that the Accountant-General would do well to maintain separate accounts of all the charges, whether direct or indirect, Pro- vincial or Local, and to include them in the quarterly state- ments." (G.O., No. 720, Financial, dated 4th September 1897, printed in G.O., No. 2106-M., dated 27th September 1897.) 11. Order No. 514-P., dated 25th May 1898.--" The suggestion of the Collector of Kurnool that all expenditure in connection with the plague should be defrayed in the first instance from Provincial funds subject be final adjustment at the close of the operations cannot be accepted. G.O., No. 720, Financial, dated 4th September 1897, lays down the incidence of plague charges, and the Government sees no reason why it should be deviated from. If any district board or municipality finds its funds unequal to the burden of plague charges, it should remodel its budget by omitting all avoidable expenditure and in the last resort may apply for an advance from Provincial funds. "2. The Collector being the officer who should initiate and control all plague measures in his district, is primarily respons- ible for making provision for the necessary expenditure, and it will be his duty to see that municipal and district board budgets are so framed as to provide sufficient funds for carry- ing out those measures, and in cases where the expenditure has to be met by Government to obtain grants in ample time. As most of the Provincial expenditure will fall under 24. Medical, Collectors will be requested to forward their
?128 applications for grants through the Surgeon-General, who will, after checking the estimates under the heads controlled by him, consolidate them in his office and submit them in print to Government. Except in circumstances of very great urgency, no Collector should work without a duly sanctioned grant. Where unforeseen expenditure for which there is no grant has to be incurred, immediate report of the fact should be made to Government. "3. To enable Government to exercise a proper check over plague expenditure and to see that the provision of funds is adequate, the Collector of each district where plague pre- ventive measures are being taken should, in addition to the annual estimate referred to in paragraph 2, submit, through the Surgeon-General by the 5th of each month in the forms adopted in the civil budget estimates and under the proper service heads, a detailed statement of the actual expenditure in the previous month and an estimate of the probable require- ments for the current month and the remainder of the official year. In these estimates the grants already sanctioned from Provincial and the sums which have been made available from Local and Municipal funds should be shown. The Account- ant-General is requested to get the necessary forms printed and supplied to the Collectors concerned and to the Surgeon- General as soon as possible. The Superintendent, Govern- ment Press, will see that these forms and estimates are printed as quickly as possible." (G.O., No. 514-P., dated 25th May 1898.) 12. G.O., No. 547, Financial, dated 18th June 1898.-" The principles already laid down in G.O., No. 720, Financial, dated 4th September 1897, in regard to the distribution of plague charges between Provincial, Local and Municipal funds will be adhered to and, as already intimated in para- graph 1 of G.O., No. 514 P., dated 25th May 1898, the proposal that all expenditure in connection with the plague should be defrayed in the first instance from Provincial funds, cannot be entertained. "2. There is some force, however, in the remarks in para- graph 2 of the letter from the Collector of Bellary, No. 551, dated 27th March 1898, for there can be no doubt that the measures adopted in the frontier districts proper which adjoin or are nearest to the plague-stricken areas of Bombay, Hyderabad and Bengal, while primarily benefiting those
?129 districts themselves as being nearest the seat of infection, at the same time have the direct result of protecting other portions of the Presidency as well. This remark is also to some extent applicable to such districts as North Arcot and Coimbatore, which are not frontier districts proper, but in which special plague inspection stations have been established. "3. His Excellency the Governor in Council therefore directs that the portion of plague expenditure in frontier districts, which, under G.O., No. 720, Financial, dated 4th September 1897, is not Provincial, shall, with effect from the 1st April 1898, be distributed in the ratios of one-third in frontier districts proper, and of one-fourth in such districts as Coimbatore and North Arcot, against the district in which the expenditure is incurred, the remaining two-thirds or three-fourths, as the case may be, being contributed by the other districts of the Presidency rateably to their annual receipts. "4. The estimates called for by the Local and Municipal Department in paragraph 2 of G.O., No. 514 P., dated 25th May 1898, should be recast on the foregoing lines, and that department will be requested to issue the necessary orders at an early date to ensure that all Local Boards and Municipali- ties adjust their budget estimate for the current year and, if necessary, for ensuing years, in order to meet the proportion of plague charges debitable to them. "5. The classification of details will be in accordance with the distribution shown in the appendix to these proceedings. APPENDIX.* PLAGUE CHARGES. Provincial. 3. Land Revenue-Charges of District Administration- Additions to Collector's office establishment. (Temporary clerks-Regulation 13.) Plague Officers (Regulation 26)- Divisional officers, Assistant Collectors, Personal Assistants to the Collector. Special Divisional officers. Extra Assistants in charge of taluks or smaller areas. * The regulations referred to in the appendix are those issued in G.O., No. 93 P., dated 26th February 1898. 17
?130. Assistant Plague Officers- Tahsildars, Deputy Tahsildars (ordinary or special), ex-officio, and persons specially appointed. Cost  of  stationery, postage, telegraph  and   other incidental charges incurred departmentally (Regulation 26). Cost of printing passports and passes (Regulation 29). 5 and 7. Salt and Excise- Peons of the Salt and Excise department ordered on plague duty (Regulation 12). 20. Police-District Executive Force- Officers in charge of Frontier Inspection Stations (Regulation 2). Constables detailed for " Cordon" duty (Regulation 12). Constables and peons accompanying Tahsildars (Regulation 18). 24. Medical-Medical Establishments- Additional   Commissioned    and   Non-commissioned   Medical Officers (Regulation 21). Additions  to   office   staff  of  District Medical  and   Sanitary Officers (temporary clerks)-Regulation 13. Personal  and office tents, with lascars, from  the  Inspector- General of Ordnance (Regulation 13). Hospital staff transferred to plague duty (Regulation 13). Imperial. Cordon Staff-Military- One   hundred  men  of  Madras  Infantry   and  all  connected charges (Regulation 11). Local. 24-D. Medical-Grants for Medical Purposes- Frontier Inspection Stations (Regulations 3 to 5)- Pay and travelling allowance of establishments entertained for Railway and Road Frontier Inspection Stations. Observation Staff (Regulations 6, 27, and G.O., No.  93 P., dated 26th February 1898) -   ? Pay. Travelling allowance. Horse allowance. Total.  RS. RS. RS. RS. Plague Supervisors 150 30 15 195 Plague  Inspectors or Sanitary   In- spectors. 45 15 15 75 Assistant Plague Inspectors ... ... ... 15-25 Their peons ... ... ... ... Supervisors of Camps and Gumastahs ... T.A. ... 15-45 Ambulance Staff (Regulation 9)- 2  European or Eurasian  nurses. 4 Male ward attendants. 3  Female ward attendants. 4  Dhooly-bearers.
?131 3 Male and 2 female toties. 2 Dhobies. 2 Cooks. 1  Certificated Sanitary Inspector. 2  Hospital Assistants. 1 Compounder. Supplies and Services, Contingencies- Cost of stretchers, medical stores,  disinfectants and comforts, hospital furniture and clothing (Regulation 8). Cost of construction  of observation plague  camps, including hospitals at Railway Inspection Stations   (including sheds and quarters) and at Road and Frontier Inspection Stations. Cost of  stationery, postage,  telegraph and other incidental charges incurred by the officers in this list. N.B.-Travelling expenses and all other contingent charges incurred by officers of Government departments should be debited to the departments con- cerned. Similar charges incurred by officers specially appointed should be debited to the heads to which their salaries or allowances are debited. Order No. 596 P., dated 20th June 1898.-" Communicated to all Collectors, Presidents of District Boards, Chairmen of Municipal Councils and the Surgeon-General for informa- tion and guidance. The estimates already called for from Collectors should be revised in accordance with the orders now issued, and all Local Boards and District Municipalities should scrutinize their budgets with a view to provide for plague expenditure debitable to them." (G.O., No. 596-P., dated 20th June 1896.)
