THE MADRAS MARINE PLAGUE REGULATIONS. (Revised up to 30th September 1910.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 1 anna 6 pies.] 1910. [3 pence.]
THE  MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS  IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN.  (Revised up to 23rd March 1909.)  M A D R A S:  PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS.  1909.
?CONTENTS.         PAGE  I.-The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.. .. ..    1  II.-Notification of the Government of India, Home Department   (Sanitary-Plague), No. 2256, dated 22nd December 1906,   delegating to Local Governments powers under the   Epidemic Diseases Act      3  III. -Plague regulations in force outside the Presidency Town   4  APPENDICES.  APPENDIX I. - Notes on certain matters connected with plague--   (1) General remarks..      60  (2) Advantages of early discovery of plague    61  (3) Observation, disinfection and segregation of   contacts        62  (4) Evacuation       62  (5) Inoculation       63  (6) Disinfection       64  (7)Rat-plague and destruction of rats    66  "II-A.-Plague passport      70  "II-B.-General pass, for journeys by road or boat    71  "II-C.-General pass, for journeys by rail     72  "II-D.-General pass, for persons leaving an infected or   notified place to attend markets      72  "II-E.-Special pass, for persons leaving an inhabited   infected area       73  "II-E1.-Pass for plague contacts . .     74  "II-F.-Plague inoculation certificate     74  "II-G.-Register of permanent passes issued to persons   attending markets       75  "II-H.-Relaxation of passport rules     76  "II-H1-Ex-officio exemption certificate     78  "II-I.-Intimation form      79  "II-J.-Time allowed at inspection stations for plague   examination       80  "II-K.-Detention certificate      80  "II-M.-Statement to accompany proposals for placing   restrictions on fairs and festivals     81  "II-N.-Notifications for placing restrictions on fairs and   festivals        82  "II-O.-Plague report to be submitted to Government   83  "II-O1.-Plague report to be submitted to Collector    84
?iv        PAGE  APPENDIXII-P.-Destruction of plague records  87  "II-Q.-Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of  Government     88  "II-R.-Part I-Allowances of officers deputed to plague  duty      89  Part II-Salaries of officers temporarily enter-  tained for plague duty ..    92  "II-S.-Pay and allowances of plague inspectors  94  "II-T.-List of plague charges    97  "II-U.-Madras Command order No. 810, dated 7th  October 1903, prescribing rules regulating the  movement of troops from infected areas   101  "II-V.-G.O., No. 656, Financial, dated 29th September  1905, prescribing the form of the quarterly  statements of audited charges to be submitted  by the Accountant-General    106  II-W.-Instructions for the forwarding of material to the  King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy.  111  "II-X.-Rules for the use of Cyllin   115  "II-Y.-Description of the 'Success Knapsack Sprayer.' 116
?THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE  OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN.  I.  THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897).  An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of  Dangerous Epidemic Disease.  WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention  of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby  enacted as follows:-  Short title, extent and  commencement.  1. (1) This Act may be called the  Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897;  (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive  of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas  and the Pargana of Spiti); and  (3) It shall come into force at once.  Power to take special  measures and prescribe  regulations as to dangerous  epidemic disease.  2. (1) When at any time the Governor-General in Council  is satisfied that India or any part  thereof is visited by, or threatened with,  an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic  disease, the Governor-General in Council,  if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the  time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take  or require or empower any person to take such measures and,  by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations to be  observed by the public or by any person or class of persons  as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such  disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what  manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including com-  pensation if any) shall be defrayed.  (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene-  rality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in  Council may take measures and prescribe Regulations for-  (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or  arriving at, any port in British India and such
2 [Epidemic Diseases Act.  detention thereof, or of any person intending  to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be  necessary; and  (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway  or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital,  temporary accommodation or otherwise, of  persons suspected by the inspecting officer of  being infected with any such disease.  (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general  or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred  by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government  with respect to the territories administered by it.  Penalty.  3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made  under this Act shall be deemed to have  committed an offence punishable under  section 188 of the Indian Penal Code.  XLV   1860.  Protections to persons  acting under Act.  4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any  person for anything done or in good  faith intended to be done under this  Act.
?3  II.  NOTIFICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME  DEPARTMENT (SANITARY-PLAGUE), No. 2256, DATED  CALCUTTA, THE 22ND DECEMBER 1906, DELEGATING TO  LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIONS POWERS  CONFERRED BY THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.  WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others  threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease  known as plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise  of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3) of the  Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897), is pleased to direct  that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised,  to prevent the outbreak of plague or the spread thereof, by  local Governments and administrations with regard to their  respective territories as follows:-  (a) All the said powers by the Governors of Fort St.  George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governors of  Bengal, Eastern Bengal and Assam and Burma;  * * * *  2. The notifications of the Government of India in the  Home Department, No. 302, dated the 4th February 1897,  No. 834, dated the 6th March 1897, No. 1330, dated the 27th  May 1898, and No. 4614, dated the 28th November 1898, are  hereby cancelled.  *
?4  III.  PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE  THE PRESIDENCY TOWN.  WHEREAS certain parts of the Presidency of Madras are  visited by, and other parts are threatened with, an outbreak of  a dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, and whereas the  ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force in the  Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the  outbreak or spread of the disease:  In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-  section (1) of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and delegated  to him under sub-section (3) of the same section by the  notification of the Government of India in the Home Depart-  ment, No. 2256, of the 22nd December 1906, the Governor of  Fort St. George in Council is pleased to prescribe under the  said Epidemic Diseases Act, and in supersession of all regula-  tions previously issued on the subject, the following regulations  to be observed throughout the Presidency except the City of  Madras:-  Part I.-The Passport System and other General Precau-  tionary Measures to be adopted in all Towns and  Villages outside the Presidency Town.  Infected  area.  1. The Local Government, or, subject to their control, the  Collector of a District, may issue an order declaring that any  town, village or other area is infected with plague; and a copy  of such order shall be notified in the next issue of the Fort St.  George or District Gazette. The order will ordinarily take  effect from the date of notification in the Gazette. But when  the order is issued by the Collector in an emergency, it will  take effect as soon as it has been notified locally by beat of  tom-tom under the Collector's orders. As a rule, only places  in which one or more indigenous cases of plague have occurred  or in which the existence of plague among rats has been proved  by bacteriological tests should be so notified. The Local  Government may in the same manner notify railway stations,  which, from their proximity to infected areas, are liable to be  used by persons leaving such areas.
?5  Surveillance  or passport  rules.  Every  arrival from  an infected  or notified  area bound  to obtain  a passport  and place  himself  under  surveillance.  2. (1) Every person arriving, or suspected of having  arrived, from any place notified under the last preceding rule  shall, unless he is exempted under Rules 89 and 121 or unless  he already holds a passport or a permanent pass under Rules  82-84 or unless he has been detained for the full period of  incubation at a road or railway inspection station or in a plague  camp, before leaving the railway station at which he has  alighted, or before disembarking from the steamer, ship or boat  in which he has travelled, or in the case of arrival by road  either immediately on reaching a road frontier inspection station  or any town or village within an area placed under observation  under Rule 52 infra or within twelve hours from the time of  arrival at any other place, obtain from the officer mentioned in  Rule 3 infra a passport in the form shown in Appendix II-A  binding him to present himself for observation daily for the  next seven days before the local authority of the town or village  where he may reside or work; and be shall be bound so to  present himself.  Definition of  "local  authority".  (2) By a "local authority" is meant any of the follow-  ing officers:-  (a) The local medical officer.  (b) The station-house officer.  (c) The headman of the village.  (d) The karnam of the village.  (e) Any person appointed by the Collector of the  district for the purpose.  In places where there is more than one local authority, the  duties of the local authority shall, unless the Collector other-  wise directs, be performed by the officer who stands first in the  order given in this clause. In large towns, such as Madura,  Trichinopoly, Salem, etc., the duties of local authorities under  these rules should ordinarily be performed by a medical  subordinate and should not be left to any lower class of officer.  Penalty. (3) Any person refusing to comply with or attempting to  evade this rule may be detained for seven days at the nearest  inspection station or other place appointed by the Collector for  the purpose in addition to being liable to the penalty prescribed  in Rule 100.  Note.-(1) This rule does not apply to passengers from a non-infected or non-notified  railway station who pass through an infected or notified railway station without breaking  journey at that station.  (2) Persons who make frequent or daily journeys from an infected to an  uninfected area may in lieu of passports be given general passes as laid down in Rule 84  infra.  (3) The Collector, or any plague officer or assistant plague officer not below the  rank of deputy tahsildar may, by written order, exempt any person from personal  attendance before the local authority. Exempted persons will be inspected at their  residence if the local authority considers inspection necessary or if superior authority  requires it. For the definition of plague officer and assistant plague officer see Rule 103.
?6 Passport- issuing officers. 3. The following officers are authorized to issue pass- ports:- (a) To travellers alighting at rail- The medical officer in charge or way inspection stations.  other officer acting under his   orders. (b) To travellers alighting at rail-  Such medical, sanitary or other way stations included within officer as may be appointed by municipal limits. the Chairman with the Collector's   approval. (c) To travellers alighting at other  The stationmaster or other officer  railway stations. appointed by the Collector for   the purpose. (d) To travellers arriving by The medical, sanitary or other steamer, ship or boat. officer appointed to examine such   travellers. (e) To travellers arriving by road. The medical, sanitary or other   officer appointed to examine such   travellers, or if no such officer   has been appointed, the local   authority of the place of arrival. The Collector should arrange with the railway authorities at which stations the railway staff shall be required to perform the duties connected with the issue of passports and at which stations the Collector should make other arrangements. Station- masters requiring forms or service postage stamps should apply to the Collectors concerned, and should use the following designation in franking covers containing correspondence connected with their passport work-" Stationmaster and Honorary Plague Passport-issuing officer." Duties of passport- holders. 4. Every person required by these rules to take out a pass- port shall declare truly his name, address, and such other particulars as may be required by the officer issuing the passport. He shall, unless exempted, for seven days from the date of the issue of the passport, daily present himself with his passport at the appointed time before the local authority of the place where he may be for the time being, and shall daily obtain that officer's signature on his passport in token of his having so presented himself. If he becomes ill or if any sickness occurs in the house in which he is or has been residing during the said period of seven days, he shall give immediate information of the same to the local authority. He shall report similarly any change in his residence occurring within seven days from the date of the issue of the passport, and if he changes his residence, he shall, before departure, get the entries under head- ings 11 and 12 of his passport altered by the local authority. On the expiry of the said period of seven days, he shall deliver
?7  up his passport to the local authority of the place where he may  then be.  Intimation  of issue of  passports.  5. Every officer issuing a passport shall immediately send  the triplicate copy of it by post, or by special messenger or in  any other manner which the Collector may direct, to the local  authority of the place of destination of the holder of the pass-  port. If the local authority of the place of destination is not  known, the triplicate copy of the passport shall be sent to the  tahsildar concerned for transmission to the local authority.  When the destination is beyond India, the triplicate should be  sent to the local authority at the port of departure from the  Madras Presidency. Intimation of the issue of the passport  need be telegraphed only in urgent cases.  Change of  residence  during  surveillance.  6. (1) The following procedure shall be followed in respect  of passport-holders who change their residence within the  Madras Presidency within seven days of their arrival:-  (a) The local authority of the original place of arrival  shall send the triplicate copy of the passport to the local  authority of the new place of destination after noting therein  the number of days during which the passport-holder has been  observed.  (b) If the new place of destination is in another district,  the change of residence shall also be intimated direct to the  district medical and sanitary officer of that district and through  the tahsildar or municipal chairman concerned to the district  medical and sanitary officer of the original place of arrival.  The intimation should contain the following particulars:-  Passport number, date and station of issue.  Passport-holder's name and father's name.  How long observed and where.  New place of residence-district, taluq, village, street, and  number or name and occupier of the house.  The forms should be printed at the District Presses.  (2) When the destination is beyond India, the intimation  should be sent to the local authority of the port of departure  from the Madras Presidency.  Duties of  local  authority  or passport-  examiner.  7. The local authority of the place of destination shall keep  himself promptly informed of all arrivals from infected or  notified areas, shall report to higher authority every person  arriving without a passport, and shall see that, on the arrival  of a passport-holder, he is observed daily for seven days. Any  case of illness or death in the house in which such passport-  holder is or has been residing shall be forthwith reported with  full details to the nearest plague officer or assistant plague
?8  officer or to the nearest medical officer. Particular attention  should be paid to cases of fever accompanied with acute affec-  tion of the lungs, as these symptoms may indicate the existence  of pneumonic plague. The appearance of glandular swellings  even though attended by constitutional disturbance so slight as  not to prevent the patient moving about, the occurrence of  abortion amongst women, of convulsions amongst children and  of sudden death in the aged should be regarded as suspicious  and should be reported. After seven days, the duplicate pass-  port shall be recovered from the passport-holder and sent to  the tahsildar or municipal chairman.  Register to be  maintained  by local  authority.  8. Every local authority shall maintain a register, which  may be in manuscript, in the following form:-  (1) Date of receipt of triplicate copy of passport or other  intimation.  (2) Name of passport-holder.  (3) From what infected or notified area arriving.  (4) Date of arrival of passport-holder.  (5) Number, date and place of issue of passport.  (6) How long kept under observation.  (7) State of health of the passport-holder and other persons  living in the house in which he is or has been residing.  (8) Date of departure if occurring within seven days.  (9) Destination.  (10) Date of despatch of triplicate passport to the local autho-  rity of the place of destination, and of intimation to the  tahsildar or municipal chairman and district medical  and sanitary officer.  (11) Date of despatch of the duplicate passport to the tahsildar  and how despatched. If sent by messenger, his name  and time of his departure.  Persons  passing  through a  railway  inspection  station.  9. In the case of persons passing through a railway  frontier inspection station, the medical officer in charge shall  record the following information in respect of every traveller  from an infected or notified area who is not detained by him  under the provisions of Rule 24 and shall send it without  delay-if possible by the railway guard of the same or next  train-to the district medical and sanitary officer of the district  to which such traveller is proceeding:-  (1) Date of arrival.  (2) Name of traveller (in full, including house-name and  caste-title).  (3) Father's name.  (4) Caste.  (5) Age and sex.
?9 (6) Whence coming. (7) Railway station of destination. (8) Number of railway ticket. (9) Destination and residence during the next seven days. District.  Taluq .  Village (or amsam and desam).  Street.  Number or name of the owner of  the house.  10. The foregoing rule does not require the maintenance of a register. The information referred to should be recorded in duplicate with the aid of carbon paper, a separate slip of paper being used for each passenger, except in the case of the members of a family proceeding to the same destination, when their names may be entered in one slip. One set of copies should be forwarded at once to the respective destinations and the other kept for reference at the inspection station. No such intimation is necessary in the case of persons exempted from the passport rules under Rule 89 as the officers to whom they are immediately subordinate are responsible for their observa- tion; but it should be forwarded in the case of inoculated persons from infected areas who hold valid certificates, as they are liable to be observed at their own houses. The intimation forms will be supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press, to Collectors on indent. If the guards of the trains and other railway subordinates do not carry out the instructions given to them with regard to the transmission of the names and addresses of passengers, they may be prosecuted. The object of sending intimation of arrivals from infected parts to the district medical and sanitary officer is not merely to inform him of the movements of such persons, but to enable him to see that the passport-issuing officers, the local authorities, and the tahsildars, respectively, carry out their duties under the pass- port rules. He should maintain a register of all intimations received by him and should see that all persons mentioned therein are duly accounted for. Intimation in respect of other travellers. 11. In the case of persons coming from an infected or notified area and not passing through a railway frontier inspec- tion station, the duty of recording the information mentioned in Rule 9 (excepting items 7 and 8) and of communicating it to the district medical and sanitary officer shall devolve on the officer issuing the passport. The form in which the informa- tion referred to should be recorded is prescribed in Appendix II-I. Copies of the form are supplied by the Superintendent, Government Press.
?01  Duties of  district  medical and  sanitary  officer and  tahsildar.  12. The district medical and sanitary officer shall forward  the reports referred to in Rules 6, 9 and 11 to the tahsildar  (or municipal chairman) concerned, within whose jurisdiction  the place of destination lies, and it shall be the tahsildar's (or  municipal chairman's) duty to see that the persons mentioned  in the reports are duly observed, and that any case of sickness  or death in the houses occupied by them is promptly reported,  and to bring to the Collector's notice all instances of omission  to issue passports and all attempts to evade these regulations.  The tahsildar (or municipal chairman) should file together the  reports received from the district medical and sanitary officer.  No separate register need be maintained by him. As soon as a  passport is recovered from the passport-holder under Rule 7, it  shall be forwarded without delay to the district medical and  sanitary officer after the number of the item in the report has  been noted on it and after the fact that the passport has been  recovered has been noted against the corresponding entry in the  report.  Incapacitated  persons and  minors.  13. In the case of incapacitated persons and persons who are  under twelve years of age, the obligation to take out passports  for them, to present them for daily inspection, to report truly  their names and addresses, to intimate any change in their  residence, and, to comply otherwise with the requirements of  these regulations shall rest on their legal guardians or on any  person in whose charge they travel or who receives them at the  railway station of destination.  Tahsildar's  duties may be  performed by  municipal  chairman.  14. The term "tahsildar" in these regulations includes  deputy tahsildar. In municipalities, the tahsildar's duties  under these regulations shall be performed by the municipal  chairman.  Note.-Rules 82-90 also relate to the subject of passports and should be referred to.  Notice in  railway  carriages  regarding  passports.  15. Every railway administration shall put up in a con-  spicuous place in every railway carriage a copy of the following  notice in English and in the principal vernacular language of  the country through which the railway line passes:-  Notice.  The Madras plague regulations require all passengers arriving  from plague-infected parts to take out passports at the station where  they alight, or  (1) in the case of passengers proceeding to Madras by mail trains  on the North-East Line and by the other lines of the Madras  and Southern Mahratta Railway, at Basin Bridge;  (2) in the case of those proceeding to Madras by trains, other than  mail trains, on the North-East Line of the Madras and  Southern Mahratta Railway, at Ponneri.
?11  Persons infringing the regulations render themselves liable to  prosecution.  Copies of Rules 1- 4 shall also be hung up in English and  the vernacular in all railway stations.  Inspection  of railway  passengers.  16. (1) At or near any railway station which has been  appointed by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette to be  an inspection station, any medical officer appointed in this  behalf may detain any train and require every person travelling  therein to alight and submit himself to such medical examina-  tion as the medical officer may direct, and may for this purpose,  with the assistance, if necessary, of the police, use such  reasonable force as may be required in order to detain such  passenger either on the railway premises or in some other  suitable place which the Collector shall provide for the  purpose.  (2) All inspecting officers, male and female, at railway  inspection stations, and clerks employed at important stations  such as Jalarpet should always carry with them a note-book of  a special conspicuous colour with the words " Government of  Madras Plague officials' note-book " printed on the back. A  copy of the appointment order should be attached to the  note-book. Copies of the book may be obtained from the  Superintendent, Government Press, through the Surgeon-  General.  17. Every passenger shall be bound to submit himself to  examination and shall furnish the information referred to in  Rule 9 supra and any other particulars which the medical  officer or any person acting under his orders may demand.  Any person refusing to comply with this rule may be detained  for such period as may be necessary, and shall also be liable to  the penalty prescribed in Rule 100.  18. All passengers should be required to quit their  carriages and should be examined on the platform or other  suitable place, suspicious cases being removed for more careful  investigation to a place reserved for the purpose. Care shall  be taken that the carriages are locked before the arrival of the  train at the inspection station, and that no passenger is  permitted to leave his carriage until the arrangements for such  examination are complete.  19. Railway administrations shall instruct their staff to  give every assistance to the medical officers conducting the  inspection in order to minimise the detention of the trains,  and to detain the trains until the medical inspection is over.  Railway ticket-collectors may be allowed to accompany the
?12  plague inspecting officers, if this course is found to economize  time. The table given in Appendix II-J shows the time  within which medical officers are required ordinarily to  complete plague inspection, and every endeavour should be  made to complete the inspection of trains within the time there  mentioned. If, on special occasions, the time is exceeded, a  report explaining the delay should be immediately sent to the  Collector for his information and for such action as he may  think necessary.  20. It is the duty of railway authorities assisted by the  platform police to see that passengers alighting at a railway  station do not leave the premises except by the proper exit,  and to afford every facility for the working of the plague  regulations. Ticket collectors should be required to stop all  passengers holding tickets issued at infected or notified stations  until their names and addresses have been taken down and  passports issued to them either by the plague official appointed  for the purpose, or at smaller stations, by the station staff.  21. The inspecting officers shall not only thoroughly  examine passengers and passenger vehicles, but shall also  inspect guards, drivers and firemen and their vans and engines,  so that no person may escape inspection. No distinction shall  be made between railway employs and others, and before  any train, whether carrying passengers or goods, leaves the  inspection station, a thorough search shall be made to discover  if any persons have concealed themselves with the object of  evading inspection.  22. In the absence of any symptoms showing a passenger  to be suffering from fever, it is unnecessary to examine his  person for the purpose of finding out whether buboes are  present. This practice, if it is at present enforced anywhere,  should be discontinued.  23. Female passengers shall, under no circumstances, be  examined by men. For their inspection, one or more nurses  are attached to each inspection station.  24. After examination, all persons shall be allowed to  proceed to their destination except-  (a) those suffering from or suspected to be suffering  from plague, or those who have so recently   suffered from plague as to be possibly in an  infectious state;  (b) those who have been in immediate contact with  a person suffering from pneumonic plague or  suspected pneumonic plague.
?13  Persons coming under class (a) shall be detained until they  are cured or as long as the infection or suspicion of plague  remains. Information of such cases shall be sent urgently to  the Collector and the district medical and sanitary officer of  the district. All contacts shall, after disinfection of their  clothing and effects, be furnished with passports and be per-  mitted to proceed with their journey, provided that the  inspecting medical officer shall have power to segregate in a  segregation camp for a period not exceeding seven days any  contact of a case of pneumonic plague.  Persons coming under class (b) may be detained at the  discretion of the medical officer till the full period of incubation  (i.e., seven days) has elapsed since they left the infected area,  or if that date is not known, for seven days.  25. Care should be taken that inspection stations are not  converted into detention camps. Any attempt at wholesale  detention will only produce evasion of inspection. Unless a  passenger shows symptoms of plague or has been in contact  with a case of pneumonic plague, he should not be interfered  with. This rule applies also to road frontier inspection  stations.  26. Officers in charge of a plague camp shall give a certi-  ficate in the form shown in Appendix II-K to every person  discharged from the camp. In order to enable such persons to  resume their railway journey they shall take the certificates to  the stationmaster and get them endorsed by him.  27. * * *  28. Any person arriving at, or passing through, an  inspection station may, at the discretion of the inspecting  medical officer, be compelled to obtain a passport in accordance  with Rule 2 supra and to undergo surveillance for seven  days.  29. The inspecting medical officer may also require any  passenger to deliver up his ticket, in order that the prescribed  mark indicative of his having arrived from a plague-infected  locality or an area notified under Rule 1 and therefore of his  being liable to obtain a passport at the station of destination  may be impressed thereon; and such passenger shall be bound  to deliver it up accordingly.  30. The mark thus used is a hole four-tenths of an inch  square punched in the long side of railway tickets. It should  be made only on the tickets of those passengers who come, or  are suspected to come, from plague-infected areas or from
?14  places notified by Government for the purposes of the pass-  port rules. The special mark should be made at the first  inspection station at which the passenger arrives. It is not  necessary to punch his ticket again at any subsequent inspec-  tion station through which he may pass, but he must be  medically examined nevertheless. Tickets of persons who  come from an uninfected area, or who, though coming from an  infected area, have been detained for seven days at one of the  observation camps established in the Madras Presidency, need  not be so marked.  31. Care should be taken that the plague punches are not  used except by responsible persons and that they are kept in  safe custody when not in use. The officers in charge of  railway inspection stations will be held responsible for the safe  custody of the plague punches, and under their orders the  punches may be used by their assistants, but under no  circumstances by the police. The wrong punching of tickets  should be specially guarded against, as the annoyance caused  by consequent liability to take out a passport may be very  great.  32. In cases where a passport has been wrongly issued  owing to erroneous plague-marking of the railway ticket, or  otherwise, the municipal chairman or any revenue officer not  below the grade of deputy tahsildar is authorized to cancel the  passport on satisfactory proof that it was wrongly issued.  33. The passport rules should be worked in such a manner  as to cause the minimum of inconvenience to gosha women,  and persons belonging to that class should, whenever possible,  be exempted from attendance at the hospital or elsewhere and  be inspected at their own houses. The examination of gosha  women shall always be conducted by females, who, when not  trained or duly qualified, shall work under the instructions of  the local medical officer. No fee shall be charged for the  inspection of passport-holders at their own houses.  34. With the view of facilitating the working of the pass-  port rules, railway employs holding periodical railway passes  and Government officials holding standing passes should be  required to provide themselves before departure with certifi-  cates signed by the stationmaster concerned showing the  places from which they start.  Attempts to  evade inspec-  tion.  35. If a passenger from a plague-infected or notified area  appears to be attempting to evade inspection either by alight-  ing at a railway station short of that for which his ticket has  been taken or of an inspection station, or by arriving other-
?15  wise than by train at or beyond an inspection station, and is  unable to show any business at the place of alighting or  arrival, he may be detained by the stationmaster or railway  official in charge or by any officer specially authorized by the  Collector in this behalf at the railway station at which he has  alighted or arrived and with the assistance of the Police be  forwarded or returned, as the case may be, to the inspection  station by the same or next train proceeding thereto and there  handed over to the medical officer in charge. The railway  fare of the person so detained and forwarded to the inspection  station shall be paid by the passenger and, if not paid, shall  be recovered from him by the railway authorities as excess  fare.  Note.-The powers conferred by this rule should only be exercised under exceptional  circumstances to prevent evasion of the passport rules.  36. Special care should be taken to prevent evasion of the  rules by passengers halting or re-booking at intermediate  stations. If a passenger coming from a plague-infected area  breaks his journey at any station short of his destination, his  ticket should, notwithstanding, be punched, or if the station  has not been supplied with a plague-punch, the right-hand  lower corner of the ticket should be clipped with scissors. If  a passenger coming from a plague-infected area alights at  any station, he should be brought under the passport rules.  If he announces his intention of re-booking within twelve  hours, his new ticket shall be punched or clipped as above.  If necessary, the powers conferred by the last preceding rule  may also be employed, and passengers whose conduct gives  ground to suppose that they intend to evade the rules should  be watched.  Intimation to  Ceylon  medical officer  at Tuticorin.  37. The inspecting medical officer, Jalarpet, shall send  telegraphic intimation to the medical officer of the Ceylon  Government at Tuticorin when passengers pass from Banga-  lore to Tuticorin. The cost of these telegrams will be  recovered from the Ceylon Government by the Accountant-  General.  Movement of  troops, police  and coolies.  38. When a large body of troops or police or coolies  engaged in plague operations are returning to a healthy district,  previous intimation of their departure shall be given to the  Collector of the district in which the place of destination is  situated. Before starting they shall be carefully examined  and disinfected, and on arrival at their destination they shall  be given passports according to the rules. With regard to  troops and their families and followers leaving infected areas,  the rules in Madras Command Order No. 810, dated 27th
?16  October 1903, shall be observed. These rules are reprinted  as Appendix II-U to these regulations.  Expenditure  on inspection  sheds and on  supply of  punches.  39. Any expenditure incurred in providing inspection  sheds on railway platforms in cases where there are no proper  facilities in the railway station for the examination of pas-  sengers in accordance with the plague regulations or in the  supply of punches or scissors for marking railway tickets  will be borne by the civil department and not by the railway  administrations. The construction of all such buildings will,  in the absence of the orders of the Government to the con-  trary, be carried out ordinarily by the railway administration  concerned, the civil department defraying merely the cost  of the same.  Fairs, festi-  vals and  pilgrimages.  40. When a festival, fair or other public gathering which  is likely to be attended by persons from plague-infected parts  is about to take place in an uninfected area, the Collector may  apply to Government for orders to prohibit attendance thereat  and to enforce the prohibition by stopping temporarily the  issue of railway tickets to persons from infected areas or by  other means. A similar course should be adopted when a  festival, fair or other public gathering which is likely to be  attended by persons from healthy parts is about to take place  in a plague-infected area.  41. Proposals submitted under the preceding rule should  be forwarded through the Sanitary Commissioner so as to reach  Government a month and-a-half previous to the holding of the  fair or festival. In order to avoid delay in their submission,  Collectors should prepare in their office every month a list of  all the fairs and festivals to take place during the ensuing  three months, and should send by the 15th of each month  their recommendations relating to religious and other gather-  ings to be held in the next month but one. Notice of the  prohibition of the issue of railway tickets should be given to  the railway authorities at least a week previous to the date of  commencement of the prohibition.  42. The Collector's reports should be invariably accom-  panied by draft notifications under the Epidemic Diseases Act,  1897, and by a statement in the form shown in Appendix  II-M. Skeleton notifications are printed as Appendix II-N.  43. The prohibition of attendance at fairs and festivals  should ordinarily be applied only to the larger fairs and  festivals. In the case of unimportant local festivals, a careful  working of the passport rules should suffice.  44. Where pilgrimage to a fair or festival has been pro-  hibited by Government, the Collector should, as far as the
?17  means at his disposal permit, watch all the roads round the  village or town in order to prevent pilgrims from entering the  place unobserved. Persons who are suspected to have come  from infected parts should be served with passports and watched  for seven days. It must be distinctly understood that the  prohibition is not in any way intended to interfere with the  performance of the usual religious ceremonies at the temple,  and that its only object is to prevent the assemblage of persons  who might import or spread the plague.  45. A special establishment to carry out the measures  prescribed in the foregoing rule is not ordinarily required.  As far as practicable they should be carried out with the aid  of the existing district establishment. If in any special case  extra establishment is needed, a separate recommendation  should be made when the imposition of restrictions on the  holding of the festival or fair is suggested. It is not necessary  for the purpose of these measures to build costly structures at  each place where a festival or fair is held. It will suffice if  the Collector has in stock materials for one or two sheds,  which may be utilized if required, but if not, may either be  sold, or carted to another place where they may be required  after the close of the festival.  46. As regards pilgrimage to the Hedjaz, the Government  of India annually issue orders either prohibiting it altogether  or allowing it under certain conditions from uninfected parts  only. In the latter case, the intending pilgrims are collected  at convenient observation camps, they are not allowed to  purchase passage tickets to the Hedjaz except at those observa-  tion camps, and after they have been detained for the prescribed  period and certified to be free from infection, they are sent in  special trains or carriages to the selected ports for embarka-  tion. Pilgrims returning from the Hedjaz in healthy vessels  are, after disinfection of the clothing and baggage, sent at  once to their destination without being allowed to mix with  the population of the port of landing. Those returning in  a plague-infected vessel are subjected to seven days' observation  in a camp before being sent to their homes. The authorities  of the port of landing are required to send nominal rolls of the  pilgrims to the Collectors concerned, and to give previous  intimation of their departure, in order that they may be  watched for a few days after arrival at their destination.  Information  regarding  plague cases  and arrivals  from infected  areas.  47. Every house-holder and every medical practitioner  who becomes cognizant of the occurrence in his house or in any  public or private dwelling or place within the limits of the  municipality, town or village in which he resides, of any  2
?18  unusual mortality among rats or of any case of plague or of  fever with glandular swellings, and in the case of persons who  live within an area that has been notified as infected or who  have been in any way exposed to plague infection, of acute  affections of the lung, of convulsions in children, abortion in  women and sudden death in the aged, shall be bound to give  information of the same, with the least practicable delay, in a  municipality to the chairman of the council and the medical  officer in charge of the municipal dispensary or hospital, and in  a non-municipal town or village to the village head or to other  nearest officer of the revenue or medical department, who shall  report the fact at once to their immediate official superiors.  47-A. The owner or occupier of any house in which a case  of plague occurs shall be bound to give full and true informa-  tion to the plague officer, or to any member of the observation  or preventive staff or to the local authority who has jurisdiction  over such house, regarding all persons who have been in  immediate contact with the patient.  48. Every house-holder and every keeper or person in  charge of an hotel, chattram or other place of public resort,  shall also in the same manner forthwith report the arrival at  the house, hotel, chattram or other place, of any person from  any area which has been declared by the Governor in Council  or by the Collector to be infected or which has been notified by  the Governor in Council for the purposes of these rules.  48-A. Upon receipt of information, under Rule 47 or  otherwise, of the occurrence of unusual mortality among rats,  the chairman in municipal limits or the district medical  officer, and in regard to non-municipal areas, the Collector  or district medical officer, shall forthwith forward a special  report regarding rat-mortality to the Sanitary Commissioner  and may, if necessary, forward specimens of dead rats, under  proper precautions, to the Superintendent of the King Insti-  tute of Preventive Medicine for bacteriological examination.  Power to  enter any  building or  place for the  purpose of  inspecting  plague cases  and taking  necessary  measures.  49. The Collector or any officer authorized by him for this  purpose may at any time enter any building or place in which  plague is reputed or suspected to exist, and may inspect and,  if necessary, detain or remove and isolate any person suffering  or suspected to be suffering from plague or to have so lately  suffered from plague as to be in an infectious state, or likely  from recent contact with cases of pneumonic plague to have  been infected or to be in an infectious state.
?19  Bringing of  susceptible  articles from  infected areas  prohibited.  50. No person shall bring, take, send, or consign by sea or  land, soiled linen and used bedding (except when carried as the  personal baggage of travellers), rags and waste paper from a  plague-infected place into or through any part of the Madras  Presidency. Articles brought in contravention of this prohibi-  tion shall be destroyed, and no person shall be entitled to claim  compensation on account of such destruction. See also  Appendix I, Note (6) on Disinfection.  Destruction  of rats.  51. The Collector shall take steps for the extermination  of rats both in infected and threatened localities. He shall  also arrange for the frequent inspection of consignments of  grain arriving from plague-infected areas and of landing places,  railway goods-sheds, and grain bazaars, and for the killing and  subsequent destruction by burning of all rats found therein.  See also Appendix I, Note (7) on Rat-plague and Destruction  of rats.  Part II.-Rules applicable to Places under Observation or  imminently threatened with Plague.  Areas under  observation.  52. The Governor in Council may, if it appears to him  that any district, town, village, or other area is imminently  threatened with plague, issue an order declaring such district,  town, village, or other area to be under observation. A copy  of such order shall be published in the next issue of the Fort  St. George Gazette.  Frontier  inspection  stations.  53. Upon the issue by the Governor in Council of an  order declaring any area to be under observation, the Collector  shall, subject to the sanction of Government, establish frontier  inspection stations with the necessary staff for the examination  of persons entering the notified area. These frontier inspection  stations shall be placed ordinarily at railway stations and shall  be as near as may be to the frontier. Inspection stations shall  not be established on roads except in places where the nature  of the country forces traffic to converge between narrow lines  and when the staff can be placed under proper supervision.  This prohibition does not apply to passport stations at the  entrance to towns.  54. At each frontier inspection station shall be erected a  sufficient number of sheds for hospital and observation pur-  poses; and a sufficient supply of disinfectants and stores shall  be maintained.  55. All passengers arriving by rail at these inspection  stations shall be there examined and dealt with in accordance  2*
?20  with the provisions of Rules 16-36 supra and those arriving  by road shall also be provided with passports under Rule 2.  Observation  ranges and  staff.  56. (1) The Collector shall divide the area under observa-  tion into observation ranges and shall appoint an inspector  for each of them. The size of each range shall admit of the  inspector's visiting every portion of it in ten days and shall be  fixed with reference to such details as the number of villages  included, their population and importance, difficulties of loco-  motion and geographical features. For each non-municipal  town with a population in excess of 5,000 a separate plague  inspector should be appointed.  (2) Every municipality which is declared to be under  observation or which is included in the area under observation  shall be divided into ranges, which should, as far as possible,  follow the municipal wards, and for each range an inspector  shall be appointed. When any ward contains less than 1,200  houses or a population of less than 5,000 persons it may be  combined with other wards to form one range. Three ranges  shall ordinarily form a division and each division shall be  placed under a divisional inspector.  (3) The Collector may also appoint plague supervisors to  check the work of inspectors.  (4) As far as possible such plague inspectors shall be  certificated sanitary inspectors, hospital assistants not below  the third grade, or persons who shall have received a special  training for dealing with plague to the satisfaction of the  Sanitary Commissioner. Hospital assistants, when available,  may in all cases be employed in place of sanitary inspectors on  plague work.  Note.-The limits of population and extent laid down in clause 2 may be varied  according to local conditions.  Duties of the  observation  staff.  57. (1) Subject to the Collector's control, this observation  staff shall work under the district medical and sanitary officer  or other officer appointed by the Collector for the purpose. In  municipalities the Collector may place the staff under the  control of the municipal chairman, and may vary or cancel any  such order. It shall be the duty of the observation staff  constantly and systematically to patrol the ranges in order to  gain the earliest possible information of any suspicious death  or of the occurrence of any case of plague, to report immedi-  ately any such case or any suspected case and to remove with  the aid of the ordinary conservancy establishment all defects  in sanitation which would favour the propagation of plague,  such as accumulations of filth, sewage, or the like. It should
?21 also check the possession of passports or passes, in the case of persons arriving from an infected locality. Should any person so arrive without a passport or pass, or having broken its conditions, any member of the observation staff may detain him and shall produce him at the earliest possible date before a plague officer having jurisdiction. (2) It shall also be the duty of this staff to ascertain whether any special sickness or mortality has occurred among rats, and to examine any rats that may be found, in order to see whether any enlarged glands are present. Houses in which sick or dead rats are found should be disinfected. (3) Inspectors for their respective charges and village headmen for their villages shall keep a record of all persons suffering from continuous fever for more than twelve hours, and inspectors shall arrange with the village headman to have such persons inspected twice daily. If a member of the obser- vation staff discovers a case of plague, he shall proceed in accordance with Rule 67 et seq. Ambulance Btaff. 58. In municipalities or districts which appear to him to be imminently threatened with an attack of plague, the Collector should make all arrangements necessary to enable him to concentrate at any point on short notice an ambulance staff together with the equipment prescribed by Government. The ambulance staff should ordinarily be constituted as follows:- Sanitary Section. Medical Section. One plague inspector. Two hospital assistants. One dhoby. One or more trained nurses. Two male toties. Four male ward attendants. One female toti. Three female ward attendants Two dhooly bearers. One dhoby. Disinfectors (any number up to 50 Two cooks. for a single section, to be recruited  locally in the infected area, if  sepoys be not employed).  Of the foregoing staff the ward attendants, dhoby and cooks belonging to the medical section need not be entertained unless and until cases of plague occur, and it will usually be sufficient to appoint a single hospital assistant until plague occurs. Plague oamps. 59. The Collector may call upon any municipal council or local board within an area under observation to provide and maintain any or all of the following:- (a) a hospital camp for the isolation and treatment of persons suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague;
?22  (b) a suspect camp for the detention of contacts;  (c) a health camp for the occupation of persons who  may be required to vacate any building or ground  under these regulations and who may be unable  to procure necessary accommodation for them-  selves.  60. The municipal council or district board shall be bound  to provide these camps in accordance with the requisition of the  Collector, and at such places (whether within or without the  local jurisdiction of the municipality or local board) as the  Collector, or subject to the Collector's control, the district  medical and sanitary officer or such other medical officer as  the Collector may depute, may determine. For the camps so  provided the municipal council or the district board, as the  case may be, shall furnish such hospital establishment, equip-  ment and supplies as the Collector may direct, and shall also  make arrangements for feeding persons detained under any of  these regulations on payment by them of the cost. In the case  of indigent persons, the municipal council or the district board,  as the case may be, shall supply them with food free of charge:  provided that any person so detained shall have full liberty to  supply his own food subject to such rules and conditions as the  medical officer in charge may prescribe.  Acquisition  of lands or  buildings  required for  plague  purposes.  61. The Collector or the chairman of the municipal  council or the president of the local board may without notice  enter upon, occupy and use, or may depute any person to  enter upon, occupy and use, without having recourse to the  provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, any building or  place which is required for and is, in the opinion of the  district medical and sanitary officer or other medical officer  deputed in this behalf, suitable for the purposes mentioned in  the last preceding rule or for any other purposes connected  with plague measures, provided that if the building or place  is occupied, twenty-four hours' notice in writing shall be given  to the occupier or shall be conspicuously affixed on such  building or place. The owner or the lessee of such building  or place shall be entitled to a reasonable rent to be fixed by  the Collector for the period during which the ground or building  may remain in the occupation of the municipal council or the  Collector and president of the district board, as the case may  be: and the Collector, chairman of the municipal council or  president of the local board, as the case may be, shall, when the  building or place ceases to be occupied for the purposes of the  last rule, thoroughly cleanse and disinfect it, and if the owner  so desires, shall whitewash internally and externally any building
?23  so occupied. Nothing in this rule shall authorize the chairman  of a municipal council to enter upon, occupy or use any building  or place which is the property of Government without the  previous permission of the Collector  Private  plague  oamps.  62. Contributions towards the cost of the construction and  maintenance of private plague hospitals and segregation camps  in places which are or may be threatened with plague will be  made by Government from provincial funds in accordance with  the following scale:-  (a) For construction, half the cost will be paid by  Government provided the charges are considered reasonable  and the buildings erected on sites approved by the Collector  or plague officer acting under his control. In any case of  doubt or dispute the Government will have the right to  estimate by means of the Public Works department the value  of the work done.  (b) For maintenance, grants not exceeding half the  actual expenses will be sanctioned by Government on the  following conditions:-  (1) the arrangements for the sanitation and supply of  food must meet with the approval of the Collector;  (2) the amounts will be paid, month by month, in  arrears to the manager or managers approved  by the Collector.  63. Hospitals and camps to which a grant is made under  the last preceding rule will be under the general supervision  of Government officials, but these officials will have nothing to  do with the treatment of the sick except at their request, and  their duties will be confined to preserving order, preventing  theft, keeping guard, and attending to sanitation. Detailed  instructions with regard to the construction, equipment and  management of plague camps will be issued by the Sanitary  Commissioner and of plague hospitals by the Surgeon-General.  The sale-proceeds of private hospitals to which Govern-  ment have made a contribution will be equally divided  between Government and the plague committee concerned.  Grants for  erection of  sheds in  rural areas.  64. In rural areas district boards may find it cheaper to  give poor people grants not exceeding Rs. 3 per household and  let them make their own arrangements rather than to build  sheds for them. Such grants should be kept at as low a figure  as possible, and should be made as a rule only to those who are  otherwise unable to furnish themselves with shelter.
?24  occupation of  buildings  belonging to  Government  departments.  65. It may become necessary at any moment for Collectors  or other plague authorities to occupy buildings belonging to  other departments than the Revenue department for plague  purposes. In such cases the earliest possible intimation of  such occupation should be given to the authorities in charge  of such buildings. Before occupying them, any moveable  articles in the building at all likely to retain infection should  be removed and placed under proper custody.  Conveyances  for the  carriage of  the sick and  of infected  articles.  66. The Collector, or the chairman of the municipal  council or president of the local board, as the case may be,  shall provide suitable conveyances for conveying to the plague  camps established under Rule 59 persons suffering, or suspected  to be suffering, from plague, and for the transport of any  clothing, bedding or other articles which have been exposed  to infection.  List of areas  under obser-  vation.  66-A. (1) Collectors of districts containing areas notified  under Rule 52 should submit not later than the 1st of April  and the 1st of October in every year, a statement showing  separately the taluqs and municipalities which should continue  to be regarded as being under observation during the ensuing  half-year and the areas which should be freed from observation.  Government will then publish a single consolidated notification  specifying all the areas in the Presidency which will remain  under observation during the half-year, municipalities and  taluqs of districts being shown separately.  (2) If any area not included in the half-yearly notification  is imminently threatened with plague in the course of the  half-year, proposals for placing it under observation should be  submitted to Government immediately, the municipal and non-  municipal areas comprised in it being specified separately;  but no proposal for rescinding a notification declaring an area  to be under observation should be submitted except on the  dates specified in the previous paragraph.  Note.-For the purpose of this rule municipalities and taluqs of districts shall be  regarded as units. Proposals should not be submitted in respect of any smaller areas.  Part III.-Measures to be adopted on the Occurrence  of a Case of Plague.  Report by  local officers  of occurrence  of plague;  isolation of  patients and  contacte.  67. (1) On the occurrence of an actual or a suspected case  of plague in a town, village or railway station other than an  inspection station whether in a district declared to be under  observation or not, the village headman or other local officer  shall-
?25  (i) isolate the patient in the camp provided under  Rule 59 supra, or, if no camp has been provided,  in a hut or shed to be immediately constructed  for the purpose on a site remote from inhabited  houses, and shall invariably cause the houses  in which the patient was found to be completely  evacuated;  (ii) send intelligence by express to the tahsildar or  municipal chairman, and, if plague inspectors  have been appointed, to the nearest plague  inspector.  (2) The village headman or other local officer shall  segregate in a separate camp or hut all persons who have been,  or are suspected to have been, in contact with the patient if the  latter is suffering from pneumonic plague, and not otherwise.  It is sufficient in cases of bubonic plague to observe contacts  for a period of seven days, and to disinfect their clothing and  effects.  Report by  plague  inspector and  tahsildar or  municipal  chairman.  68. Upon receiving information of the occurrence of an  actual or a suspected case of plague, the tahsildar, the municipal  chairman or plague inspector, as the case may be, shall inform  all superior officers up to the Collector by the quickest possible  means, and shall go at once to the infected locality. The  tahsildar or the municipal chairman shall arrange to be  accompanied or followed by the nearest medical officer with a  supply of medicines and disinfectants and by a sufficient staff  of constables and peons.  Action to be  taken by  plague  inspector and  tahsildar or  municipal  chairman.  69. On arrival at the infected place, the plague inspector  (or medical officer if there is no plague inspector) shall  supervise the isolation of the patient and the disinfection of  his residence, clothing, sputa and excreta, and the clothing,  and at his discretion, the persons of all who have been in  contact with the patient and shall continue such supervision  until relieved under the orders of a plague officer and sent  back to other duty. Houses immediately adjoining that in  which the case of plague has occurred shall also usually be  disinfected.  70. (1) The tahsildar or municipal chairman shall, if the  plague patient has already been completely isolated, arrange  for the efficient maintenance of such isolation, for the provision  of medical attendance on the patient, for the complete evacua-  tion of the house and for the thorough carrying out of the  measures of disinfection specified in the last preceding rule.  If the patient has not been isolated, the tahsildar or municipal
?26  chairman shall at once provide for his isolation, and shall, if  necessary, provide the accommodation referred to in Rule  59 supra.  (2) The tahsildar or municipal chairman shall, in like  manner, provide for the efficient maintenance of the segregation  of contacts, if they have been segregated, or for the efficient  carrying out of the seven days' observation, if they have been  placed under observation.  Action to be  taken by  plague officer.  71. On receiving information of a case of plague, the  duties of a plague officer (see Rule 103) shall be as follows:-  (1) He shall send telegraphic information to the  Collector and the district medical and sanitary officer.   (2) He shall then go to the scene of outbreak, and shall  enforce the measures mentioned above.  (3) He shall see that the hospital, the suspect camp and  the health camp are properly organized and guarded.  (4) He shall see that the patrols and guards round the  infected area completely isolate it, or such part of it as he  deems fit, so as to prevent the return of the inhabitants without  his written permission.  (5) He may also, when authorized by the Collector,  direct the evacuation of the village or town or any part of it,  and the removal of the inhabitants to a health camp, provided  sufficient shelter is available, and their detention there for a  period not exceeding seven days from the date of the occurrence  of the last case of plague among them.  (6) On the evacuation of houses, he shall cause them to  be surrounded by a cordon with the object of preventing the  return of the inhabitants without his written permission until  he considers that the infection has disappeared.  Note.-For further information as to the steps to be taken in plague outbreaks, the  importance of early discovery of plague cases, and the segregation of contacts, see notes  (1), (2) and (3) in Appendix 1.  Report by  Collector and  the action to  be taken by  him.  72. (1) The Collector, on receiving information, shall  telegraph to Government and the Sanitary Commissioner, and  shall despatch the ambulance staff with its equipment to the  village under the district medical and sanitary officer, or his  assistant.  (2) The Collector may notify by tom-tom (the notification  to be as soon as possible published in the District Gazette) that  any town or village, or part of a town or village, or group of  villages, is infected, and thereupon the regulations contained  in Part II shall come into force in the district if they have not  been brought into force by Government already.
?27  (3) The Collector may order the evacuation and disinfec-  tion of infected houses and houses in their neighbourhood, or  of infected villages and towns, and may prohibit their reoccu-  pation without permission, provided that such arrangements as he  thinks fit shall be made before evacuation, for the accommoda-  tion, in a health camp or elsewhere, of those who may be  unable to provide shelter for themselves.  Note.-For further remarks regarding evacuation, see note (4) of Appendix 1.  (4) The Collector may require    the evicted people to  reside in any place which he may appoint, under such restric-  tions as he may deem necessary.  (5) The Collector may requisition the services of any  public servant or, for work connected with a railway, of any  railway employ.  (6) The Collector shall, if possible, go to the village and  direct operations.  (7) The Collector may also, on the evacuation of houses,  make such arrangements as he thinks fit for the custody, free  of charge, of money and valuable property of small bulk  belonging to persons who are bon-fide residents of houses that  may be evacuated, and who may desire so to deposit such  property, provided that articles so deposited are securely packed  and sealed, and on the clear understanding that the Govern-  ment will not be responsible for any loss or damage to the  property so deposited.  Every person depositing property in the manner aforesaid  shall be granted a certificate in the following form:-  Certificate for property deposited in safe custody.  Certified that a sealed package said to contain (nature of property)  and said to be of the value of has been received for  deposit from (person) residing in (town or village,  street and No. of the house, etc.) on the sole responsibility  of the depositor; the Government not being responsible in the event of  any damage or loss occurring to the property in deposit.  Signature and designation of the officer  issuing the certificate.  Date Signature and designation of the  depositor.
?28  Part IV.-Rules applicable to Areas declared  to be infected.  Preventive  ranges.  73. If observation ranges have already been established  under Rule 56 supra in the neighbourhood of an infected area,  they shall be reduced in extent so as to enable the inspectors  to visit every village within their respective ranges in seven  days. The distance from the extreme limits of any such range  to any point on the periphery of the infected area shall not  exceed twenty miles. If an observation staff has not been  already appointed, the Collector shall at once organize one so  as to meet this requirement. Ranges so formed round infected  areas shall be termed preventive ranges to distinguish them  from the observation ranges mentioned in Rule 56 supra.  These ranges shall be placed in the charge of plague inspectors,  whose duty shall be to visit frequently every inhabited part of  their ranges, to check the working of the passport system, and  to maintain a watch over the health of the inhabitants with the  object of quickly discovering cases of plague and preventing  the spread of the disease.  Inoculation.  74. The Collector shall arrange for a sufficient supply of  Haffkine's vaccine in order to bring inoculation within the reach  of the inhabitants of plague-infected and plague-threatened  localities and shall afford them every facility for being  inoculated.  Note.-For further information regarding inoculation, see note (5) in Appendix I.  Certificates  of canses of  death.  75. (1) When he has a sufficient medical staff at his  disposal to secure immediate inspection, so that there may be  no chance of funerals being delayed, the Collector may, with  the previous sanction of Government, order in respect of any  particular area that a certificate of a medical officer showing  the cause of every death shall be obtained within two hours  after such death. It must be understood that medical exami-  nation of a corpse is entirely optional on the part of the  relations, and that no one will be compelled to allow the inspec-  tion of the corpse of a deceased relative. The examination of  the corpses of women by men shall never be required. The  orders of the Government shall be obtained before this rule  is acted upon in any area, and in applying for sanction, the  Collector shall report fully on the following points:-  (i) What classes of officers will be authorized to issue  certificates under the rule.  (ii) Whether any fee will be required for the grant of  this certificate.
?29  (iii) Whether there is such a number of Government  medical officers, male and female, at the station  as will be sufficient to carry out inspection  promptly so as not to cause any delay in burials.  (iv) Whether there has been any increase in the rate  of mortality.  (v) Whether there is any reason to believe that deaths  are concealed or that causes of death are not  correctly reported.  (2) If, after the issue of an order under clause (1) of this  rule, a burial or cremation takes place without such a certifi-  cate having been obtained, the death may be presumed to have  been due to plague, and the rules regarding the segregation of  the contacts and the disinfection of the house may be applied.  House  search.  76. With the previous sanction of Government, the  Collector may organize search parties to visit houses for the  purpose of detecting cases of plague, when there is reason to  believe that the residents are attempting to conceal them.  Special enquiries shall also be made as to any sickness or  mortality among rats, and houses in which sick or dead rats  have been found shall be disinfected.  77. The system of house-visitation and house-search will  ordinarily be permitted only when plague exists in small and  well-defined areas, such for instance as an isolated quarter or  ward of a town, or a single village in a neighbourhood which  is otherwise completely free from infection. When this mode  of discovering plague is adopted, care should be taken that a  sufficient number of European officers are employed to render  the powers of search effective and at the same time prevent  the subordinate establishments from abusing their authority.  Failing officers of the civil establishments, young officers of  the Staff Corps should be deputed for this duty. Respectable  inhabitants who volunteer for the service should be employed  to assist in searching for concealed cases of plague. As far as  possible, houses should be allowed to be entered only by persons  of caste or of the same religion as the occupants, and women  should be utilized in examining women and in searching any  room or place exclusively occupied by them.  Removal of  plague  patients to  hospital.  78. Plague patients who are left without any one to look  after them or who have no home should in all cases be removed  to hospital, and in dealing with imported cases or with an out-  break in a small place upon which it is possible to concentrate  a sufficiently strong establishment, the first measure to adopt is  the compulsory removal of the sick to hospital. In dealing
?30  with early indigenous cases the same policy may be advisable.  But if plague continues a point may soon be reached when it  will cease to be possible to obtain information as to all cases.  When this point is reached, the continuance of attempts to  remove the sick to hospital may result in the sick being carried  from house to house for purposes of concealment, and at this  stage the less the sick are interfered with the better. All that  can then be done is to endeavour to palliate the evils that result  from leaving people in their houses by arranging for continual  visitation of the sick at home, the frequent disinfection of the  infected room, and the encouragement of inoculation among  persons left in the houses with the sick.  79. Except as mentioned in the last preceding rule the  removal of patients to hospital shall not be compulsory. Every  effort shall, however, be made to induce patients to go  voluntarily to hospital and to lessen the aversion to hospital  by the following means-(1) by encouraging the establishment  of private and caste hospitals; (2) by locating hospitals near to  infected quarters; (3) by limiting the size of hospitals so that  patients may receive more individual attention; (4) by arrang-  ing for the provision of an adequate number of medical  attendants and nurses and of ample and comfortable accom-  modation for patients and their immediate relatives or friends;  (5) by permitting at least two relatives or friends to be in  attendance on each patient so that the patient may never be  left alone; (6) by allowing the patients to have their own  food and medicines and to receive visits from their relations,  friends and religious instructors; (7) by taking care that all  arrangements for observance of caste customs and for the  comfort and convenience of patients and their attendants are  completed before inviting removal to hospitals.  79-A. For each plague hospital or camp in a town or other  large centre of population, the Collector shall appoint a com-  mittee of non-official visitors. The committee shall consist of  as many members as may be fixed by the Collector, shall be as  representative in character as possible, and shall work subject  to such rules as may be laid down by the Collector. The  functions of the committee shall be confined to the making of  useful suggestions in connection with the administration of  the hospital or camp and shall not include any power to  interfere with or issue orders to any of the officials on duty at  the premises.  80. Moribund patients should never be removed to hospital  except at the express wish of the friends or relations of the
?31  patients. The risk of leaving in his house a patient whose  case is so serious that the medical officer thinks he has not a  fair chance of recovery is not great after the existence of the  case has become known. The pneumonic variety of plague  being contagious, persons suffering from this type of the disease  should not be removed to the general wards of plague hospitals,  but should be isolated in separate wards of the greatest possible  air space. It is further advisable that such cases should not  be treated in private houses, unless, in the opinion of the  medical officer, the room occupied by the patient is suited for  his complete isolation, and proper control over the number of  attendants and enforcement of disinfection can be had.  81. (1) The Collector of the district may make rules-  Sanitary  restrictions  with  regard to  funeral  processions  and burials.  (a) prescribing the route which shall be taken by a funeral procession from the place of death to the graveyard, burning ground or other place for final disposal of the corpse, and the places, if any, at which such procession may halt on its way for funeral prayers, ceremonies or other purposes;  (b) for enforcing burial in certain places or at a certain depth, ordinarily not less than six feet;  (c) requiring that the bathing of persons attending the funeral shall be conducted at a place prescribed by him.  (2) He may also prohibit the burial or burning of corpses of persons reasonably supposed to have died of the plague in or upon ground other than ground specially assigned by him for such purpose.  (3) When a person dies of plague elsewhere than within the limits of a hospital, no one shall touch the corpse except those who undertake the necessary duties of preparing it for the funeral. The dead may be dressed for the grave by their own relations or in whatever manner may be customary among the class to which they belong, but such persons shall disinfect themselves according to the orders which may be issued by the Collector in this behalf.  Persons  leaving  an infected  place should  obtain pass-  ports.  82. The Collector may direct that every person wishing  to leave whether by road or rail an infected or notified town,  village or area with the view of residing in another town,  village or area, whether infected or not infected, shall, before  doing so, apply to and obtain from such officer as may be  appointed in this behalf passports in the form shown in  Appendix II-A; provided that no passport shall be issued
?32  to any person suffering or suspected to be suffering from  plague, or to persons who have so lately suffered from plague  as to be in an infectious state or who are likely from recent  contact with cases of pneumonic plague to be infected or to be  in an infectious state; and the said officer may always require  and in case of contacts shall require, before granting a pass-  port, that all clothes and other articles which are proposed to  be taken away shall be disinfected in such manner as he or  superior authority may direct.  Explanation.-A convalescent cannot be considered to be  free from plague infection until the expiry of one month from  subsidence of acute symptoms of the disease, or one week from  the complete healing of a bubo.  Other kinds  of passports.  83. In lieu of the passport prescribed under the last  preceding rule or to meet the case of frequent journeys to an  infected or notified town, village or area, the Collector may  issue or permit to be issued other kinds of passports, namely-  (1) A general pass in the form shown in Appendix II-B  covering frequent or daily journeys by road or boat from a  specified village, but not journeys by rail nor residence outside  the affected area or specified village.  (2) A general pass in the form shown in Appendix  II-C covering frequent or daily journeys by rail from a speci-  fied village, but not residence outside the affected area or  specified village.  (3) A general pass in the form shown in Appendix II-D  covering visits to a periodical market.  General  passes.  84. General passes in Forms B and C may be given to  agriculturists and others having occasion to make daily or  frequent journeys to or from an infected area, and may be  given for a specified period, but they will not cover residence  outside of the infected area, otherwise than in the village  specified in the pass.  In the case of agriculturists, if the  officer granting the pass is satisfied that it is necessary for the  whole family to go and work in the fields, a single pass may  be given for the family, but in the case of railway journeys a  separate pass in Form C shall be issued to each individual.  General passes should be given freely, and in the case of agri-  culturists working in the fields need not be revoked even should  a case of plague occur in the family of the pass-holder. In the  case of persons who regularly visit weekly markets in adjoin-  ing non-infected areas and return to the infected or notified  place within a period not exceeding 24 hours, a permanent
33  pass in the form given in Appendix II-D should be issued.  Intimation of the grant of such passes shall be duly communi-  cated to the officers concerned in the non-infected area, and  a register shall be maintained in the form shown in Appendix  II-G of all permanent passes issued.  Special  passes.  85. Instead of the passport or passes referred to in the  last three rules a special pass in the form shown in Appendix  II-E may be issued permitting persons to leave inhabited areas  of an infected or notified town or village and reside on fresh  sites approved by an officer authorized in this behalf. Such  passes may be granted for households, provided that the name  and description of each person covered by the pass is entered  therein. The officer issuing the pass may always require,  before the pass is given, that all clothes and other articles to  be taken away shall be disinfected in such manner as he or  superior authority may direct. Persons holding these passes  shall not be allowed to return to the inhabited area except  under such restrictions as the said officer may from time to  time require or until the pass shall have been cancelled by  him and until all clothing and articles to be taken back with  them shall have been disinfected.  85-A. Persons who have been in immediate contact with  plague patients and to whom a passport under Rule 82 has not  been granted, shall be placed under surveillance under a pass  in the form in Appendix II-E1.  Establish-  ment of pass-  port-issuing  offices.  86. At convenient spots within, or in the proximity of,  the inhabited area of an infected or notified town or village,  the Collector shall establish one or more offices for the issue of  passports and passes and shall notify by tom-tom the locality  of such office or offices at such intervals as he shall consider  sufficient to inform the inhabitants of their purpose and position.  86-A. As long as plague is confined within narrow limits,  an infected place must be regarded as requiring as much  protection as any other place against fresh importations of  infection, and all persons who may come from a second centre  of contamination or from a railway station which in conse-  quence of its proximity to such a second centre has been  notified by the Local Government, should be furnished with  passports if not already provided with them under Rule 82  and be kept under surveillance. But a person who comes to  an infected place from a railway station which has been  notified in consequence of its proximity to that place does not  require a passport and if any passport had been issued at such  3
34  station, it shall be recovered by the local authority of the  place of arrival and forwarded to the officer who issued the  passport. On the other hand, a person who proceeds to such  a railway station from the place which is infected shall take  out a passport though if he returns to the infected place  within seven days the passport may be given up on his return  and further inspection is unnecessary.  86-B. Whenever under the provisions of Rule 82 or Rule  86-A, a fresh passport is issued to a person already holding  a passport the officer issuing such fresh passport shall recover  the old passport and transmit the same to the officer by whom  it was issued, the issue of the new passport being noted on  the old passport.  Duties of  paasport-  issuing  officers.  87. It is the duty of passport-issuing officers not merely to  issue passports to those who apply for them, but also to trace  persons who have evaded or infringed the passport rules.  Evasion of  rules.  88. Any person evading or infringing these rules shall be  prosecuted, unless the Collector sees reason to the contrary, and  any such person, whether prosecuted or not, shall be placed  under the passport system as soon as the evasion is discovered.  Persons  who are  entitled on  application to  obtain certi-  ficates of  exemption  from the  passport  rules.  89. All Government or railway officers or pensioners on  salaries or pensions of Rs. 100 or upwards per mensem, all  deputy tahsildars, all medical officers, all titleholders, all  special or honorary magistrates, all members of district boards,  taluk boards or municipal councils shall be exempted ex-officio  from the necessity of taking out passports or passes. A  certificate of exemption should be issued on application to  every such person in the form given in Appendix II-H1. The  certificate should ordinarily be issued by the Collector of the  district in which the applicant permanently resides or under  his orders. In the case of residents of Madras City it  should ordinarily be issued by the President of the Corpora-  tion of Madras or the Health Officer or under their orders.  The Collector or the President, as the case may be, may  however for sufficient reason issue the certificate to any  person who, though not permanently resident in the district  or city, temporarily resides, or stays for a temporary purpose  within such limits. In the case of persons belonging to the  classes enumerated above who reside either permanently or  temporarily at Bangalore, the certificate will be granted by  the Collector of the Civil and Military station, Bangalore.  The certificate will be in force throughout the Presidency,
?35  but will be liable to be revoked as soon as the holder ceases  to possess the qualification entitling him to exemption.  The special exemption shall not cover the clerks and  servants of the persons exempted nor the members of their  families, who shall be liable to observation under the ordinary  rules, nor shall the exemption confer any immunity from  disinfection of the person and effects of the exempted party  when he has been in immediate contact with a plague  patient.  Exemption  of other per-  sons in the  interesta of  the public  service or on  personal  grounds.  The Collector, or the President of the Corporation of  Madras (for the city of Madras); or the Collector of the Civil  and Military station, Bangalore, as the case may be, shall  have power also to exempt from the necessity of taking out  passports or passes, the following classes of persons:-  (1) Railway, Postal or other Public servants of such  grades as may, from time to time, be determined by Govern-  ment. Reference on this subject may be made to Appendix  II-H  (2) Any person with regard to whom there are no  reasonable grounds for suspicion of infection.  Any misuse of the exemption certificate will entail its  summary withdrawal. The certificate will remain in force till  the end of the financial year in which it is granted, but the  Collector, the President of the Corporation of Madras or the  Collector of the Civil and Military station, Bangalore, as the  case may be, may cancel it at any time without assigning  reasons. Certificates granted under this rule shall be in force  throughout the Presidency.  Observation  camp to  protect a  town or  large village  threatened  with plague.  90. When there is a town or large village in the vicinity  of an infected area, the Collector may establish a camp of  observation at such town or village and may order detention  and disinfection in such camp of any person, not possessing a  passport or pass, who is suspected of having left the infected  area within a period of one week prior to the date of his  arrival. He may appoint special places where markets may be  held and may prescribe limits beyond which it shall not be  lawful for persons bringing articles for sale from or to an  infected area to pass.  Use of public  conveyances  by plague  patients  prohibited.  91. No owner, driver or person in charge of a public  conveyance shall carry any person suffering from the plague;  nor shall any person suffering from the disease enter or be  taken in a public conveyance.  3*
36  Infected  houses not  to be let until  disinfected.  92. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting,  a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has  reason to know, that a person has suffered or is suffering  from the plague, without having such building or part thereof,  and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected  to the satisfaction of the medical officer appointed by the  Collector in this behalf.  Destruction  of infected  huts or sheds-.  93. If the Collector of the district or an officer generally  or specially authorized by him in writing in this behalf is of  opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary  to prevent the spread of the plague, the Collector or such  officer as aforesaid may summarily take measures for the  destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is  constructed.  94.                   *               *               *  95.                   *               *               *  Abatement of  nuisances.  96. The Collector or an officer generally or specially  authorized by him in writing in this behalf may, when he  considers necessary, enter upon any premises, whether situated  in a municipality or not, at any time during daylight and  summarily execute any work required under, or summarily  abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections  186, 220, 221 and 228 of the District Municipalities Act, 1884,  or sections 99 and 101 of the Local Boards Act, 1884.  Closing of  places used  for supply,  preparation,  &c., of arti-  cles of food  and drink.  97. The Collector of the district or any officer specially  authorized by him in this behalf may close any shed used for  accommodation of animals whose milk or milk products are  sold by the owner or his agent, and any place used for the  supply, preparation or storage of articles of food and drink in  infected localities or in the immediate neighbourhood of  infected houses, and may direct the removal and, if necessary,  the destruction of all articles of food and drink found in such  places.  Restrictions  on the wash-  ing of  clothes.  98. The Collector of the district may prescribe that no  person undertaking for hire the cleansing of clothing or other  laundry process within an infected area shall store or wash or  otherwise deal with clothing except at such places and at such  times and under such conditions as he may direct.  Closure  of plague  hospitals and  camps.  99. No hospital, suspect camp or observation camp shall be  closed without the special orders of the Collector, and until the  receipt of such orders the municipality or the district board  shall maintain such places in efficient repair.
?37  If there have been no actual or suspected cases of plague  therein, the Collector may allow a health camp to be closed  after seven days, and a village or town or section of a town in  which no death or fresh case of plague has taken place for ten  days after the recovery or death of the last case to be rein-  habited as soon as he has reason to believe that the infection  has disappeared.  Part V.-Penal Provisions.  Penalty for  breach of  regulations.  100. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing  to submit himself to any regulation made under the Epidemic  Diseases Act, 1897, or obstructing any measure which has  been taken by Government, or which any authority, or officer  appointed under competent authority to carry out such regu-  lation, has been required or empowered to take under any such  regulation, shall be deemed to have committed an offence  punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and  shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either descrip-  tion for a term which may extend to six months or fine which  may extend to one thousand rupees or both.  Note.-The Plague Regulations being orders formally made and issued by Govern-  ment under the Epidemic Diseases Act, no sanction is required as a condition precedent  to prosecution for disobeying them (Judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal  No. 561 of 1899).  101.                   *                *                *  102. If the Police have reason to believe that a person is  evading the plague regulations by giving a false name or a  wrong address, they can act under section 57 of the Criminal  Procedure Code, and detain the person until satisfied that they  have got his true name and address. Failing information as  to the person's true. name and address or the execution of a  bond, the Police should without delay forward him to a  Magistrate.  Part VI.-Miscellaneous.  Administra-  tive staff.  103. (1) For the purposes of these regulations the general  control of all measures connected with plague is vested in the  Collector of the district unless Government shall in any case  otherwise direct, and all officers of Government, of local boards  and of municipalities shall obey and carry out the Collector's  orders.  (2) In subordination to the Collector the following classi-  fication of plague authorities will be observed:-  (a) Plague officers including the following: divisional  officers (special or otherwise), Assistant Collectors  (extra or otherwise), the district medical and
38  sanitary officer, additional medical officers, chair-  men of municipalities when specially so appointed  by Government and any personal assistant to the  Collector and any one specially so appointed by  Government;  (b) Assistant plague officers including tahsildars and  deputy tahsildars (ordinary or special), chairmen  of municipal councils who have not been specially  appointed to be plague officers by Government,  and such other persons of known and approved  character and responsible position as the Collector  may specially appoint.  103-A. The Collector may fine or suspend subordinates  of the Government medical department who are employed on  plague duty within his district, but against such punishment  there shall be a right of appeal to Government through the  Surgeon-General. Before passing any order regarding the  punishment of a medical subordinate, the Collector shall consult  the district medical and sanitary officer. A copy of every such  order shall forthwith be communicated to the Surgeon-General  who shall be entitled, in any case in which he considers that  ascribed to the subordinate is one which touches his  the fault 1 conduct only, to require that the order shall not  carried into effect pending reference to Government. No  appeal to the Government will be entertained unless preferred  within three months from the date of the order appealed  against.  103-B. The Collector may grant casual or privilege leave  to subordinates of the Government medical department whose  services have been lent to local boards or municipalities for  plague duty. Intimation of the application should, however,  be made to the Surgeon-General before privilege leave is  sanctioned. Leave of all other descriptions such as furlough  or sick leave is granted by the Surgeon-General.  Jurisdiction  and powers  of plague  officers.  104. The Collector may, from time to time, assign to  plague officers and assistant plague officers jurisdiction over  such local areas, and confer on the latter officers such powers  as he may deem fit. The plague officers shall have the powers  of assistant plague officers and such additional powers as may  be conferred by Government.  104-A. Subject to the Collector's approval and general  control, the officer in whom the immediate control over the  plague staff employed in a municipality vests may appoint,  fine, suspend, or remove from plague duty any member of
?39  that staff except a medical subordinate. The chairman of  the municipal council shall not exercise any of these powers  merely by virtue of his office as chairman or on the ground  that the staff is paid out of municipal funds. He can only  exercise these powers to the extent to which the control of  the staff may have been vested in him by the Collector under  Rule 104.  104-B. The order of any Collector dispensing with the  services of a temporary plague subordinate shall have gen-  eral effect throughout the presidency. The Collector's order  of suspension or dismissal shall be final with regard to  officers lower in rank than that of certificated sanitary in-  spector. Certificated sanitary inspectors shall have a right  of appeal to Government. The appeal shall be forwarded  to Government through the Collector and the Sanitary  Commissioner.  105. The employment on plague duty of Government  officials of the medical and police departments should be  restricted as much as possible and volunteer agency should  be utilized as much as possible to assist in carrying out plague  measures. Whenever practicable, public and private hospitals  and camps may be placed in charge of native practitioners.  Police officers should not hold enquiries into suspicious cases  of plague. Small representative committees of the inhabitants  may be appointed in various parts of a city to co-operate  with the authorities and to bring to their notice matters  requiring attention or inquiry.  106. As far as circumstances permit, Hindus should be  employed in those parts of a city where Hindus predominate  and Muhammadans where Muhammadans are in a majority.  Officers of all grades should show the greatest courtesy and  consideration to the people, and should interfere as little as  possible with their habits, feelings and religious prejudices.  Where subordinate native agency is used, it is absolutely  necessary that Europeans should be appointed as supervisors  over small and convenient units.  Military  officers.  107. The following procedure should be adopted in  obtaining the services of military officers for plague duty:-  I. A Local Government or Administration requiring an  officer or officers for plague duty will apply to the Gov-  ernment of India, in the Home Department, detailing the  number of officers required, and where and when they  should be ordered to join. Such applications shall always be
?40  accompanied by an intimation whether the officer should bring  horses with him.  II. The Government of India will then address the  Adjutant-General in India, who will issue instructions under  the orders of the Commander-in Chief to one or more Com-  mands to supply the officers wanted, the Government of India  being at the same time informed of the instructions issued.  III. On learning from the Adjutant-General's depart-  ment from what Command the officers asked for will be  supplied, the Government of India will inform the Local  Government or Administration concerned, and all further  correspondence in reference to the individual officers detailed  by Commands, or their replacement, should they for any  reason revert to military duty, will be conducted between the  Local Government or Administration and the General Officer  Commanding.  IV. When the officers selected have joined their appoint-  ments, the General Officer Commanding will communicate  their names to the Adjutant-General's department, and their  services will then be placed at the disposal of the Government  of India.  V. It is not considered desirable that a military officer  should remain absent from his regiment on plague duty for  more than a year at a time. The General Officer Commanding  has therefore instructions to arrange with the Local Govern-  ment for the relief by a substitute of any such officer who has  been employed on plague work for over a year.  VI. When an officer's services are no longer required, he  should be directed by the Local Government or Administration  to rejoin his regiment, the General Officer Commanding and  the Government of India being at the same time informed,  and the latter will then replace the officer at the Commander-  in-Chief's disposal.  108. No officers of the Indian Medical Service or the  Royal Army Medical Corps lent for plague duty should be  permitted to revert to military duty without the previous  sanction of the Government of India.  Troops.  109. The use of troops for plague purposes should be  avoided as far as possible and their employment should be  confined to disinfection when local labour is not available.  Before being sent on plague duty, the sepoys should be  inoculated and each of them should be supplied with two suits  of white drill, one pair of boots, and two white turbans; they  should not wear military uniform or carry arms while so  employed. The sanction of Government should be obtained
?41  before requisitioning them, but where the employment of troops  has once been sanctioned, the men may be changed without  reference to Government, arrangements being made for the  relieving detachment to be inoculated before being despatched  to plague work.  Plague  measures in  Canton-  ments.  110. In Cantonments, the military authorities are imme-  diately responsible for carrying out the plague measures, and  Collectors should delegate to them the necessary powers under  the plague regulations.  Breach of  plague  regulations  by troops  and  pensioners.  111. By Command Order, No. 687, dated 18th November  1898, all ranks in the Madras Command have been directed  to obey the plague regulations, and any infringement of them  is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have  been warned (Superintendent's circular No. II, dated 14th  December 1898) that any disobedience or wilful neglect of the  regulations or obstruction offered to any official on plague  duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required  by Government as a condition of the continuation of their  pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be  liable to have his pension stopped forthwith and the same  reduced or permanently withdrawn.  Duties of the  railway staff.  112. The following are the duties of the railway officials  under the plague regulations:-  (1) To prevent passengers from infected areas from  alighting at any station other than an inspection station, and  to insist on their proceeding to the inspection station if it is  suspected that the passengers are evading inspection by so  alighting.  (2) To see with the aid of the platform police that  passengers alighting at a railway station do not leave the  premises except by the proper exit.  (3) To see that the railway tickets issued in an infected  area and the fresh tickets issued to persons from infected  areas who re-book are punched or clipped as prescribed.  (4) To stop all passengers presenting plague-punched  tickets from infected or notified stations until their names and  addresses have been taken down and they have been given  passports either by the plague official appointed for the purpose  or at smaller stations by the station staff themselves.  (5) To disinfect railway carriages from infected areas  and carriages in which persons suffering or suspected to be  suffering from plague have travelled.
42  (6) To take steps for tracing and destroying rats that  may arrive from infected areas concealed in the goods  imported.  (7) To put up a notice in all railway carriages intimating  that passengers from infected parts should take out passports  at stations of destination.  (8) To lock the carriages before the arrival of the train  at the inspection station.  (9) To detain the train until the medical inspection is  over.  (10) To see that no passenger is permitted to leave  his carriage until the arrangements for his examination are  complete.  (11) To give every assistance to the medical officers  conducting the inspection in order to minimise the detention  of trains.  (12) To carry out the instructions regarding the  transmission of the names and addresses of passengers.  (13) To afford every facility towards the working of  the plague regulations generally.  Plague staff  entitled to,  and bound to  give, one  month's  notice.  113. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the  contrary, every inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, cooly,  scavenger or other menial servant employed to do duty in  connection with plague shall be entitled to one month's notice  before discharge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof,  unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a  specified term and is discharged at the end of it. Similarly  every supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall be  entitled to one month's notice before his coolies are dis-  charged.  (2) No such inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, cooly,  scavenger or other menial servant shall, in the absence of a  written contract authorizing him so to do and without reason-  able cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his  duties without giving one month's notice or shall neglect or  refuse to perform his duties or any of them. In like manner  no supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall withdraw  his coolies without giving one month's notice.  Detention of  public  servants.  114. An officer not being on leave who is prevented from  discharging his duties through segregation on account of  plague may be treated as on duty on full pay. In the case  of an officer who is segregated while returning from leave and  thus overstays his leave, the period of detention may be
?43  treated as duty on half-pay. Officers who are suffering from  plague should be dealt with in accordance with the ordinary  rules.  Mode of  disinfection. 115. Whenever disinfection is prescribed by any of  these regulations, it shall be carried out in accordance with  the general principles laid down by Government and such  subsidiary instructions as may be issued by the Sanitary  Commissioner or, in respect to management of hospitals,  by the Surgeon-General with the Government of Madras.  115-A. For the purpose of effecting the disinfection  prescribed by Rule 57 (2), 69, or 72 (3), the Collector or any  officer who may be generally or specially authorized by the  Collector in this behalf may, at any time during daylight, force  open any closed house which, in his opinion, requires disinfec-  tion: provided that a notice calling upon the owner or tenant  of such house to open the house before a specified time shall  have been served on him, or posted on some conspicuous part  of the building, and the house has not been opened accordingly;  and provided also that as little damage as possible shall be  caused to the house in the act of opening. Locked receptacles  inside the house may be forced open by the same officers  or officers similarly authorized.  Compensa-  tion. 116. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by  or under these regulations any damage or loss is caused, no  person shall be entitled as a matter of right to claim any  compensation, but the Collector of the district or any person  authorized by him may award compensation at the cost of Local,  Municipal or Provincial funds as the case may be, and shall do  so when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circum-  stances, to whom it would be a great hardship to bear it, or  may, in such cases, provide other necessary articles in the  place of those destroyed or damaged and debit the charge to the  proper funds.  Supersession  of district  board or  municipality  by Collector  in emergen-  cies.  117. The Collector of a district may, in case of emergency  or to save delay, provide for the execution of any work or the  doing of any act which a district board or municipality is  empowered or required to execute or to do in accordance with  these regulations, and the immediate execution or the doing  of which is in the said Collector's opinion necessary for the  safety of the public, and may charge the expense of executing  the work or doing the act to the local board or municipality  concerned.
?44  Contents of  certificates,  pasees, etc.  Their im-  proper use  prohibited.  118. Any certificate, passport or pass granted under these  regulations shall contain an accurate description of the person  named in it to prevent, so far as possible, its being used by  another person; nor shall such a certificate or passport or pass  given to any person to enable him to go from one place to  another or for any purpose be used by any other person or for  any other purpose.  Segregated  or detained  persons  bound to  obey direc-  tions given to  them.  119. Every person segregated or detained under any of  these regulations shall obey the directions issued to him by  the officer in charge of the place of segregation or detention  and shall not leave such place except with the written permis-  sion of the said officer, who may take such steps as may be  necessary to enforce this prohibition.  Canal boats,  subject to  same  regulations  as buildings.  120. (1) A canal boat shall be subject to all the regulations  applicable to buildings; and passengers by a canal boat shall  be subject to interrogation, inspection and detention in the  same manner as passengers by railway.  (2) In order to prevent the spread of the infection of  the plague either by or to a canal boat, the Collector of the  district or any officer generally or specially empowered by him  in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or  to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such  officer may indicate, or may direct that it desist from plying  until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a  conspicuous position of the boat.  Privileges  granted to  inoculated  persons.  121. (1) Persons who hold certificates that they have been  successfully inoculated by M. Haffkine's process shall be  entitled to the following privileges, provided such certificates  bear a date not earlier than nine months and not later than  seven days previously:-  (a) Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering  from, plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any railway  or road observation camp when travelling, except for such  period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes,  if those are considered suspicious.  (b) They shall not be liable to take out passports and  present themselves daily for observation for seven days after  arrival from a plague-infected place, or from any place notified  by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council for the purposes  of these rules; but they may be observed at their own residence  and shall, with this view, be bound when required by any  plague officer to give their names and addresses for the next  seven days.
?45  (c) Inoculated persons who have been living in an  infected house or have otherwise been exposed to plague  infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be  required to evacuate the infected house and to have their  clothes and personal effects disinfected. When, however, all  the occupants of a house have been inoculated, neither the  patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required  to be segregated, provided arrangements are made to the satis-  faction of a plague officer for the disinfection of the house and  its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to  the neighbouring dwellings.  (2) The inoculation certificate shall be in the form shown  in Appendix II-F. But when in a certificate issued under  authority the thumb impression has not been taken, other satis-  factory evidence of identification may be accepted.  Inoculated  persons  bound to  produce their  inoculation  certificates  and make an  impression of  thumb-  marks. 122. Every inoculated person who is exempted from  segregation, detention and observation under the preceding  Rule 121 shall be bound, when called upon to do so by the  officer mentioned in Rule 3, to produce the certificate showing  that he has been inoculated by M. Haffkine's process, and also  to make an impression of his thumb-mark for the purpose of  identification.  Note.-Further information regarding inoculation is given in note (5) in Appendix I.  Plague  reports and  returns. 123. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first  discovered in any place not declared infected, the Collector or,  in his absence, any gazetted officer at the head-quarters station  of the district shall immediately telegraph the fact to the  Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal Department,  and to the Sanitary Commissioner. This telegram shall state  whether the case was indigenous or imported, if the latter  whence it was imported, how the case was discovered, and any  other further particulars, with dates, which appear necessary.  In the case of ports whence vessels sail for Europe, it should  also be stated in the telegram whether any plague or unusual  mortality among rats was observed. Within 24 hours (if  possible) of the despatch of this telegram a special report in the  form prescribed in Appendix II-O shall be despatched to  Government and to the Sanitary Commissioner. A similar  course shall be followed with each subsequent case up to and  including the third case. Names of hamlets should not be  telegraphed but only the names of the villages to which such  hamlets belong.  Provided that no special report of imported cases need be  forwarded from railway inspection stations, unless the medical
46  officer in charge considers that there are special points  requiring notice, e.g., the detection of a case from an area  hitherto unnotified, or the occurrence of attempts at evasion of  plague rules.  Provided also that in a district, other than the Nilgiris or  Chingleput, which may be infected with indigenous plague, the  submission of the special report to Government shall be restricted  to cases which occur in a union or a municipality.  124. After the first three cases have been reported in  accordance with Rule 123 special reports in the form given in  Appendix II-O regarding indigenous cases need not be sub-  mitted, but a special report of each imported case shall be  forwarded without delay to the Sanitary Commissioner, who will  transmit it to Government with his remarks if it shows any  serious negligence in dealing with the case specified or presents  any features of such special importance as to deserve the notice  of Government, but not otherwise.  For the purposes of these rules, cases of plague among  contacts who have not been, within the preceding fortnight, in  an infected place should be treated as indigenous and not as  imported.  124-A. To enable the Collector to prepare the special  reports mentioned in Rules 123 and 124, the plague inspector,  the tahsildar or other reporting officer shall draw up his report  to the Collector in the form prescribed in Appendix II-O1, in  respect of imported cases and the first three cases of indigenous  plague in any village. The report shall invariably be sub-  mitted within 24 hours from the hour of the first intimation  of plague in the case specified, and it shall on no account be  delayed merely because full information on all points is not  available. The form should be filled in as far as possible.  125. All attacks and deaths should be telegraphed daily by  Collectors to Government and the Sanitary Commissioner in the  form prescribed by G.O., No. 485 P., dated 10th March 1904.  Nil telegrams are not required. The Government send daily  telegraphic reports of indigenous plague cases in the Presidency  to the Medical officer of the Ceylon Government stationed at  Tuticorin. The cost of these telegrams will be debited to the  Ceylon Government by the Accountant-General.  125-A. Collectors of infected districts shall send daily  reports of plague to the Collectors and District Medical Officers  of adjoining districts in the form prescribed by G.O., No. 83 P.,  dated 16th January 1904.
?47  The Collectors of Nellore, North Arcot, South Arcot and  Chingleput shall send a copy of the daily plague report to the  President of the Madras Corporation, and shall also report to  him by telegram immediately on its occurrence any case of  plague or suspected plague that may occur in any new place  within their districts.  126. The following reports and returns are sent by the  Government of Madras to the Government of India:-  (a) An express telegram every Monday showing sepa-  rately the number of seizures and deaths from  plague during the week ending with the previous  Saturday (i) in the Presidency town, (ii) in towns  of 50,000 or more inhabitants in each district,  (iii) in the rest of the district, and (iv) in all  ports of the Presidency.  (b) Special telegraphic reports whenever plague ex-  tends to any new district or important place. In  the case of ports whence vessels sail for Europe,  it should be stated in the telegram whether any  plague or unusual mortality among rats was  observed.  (c) A monthly return showing daily reported plague  seizures and deaths in each district during the  previous month and also a similar separate return  for Madras City, to be despatched with a brief  narrative of any events of importance in connec-  tion with plague, so as to reach the Government  of India not later than the 7th of each month.  (d) A telegram, as soon as the statistics referred to in  clause (c) above are compiled, showing the total  number of deaths in the whole Presidency during  the month under report.  (e) A special report by letter when a district or town  of over 50,000 inhabitants previously included in  the weekly returns is considered or declared to  be entirely free from plague. Copies of this report  are circulated to all Local Governments and  Administrations and all Political officers.  127. To enable the Local Government to prepare the  monthly narrative required by the Government of India,  Collectors of districts affected with indigenous plague will  forward on the 25th of every month a concise report on plague  in their districts, showing whether the disease is increasing  or decreasing, what measures have been taken to suppress it
48  and with what decree of success, the attitude of the people, the  readiness with which they permit segregation of the sick and  contacts, or with which they evacuate houses of their own  accord, whether they accept treatment or desire inoculation,  what steps they are taking to help themselves and any other  matters of interest. This report should reach Government not  later than the 27th of the month to which it relates. When-  ever a place previously included in the list of infected areas  is considered to be entirely free from plague, the Collectors  concerned should report the fact to Government so that it may  be removed from the list. This report should state the date of  the last case and should certify that no plague patients remain  under treatment and that all necessary precautionary measures  have been taken.  128. Each Collector should keep in his office a plague  record, to which officers on plague duty in his district should  be requested to contribute brief notes on any matter they may  consider of importance in perfecting measures against the  disease, or desirable of being placed on record with a view to  adding force to theories already assented to, or controverting  them from (1) an administrative, (2) medical, or (3) sanitary  point of view. Weekly extracts from this record of the  portion bearing on sanitation should be sent to the Sanitary  Commissioner.  129. In the event of recrudescence of plague in any town  or village which has been free from the disease for any length  of time, particular efforts should be made by the local officials  to ascertain whether any definite facts bearing on the probable  cause or source of re-infection are available, and a special  report should be submitted by the Collector to Government  through the Sanitary Commissioner.  130. Inasmuch as the Mysore Darbar has instructed the  amildars and deputy amildars in charge of taluqs and sub-  taluqs of Mysore which border on British districts to give  immediate information of the occurrence of plague within  their jurisdiction direct to the tahsildars of the neighbouring  British taluqs, and as the deputy commissioners have been  similarly requested to keep the Collectors of adjoining British  districts promptly informed of the occurrence of plague in the  neighbouring districts in Mysore, Collectors of British districts  bordering on Mysore will accordingly arrange to give similar  information direct to the officials of the Darbar. Similar  arrangements are in force with regard to districts bordering  on the Nizam's Dominions. A system of intercommunication  among the Sanitary Commissioners of the various provinces has
?49  been sanctioned by the Government of India with regard to  news about the progress of plague. Under this system, the  appearance of plague should be telegraphed at once by the  Sanitary Commissioner in whose area cases occur to the other  Sanitary Commissioners on receipt of a report of a first case in  taluqs and important towns.  Plague  corre-  spondence 131. All correspondence about plague should be addressed  to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal Depart-  ment, and should be marked with the word " Plague " in red  ink on the outside covers and on the left-hand corner of the  papers. Telegrams should be addressed to " Madras, Plague."  Note.-All communications, except reports or returns on printed forms, should be  forwarded with a docket sheet, copies of which are supplied by the Superintendent,  Government Press.  132. All references regarding account matters should be  addressed to, or forwarded through, the Accountant-General.  133. Plague correspondence should be entered in a  separate current register, and the papers shown against a  new item " Plague " in the quarterly business returns. A  separate series of numbers should be given to the disposals,  and the question of destroying or retaining them should be  dealt with in accordance with Board's Proceedings, No. 101,  dated 18th April 1898. As regards passports, however, they  are of no use after the expiration of the period of observation  and may then be destroyed except where they are required  or likely to be required in connection with any prosecution  or for any special purpose.  Note.-In Appendix II-P is given a list of plague records showing when each item  may he destroyed.  134. Copies of printed Government orders relating to  plague matters need not ordinarily be supplied to medical  subordinates, sanitary inspectors or chairmen of unions, or  to each member of a municipal council. Where necessary,  district circulars embodying the purport of the Government  orders should be issued to subordinate officers. Spare copies  of Government orders are at present distributed in accordance  with the statement printed as Appendix II-Q.  135. Copies of all important orders passed by the Govern-  ment in regard to the prevention and suppression of plague  will be supplied from the Government office to the Assistant  Adjutant-General, Ninth Division, and the General Officers  Commanding Districts in the Madras Presidency, who should  also be furnished by Collectors with similar orders issued  by themselves.  4
?50  136. The Superintendent, Government Press, should  supply all Collectors with the required number of copies  of notifications of lists of plague-infected areas for circula-  tion with District Gazettes. Vernacular translations of these  notifications may be prepared and issued by the Collectors  themselves.  137. All establishments proposed to be employed in  connection with plague require the sanction of Government.  In the case of appointments which are added to an existing  establishment in consequence of extra work occasioned by  plague, and the cost of which is under the standing orders  debitable to the ordinary service heads, the application for  sanction should be forwarded with the prescribed proposition  statement through the head of the administrative department  concerned. Applications for additional establishments, the  cost of which is debitable to 3-A. Land Revenue, should be  submitted to Government through the Accountant-General  and not through the Board of Revenue. No proposition state-  ments are necessary in the case of temporary appointments  which are not additions to existing establishments and which  have been created solely on account of plague. Sanctions for  establishments employed under this rule will remain in force  to the end of the following March or September whichever is  earlier, unless for special reasons a different date is specified  in the order in any particular case. On the 1st of March  and on the 1st of September, each Collector will submit in a  single communication proposals for the retention of such of  the establishments as, in his opinion, should be retained in  the ensuing half-year, clearly explaining the necessity for  the retention of each establishment proposed to be retained.  Special sanctions should however be obtained for all additional  establishments which it may be found necessary to employ in  the course of the half-year, but all such sanctions will expire  at the end of the half-year unless otherwise directed. Collec-  tors should also submit proposals from time to time in respect  of such reductions in establishments as may be feasible and  should certify in the establishment lists submitted by them  that the establishments which it is proposed to retain are  necessary (G.O., No. 626 P., dated 24th May 1905).  137-A. The following rules shall be observed in fixing  the pay of temporary appointments required for plague  duty:-  (1) In the case of additions to an existing establish-  ment, the pay of additional appointments shall ordinarily be  the pay of the lowest paid appointment or grade in the
?51  establishment to which the extra appointment is to be added  for the class of duties to be performed.  (2) In the case of additional appointments which do  not strictly form part of any existing establishment, the pay  should be such as the officer submitting the application  considers to be proper and necessary. If a temporary  appointment is filled by an officer already in the service of  Government, the salary of the temporary post, while not  exceeding the sanctioned pay of the temporary appointment,  should also not exceed the salary admissible under article 81  of the Civil Service Regulations, viz., the pay or salary which  but for his deputation the officer concerned would have con-  tinued to draw plus a deputation allowance of one-fifth of  salary. Exceptions from this rule require the prior sanction of  Government which will be granted only in very special cases.  137-B. Applications for sanction to additional plague  establishments or additional plague expenditure should invari-  ably state whether the Collector or the head of the department  concerned can, with reference to Rule 147 infra, reappropriate  for the extra charge from the quarterly allotments passed by  Government in the latest plague estimates and when such  a course is not practicable the application should specify  particulars regarding the additional allotment required.  138. Collectors of districts affected with indigenous  plague should submit every month a printed list of officers  of all classes, including troops, employed on plague duty, in  accordance with the instructions contained in Plague Com-  missioner's Proceedings, No. 762, dated 22nd November  1898, No. 1047, dated 28th December 1898, and G.Os.,  No. 1504 P., dated 17th October 1899, and No. 626 P., dated  24th May 1905. The Inspector-General of Police should  prepare similar lists of all police engaged in plague work,  and the Surgeon-General should also submit a return show-  ing all medical officers on plague duty and all temporary  doctors obtained from England, with their stations, pay and  allowances. The lists should be submitted by the Inspector-  General of Police not later than the 10th and by the other  officers not later than the 5th of each month, and should be  distributed as follows: -  One copy to the Chief Secretary to Government,  Financial Department.  Three copies to the Secretary to Government, Local and  Municipal Department.  Two copies to the Accountant-General.  One copy to the Sanitary Commissioner.  4*
?52  The lists need not be reprinted every month, any minor  alterations being made in manuscript.  In the case of districts not affected with indigenous  plague, similar lists should be submitted to Government on  the 5th of the first month of each quarter showing the estab-  lishments employed during the preceding quarter.  Allowances.  139. The conduct of plague operations in an infected  district must be regarded as part of the general duty of the  executive officers of the district. Save in exceptional cases  no recommendation should be made for the grant of special  salary, allowance or pension for plague duty.  140. The Government of India have authorized the grant  of special allowances to medical officers for plague duty per-  formed in addition to their ordinary work in cases where  it is sufficiently arduous to deserve special remuneration.  The Local Government may also sanction local allowances  to officers of other classes provided their plague work lies  entirely outside their ordinary and legitimate duties. The  Secretary of State has also sanctioned the grant of extraordi-  nary pension to the families of police-men who die of plague  contracted in the execution of their duties in plague-stricken  localities, provided such duties entail imminent risk from  plague.  141. The special allowances given to certain classes of  officers for plague duty and the salaries attached to special  temporary appointments created on account of the plague  are shown in Appendices II-R and II-S. All questions  relating to the grant of such allowances should be referred for  the orders of Government.  Plague  expenditure  and accounts.  142. No expenditure in connection with plague establish-  ments or for the carrying out of works shall be incurred from  Provincial, Local or Municipal funds without the previous  sanction of Government. Collectors are, however, authorized  to incur, subject to the existence of budget provision,  expenditure on the following items in connection with plague  preventive measures:-  (1) Compensation for destruction of grain, clothes,  roofs of houses, etc.  (2) Employment of temporary clerks on daily wages  for passport work or similar purposes and of  temporary servants on daily wages for short  periods for disinfection purposes or for attend-  ance upon plague cases.
?53 (3) Purchase of fuel and tacks for disinfecting machines. (4) Rat-traps and rat-poison. (5) Purchase of disinfectants required for plague purposes and of serum for inoculation. (6) Payment of rent for buildings or lands temporarily occupied for plague purposes (Rule 61). (7) Contingencies, subject to the usual limits for Pro- vincial contingent expenditure, except in regard to expenditure on " Petty Works of Construction and liepairs " in respect of which the maximum expenditure that can be incurred without the sanction of Government is Rs. 250 in each case. 143. All Collectors, the Surgeon-General, the Inspector- General of Police and the Sanitary Commissioner are required to submit estimates of plague expenditure in the forms prescribed, and on the dates fixed, in the next following rule. The estimate submitted by the Surgeon-General should include provision for all medical officers and nurses (if any) who have been sent out by the Secretary of State and are temporarily attached to hospitals in Madras prior to their being posted to plague duties, 144. The following estimates of plague expenditure should be submitted by the officers mentioned in the last preceding rule :- (i) An estimate to be despatched to Grovernment on the 5th July in the following form : - Quarterly statement showing grants already sanctioned and the grants required for plague expenditure in the district of______for the year 190 -190 . Detailed account. Grants already sanctioned. Actuals up to the end of June.  Estimate.    Explanatory remarks.    Second Quarter of the Year.  Third Quarter of the Year. Fourth quarter of the year Total for the Year.  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 * In December-vide clause (ii).
?54 (ii) A revised estimate for the year current and a budget estimate for the ensuing year in the subjoined form to be despatched to Government on the 5th December : - Revised estimate for 190 -190 and budget estimate for 190 -190 of plague expenditure in the district of_______________.  Detailed account. Actuals of the Privious Year Grants Already sanctioned.* Actuals up to the 30th November(of the current Year) Revised estimate for 190-190 Budget estimaie for ensuing year. Explanatory Remarks.      Estimate for the first quarter. Estimate for the remainder of the Year. Total estimate for the Year.  1 2 3 4  5 6 7 8 9          * In July-vide clause (i).  The figures in columns 6 to 8 of this estimate should be based on the conditions existing at the time of framing the estimate. 145. The estimates should be submitted for all major and minor heads of account concerned and complete explanations
?55  for all variations in the columns of figures should be entered  in a facing page opposite the figures themselves. They  should be submitted in four main portions: viz., (1) Provincial,  (2) Local, (3) Municipal and (4) Cantonment funds; but in  order to expedite the disposal of the estimates, the Local,  Municipal and Cantonment funds portions should be submitted  to the Local and Municipal department (Plague) direct, the  Provincial portion being submitted to the Financial depart-  ment. The several portions should be submitted by  budgeting officers simultaneously and punctually. Orders on  the entire estimate for each district will issue from the  Financial department.  145-A. The following instructions should be carefully  attended to by budgeting officers:-  (i) (a) When submitting plague estimates, budgeting  officers should invariably reconcile the allotments proposed on  account of Salaries and Establishments with the entries in  the latest list of plague establishments and explain differ-  ences, where such exist, in the page for explanatory remarks  in the estimate.  (b) Provision should, as a rule, be made in the  estimates for existing establishments, but where such is not  the case full explanation should be afforded.  (c) The necessity for any provision of Rs. 300 and  upwards under Supplies and Services or Contingencies should be  explained.  (ii) If in any case the estimates as framed by budgeting  officers under Local and Municipal exceed the provisions made  in the annual budget of the district board or municipality  concerned, it should be stated how it is proposed to meet the  excess expenditure.  (iii) The figures for each municipality should be given  separately in the estimates.  (iv) In framing the estimates the totals under each head  of account should, as far as possible, be rounded to tens or to  even hundreds of rupees, annas and pies being omitted.  (v) The actual expenditure as reported by budgeting  officers in the plague estimates under Local and Municipal  should correspond with the figures communicated to the  Accountant-General by the presidents of district boards and  the chairmen of municipal councils.  146. Collectors, chairmen of municipal councils and  other officers concerned with the control of plague expendi-  ture will be reminded that they are primarily responsible for
56  making provision in the estimates for the necessary expendi-  ture in each quarter of the year; that expenditure can be  incurred only against the quarterly allotments passed by  Government; and that applications should be made for addi-  tional allotments immediately it is foreseen that the actual  expenditure in any quarter is likely to vary considerably from  the latest estimate for that quarter which has been accepted  by Government. At the same time these officers should  keep Government informed of savings to the extent of  Rs. 500 and above which are likely to accrue in the estimated  expenditure in consequence of reduction of establishments  or other causes. It should be remembered that the savings  of one quarter are not available, in the absence of reallotment,  for expenditure in a subsequent quarter, and that savings  arising from the fact that the plague estimates accepted  during the year do not utilise fully the allotments existing  in the sanctioned budgets of local bodies should not be  utilised by district boards and municipalities for non-plague  purposes.  147. Collectors can themselves effect transfer of funds  from one detailed head to another under the same minor head,  and, subject to budget provision, they may also sanction all  deviations and excesses in estimates previously sanctioned by  Government up to a limit of 5 per cent. of the total amount  of each estimate. In the case of urgent works and repairs  costing Rs. 25 or less, estimates may be dispensed with pro-  vided the bills are passed by the Collector, and the usual  certificates are furnished by the officers responsible for the  work being properly carried out.  148. Forms of estimates will be printed and supplied by  the Accountant-General. No changes shall be made in the  form without the approval of the Government in the Financial  department.  149. Each municipality will bear its own plague charges.  As regards district boards, the measures adopted in frontier  districts proper, i.e., those districts which adjoin  plague-  stricken areas outside the Madras  Presidency, not only  benefit those districts themselves as being nearest the seat  of infection, but also protect other portions of the presidency  as well.  This condition is also fulfilled, in some measure,  by districts in which railway inspection stations have been  established by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette.  Expenditure incurred by district boards in such districts on  plague preventive measures is therefore distributed by Govern-
?57  ment in the ratio of one-third in frontier districts proper  and of one-fourth in railway inspection districts against the  district in which the expenditure is incurred, the remaining  two-thirds or three-fourths, as the case may be, being contri-  buted by the other districts of the presidency rateably to their  annual receipts as shown in their budget estimates for the year.  The budget estimates should, however, provide for the gross  expenditure to be incurred by each district board, credit for  the contribution being taken subsequently on advice from the  Accountant-General.  150. If any district board or municipality finds its funds  unequal to the burden of plague charges, it should revise its  budget by omitting all avoidable expenditure, and in the last  resort may apply for an advance from provincial funds or for  a loan from the Government of India. Care should be taken  that advances granted by Government to local bodies to meet  plague expenditure are applied to the precise purposes for  which the advances were made, and are not utilized to relieve  their ordinary funds of expenditure on sanitary, medical and  other objects.  151. The clothing specified in Rule 109 will be supplied  to the troops regimentally; and as soon as it has been issued,  and the bill countersigned by the Collector, the military  department will debit the cost to the civil department in  the exchange account rendered by the Controller of Military  Accounts to the Accountant-General, who will make the  necessary adjustments and recover the amount from the local  body concerned.  152. The Accountant-General should submit quarterly  statements of audited charges-direct and indirect-under  Provincial, Local, Municipal and Cantonment funds in the  form prescribed in G.O., No. 656, Financial, dated 29th Sep-  tember 1905 (Appendix II-V). The statements should also  show all expenditure incurred in connection with plague  which has not been brought to book as direct or indirect, e.g.,  the emoluments of officers and establishments forming part  of existing departments or services and not replaced by substi-  tutes, but exclusively engaged on plague duties, and should  reach Government on the 12th  of the second month of the  quarter succeeding that to which the accounts relate. Five  copies of these statements should be submitted to the Financial  department and two to the Local and Municipal (Plague)  department.
?58  153. Appendix II-T shows the proper classification of  charges commonly incurred in connection with plague:  (i) "Direct" plague expenditure means expenditure  exhibited in the Government accounts under the head 24-D.  MEDICAL - Grants for Medical Purposes-Expenses in connection  with Bubonic Plague. " Indirect " plague expenditure means  extra expenditure due to plague but brought to account under  the ordinary appropriate service heads.  (ii) The amount of indirect plague expenditure is  therefore not ascertainable from the ordinary provincial and  incorporated local fund accounts and special statements are  prepared in the course of audit by the Accountant-General  in the case of expenditure from general revenues and by the  treasury officer in the case of expenditure from incorporated  local funds.  (iii) To facilitate the preparation of these statements all  officers who draw bills for indirect plague expenditure should  write conspicuously at the head of each such bill, beside the  account head, the word PLAGUE in red ink. If only some  of the items in a bill are indirect plague charges, the word  PLAGUE should be written against each such item instead of  at the head of the bill.  (iv) It is to be noted that pay and allowances of officers  and establishments forming part of existing departments or  services whose employment on plague duty does not involve  the payment of salaries to other persons for the performance  of their legitimate duties (even though they may be exclusively  engaged on plague duties) and not receiving extra allowances  on account of plague, do not constitute indirect plague charges  (and of course are not direct plague charges) because they  do not involve extra expense. A statement should be for-  warded to the Accountant-General by the 20th of each month  showing the pay and allowances, drawn in the previous month,  of officers and establishments so employed.  (v) From the above it will be seen that the distinction  between direct and indirect plague expenditure affects the  accounts of incorporated local funds expenditure and provincial  expenditure. As regards excluded local funds this distinction  is unnecessary and all extra expenditure, i.e., expenditure  which would not have been incurred but for the occurrence or  imminence of plague may be shown under the head Plague.  (vi) Contingent expenditure on account of plague, e.g.,  stationery, postage, telegrams, office furniture and such like  should be charged against the heads of account to which the
59  salaries of the officers incurring such expenditure are debited.  In regard to establishments newly entertained to deal with  plague, the principle that officers of superior grades should be  charged to PROVINCIAL, and those of inferior grades to LOCAL,  should be applied. With regard to establishments dependent  on officers newly employed to deal with plague, the principle  that the charge should follow the pay of the officer on whom  the establishment is dependent should hold both in regard to  establishments and contingencies. The cost of tents supplied  to officers on plague duty will follow the debit of the pay of  the officers.  154. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the plague  regulations should be credited to fines under Law and Justice.
?60  APPENDIX I.  NOTES ON CERTAIN MATTERS CONNECTED  WITH PLAGUE.  (1) General Remarks.  1. In dealing with an outbreak of plague, a combination of the  following measures is likely to produce the maximum of good:-  (1) Prompt discovery and isolation of every case of plague.  (2) Disinfection, observation and, in cases of pneumonic plague,  segregation of contacts.  (3) Evacuation of dwelling-houses.  (4) Inoculation.  (5) Disinfection of dwelling-houses.  (6) Removal and destruction by burning of plague-infeosed rats,  and the disinfection of the houses in which they are found.  (7) Systematic destruction of rats generally.  Of these measures the first is the most important. When once  plague has obtained a footing in a large place or has spread to a  number of villages it will be found very difficult to apply the measures  of disinfection and segregation. The policy to be adopted at a  particular place will depend on its physical features, the season of the  year, the general sentiment and state of education of the people in  regard to plague measures, the strength of the staff available, and the  influence of the local authorities. The systematic destruction of rats in  a threatened locality as well as in an infected area is of the greatest  value both as a preventive and an arrestive measure.  2. In the larger places, i.e., towns with a population of more than  10,000, the measures that will be found most applicable are disinfection,  inoculation, the evacuation of specially infected quarters, and (so long  as infection has not spread through the town) the isolation of the sick.  In villages, the chief measure to be relied on is evacuation, but inocula-  tion and disinfection should also be resorted to so long as there is  sufficient staff to supervise those measures. Evacuation in both towns  and villages should be conjoined with an opening up of houses sufficient  for the admission of sunlight and air whenever this is required. In  carrying out these measures it should be borne in mind that it will  always be better to apply one method efficiently and thoroughly than to  apply a number of methods with an inadequate and insufficiently trained  staff. Another point of importance is that in places where plague is  constantly recurring and the amount of plague is liable to great seasonal  variations, plague measures should be carried out with special vigour at  the season when the epidemic is at its minimum.  3. Experience has shown that it is hopeless to carry out effectively  any system of plague administration which is not supported by the
?61  people, and in a widespread epidemic the resources of Government in  the matter of funds and establishment being limited, much must neces-  sarily be left to the people themselves. Steps should therefore be taken  to inform them beforehand of the measures they will be required to  submit to, and to convince them of the utility of the particular methods  selected, so that they may be induced to carry them out not by force  but by the exercise of their own free-will and as a consequence of their  appreciating and understanding the benefits to be anticipated therefrom.  The measures are new to the people, particularly in fresh areas of  infection, and if injudiciously or over-zealously pressed, must defeat  themselves by exciting opposition instead of securing the co-operation  of the people. On the other hand, if the leading inhabitants are  induced to assist the Government officials in carrying out measures which  are clearly beneficial, it may often be possible, with their help, to carry  out with good results measures which would be ineffectual or injurious  if enforced by definite orders upon a population ignorant of their  advantages and suspicious of the objects with which they are adopted.  (2) Advantages of Early Discovery of Plague.  4. The most important and the most difficult matter in all operations  against plague is to obtain early information regarding the cases that  occur. The prompt discovery of an imported case of plague may enable  the local authorities to prevent a local outbreak, and even where a few  indigenous cases have occurred, early information regarding each new  case may make it possible to prevent the outbreak from spreading  beyond a confined area.    Every endeavour should therefore be made to  obtain information of each case of plague that occurs, as soon as possible  after the patient has been attacked, or where this is not possible, soon  after death.  5. For this purpose, the passport system as described in the Rules  1-36, should be mainly relied upon, and the co-operation of the people  in working it should be secured by pointing out to them the advantage  of protecting themselves by not mixing with persons coming from  infected areas and by giving the authorities prompt notice of their  arrival and of any cases of plague or suspicious fever among them. In  towns, one or more volunteers of each caste should be invited to assist  the circle officers in prosecuting enquiries and discovering plague cases.  The risk of concealment of cases is lessened where people see that their  leaders have ranged themselves on the side of the authorities.  6. Besides carrying out the other measures prescribed in the regu-  lations, attention should be paid to the improvement of the existing  system of registering deaths. In municipal towns special daily returns  of mortality may be called for and checked with the aid of trustworthy  subordinates posted at burning and burial grounds. In villages when-  ever the deaths reported are found to be more frequent than usual,  or when any case of fever with glandular swellings is reported, the  tahsildar with the nearest medical officer should at once proceed to the  village and make inquiries with a view to ascertain whether plague  exists in the village; and the medical officer and the tahsildar should  report to the district medical and sanitary officer the facts and the  reasons for the decision arrived at by them as to the cause of the  mortality.
?62  (3) Observation, Disinfection and Segregation of  Contacts.  7. Persons who have been in immediate contact with a plague  patient are known as " contacts" and as they are likely to develop  plague, special surveillance in their case is necessary. The clothing  and personal effects of all contacts should be disinfected and the contacts  placed under surveillance for a period not exceeding seven days under a  pass in the form in Appendix II-E1. While under surveillance, the  contacts should be allowed to pursue their ordinary avocations. Contacts  of cases of pneumonic plague should be ordinarily segregated.  (4) Evacuation.  8. By evacuation is meant the emptying of all or some of the  houses in an infected town or village, so that they may not be used as  dwelling houses until it is believed that they can again be occupied  without risk of infection, the people thus removed being lodged in  temporary camps in the open country. To make such evacuation  thoroughly effective, the following conditions are required: (1) the  people should all be got out promptly; (2) their effects should be  disinfected; (3) each new case of plague should be immediately isolated;  (4) suitable accommodation should be available; (5) the people should  be effectually prevented from visiting or sleeping in the infected houses  until either the houses have been disinfected or until sufficient time has  elapsed for the infection to disappear; and (6) lastly they should not  be permitted to scatter and spread the infection in the neighbourhood.  9. Evacuation provides the most effective safeguard against the  spread of plague that has yet been discovered. Its advantages are  self-evident and it should be resorted to wherever practicable. In  villages and small towns (population not exceeding 10,000) complete  evacuation (i.e., evacuation of all the houses) will be found to be generally  possible. In large towns, the extent to which it can be carried out  will depend on the willingness of the people, the season of the year, the  situation of the town, the facilities for providing camp accommodation,  and the strength of the available staff. It will be found to be of the  greatest value at the very commencement of the outbreak, for, the  removal of the small number of people affected will not present any  great difficulties, and prompt evacuation of the infected quarter may  save the rest of the town.  10. Evacuation is, however, likely to do more harm than good in  the following cases:-  (a) During the rainy season, when it is impossible to keep the  people, after they have once been removed from their houses, from  going back to them. In such circumstances, the people who are  removed are exposed to great inconvenience and misery without any  countervailing advantages being derived from evacuation.  (b) When the infection is widely distributed among the inhabit-  ants of a large place, it is then advisable to agitate the people as little  as possible, especially when there are among them a considerable
63  number of artisans and traders who may lose their occupation by being  removed from the town and are therefore likely to run away and infect  other places.  (5) Inoculation.  11. The exhaustive inquiries made by the Indian Plague Commission  have established the fact that inoculation with Haffkine's vaccine  lessens the liability to plague and greatly increases the chance of recovery  from an attack of the disease, and disproved the statement that serious  ill-consequences have resulted from such inoculation. The maximum  period for which protection is afforded by inoculation has not yet been  determined. For practical purposes, it has been fixed, for the present,  at nine months, but it should be noted that inoculation does not confer  any great degree of protection within the first few days.  12. Inoculation should be encouraged wherever possible and in  particular among disinfecting staffs and the attendants of plague  hospitals. In places which, either owing to their nearness to plague-  infected places or to their having previously suffered from an attack of  plague, appear to be specially threatened with a 'visitation of the  disease, no effort should be spared to explain to the people the advantage  of being-inoculated before the disease is among them and to secure the  co-operation of the more enlightened members of the communities. At  the same time, no compulsion of any sort, direct or indirect, should be  used. An awkward attempt at persuasion is liable to create opposition,  resistance, and occasionally, unfounded apprehension, and great circum-  spection is necessary in introducing inoculation in places where there  is no demand for it. The District Magistrate should be consulted  before starting inoculation at any place and the people should be  distinctly warned that inoculation is not a certain prophylactic, but  that it considerably reduces the chances of getting plague, that an  inoculated person when attacked has increased chances of recovery, and  that the process, if properly conducted, is harmless.  13. Only trained and reliable persons should be entrusted with the  actual operation of inoculation, and supervision should be exercised over  them to ensure that they use only sterilized implements. To remove  any possible ground for distrust as to the conveyance of disease from  one person to another, the inoculation syringe should be sterilized in  the presence of the person about to be inoculated. The sterilization  should be effected by immersion in carbolic acid, or preferably carbo-  lized oil kept hot by the flame of a spirit lamp underneath. After a  bottle has once been opened and only a portion of its contents used, the  remainder should invariably be thrown away.  14. Inoculated persons should be furnished with certificates in the  prescribed form [Appendix II-F]. The certificate should bear the  left thumb mark of the person inoculated and should be issued immedi-  ately after one full dose has been given, but the recipient should be  recommended to return for a second inoculation after ten days. The  full dose should always be given at one time, unless for medical reasons  it is considered advisable to divide it. If it is necessary to do this, a  certificate should not be given until the equivalent of two full doses  has been given. If, however, no undue reaction ensues after the first
?64  fractional dose has been taken, it is advisable to give the full dose at  once on the second occasion, after which a certificate may be given.  15. The privileges attached to inoculation are mentioned in  Rule 121. They are not admissible in cases of persons who hav6  recovered from plague. As a further encouragement the Government  have authorized the grant of three days' extra casual leave on  full pay  to all public servants for the purpose of being inoculated. Students  attending Government and aided schools, who undergo inoculation, will  be marked in the registers for not more than three consecutive days as  "under inoculation," and such an entry will be regarded as equivalent  to attendance. No subsistence allowance can be granted to inoculated  persons for the period during which they are incapacitated for work  owing to the operation.  16. The Sanitary Commissioner is in charge of all measures con-  nected with inoculation and will issue the necessary rules as to the  conduct of the operation, supply of Haffkine's vaccine, inoculation  syringes, etc.  (6) Disinfection.  17. Recent research seems now to demonstrate, with one important  exception, viz., pneumonic plague (a) that the number of bacilli that  actually leak out of the bodies of plague patients and rats is very small  and (b) that having left the body of their host they do not survive the  drying action of the atmosphere for longer than 24 hours. Hence the  attempt to kill these bacilli is scarcely worth the trouble and cost  involved. But there remains an agent capable of carrying about for a  considerable number of days large numbers of virulent plague bacilli,  namely the rat-flea. This insect under normal conditions, lives in the  fur of the rat's skin and feeds on the blood of the animal. But when  the rat dies the flea leaves the dead body and goes in search of other  living rats and in the event of a failure to find another passes to the  body of man, bites him and thereby infects the individual with plague.  Consequently the great object of disinfection should be to kill the rat-  flea that has left the dead rat; and in order to do this a preparation  that will kill fleas and not bacilli is required.  But having obtained such a solution which will kill fleas, there are  difficulties in its application. Where the houses are of the ordinary  poor class where plague is most likely to occur, the fleas may easily  escape in holes and crevices in the walls and escape the syringing of  the solution; and in most such cases the application of the solution is  useless. In the better class of houses of masonry and plaster walls,  disinfection with the solution is more likely to be successful and should  be applied.  Rat-fleas however die of starvation in a week if deprived of blood  from either rat or man; hence a vacated house slowly disinfects itself.  An empty house moreover has no great attraction for rats especially  if it is infected.  18. Disinfection of houses should be always carried out in the  following cases:-  (i) in houses where the occupants cannot or will not vacate,  (ii) in well-built pucca houses and bungalows,
?65  In these cases disinfection should be done thoroughly and at the  earliest possible moment after discovery of infection.  19.Plague authorities should manufacture locally kerosine oil  emulsion and should supply it gratis to people who wish to disinfect  their own houses but they need not keep up an expensive staff to do  this work.  20. Breaking holes in roofs and walls and digging up mud floors  should be discontinued.  21. The actual burning down of houses should not be resorted to  except in the case of temporary structures which are of little or no  value, or in the case of houses which are unfit for human habitation.  22. (a) The best disinfecting fluid for general use is an emulsion of  kerosine oil. The emulsion is made as follows:-  To each four cakes of sliced " Sunlight soap " add half a gallon  of water and boil until all the soap is dissolved.  Pour half a gallon of the solution still hot into an open tub tilted  to allow the fluid to be beaten up with a cocoanut spoon such as is in  general use by natives. Whilst stirring or beating up, add oil little by  little at intervals of about a minute, taking care that all trace of free  oil is absorbed into the frothy mass before fresh oil is added. After the  addition of about three gallons proceed very carefully. If properly  done, one half gallon of soap solution should emulsify a whole tin of  kerosine containing four gallons. The only error likely to be made in  the first attempt is that from inefficient stirring or too quick addition  of the oil premature over-saturation should occur, a fact which is at once  apparent to the maker. To make one brew of four gallons takes about  half an hour. It is desirable to have a couple of coolies to each tub to  take turn about stirring and pouring the oil. Each couple of coolies  should in a day turn out at the very least four brews; in actual  practice they will probably be able to turn out much more.  Another way in which the emulsion can be made with great ease  and rapidity is to do the mixing in a country churn such as is used for  making butter.  (b) The emulsion should be used in the strength of 1 part to 10  parts of water.  (c) Perchloride of mercury should no longer be used for disinfec-  tion of houses as it has little or no action on fleas.  23. Disinfection of personal effects should be carried out in the  following cases :-  (a) Native crews, third class or deck passengers and native  servants leaving infected or healthy ports for ports out of India. This  should be done on shore.  (b) Plague patients and contacts removed from infected houses,  ships or railway carriages.  (c) People vacating their houses on account of dead rats being  found in their houses.  As the disinfection of personal belongings is very unpopular,  especially those of women, and as nothing should be done that is likely  to endanger the speedy vacating of the house when dead rats are found,  the disinfection should take the form of arranging for the owner to  5
66  place all soiled clothes in water or a solution of cyllin and water, and  of exposing the bedding and better clothes to the action of the sun for  two days.  24. Disinfection of the person should be carried out in the case of  inmates vacating a plague-infected house, but, for the reason given in  paragraph 23, the inmates should be requested to take a bath and  change their clothes.  25. There seems little danger of the spread of plague by means of  ordinary articles of merchandise, and it is therefore not necessary to  disinfect such articles. The only restriction found necessary is the  prohibition against the importation from infected localities of rags,  waste paper and soiled linen. Any such articles brought in contraven-  tion of this prohibition should be destroyed.  Gunny bags that have been in use to carry grain should be disin-  fected in a steam-steriliser before being received by railway companies  if they come from a plague-infected area. This does not apply to new  gunny bags packed in bales.  26. Any railway carriage from which a passenger who is suffering  from plague has been removed shall be detached at the nearest con-  venient station, and shall be disinfected by the railway authorities as  follows and, if that station is an inspection station, such disinfection  shall be effected to the satisfaction of the inspecting medical officer.  (i) In the case of a third class or intermediate class carriage, the  carriage should be thoroughly well swilled with a solution of kerosine  oil emulsion and allowed to dry.  (ii) In the case of a first or second class carriage, the carriage  should be kept on a siding locked and shut up for seven days. It should  then be carefully swept out and cleaned and may be taken into use  again.  (7) Rat-plague and Destruction of Rats.  27. It has been observed, and proved by experiment, that rats are  very susceptible to plague and that a large mortality among rats  ordinarily precedes an epidemic of plague among human beings. Rats  with fleas present on their bodies are the main agents in the dissemina-  tion of plague. Their destruction, and the observation of any special  sickness or mortality among them, is of the first importance.  28. Measures for the destruction of rats should be universally  adopted. These vermin should, as far as possible, be exterminated in  every locality which is likely to be exposed to infection or in which a  recrudescence is to be feared. Special precautions in regard to rats  should not be confined only to infected localities or localities immediately  threatened  and the neighbourhood. Granaries being the favourite  haunts of rats, grain bags arriving from a place suspected of being  infected with plague should be carefully examined, and any rats found  should be destroyed and their bodies burnt; the bags and the grain  should be well exposed to the sun for 48 hours if dead rats are discovered.  Infection once brought into a granary spreads rapidly among the  healthy rats, and thence to human beings living in the neighbourhood.  Collectors, Presidents of District Boards and Chairmen of Municipal  Councils should therefore take special precautions to prevent infection
?67  from this source. Arrangements should be made for the constant  inspection of granaries and grain bazaars, and care should be taken to  keep them clean and disinfected and to have the rats exterminated.  In inspecting granaries particular inquiries should be made whether  any dead or sick rats have been observed. Rats sick with the plague  seem careless in the presence of men and run about in a dazed way  with a peculiar limping gait in the hind legs, owing to painful glands  in the groin. They frequently run round in circles or roll over, and  are occasionally seen to drop from the roof. The Port and Sea Customs  authorities should be instructed to see that no rats are landed with  goods imported by sea, and that rats found in ships are as far as  possible destroyed. Bandicoots, mice and other rodents are also liable  to become infected with plague and should therefore be destroyed.  29. The systematic destruction of rats whether in infected or  uninfected areas must be regarded as a measure of the first importance,  but more especially should the destruction be carried out in-  (a) infected places and the surrounding area within a radius of  ten miles;  (b) landing places and railway goods-sheds, where rats from  infected places are likely to be imported with goods brought by sea or  railway; and  (c) grain godowns.  In the case of (a), rewards may be necessary, but the maximum rate  should not ordinarily exceed three pies. In other cases, the Port or  Railway authorities are expected to do all that is required without the  reward system.  30. The best methods of destroying rats are (a) by chemical poison,  and (b) trapping.  (1) Poison:-  (a) Nearly all the most efficient rat-poisons are mixtures of  phosphorus with flour flavoured and sweetened to attract the rodents.  Hence they are poisonous to man and animals and a certain amount of  care is necessary to see that children, fowls, dogs, etc., do not eat the  baits. The best preparations are the poison made by the Punjab  Government (The Punjab Rat Exterminator, price annas 12 per tin)  and Mushicide (price Rs. 3 per tin). The former can be obtained by  sending indents to the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras who will  arrange for the supply, but as a large stock is not maintained notice of  approximate requirements should be sent early. The latter can be  obtained from Messrs. Jaggat Singh, Son & Brother, Rawalpindi.  (b) Procedure adopted in carrying out poisoning operations.-The  following is the procedure adopted: the contents, 12 ounces, of a tin of  the poison are thoroughly mixed with 2 lbs. of jaggery or treacle,  sufficient flour being added to make a stiff paste; this is rolled into  large pills and is sufficient to make 1,600 baits. Although general  ignition of the poison cannot take place at high temperature, some slight  sparking of particles may occur; to avoid this the mixing should not  be done in the sun's rays, handling should be avoided as much as  possible, hands should be kept wet with water. The pill method is  superior to spreading the paste on bread because baits can be prepared  more rapidly, the poison does not volatalise and the baits retain their  5*
?68  poisonous qualities for some time; they are also less luminous in the  dark, and, therefore, more readily taken by rats. These baits are placed  about 20- 40 to each house, in places that are practically only accessible  to the rat, which excludes all danger to children and domestic animals;  such places are in the rat holes themselves, behind boxes, underneath  corn bins, on the tops of the wall supporting the roof, etc. In any  town or village as large an area as practicable should be treated in this  way, at a single operation, in order to give as great a shock as possible  to the rat population before they recognise the dangerous character of  the bait. Baitings on successive days have been found to have no  advantage over the single baiting method. Baits are prepared in the  morning and laid in the afternoon and evening. For the preparation  and placing of the baits a compounder and three coolies are usually  employed. Such agency can ordinarily prepare and lay, in a day, from  9,000 to 12,000 baits, that is to say, they can thoroughly treat a village  of 400 houses, approximate population 2,000-2,400. A Hospital  Assistant or Assistant Surgeon should ordinarily be in charge of one or  more gangs, such gangs operating in large villages or adjacent small  villages. Where the active co-operation of the inhabitants is obtained,  more work than this can be done.  If the baits are properly placed, they may be allowed to remain,  instructions being issued that all village sweepings for the next week  should be burnt; otherwise baits will find their way to the village  rubbish heap, where fowls, pigs, etc., may find and eat them. The dead  rats found are collected and buried or burnt.  A search for dead rats should be made every morning for six  days after the poisoned baits are put down.  (c) The frequency with which this procedure should be repeated  depends on the rate at which the rat population recover from the shock  caused by the poison, but on the whole a month should elapse before  any fresh trial to poison rats of any particular neighbourhood is  attempted.  (d) This method of poisoning should be made use of whenever  an epidemic is likely to occur, but in all places where a recrudescence is  expected in the cold weather two attempts should be made, one in the  month of October and the other in November.  (2) Trapping:-  (a) Trapping of rats should go on at all times within infected  areas; but it is occasionally well to leave certain areas unmolested  for a week or two so that the rats may not become too familiar with  the trap.  (b) The best trap is the " Wonder " trap or one that works on  this principle; it should however be made of steel wire, not galvanised  iron, as a strong rat can bend the latter. The best made traps of this  nature are made at the North-West Frontier Iron Works, Rawalpindi.  They cost Rs. 2 each and the makers pay carriage if a large  number is ordered. The Plague Research Laboratory, Parel, Bombay,  will supply a small number to any local body, but the carriage from  Bombay will have to be paid by the purchaser. Other traps which work  on this principle and which have been found useful against rats can be  obtained from the Army and Navy Stores, Bombay, from Messrs.  Oakes & Co., Madras, and from Saiyid Abdul Karim Sahib, No. 6,  K. Shanmugaroyan Street, Georgetown, Madras.
?69  (c) The trap should be cleaned weekly and rubbed with a little  cocoanut oil to prevent rust.  (d) All rats caught should be taken to centrally placed depts  to be counted, if possible classified and killed. In the case of rats  caught in infected localities it is desirable that such rat fleas as may be  present on the rats should be destroyed. The best method of killing  fleas on the rats caught prior to classification is to plunge the rat-trap  into a vessel of boiling water or solution of phenyle.  (e) The bodies of dead rats caught in an infected area should  be burnt.  (f) One cooly should be able to bait, clean, and look after 50  to 100 traps.  31. The charges incurred in the destruction of rats should be debited  to local or municipal funds according to the area within which such  charges are incurred.
70  APPENDIX II-A. PLAGUE PASSPORT [See Rule 2 on. page 5.] The originals and triplicates to be printed on white printing paper and the duplicates on badami paper. The instructions and other entries below the thick black line to be printed on the back of the duplicates only. Care should be taken to see that the duplicate containing the instructions is delivered to the holder of the passport.]  1. No. of passport. 2. Infected area last visited (give district, taluk and village). 3. Place of issues (give district and station). 4. Date of arrival. 5. Name of person (in full), 6. Father's name. *  7. Caste and occupation. 8. Age. 9. Sex.* 10. Permanent residence- (give district, taluk, village, street, and number or name of the owner of the house). 11. Destination and residence during the next seven days (give district,  taluk, village, street and number or name of the owner of the house). 12. TO whom the triplicate copy of the passport sent and when. I declare the information set forth above under headings 5 to 11 to be correct, and I do hereby bind myself (a) to  appear/ present the above-mentioned person for inspection, daily, for the next seven days before the passport-examining officer of place where I may be for the time being, (b) to report to the said officer before departure any change in  my residence/  the residence of the above-mentioned person  within the said period of seven days, and (c) to deliver to the said officer this passport on the expiry of the said period. Date Signature or mark of the traveller or person in charge of him. Declared and signed before me. Date  Signature and designation of officer issuing the passport. * May be omitted when clearly not required for identification.  For village in Malabar, give the names of amsam and desam.   INSTRUCTIONS.  Date, Signature.  1. This passport should be prepared in triplicate. The original  should be retained for record, the duplicate delivered to the traveller,  and the triplicate sent without delay to the officer who has to examine  turn for seven days. The full designation and address of this officer  should be entered under heading 12. One passport form should not be  used for more than one individual. Only persons coining from infected  or notified places can be required to take out passports.     1st day      2nd "      3rd "     2. The passport-issuing officer should explain to the traveller or his  guardian the terms of the passport and warn him that any breach of  his terms will entail prosecution and punishment with imprisonment  for a terra which may extend to six months or fine which may extend  to Rs. 1,000 or both.  4th "      5th "      6th "  3. The passport-holder should, unless exempted by a written order  endorsed on the passport, appear daily for seven days with his passport  before the passport-examining officer and obtain that officer's signature  on the margin of his passport in token of inspection.     7th "        4. By a passport-examining officer is meant any of the following    officers : -    (a) The local medical officer.    (b) The station-house officer.    (c) The headman of the village.    (d) The karnam of the village.    (e) Any person appointed by the Collector of the district for the  purpose.       In places where there is move than one passport-examiner, the  duties of the passport-examiner shall, unless the Collector otherwise  directs, be performed by the officer who stands first in the order given  in this clause. In the absence of the officer who ordinarily performs the  duties of the passport-examining officer, the person holding the passport  should appear before the officer who stands next to him in the order  given in this clause.                      5. The passport-holder is not obliged to remain at a place for seven  days by reason of his passport, but should he desire to change his  residence within that period, he should give due intimation to the  passport-examining officer and get the entries under headings 11 and  12 altered before departure. On the seventh day he should deliver his  passport to the passport-examining officer.     Forwarded tahsildar          to the deputy tahsildar         municipal chairman  of the traveller having been duly observed.              6. The passport-examining officer should satisfy himself that the  person presenting the passport is the person described therein, He  should ascertain from the traveller whether there is any sickness or  death in his house. If the traveller exhibits any symptoms of plague  or if any sickness or death is reported in his house or if he fails to  appear for inspection, the said officer should take immediate steps for  detaining him or for making the necessary inquiries as to the cause of  sickness, death or absence.              Signature and designation of passport-examining officer.           7. For further particulars, see city plague regulations when residing  in Madras or mufassal plague regulations when residing elsewhere.       8. Peons, lascars and trollymen in the employ of railways, when  upon duty of a nature that would cause inconvenience to the railway  service if they had to appear before the passport-examining officer of  their place of residence, may present themselves for purposes of  observation of their state of health before any stationmaster who has  been appointed an honorary passport-examining officer.        Date.         Station.  9. Telegraph employs in combined post and telegraph offices may  present themselves for purposes of observation of their state of health  before the postmasters in charge of their offices.
71  APPENDIX II-B.  GENERAL PASS.  [See Rule 83 on page 32.]  (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by road or boat to or  from an infected area.)  No.  District.  Station of issue.  Name of person.  Father's name.  Caste.  Age.  Ordinary residence.  Journey covered by this pass.  This pass protects the person named above and the members of his  family mentioned on the reverse, but it does not authorise journey by  rail, for which a separate pass shall be obtained by each individual  requiring it, nor does is cover residence outside the village * of  It will be in force until revoked.    Signature.    Designation.    Date.  * The village specified should be that in which the holder permanently resides with his family.  (Reverse of Form.)  Name.           How related to pass-holder.    Signature.    Designation.    Date.
72 APPENDIX II-C. GENERAL PASS. [See Rule 83 on page 32.] (To be issued for daily or frequent journeys by rail to or from an infected area.) No. District. Station of issue. Name of person. Father's name. Caste. Age. Ordinary residence. Journey covered by this pass. Signature. Designation. Date. APPENDIX II-D. GENERAL PASS. [See Rule 83 on page 32.] (To be issued to persons who leave an infected or notified place to attend markets in the adjoining non-infected area.) 1. Inspection station through which the holder will pass. 2. Railway station where the holder will alight. 3. Name of person. 4. Father's name. 5. Caste. 6. Age. 7. Sex.  District. 8. From what infected or notified place. Taluk.  Village.  District. 9. To what market Taluk.  Village.  This pass allows the holder to remain in the village of--- for 24 hours at a time without a passport. On the expiry of the period he must either have left the village or have provided himself with a passport. He must show this pass to the officer in charge of the inspection station through which he will have to pass when proceeding to the village where the market is held and to the passport-issuing officer at the railway station where he alights as also to the local authority of the village at or near which the market is held and obtain their initials on the reverse. He will likewise show this pass on his return to the officers mentioned above and obtain their initials. There is, however, no necessity to present it at the railway inspection station if there be no medical inspection on his return journey from the village. Holder's signature Date Signature of issuing officer.
?73  APPENDIX II-E.  SPECIAL PASS.  [See Rule 85 on page 33.]  (To be issued to persons leaving an inhabited infected area to reside  in its neighbourhood.)  No.  District.  Station of issue.  Number of office of issue.*  Name of person.  Father's name.  Caste.  Occupation.  Age.  Ordinary residence.  The above-named person (and his family consisting of            males  and          females as per reverse) is/are permitted to reside temporarily at  (name of site or number of field) on his producing this pass, with the  accompanying certificate  duly filled in by the officer responsible for  disinfection.  Date Signature and designation.  * To be entered when there is more than one office of issue in a town.   If the family leaves a healthy area of the town or a house that has not been infected, this part of the certificate may be dispensed with at the discretion of the issuing officer.  (Reverse of Form.)  Name.                  How related to pass-holder.  Signature.  Designation.  Date.  Disinfection Certificate.  I hereby certify that having satisfied myself that arrangements for  residence at the site named by the above-described person (and his  family) were complete, I immediately before his/their departure carefully  disinfected all clothing and property removed by him/them.  Date Signature of officer in charge of  disinfection.
74 APPENDIX II-E1. Pass for Plague Contacts. [See Rule 85-A on page 33.] Take notice that you-------------------------------being a plague contact are required to submit yourself daily for examination at *____________ -----------------between the hours of---------------and---------------by the passport examining officer until he is satisfied that by reason of disinfection of all infective matter in your residence, property and clothing, and complete recovery and discharge of any person who has suffered from plague with whom you may have last been in contact, a period of seven days' freedom from imminent danger of contact with infective matter has elapsed. Date------------------------- Range Inspector. * Here insert either a public office, or in special cases the person's residence. Register No. I acknowledge receipt of contact pass No.------------, and am aware that disregard of its conditions will subject me to prosecution under Rule 100 of the Madras Plague Regulations in force outside the Presidency town. Date------------------------- Signature of contact or guardian of contact. APPENDIX II-F. [See Rule 121 on pages 44 and 45.] [COUNTEKFOIL.]  Plague Inoculation Certificate.    No.  CERTIFIED that ,son of    , resident of  ,Street/Village Name         Father's name  ,Town/Taluq  ,District      Street  , has been inoculated by me, and   that his thumb-mark was at the time impressed before me.  Village   Town/Taluq  Space for left thumb-mark.    Signature and designation.} District   Dated   Note.- Unless suffering from, or suspected to be suffering from, plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted from segregation, from detention when travelling, and from seven days' observation under the passport rules. It does not, however, exempt him from liability to evacuate an infected house, except in the case where all the occupants of the house have been inoculated, or to have his clothes and person disinfected when travelling. The certificate is valid for a period of nine months.  Date    Initials of operator
75 APPENDIX II-G. Register of Permanent Passes issued to Persons attending Markets. [See Rule 84 on pages 32 and 33.]    Date of  Name of person. Pass number. Arrival. Return. Remarks.
?76  APPENDIX II-H.  Relaxation of Passport Rules.  [See Rule 89 on pages 34 and 35.]  The inconveniences and difficulties attending the working of the  passport rules in the case of railway officers have been brought to notice  both by the railway authorities and Collectors. A general relaxation  of the rules cannot be made in favour of any particular class. The  trouble that is now experienced by those constantly on the move may  be avoided by them if they are willing to be inoculated, and no relaxa- tion of the rules is called for in the case of those who are unwilling to  be inoculated and to whom the inconvenience is merely personal.  2. There are persons, however, constantly employed on the railways  such as engine drivers, firemen, guards and mail sorters, with regard to  whom, as long as they are on actual duty from day to day, the strict  enforcement of the passport rules may result in public inconvenience  and in their cases some relaxation may be granted. The duties of  these men are of a fairly constant nature, and they halt for any length  of time only at the larger stations, where their absence from regular  duty must come at once to the notice of a superior officer. On the  application of the railway or postal authorities, Collector/the President of the Corpora- tion of Madras may exempt by name from the ordinary passport rules  individual servants of the classes named, and such other employes of a  railway also as, in their/his opinion, are required to travel so frequently on  duty that compliance with the requirements of the passport rules would  cause impediment to the execution of their duty, on the understanding  that the officer to whom they are immediately subordinate must report  at once to the nearest local authority every case of sickness among the  servants to whom the exemption is given. Any permanent change in  the nature of the duties performed should be reported to the officer  granting an exemption certificate. Persons so exempted shall be  provided with tickets in the following form:-  Passport Exemption Certificate.  District of  Register No.  (Name)                                  , son of                             employed as  and ordinarily residing at                                  , has been  exempted from the passport rules as long as he travels on duty as such  between the stations of  and  Mark of left thumb  Date of issue  Signature, designation and seal of officer issuing this ticket.  Note.- (1) This certificate is valid up to the 31st March next. It must be exhibited by  the bearer on demand to any person authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or  issue passports, or to examine the health condition of travellers.
?77  (2) The holder of this certificate is bound to report to the nearest local  authority any case of sickness, whether in himself or another person, occurring in the  house in which he resides within seven days of his last visit to an infected area. Failure  to comply with this direction will render the holder liable to prosecution.  It should be understood that exemption from the passport rules does  not carry exemption from any of the other regulations framed under  the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.  3. Other classes of railway servants are probably less frequently on  the move and the enforcement of the rules among them is likely to  result less frequently in public inconvenience. In cases of real diffi- culty, it may be possible to arrange under Mufassal Rule 2 (1) for  the inspection of the passport-holder at the railway station, or, under  Mufassal Rule 103, railway officers of known and approved character  and responsible position may be appointed honorary assistant plague  officers, and empowered under Mufassal Rule 2 (2) (e) as " local  authorities " at certain stations for the working of the passport rules  among railway servants.  4. Under             Mufassal Rule 89/City Regulation 25, Collectors/the President of the Corporation of Madras  may exempt from the necessity of taking out passports any person who  is neither a railway nor a postal servant. Such exemptions must be  made personally, not generally, and should be granted sparingly.  They must be in the following form:-  Under Mufassal Rule 89/City Regulation 25 (name) whose signature is exhibited  Signature.                                                                         in the margin,  and who is employed as a  , is hereby  exempted from the plague passport rules.  Date of issue    (Signature.) Number in Collector's/President's register.      Collector of/President of the Corporation of Madras.  Note.-(1) This certificate is valid up to the 31st March next. It must be exhibited  by the bearer on demand to any officer authorized under the plague regulations to inspect  or issue passports or examine the health condition of travellers.  (2) The holder of this certificate is bound to report to the nearest local  authority any case of sickness whether in himself or another person, occurring in the  house in which he resides, within seven days of his last visit to an infected area. Failure  to comply with this direction will render the holder liable to prosecution.  5. The certificates of exemption prescribed in paragraphs 2 and 4  above will be issued by the Collector of the district or the President  of the Corporation of Madras, according as the head-quarters of the  individual exempted or his usual residence is within a mufassal town  or the city of Madras. These certificates shall be in force throughout  the Presidency.  6. Any concession may be withdrawn at any time without assigning  a reason.
?78  APPENDIX II-H1.  Ex-officio Exemption Certificate.  [See Rule 89 on pages 34 and 35.]    Under Mufassal Rule 89/City Regualtion 25, (name) (designation) * whose signature  is exhibited in the margin, is hereby exempted from the plague  pass-  port rules.  (Signature.)  Date of issue    (Signature.) Number in Collector's/Prresident's register.      Collector of/President of the Corporation of Madras.  * (Here enter the applicant's qualification for exemption under paragraph 10 of  G.O., No. 1010 P., dated 15th September 1905.)  Note.-(1) This certificate will be in force throughout the Presidency until revoked  by the Collector/President of the Corporation of Madras who may cancel it  without assigning  reasons. Any misuse of it by any person will entail its summary withdrawal.  (2) The exemption granted by this certificate does not cover the members of  the families, clerks and servants of the person exempted who will be liable to observa- tion under the ordinary rules. Nor does this certificate exempt its holder from  liability to have his person and effects disinfected when he has been an immediate contact  of a plague patient.  (3) The certificate must be exhibited by the bearer on demand to any officer  authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or issue passports or examine the  health condition of travellers.  (4) The holder of this  certificate is bound to report to the nearest local  authority any case of sickness whether in himself or  another person  occurring in the  house in which he resides within seven days of his last visit to  an infected area. Failure  to comply with this direction will render the holder liable to prosecution.
APPENDIX II-I.  Intimation Form. [See Rule 11 on page 9.]          Destination and residence during the next seven days  Date of arrival. Name of traveller. Father's name. Caste. Age. Whence coming. District. Taluq. Village. Street. Number or name of the owner of the house. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12  79 N.B. - A single form may be used for more than one traveller proceeding on the same day to the same district.
80 APPENDIX II-J. Time allowed at Inspection Stations for Plague Examination. [See Rule 19 on pages 11 and 12.] Railway administration. Inspection station. Time required for inspection. Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway. Guntakal Thirty-six minutes for all trains from Bombay or Raichur. Do. Jalarpet Fifty minutes for mail trains and thirty minutes for passenger trains from Bangalore. Do. Hindupur Thirty-two minutes for all train s from Bangalore. South Indian Railway . . Erode Thirty minutes for all trains. Do. Shoranur Thirty minutes for all trains from Calicut. APPENDIX II-K. Detention Certificate. [See Rule 26 on page 13.] ............................... Camp. 1. Name of passenger 2. Number and description of ticket 3. Detained from to 4. Name and designation of issuing officer
81 APPENDIX II-M. Statement to accompany Proposals for placing Restrictions on Fairs and Festivals. [See Bule 42 on page 16.] Name of festival or fair. Place where held. Distance to  nearest  railway station Date of  commence- ment and  termination  of festival or fair. Average attendance during the  past three  years. From what districts in  the Madras Presidency and from what places  outside the Presidency,  pilgrimage should be prohibited, and the number of people  expected from each of  such districts or places.                                                             1 2 3 4 5 6       6
82 APPENDIX II-N. Notifications for placing Restrictions on Fairs and Festivals. [See Rule 42 on page 16.] NOTIFICATION No. I. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held is infected.] WHEREAS there is plague in              , in the              taluq of the district, and whereas it is desirable to prevent its spread: The Governor in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, prohibits pilgrimage to the ensuing                                       festival of from the                     to the                             , inclusive, [and also the holding of the usual cattle fair in connection with the said festival,] [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the district[s] for the station[s] of on the                                         Railway and for the station[s] of                              on the Railway to any person intending or  believed to be intending to be present.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. NOTIFICATION No. II. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held lies in the vicinity of an infected area and it is necessary to prohibit all pilgrimage.] WHEREAS the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at                         in the taluq of the                                district,  if pilgrims are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing                           festival of                                [and the usual cattle fair is permitted to be held at that place]: In exercise of the powers delegated to  him under the Epidemic Diseases  Act, 1897, the  Governor in   Council  prohibits   [the holding of the said fair and also the] pilgrimage to the  said festival from the to the                               , inclusive, [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway  shall be sold within the                         district[s] for the station[s] of on the                               Railway and for the station[s] of                            on the                                Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back.
?83 NOTIFICATION No. III. [To be used in cases where pilgrimage from infected areas is prohibited.] WHEREAS the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at  in the taluq of the district, if persons from the and other parts declared to be infected with plague are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing festival [and cattle fair]: In exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, the Governor in Council prohibits [the holding of the cattle fair and also] the attendance at the said festival [or fair] from the  to the inclusive, of persons from the said parts, [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold within the   district[s] for the station[s] of on the Railway and for the station[s] of on the  Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contravention of this notification will be turned back. APPENDIX II-O. Plague Report. [See Rule 123 on psge 45.] Plague Report District. Date No. 1. Name of town or village-.  Imported. Indigenous.   2. Population of town or village-. 3. Plague cases up to date of last report Number of seizures -.  Number of deaths-.  Date of last attack -. 4. (a) Date of commencement of illness-. (b) Name and designation of person who first reported the case, and date on which he did so -. 5. When reported by telegram-. 6. Imported or indigenous-? (a) Was this village completely evacuated, disinfected, and re- occupied, since date of last attack, and if so how do you account for the recrudescence-? 7. Brief history of case-. 6 *
?84 8.  (a) If imported, had patient a passport on arrival-? (b) If he had no passport, did the local authority supply him with one-? (c)  In any case was proper surveillance maintained over the patient from the first-? (d)  If indigenous, state, by a careful review of facts ascertained, why it is considered to be so; and point to any neglect of precautions by which this has been brought about-. 9.   Steps taken to isolate and treat the patient-. 10.  Steps taken in respect of contacts-. 11.  Steps taken towards the evacuation and disinfection of the infected house and property-. 12.  Was there any opposition on the part of the inmates of the infected house or of the people of the village to the plague measures-? 13.  Are measures being taken to kill rats and destroy the carcasses by fire ?    Describe them and state degree of success. 14.  Are rats plague-infected ? 15.  Have steps been taken to verify the diagnosis of plague in the human    being    or   rats    by    bacteriological    examination   or otherwise ? 16.   Remarks. APPENDIX Il-O1. [See Rule 124-A on page 46.] [To be submitted within 24 hours of discovery of a plague case.] Hamlet--. Village-. Number in taluq map-. Population-. 1. Name, age and caste of the patient. 2. (a) Date of commencement of illness. (b)  Date of death. 3. (a) Were there any plague cases or deaths by tever in the house or family within the last 30 days, if so, when ? (b) Did the patient remove any plague corpse or infected article ? (c)  Was the patient in close contact with  any plague cases, if so, was he segregated or placed under surveillance for 7 days ? (d)  Did  he obtain  grain, clothing   or  other  article  from   any infected house or shop ? (e)  Did he visit any plague-infected locality, if so, when ? (f) Did any person from an infected area reside in his house: if so, when ?    Did they bring goods susceptible to infection with them ? (g) If answers to questions (a) to (f) be found in  the negative to what source can the infection be traced ?
?85 4. If he arrived from any infected locality- (a) Was he given a passport, if not, why not ? (b) How did he manage to evade the passport ? (c)  Was his arrival noticed by village munsif and, if not, what is his explanation ? (d)   At what hour did the  village munsif send information as to the illness of the patient ? 5.  (a) Date and hour at which range inspector heard of the case and how information was obtained: if from any official, state name and designation. (b) Date and hour at which range inspector went to the village. (c)  Note date and hour at which first intimation of attacks was sent to- (i) Plague supervisor. (ii) Additional medical officer./Ambulance hospital assistant. (iii) Special plague officer./Tahsildar or revenue divisional officer. (d)   Explanation of delay between- (i) Date of attack and date of despatch of first intimation to superior officers; (ii) Date of first intimation and date of despatch of detailed report. 6.  Was the case reported by the village munsif ? (a)    (i) If not, what is his explanation ? (ii) Did he keep the fever register properly, and on  what date was the case entered in it ? (b)    (i) Who is the house-owner, or chief male member of the family ? (ii) Did he give information as required by plague regulation 47 and, if not, what explanation is forthcoming as to why he should not be prosecuted ? (c)  Name and designation of the person who first reported the case and the date on which he did so. (d)  What action did the village munsif take before arrival of the range inspector to prevent spread of the disease ? 7.  (a) When did the range inspector last visit the village ? (b) How many deaths were there in the village ? (i) Since the range inspector's last visit. (ii) Since the commencement of the preceding month. (iii) How many  of the deaths were registered as due to fever and   to causes that you consider  might  be confused   with  the    toxic,   convulsive,   puerperal, pneumonic and intestinal forms of plague ? 8.  Was the patient examined- (a) By any medical officer and by whom and when ? (b) What symptoms of plague were noticed ? (c) Brief history as given by medical officer or as ascertained by medical officer. 9.   (a) Was the patient isolated ? (b) What accommodation was provided for him ?
?86 (c) Is he treated, if so, by whom ? (d) What objections, if any, exist for his being removed to plague hospital or being treated by ambulance ? (e) Is it necessary to provide him with rations, if so, how was he provided for, pending orders ? What rations were ordered ? 10. Note names of contacts- (a) The relationship to the patient and age. (b) Which of the contacts are in actual attendance on the patient ? (c) Was complete list of contacts given to village munsif for observation, if so, when ? (d) What steps have been taken in respect of segregation or observation of contacts ? 11. (a) Was the infected house evacuated, if so, when ? (b) (i) Were the house, clothing and other property disinfected, if so, how ? (ii) Were openings made in the roofing for free entrance of air and sunlight ? (c) What " Samans " were found in it and how were they dis- infected ? (d) Were all rags and rubbish burnt ? (e) Was the corpse buried or burnt ? (f) How deep was the body buried ? (g) How far was the burial ground from human dwellings and water source ? (h) If the patient is alive, what arrangements were made for disinfection of clothing in use, periodical collection and disposal of fcal matter and urine, sputa, rags and bandages soiled with discharges ? (i) Who were the corpse-bearers and were their persons and clothing well disinfected ? Number of plague cases in the village up to date (including previous year). Years. Imported. Indigenous.  Seizures. Deaths. Seizures. Deaths. 1898-99     1899-00     1900-01     1901-02     1902-03     1903-04     1904-05     1905-06     1906-07     1907-08     12. Are measures being taken to kill rats and destroy the carcasses by fire ? Desoribe them and state degree of success.
?87 13. Are rats plague-infected ? 14. Have steps been taken to verify the diagnosis of plague in the human being or rats by bacteriological examination or otherwise ? 15. General remarks. Date Range Inspector.  Plague Report. From The range inspector. Date of despatch. Date of receipt by Supervisor. Remarks by the Supervisor as to- (i) Whether he inspected the case and supervised the operations, (ii) If not, why not ? (iii) Any other remarks. Date of despatch to plague officer. Supervisor. Date of receipt by plague officer. Remarks as to when he visited the villages, where the ambulance is stationed, etc. Date Plague Officer.  APPENDIX II-P. Destruction of Plague Records. [See Rule 133 on page 49.]  Description of records. When to be destroyed. 1. Daily reports relating to passports.  At the same time as the passports to which they relate.  2. Daily intimations furnished to the  district medical and sanitary  officer by the medical officer in  charge of a railway inspection  station under Mufassal Rule 9.   3. Daily intimations furnished to the  district medical and sanitary  officer by passport-issuing officers  under Mufassal Rule 11.   4. Intimations of change of residence  of persons while under observation.
88 Description of records. When to be destroyed. 5. Daily reports of plague cases and At the close of the month succeeding that to which they relate. deaths in the Mysore State.  6. Daily reports of plague cases and  deaths in Bangalore.  7. Weekly reports of plague cases and  deaths in the Bombay presidency  and the Hyderabad State.  8. Weekly returns of deaths in muni- After one year. cipalities.  9. Daily telegrams of plague cases  received by the Collector and the  district medical and sanitary  officer under Mufassal Rule 71.  10. Weekly diaries of plague super- After one year. visors and sanitary inspectors in  charge of observation circles.  11. Daily reports of passengers in-  spected and of those detained at  railway inspection stations.  12. Weekly returns of inoculations  received from the district  medical and sanitary officer.  13. Weekly returns received from  divisional officers of breaches of  passport rules dealt with by  them.  APPENDIX II-Q. Distribution of Spare Copies of Printed Orders of Government. [See Rule 134 on page 49.] A. Collector's office (three copies). B. Divisional officers (each one copy). C. Treasury deputy collector (one copy). D. Tahsildars (each one copy). E. Deputy tahsildars in independent charge (each one copy). F. District medical and sanitary officer and civil surgeons (one copy). G. Additional medical officer on plague duty (one copy). H. Medical officer in charge of plague inspection station (one copy). J. Special plague officers (each one copy). K. Municipalities (each two copies). L. President, district board (one copy). M. Taluk boards (each one copy).
?89 APPENDIX. II-E. [See Rule 141 on page 52.] PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Military officers and troops (a) When employed on guard duty.* Nil.  (b) When employed on sanitary duty,  such as searching, disinfecting, superintending,  scavengering, etc.-   (i) Combatant British commissioned officers of  over 5 years' service. Rs. 300 a month.  (ii) Combatant British, commissioned officers  under 5 years' service. RS. 200 a month.  (iii) British non-commissioned officers. Re. 1 + annas 6 extra ration money per diem.  (iv) British privates Annas 12 + annas 6 extra ration money per diem.  (v) Native officers Rs. 1-8-0 a day.  (vi) Native non-commissioned officers. Annas 12 a day.  (vii) Sepoys  Annas 8 a day.  (viii) Followers -   Not exceeding one dhobi, one barber,  one bhisti, one cook for a detachment  of fifty sepoys. Annas 4 a day for each man.  Not exceeding one sweeper for a detachment  of fifty sepoys. Annas 2 a day. * When the troops employed on plague duty have been performing guard and sanitary duties in the same place together, that is to say, when some of the party have been employed on sanitary duties, while others have been doing guard duty, the duties being interchangeable, all the troops should be paid allowances. On the other hand, where the duties assigned to any one body of troops have been exclusively of the nature of guard duties, no allowances should be granted. The allowances shall be paid only for the days on which the troops are actually employed on plague duty or during subsequent segregation prior to return to duty. All doubtful cases should be referred for the special orders of Government.
?90 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-cont. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. *  B. Medical officers wholly employed  on plague duty. (i) Officers of the Indian Medical Service in military or civil  employ. Consolidated pay according to the following scale : -   Rank.                                           Consolidated pay per Mensem.                                                 RS.   Lieutenant 700   Captain     750   Captain   after five years' service     800       Captain after seven years' service  850       Captain  after   ten years' service  900       Major 1,000   Major after   three years' service  1,100       Lieutenant- Colonel 1,450      (ii) Commissioned      officers other   than   those   of the     Indian    Medical Service -             (a) Transferred from regi- mental     or   purely military duty. Same   as   in   the  case  of British commissioned military officers.     (b) in civil employ Rs. 5 a day.  (iii) Senior   military   assist- ant surgeons with the honorary     rank      of Captain or Lieutenant. Rs.   5   per    diem,    together with house-rent    allowance     (in   lieu of   free   quarters)   of Rs.   50  a month.           (iv) Military             assistant surgeons   in   civil   or military    employ    on pay    exceeding     Rs. 150. Rs. 3  a day.                In     addition     to    any acting,      charge      or  house            allowance they         may      have been   drawing at   the time   of    their   depu- tation  to plague duty and       which       they would    have      conti- nued     to     draw   but for such deputation.                           (v) Military             assistant surgeons   in   civil  or military     employ   on pay not exceeding Bs. 150. Rs.  2 a day.                                   (vi) Civil assistant surgeons, Rs. 2 a day.  (vii) Civil apothecaries Rs. 25 a month or in the case of men,  who at the time of their deputation were in independent- charge, the full charge allowance of their grades.             * Medical officers whose sole duty is the inspection of ships for plague purposes are not entitled to any special fee for conducting inspection in rough weather.  A port health officer will be entitled to a local allowance of one-thirtieth of a month's pay for each Sunday or close holiday on which he is unavoidably required to inspect vessels in connection with plague. Each member of the port health officer's staff will be entitled to a similar allowance in the same circumstances. The allowance will be given only in cases where no compensation holiday is granted and shall not exceed one- thirtieth of the salary of the officer whatever may be the number of inspections made by him on the Sunday or close holiday.
?91 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-cont. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. B.   Medical       officers wholly employed on plague duty - cont. (viii) Hospital   assistants employed   as plague inspectors. Vide appendix II-S.  (ix) Hospital          assistants engaged     on     other plague duty. * Rs.  10 a month.    This allow- ance   will   be   in    addition to house-rent   or    free     quarters according  to rule if   employed on the plains.    If employed on the   hills, a   consolidated   hill allowance of one-third   of   the pay will be paid, but no house- rent or   warm  clothing  allow- ance   will   be   admissible.    A pony allowance  of  Rs.   15 per mensem   will     be   paid    if the hospital   assistant   has     other than purely   stationary duties, provided   a serviceable pony is maintained and used.                                              C. Medical   officers, doing        plague work    in    addi- tion     to     their ordinary duties. (1)   Commissioned  Such   local   allowance,   not exceeding   one-fifth   of   the salary,  as  may  be fixed in each  case   by   Government. The    allowance    should    be given only to officers whose additional plague work, such as that of medical inspection of    passengers   by   road  or railway, is entirely separate from, and outside the sphere of, their ordinary duties and not to officers whose ordinary and legitimate work, such as that of attending on the sick in   hospital,   has   been   in- creased owing to the occur- rence of plague.  officers.                     (2)    Medical subordinates.                        (3) Nurses or midwives.  D. Plague   super- visors belong- ing to the salt,  abkri and other departments. (i) Appointed in non-munici- pal areas. Allowance of 25 per cent, of the pay + Rs. 30 fixed travelling allowance + Rs. 15 horse allowance,  provided the permanent pay +   25 per cent.  thereof does not fall below Rs. 80. * This allowance will be admissible irrespective of the fact whether the hospital assistant was in receipt of a charge allowance or not at the time of his deputation to plague duty. No separate allowance will, however, be paid in lieu of charge allowance nor can deputation allowance be drawn in addition.  An allowance of one-thirtieth of a month's pay may be drawn by a port health officer for every day certified by the port officer to be a day of bad weather on which he is unavoidably required "to inspect a vessel in connection with plague. In the case of the port of Madras this allowance may be drawn only in case of inspection of vessels lying outside the Madras harbour. A double allowance, two-thirtieths, may be drawn by a port health officer when he is required to make this inspection involving special risk on a Sunday or close holiday, but in no case shall any port health officer draw any additional allowance whatever may be the number of inspections made by him on that day.   See note  on page 90.  When the out-door plague work of a medical subordinate is so heavy as to necessi- tate the use of a conveyance, carts or jutkas may be provided for him by the local body concerned. The actual charges incurred in the payment of hire should be debited to "Contingencies."
?92 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-cont. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. D. Plague   supervisors  belonging to the  salt,  abkri   and  other departments  - cont. (ii) Appointed   in municipal towns.   Same as in the case of D (i), but minus the fixed travelling allowance. E.   Compounders on ambulance staff.       .... Allowance of 20 per cent. of the  salary to be granted only when  the ambulance staff is on active  plague duty. Note.-(i) The instructions issued in G.O., No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904, as to the creation of temporary appointments and the grant of deputation allowances to servants employed on plague duty should be carefully followed.            (ii) The language allowance of Rs. 2 per mensem granted under article 244 of the Civil Medical Code is inadmissible in the case of hospital assistants on plague duty. PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty. Designation. Salary. Remarks. A. Retired    commis- sioned     medical officers. Rs. 500 a month (in addition to their pensions which will continue   to   be a   military charge). The    officer   must   have   retired before 1st April 1898,   and his re-employment must be either on plague duty or in a post which cannot be filled, in the ordinary way by reason of   the   officers, who would, in ordinary course, be available for it, being required for plague duty.    The appoint- ment    requires     the     previous sanction of   the Government of India. B. Temporary English doctors. Rs.   500   a   month   or   such salary  as may be fixed in their  agreements  with the Secretary of State. .... C. Retired    military  assistant surgeons. Pay of   their   grade   at   the  time of retirement + Rs. 100  allowance  subject to a maximum of Rs. 350 a month.     In   special    cases the local  Government   may raise the limit to Rs. 500. A   retired   honorary   com- missioned     officer     of    the Indian Subordinate Medical Department   is   entitled   to double first-class   travelling allowance by rail, and eight annas a mile by road. The officers should be required to produce   certificates   of physical fitness,   and   their   appointments should, in the first instance, be made for periods not exceeding six months.
?93 PART II.- Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks. D. Uncovenanted medical officers. Such    pay     not    exceeding Rs.   350   a   month   as   the Surgeon-General   may  find necessary,   with   travelling  allowances to and from the places to   which   they   are posted at the rates of double second-class  fares for jour- neys by rail and annas 4 a mile for journeys by road. The   term   of   employment   may, subject to their good conduct and efficiency, be for a period of three months,   the   engagement being  terminable after the expiry of the first   two   months by a written notice given by either the Govern- ment or the officer. E. Temporary civil assistant    sur- geons. Pay  Rs.   100  a   month + allowance of Rs.   2 a day, with   travelling    allowance to and from   the  place to which they are appointed.  F. Private     hospital assistants. Pay  assigned   to   the  corre- sponding grades of hospital assistants    in   Government service   [+   50   per   cent. thereof] with compensation for quarters. .... G. Retired hospital assistants. Pay of   their   grade  at  the time of retirement (in addi- tion to their pension). .... H. Lady           nurses obtained   from England. (a) Rs. 175 a month in addi- tion   to   free   quarters, fuel, lights and punkah- pullers,       commencing from date of embarka- tion to India ; (b) double first-class  fare by rail when travelling on duty ; (c) first-class   passage    when proceeding  by   steamer from one part of India to another on duty If free quarters are not provided , an   allowance  of   Ra.   3   a   day should be paid. J. Qualified      Euro- pean, Eurasian or Native nurses    locally recruited. Such     pay    not    ordinarily exceeding  Rs.  75 a month with free quarters or Rs. 10 for house-rent. When the nurses attend on plague patients, a boarding allowance of Rs.  1-8-0 a day in the case of Europeans and Eurasians, or one rupee in the case of natives should be  paid. When employed on  duties entailing a considerable amount of moving about within a limited   area   and   necessitating the frequent hiring of vehicles, they may be paid actual convey- ance   allowances irrespective   of the five miles' limit prescribed in article 1055 of the Civil Service Regulations.     For     terms     on which caste native nurses may be trained,  see G.O.,  No.   1835 P., dated 23rd December 1899.
?94 PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-Cont. Designation. Salary.  Remarks. K. Private      gentle- men appointed as           plague supervisors   in municipal towns. Rs. 2 a day + Rs. 15,  horse allowance. Such supervisors should usually be Europeans  or Eurasians.    They need not be appointed unless the outbreak   of   plague   requires a special organization to deal with it. L. Private gentle- men appointed as plague supervisors   in rural areas. Rs.   80 pay + Rs.   30,  fixed travelling  allowance, + Rs. 15, horse allowance. .... M. Plague      inspec- tors - [As in Appendix II-S.]  N. Other   temporary subordinates including menial servants Such rates as would be suffi- cient to induce persons  to take up the appointments. Menial servants are not   eligible for any allowances, and should be conveyed from place to place at the cost of Government.  APPENDIX II-S. Pay and Allowances of Plague Inspectors. [See Rule 141 on page 52.] Plague inspectors will be- I. Certificated sanitary inspectors ; II. Hospital assistants ; or III. Men specially trained for plague duty. I.-Certificated Sanitary Inspectors. Certificated sanitary inspectors are those who have the qualifications prescribed in the rules published under G.O., No. 1131 L., dated 11th September 1903. Plague inspectors for range work should primarily be recruited from this class. A list of men available for duty will be kept by the Sanitary Commissioner by whom they will be posted for plague work on the requisition of and in consultation with Collectors. When once an inspector has been posted, further control on the part of the Sanitary Commissioner will cease, and he should not G.O., No. 1080 L., dated    be withdrawn or transferred by the Sanitary 27th September 1905.                     Commissioner   without    the   consent    of   the authority employing him and in the case of a local fund official whose appointment is pensionable without the sanction of Government.
95 Pay and Allowances. The pay and allowances of a certificated sanitary inspector on plague duty will be regulated as follows :- (i) When employed as a  range inspector in a rural  area. Rs. 45 pay + Rs. 15 pony allowance. When employed in  the municipalities of Ootacamund, Coonoor or Kodai- knal, or in rural areas in the Nilgiris, he will be entitled to draw a hill allowance of one-third of  the pay. (ii) When employed as a  disinfection inspector in a rural area. Rs. 45 pay.   When travelling on duty a  daily allowance of As. 8 under article 1063 of the  Civil Service Regulations  up to a maximum of Rs. 8  a month, or a fixed monthly  allowance of Rs. 8, at the  discretion of the Collector.   (iii) When employed as a divi- sional inspector in a  municipality. Rs. 40 pay + Rs. 15 pony  allowance.  (iv) When employed as a dis- infection inspector in a  municipality. Rs. 40 pay.  Note.-(1) A Government servant transferred to local fund or municipal service for employment as a plague inspector will draw his permanent pay plus 25 per cent. thereof, provided that the aggregate is not less than Rs. 35 and not greater than Rs. 45, as well as the allowances admissible under This part of the appendix for the class of duties performed. (2) The emoluments of certificated sanitary inspectors deputed for plague work from Local fund or Municipal service, either temporary or permanent, will be regulated under the rules as to deputation allowances issued under G.O., No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904. II.-Hospital Assistants. The allowances of a hospital assistant employed as a plague inspector will be as follows : ordinarily the services of only third-class hospital assistants should be used for range work :- (a) Third-class hospital assistants- (i) When employed as a  range inspector in a  rural area or as a divisional  inspector in a  municipality.  Rs. 40 pay + a pony allowance of Rs. 15 or a cycle allowance of Rs. 5 + Rs. 10 special plague * allowance. If employed on the hills the hospital assistant will be entitled to draw a consolidated hill allowance of one- third of the pay, but no house-rent or  warm clothing allowance will be admissible .             (ii) When employed as a  disinfection inspector  in a rural or municipal  area,  Rs. 40 + Rs 10 special plague * allowance.           (b) Hospital assistants of other  than third class. Grade pay + Rs. 10 special plague * allowance. A pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem may be paid  if the hospital assistant  has other than purely  stationary duties, provided  a pony is maintained and  used.                          III.-Men specially trained for Plague Duty. These are men who are selected locally by the Collector for training and after being trained specially for plague duty by the Deputy * The special plague allowance will be admissible irrespective of the fact whether the hospital assistant was in receipt of a charge allowance or not at the time of his deputation to plague duty. No separate allowance will, however, be paid in lieu of charge allowance nor can deputation allowance be drawn in addition.
?96 Sanitary Commissioner receive certificates from the latter as to their fitness for employment as plague inspectors. Their pay and allowances will be regulated as follows:- (i) (a) A member of the permanent establishment in superior service, whether belonging to the Revenue or other branches of the Government service, employed as a range inspector in a rural area will draw a minimum pay of Rs. 35 plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15. But when employed as a disinfection inspector in a rural area he will draw only a minimum pay of Rs. 35; no pony allowance will be granted, but when travelling on duty a daily allowance of As. 8 under article 1063 of the Civil Service Regulations up to a maximum of Rs. 8 a month or, at the discretion of the Collector, a fixed monthly allowance of Rs. 8 may be granted. (b)   A member of the  permanent  establishment  in  local fund or municipal  service employed as a plague inspector in a rural area will draw in addition to his  salary in such   service only a deputation allowance in  accordance  with  the rules  issued  in   G.O.,   No.   384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904, plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem, if employed as a range inspector, or a daily allowance of As. 8 when travelling, under article 1063 of the Civil Service Regulations up to a maximum of Rs. 8 a month or at the discretion of the Collector, a fixed monthly  allowance  of Rs.   8 if employed as a  disinfection inspector. (c)  A private person employed as a plague inspector in a rural area will draw such pay not exceeding Rs. 30 as the   Collector may fix. When employed as a range inspector he may be paid a pony allowance of Rs. 15, and if employed as a disinfection inspector, he may be paid when travelling a daily allowance of As.   8  up to a maximum of Rs. 8 a month, or a fixed monthly allowance of Rs, 8, at the discretion of the Collector. Note.-(1) A pay in excess of Rs. 35 can be  granted to Government servants only if admissible under article 753 (iv) (a) of the Civil Service Regulations. (2) All   plague inspectors employed in   the  Nilgiris  will   be   entitled to draw a consolidated hill allowance calculated at one-third of their pay. (ii) In the case of a person specially trained who is employed on plague duty in a municipality or a union the pay shall not ordinarily exceed the following scale :- (a)  Range Inspector.-Rupees 25 for a charge of about 5,000 inhabitants (or 1,200 houses). Rupees 30 for a charge of about 6,500 inhabitants (or 1,500 houses). When employed in the Coonoor, Ootacamund or Kodaiknal Municipality he will be entitled to draw a hill allowance of one-third of the pay plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem. (b)  Divisional Inspector.-Rupees 40 plus Rs. 15 pony allow- ance. When employed in the Coonoor, Ootacamund or Kodaiknal Municipality he will be entitled to draw a hill allowance of one-third of the pay. (c)  Disinfection    Inspector.-A range   or  divisional  inspector appointed as a disinfection inspector will draw the pay he received as
?97 range or divisional inspector and no special allowances will be granted for doing disinfection work. (iii) A member of the permanent establishment in the superior service of Government who is specially trained for plague duty, will be paid the following emoluments when employed as a plague inspector in a municipality or union, subject to the maximum rates prescribed in clause (ii) : - (1) When employed as a range inspector, a minimum pay of Rs. 25 per mensem. (2) When employed as a divisional inspector, a minimum pay of Rs. 30 plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem. (3) A pay in excess of the limits mentioned in clauses (1) and (2) can be granted only if admissible under article 753 (iv) (a) of the Civil Service Regulations. (iv) A member of the permanent establishment in local fund or municipal service who is specially trained for plague duty and employed as a plague inspector in a municipality or union, will draw in addition to his salary in such service only a deputation allowance, in accordance with the rules issued in G.O., No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904. A pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem will be granted to him if he is employed as a divisional inspector. Note.-The instructions issued in G.O., No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904, as to the creation of temporary appointments and the grant of deputation allowances to servants employed on plague duty, should be carefully followed. APPENDIX II-T. List of Plague Charges. [See Rule 153 on page 58.] PROVINCIAL-INDIRECT. 3. LAND REVENUE-Charges of District Administration. General Establishments -  (1) Cost of additions to office establishments of revenue officers necessitated by plague.  Salaries.   Establishment.  Allowances.  (2) Pay and allowances of temporary additions to the revenue staff necessitated by plague.   Contingencies.   Sub-divisional Establishments -   Establishment.   Allowances.   Contingencies.  15. POST OFFICE-District Post Charges. Establishments.  (3) Additional post establishments for serving plague camps. Allowances.   Contingencies.   7
98 18. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION-Civil Secretariats. Chief Secretariat - Establishment.  (4) Extra establishment required for dealing with plague correspondence.   Local and Municipal Department Establishment.   19-A. LAW AND JUSTICE -COURTS OP LAW -Criminal Courts.  Charges of Stationary Sub- Magistrates.  (5) Court required in consequence of plague. Special Sub-Magistrate.   Temporary Establishment.   Allowances.   Contingencies.   20. POLICE.  Presidency Police.  (6) Additional police employed  in consequence of plague. District Executive Force.   Railway Police.   24-A. MEDICAL -Medical Establishment.  District Medical and Sanitary  Officers - Allowances. (7) Extra allowances on account of plague of medical officers and subordinates performing plague duties in addition to ordinary  duties.  Reserve Medical Subordinates - Allowances.   24-C. MEDICAL -Sanitation and Vaccination.  Sanitary Department - Establishment. (8) Extra establishment employed in the office of the Sanitary Com- missioner in connection with plague  work. 30-C. STATIONERY AND PRINTING.  Government Press (9) Cost of printing passports and  passes at the Government Press. PROVINCIAL-DIRECT. 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes.    Salaries - Salaries of Plague Commis-  sioner, gazetted medical  officers and military officers. (10) Pay and allowances of medi- cal officers and subordinates including clerks and passport-issuing  officers exclusively employed on  plague duty in connection with the  inspection and observation of tra- vellers by sea and by railway and the segregation and medical treatment
99 Plague allowances of gazetted of such as are affected or suspected medical officers and military to be affected with plague, at sea- officers. ports, or at railway stations notified Salaries of subordinate medical as railway inspection stations in the officers. Fort St. George Gazette. Plague allowances of subordi-  nate medical officers. (11)   Temporary   establishments Exchange compensation allow- entertained for the purposes men- ance. tioned in No. (10). House-rent allowances. (12)  Grants for the construction, Local allowances. etc., of private plague hospitals.  (13) Cost of construction of sheds  and cost of medical stores, disinfect- Establishments- ants, carbon paper, etc., required  strictly for the purposes specified in  No. (10). Allowances-  Tentage of officers. (14)  Pay and allowances of mili- Travelling allowances  of tary     officers   whose   services  are gazetted officers. formally placed at the   disposal of Travelling allowances of non- the Civil Department for  employ- gazetted officers and estab- ment on plague duty   and of clerks lishments. and   servants    attached   to    them  wherever they may be employed. Supplies and Services-- (15)   Pay     and    allowances    of Petty construction and repair Government officers other than those of buildings. mentioned in items Nos.   (10)  and Contribution to private hos- (14) whether   belonging    to    the pitals. Indian Civil Service, Forest, Survey, Dieting charges. Customs, Salt or other departments, Cost of instruments, medicines specially   deputed by  Government and disinfectants. for employment in connection with Hospital clothing and bedding. plague   measures, and   clerks   and Other hospital equipment and servants attached to them ; also the necessaries. emoluments   of medical   men   and  nurses procured  from  Europe and  clerks and servants attached to them. Contingencies- (16)  Extra allowances on account Tour charges. of  plague of military officers  and Service postage. men who remain on the strength of Do.    telegrams. their regiments though detailed for Purchase of furniture. plague duty, and all extra expendi- Repairs    of        do. ture due to their deputation if (in Office expenses. the case of men only) their services Miscellaneous. are utilized for purposes mentioned  in No. (10).  The extra allowances on account  of plague of military officers are  debitable to provincial, whether  they are engaged for purposes  mentioned in No. (10) or not.
?100  The extra allowances on account  of plague of commissioned medical  officers in military employ performing  plague duty in cantonments  in addition to their own should be  borne by the Military Department. LOCAL- INDIRECT.  18-J. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION - General Establishment of Local  Funds. Establishments.  (17) Extra establishment employed in local fund offices.   Allowances.   Contingencies.  24-A. MEDICAL - Medical Establishment. District Medical and Sanitary  (18) Additions to the office estab- lishment of district medical and  sanitary officer.  Officers' establishment -   Establishments.  Allowances.   Contingencies.  24-B. MEDICAL - Hospitals and Dispensaries, Salaries.  (19) Extra expenditure in existing hospitals and dispensaries due to  plague.   Establishments.  Allowances.   Supplies and Services.   Contingencies.  MEDICAL - Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitation and Conservancy -  (20) Additions to the existing sanitary staff for plague work.    Establishment.  Allowances.   Supplies and Services.   Contingencies.  LOCAL- DIRECT. Salaries - (21) Pay and allowances of  medical subordinates, clerks and passport-issuing officers employed in plague hospitals and at railway stations not notified as railway inspection stations in the Fort St. George Gazette and at road frontier inspection stations. Salaries of subordinate  medical officers.     House-rent allowance.   Plague allowance.   Establishment -   Matrons and nurses.   Compounders.   Ward attendants and  servants.  (22) Cost of observation staff consisting of plague supervisors, plague inspectors and their peons. Storekeepers.   (23) Ambulance staff.
?101 Establishments employed at  plague camps and road  frontier inspection stations  and at railway stations not  notified as railway inspection  stations in the Fort St.  George Gazette.  (24) Cost of camp establishments,  superintendents and gumastahs and menial servants.  (25) Cost of construction of  plague hospitals and " observa- tion," "suspect," "health" and " staff " camps. The cost of sheds, constructed in cantonments should be borne by cantonment funds.       Allowances -   Travelling allowances.   Supplies and Services -  (26) Cost of stretchers, medical  stores, disinfectants, comforts and furniture and clothing for plague  hospitals. Petty construction and repairs  of buildings.   Funeral expenses.   Dietary charges. Nos. (21) to (26) must be  understood as referring to expenditure for purposes other than those specified in No. (10).  Clothing and bedding.   Cost of medicines and instru- ments and disinfectants.   Other hospital necessaries.  (27) Extra expenditure due to the deputation of troops on plague duties other than those specified in No. (10)- see also No. (16). Contingencies -   Purchase of furniture.   Repairs of do.   Tour charges.  (28) Rewards for the destruction  of rats. Postage charges.  Telegraph charges.  (29) Cost of carbon paper supplied  to passport-issuing officers  at railway stations not notified as  railway inspection stations in the  Fort St. George Gazette. Office expenses.   Miscellaneous.  APPENDIX II-U. Madras Command Order No. 810, dated 27ih October 1903. [See Rule 38 on page 15.] * Military Depart- ment letter No. 2494-C, dated 8th October 1903. SANITARY-Plague.'-The following rules, proposed by the Sanitary Commissioner, Madras, in connection with the precautions to be taken OD account of plague when troops inhabiting infected areas move to localities infected or not, and which the Government of India have no objection * to being adopted in the Madras Presi- dency, are published for the information and guidance of all concerned : BULKS KEGULATING THE MOVEMENTS OP TROOPS INHABITING INFECTED AREAS PROCEEDING TO LOCALITIES-INFECTED OR NOT-IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY. I.- Troops above fifty in number unaccompanied by their wives and families or those of followers. (a) If possible, ten days previous to departure, all infected areas shall be out of bounds for all concerned.
?102 (b) On a date as close to that of departure as feasible, all clothing and property to be carried with the troops and followers, of a susceptible nature, shall be disinfected in the presence of the medical officer in medical charge of the troops. A certificate signed by him to this effect shall be forwarded to the plague local authority at the place of final arrival. (c) The requirements of paragraph (b) having been satisfied, the troops may proceed to their intended destination, subject to the follow- ing precautions being observed subsequent to their departure:- (i) At the first passport-issuing station in the Madras Presidency passed through, the officer in command shall give a complete list of all troops and of all persons accompanying them and shall bind himself to exercise his full authority to cause their health state to be daily ascer- tained and to report promptly to the nearest plague local authority the occurrence of plague or of any symptoms suspicious of plague. To meet this requirement, the officer shall sign in triplicate certificates in the form attached (A); to the triplicate should be attached, signed by him, the nominal roll of the troops under his command and of all persons accompanying them. This shall be forwarded by the passport- issuing officer to the declared place of final destination. (ii) The medical officer in medical charge of the troops or, if no medical officer be with the troops, the senior officer in charge, shall each day, during ten days, arrange to inspect the troops under his orders and all persons accompanying them without exception and shall certify as to their state of health by using the list form B. When the passport-examining officer of the locality halted at is not a medical officer, the medical officer in charge of the troops or, if there be not one, the senior officer in command of the troops shall hand the list duly signed by him to the passport examining officer for countersignature in confirmation of the fact that it had been on the day of halt signed by him. (iii) When halting at a village or town where the passport examining officer is a medical officer, the medical officer of the troops shall arrange to conduct an inspection as to the state of health of the troops and those accompanying them in the presence of the passport- examining officer; but, if no medical officer be in charge of the troops, the senior officer in command shall arrange in consultation with the passport-examining officer for the conduct by that officer, in his presence at a reasonable time of day, of such inspection of the troops and of those accompanying them. II.- Troops below fifty in number unaccompanied by their wites and families or those of follower*. (a) After conforming with Rule I (a) and (b), the troops and all accompanying them shall individually be subject to Rule 2 of the Madras Plague Regulations in force outside the Presidency Town, and the officer in command, in consultation with the medical officer if there be one, shall afford all necessary facilities for their observance. III.- Troops accompanied by their families, followers and their families. (a) If, within the period of twelve months, the troops or the followers or their families have not suffered from indigenous plague :
103 (i) As far as possible, ten days previous to departure, all infected areas shall he out of bounds. (ii) The troops, their families, their followers and their families shall vacate their lines on a date as close to that of departure as feasible and encamp upon a clean area and not be allowed to return to the lines or to any part of the infected locality. (iii) They shall be detained in camp only for such period as will enable the medical officer in charge to superintend disinfection of all clothing and susceptible property and to grant a certificate that this has been duly carried out in respect to the property of all troops, their families, their followers and their families, and servants of officers. (iv) As soon as the process of disinfection is completed, they shall be subject to Rule I (i), (ii), (iii). (b) If, within a period of twelve months, the troops or their families, their followers or their families have suffered from indigenous plague: (i) The troops, their families, their followers and their families shall be encamped and segregated on a clean area for a period of ten days subsequent to such time as may be necessary for the complete disinfection of the clothing and susceptible property of the troops, their families, their followers and their families, and of servants of officers, under the superintendence of the medical officer in charge. During this period, their health state must be daily observed by the officer in medical charge. If the health state of the persons thus observed gives rise to suspicion of plague, a special report should be made by the medical officer to the General Officer Commanding through the usual channel. (ii) The requirements of sub-section (1) having been observed, the troops, their families, their followers and their families shall be subject to the requirements of Rule I (c) (i), (ii), (iii). (c) If, within a period of three months, the troops or their families, their followers or their families have suffered from indigenous plague: (i) The intention to move them to any locality in the Madras Presidency should be brought to the notice of the Government of Madras by the Lieutenant-General Commanding the Forces. A TROOPS. Plague Passport. [See Rule 2 of Madras Plague Regulations in force outside the Presidency Town. ] 1.  Number of Passport. 2.  District. 3.  Station of issue. 4.  Date of arrival.
104 5.* Number of men (Total). 6.* Number of women (Total). 7.*Number of children (Total). 8. Whence coming (give district, taluk and village).  9. Destination and residence during the next seven days (give district, taluk and  village). 10. To whom the triplicate copy of the passport sent. I declare the information set forth above to be correct, and i do hereby bind myself (a) to inspect or cause to be inspected the above- mentioned persons daily, for the next seven days, before the passport- examining officer of the place where I may be for the time being, (b) or to grant the necessary certificate that this has been done, (c) to report to-the said officer before departure any change in the residence of the abovementioned persons within the said period of seven days, and (d) to deliver to the said officer this passport on the expiry of the said period. Date ----------------------------, Signature of the Officer in charge of Troops. Declared and signed before me. ---------------------------, Date Signature and designation of Officer issuing the Passport, List Form B. Date of signing Passport Certificate A. Locality of halt Date of halt Names of men, women and children Numbers of men Period of observation.  State of Health Signature of examining Officer. Date of report to local authority of plague or any symptoms suspicious of plague. Signature of officer making the report.      1 2 3 4 5 6 7                     * To the triplicate should be attached a complete nominal roll,  For villages in Malabar, give the name of amsam and desam.
?105 2. The above rules do not extend beyond the Madras Presidency proper, and in those Military districts which lie partly in the Madras Presidency and partly in the Bombay Presidency, the rules are to be applied only to the portion which is situated within the former Presidency. 3. The Madras Presidency should be taken as comprising the following Civil districts '.- Madras.  Trichinopoly.  Malabar.  Ganjm.  Madura. South Canara. Vizagapatam .  Tinnevelly. North Arcot. Gdvari. Coimbatore.  South Arcot. Kistna.  Cuddapah. The Nilgiris. Nellore.  Kurnool, Salem. Chingleput.  Anantapur.  Tanjore. Bellary.   APPENDIX: ii-v. _______ G.O. No. 656, financial, dated 29 th September 1905. [See Rule 152 on page 57. Recorded. 2. The quarterly statements of audited plague charges Direct and Indirect under the heads PROVINCIAL, LOCAL arid MUNICIPAL, which are submitted to Government by the Accountant-General under para- graph 10 of G.O., No. 421, Financial, dated the 2nd July 1904-, should, for the future, contain the following statements only :- (i) Under PROVINCIAL an abstract statement of Direct and Indirect charges under each major head showing expenditure by districts in form A appended to these proceedings ; (ii) Under LOCAL a statement in form B appended to these proceedings giving totals of Direct and Indirect expenditure for each district without details ; (iii) Under MUNICIPAL a statement in form C appended to these proceedings showing expenditure for each municipality ; (iv) A summary in the form at present in use showing the charges incurred on account of salaries of officers and establishments employed on plague duty forming part of existing departments but not replaced by substitutes; and (v) A statement in the form, at present in use showing the rateable distribution by districts of plague expenditure among district boards. 8
?901 A.-PROVINCIAL. Abstract of Direct and Indirect Plague Charges showing by districts the estimates for 190 -190 and the estimates for, and the progressive totals of expenditure under, each head for the quarter ending the---------------------------190 .  Districts. 3. LAND REVENUE. 18. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.  Estimates for the year 190 -190 .  Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter. Total expenditure to the end of the quarter.  Estimates for the year 190 -190 . Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commence-ment of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter. Total expenditure to the end of the quarter. 1 2 3 4 5 6  7 8 9 10 11  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Total
?107 A.-PROVINCIAL-cont. Abstract of Direct and Indirect Plague Charges showing by districts the estimates for 190 -190 and the estimates for, and the progressive totals of expenditure under., each head for the quarter ending the---------------------------190 .  Districts. 20. POLICE. 24- A. & C. MEDICAL, including Sanitation and Vaccination.  Estimates for the year 190 -190 . Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter.  Total expenditure to the end of the quarter. Estimates for the year 190 -190 . Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter. Total expenditure to the end of the quarter.  12 13 14  15 16  17 18 19 20 21  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Total
?108 A.-PROVINCIAL-cont. Abstract of Direct and Indirect Plague Charges showing by districts the estimates for 190 -190 and the estimates for, and the progressive totals of expenditure under, each head for the quarter ending the---------------------- -190 Districts. 24-D. MEDICAL. TOTAL.   Estimates for the year 190 -190 .  Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter. Total expenditure to the end of the quarter. Estimates for the year 190 -190 . Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the , quarter. Total expenditure to the end of the quarter.  22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30  31  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Total.           The estimates in columns 2, 7,12, 17, 22 and 27 should be the sanctioned estimates as contained in the Civil Budget Estimate. Columns 4 , 6, 9, 11,14, 16, 19, 21, 24 , 26, 29 and 31 need not be filled up for the first quarter.
?601 B.-LOCAL. Abstract Statement of Direct and Indirect Plague Charges showing by districts the estimates for 190 -190 and the estimates for, and the progressive totals of expenditure under, each head during and up to the quarter ending the-----------------190 Districts. Indirect.  Direct.  Estimates for the year 190 -190 . Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter. Total expenditure to the end of the quarter. Estimates for the year 190 -190 . Estimates for the quarter. Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter. Total expenditure to the end of the quarter. 1 2  4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Total           The estimates in columns 2 and 7 should be the estimates -which enter into the totals of the Civil Budget Estimate. Columns 4, 6, 9 and 11 need not be filled up during the first quarter.
?110 C.-MUNICIPAL. Statement of Plague Expenditure showing the estimates for 190   -190  ,  the estimates for, and the progressive totals of expenditure up to the quarter ending the-------------------------------------190 . Districts. Serial number. Municipalities. Estimates for the year 190-190 . Estimates for the quarter.  Expenditure up to the commencement of the quarter. Expenditure during the quarter. Total expenditure to the end of quarter. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8    Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Total   ..         Columns 6 and 8 need not he filled up during the first quarter.
?111 APPENDIX II-W. Instructions for the forwarding of Material to the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy. PLAGUE. A.-HUMAN PLAGUE. Sources from which material suitable for examination may be obtained. 1.  Spleen or liver- (a) In fatal cases. (b) Where it is possible to perform puncture of these organs during life. 2.  Buboes.-In Bubonic plague. 3.   Sputum.-In Pneumonic plague. 4.   Peripheral blood.-When nothing else is available. The preparation of specimens. Material for cultural tests. This will be necessary only in special cases. It is essential in sending such material that it be surrounded by sufficient ice to ensure its reaching Guindy without decomposition. Such material will in general be sent only as a result of correspondence on the subject when special directions will be given. 2. In all ordinary cases " films " should be forwarded. Preparation of film from the spleen. (a) Dip one or two slides in water and clean them thoroughly with a clean soft cloth. Lay the prepared slides on one side out of the way of dust, etc. (b) Remove the spleen or if a complete post-mortem examination is not made extract the spleen by passing the hand through an incision over the left costal margin. Remember that the spleen may be dragged backwards and upwards by the stomach if this organ is collapsed. When for any reason even a modified post-mortem examination is not possible one may resort to puncture with a large needle. In this procedure it is very difficult to be sure that the spleen has really been tapped. It is also extremely difficult as a rule to get blood from a spleen after death. It is best therefore, if driven to use a needle, to puncture the larger and more engorged liver. (c)   With a knife or more conveniently still with a pair of scissors cut into and remove with the aid of a forceps a piece of the spleen about the size of a small pea.    Holding this piece of tissue in the forceps wipe it thrice along one  of the  clean slides forming three separate streaks. Avoid excess of blood by " dabbing " the piece  of tissue when this is necessary on the slide before proceeding to make the streaks. In the case of the spleen this is usually not necessary. (d)  Wave the slide in the air until everything is quite dry. 9*
?112 (e) Wrap the slide in white paper. Write particulars on the outside of the packet and despatch in one of the boxes provided by the institute for the purpose.* Preparation of film from the liver. Adopt the same procedure as for the spleen taking care to get rid of an excess of fluid before smearing. To puncture the spleen during life- (a) Use an ordinary hypodermic needle. (b) Do not use any antiseptic but boil the syringe if necessary. (c) Eject a small drop of the blood obtained on to a slide and make a film as for peripheral blood. To obtain material for examination from buboes. (a) Clean several slides. (b) Clean the skin over the bubo with a little soap and water and a clean towel. This is important as the skin of the groin and axilla contains many organisms which are liable to increase the difficulty of diagnosis where a minute quantity of fluid only is obtained. (c) Steadying the bubo with the left hand plunge the needle well into the mass taking care to avoid such dangerous structures as the femoral artery. Before doing anything further allow the needle to remain a few moments in the tissues. Withdraw the point of the needle very slightly and pull out the piston of the syringe. It is often difficult to get any fluid whatever from a gland. In such cases the only procedure is to allow the needle to remain in for some minutes. (1) Do not draw the needle too far out. Nor mistake a little blood drawn in from the skin itself on the withdrawal of the needle for gland juice. (2) If there is any doubt as to the origin of the fluid obtained this should be stated on the specimen as it may be possible microscopically to confirm or dissipate such doubts. An alternative method much to be preferred where it can be carried out is to cut down upon the gland, divide it, and take a scraping from the cut surface. In cases where diagnosis is of infinite importance this is by far the best procedure as it will yield almost certain evidence, both positive and negative, regarding plague. * Note.-Slides and boxes for forwarding spcimens can be obtained by indenting on the King Institute. Envelopes should be marked "plague indent" and addressed "Superintendent, King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy." The following form of indent is suggested:- Please supply to Slides A box will be sent with every two slides. Not more than 12 slides with 6 boxes will ordinarily be issued at a time, and when slides and boxes in excess of this number are required, they should be obtained from the Madras Medical Stores Dept. Telegraphio address "Institute."
?113 Do not be satisfied with pus from a discharging bubo or from a suppurating bubo if less advanced buboes are present. Pus from an old bubo may very well contain no recognisable plague bacilli whilst pus from a bubo which has been discharging for some time is scarcely likely to contain bacilli. In fatal cases in addition to smears from the spleen any enlarged glands should invariably be incised and smears made from the cut surface. To prepare films of peripheral blood. (a) Clear one or two slides and rub up the shaft of a needle (surgical or sewing). (b) Clean a finger of the patient by rubbing it gently with a wet cloth and carefully drying it. (c)  Hold the finger between the thumb and first finger of your left hand and compress gently to drive the blood to the tip where you are going to prick. (d)  Prick, and when a drop about the size of a match head has exuded lower a clean slide upon it taking care not to " dab " the slide on the skin. (e)   As quickly as possible, taking the slide in the left hand and the point of the needle in the right lower the shaft of the needle on to the drop and spread this over the slide in a thin film by passing the needle slowly  and in one sweep from left to right.    If the result is not satis- factory use another slide. (f) On another slide or if necessary on the same slide at one end collect another drop of blood and spread this with the head of the needle over an area equal to that of a two-anna piece. When quite dry wrap in paper and label. General cautions regarding films. (1)  On no account cover any specimen with a slide or cover glass. (2)  Never use a slide without having first thoroughly cleaned and carefully polished it. (3)  Never omit to wrap film in paper before placing in the box for despatch. (4)  Do not nail, paste over with paper or otherwise deface the box. All that is necessary is to tie it round with a piece of twine and wrap neatly in a wrapper. Interpretation of results. (1) Do not send a film of peripheral blood with the idea that you have done all that is required to enable the case to be diagnosed. The plague bacillus cannot as a rule be found in the peripheral blood of plague patients. The absence of the plague bacillus from such a speci- men therefore really means very little and certainly does not exclude plague. As a rule the sending of peripheral blood only is an omission on the part of the Hospital Assistant or other concerned who if more energetic could as a rule forward more likely materials such as smears from the spleen of fatal cases, smears from buboes, etc.
?114 (2) Sputum as a rule contains countless organisms some of them closely resembling in appearance the plague bacillus. Fortunately when plague bacilli are present at all they are in large numbers and give a characteristic appearance to the specimen which enables the pneumonic type of plague to be detected readily by microscopical examination. There is in sputum however always the possibility - (i) That it is not derived from the lungs at all but only from the throat or even the mouth. (ii) That plague organisms are scanty and cannot with certainty be detected on account of the multitude of other organisms. (iii) That bacilli bearing a close resemblance to plague may be present and so render a guarded opinion necessary. (3) Microscopical examination of a bubo prior to suppuration gives almost certain evidence as to plague. The only error likely to occur is that fluid supposed to be from the gland is really from the tissues around it or even blood from the skin sucked in when the needle is withdrawn. It is on account of the uncertainty attaching to puncture that cutting down upon the gland is so much to be preferred when a great deal turns upon the diagnosis. Old buboes which have become purulent may or may not show the plague bacillus since this organism is apt to be killed off. (4) The examination of specimens of the spleen or in default of this the liver of a fatal case is most likely to give definite results. Almost all fatal cases tend eventually to become septicmic and the absence of bacilli from the spleen and liver is extremely strong evidence against the case being one of plague. On the other hand in no exami- nation except that of a fresh bubo can such definite positive evidence of plague be obtained as in films from an undecomposed spleen. Where decomposition is advanced a guarded opinion is often necessary since the plague bacillus rapidly disappears under such circumstances and even if present is considerably altered in appearance. B.-RAT PLAGUE. (a) Whole rats should not be forwarded unless there are special reasons for such a procedure. If rats are sent whole they should be packed in sufficient ice to allow them to reach Guindy undecomposed. Rats may also be sent in spirit. In this case the abdomen should be opened and at least one pint of spirit be used for each rat. This method of sending material should only be adopted when no other procedure is possible. (b) Material sent for diagnosis should always, if possible, be in the form of films. To make a film from a suspected rat. (a) Lay the rat on its right side and with a pledget of wool dipped in weak spirit wipe over the side of the belly which lies upper- most. This will keep the hair from interfering with the subsequent dissection. (b) Pinching up a large fold of skin with a forceps and with a pair of scissors cut this off. If the whole thickness of skin and muscle
?115 over the abdomen be included in the fold one out of the scissors will expose the viscera with the small elongate spleen lying upon them. (c) .Remove the spleen with the forceps and lay it upon a slide. (d) Snip off a small piece about the size of a pea and make three streaks on a clean glass slide as described under "Human Plague." (e) Dry and wrap in paper. Pinch up and slice away with the scissors folds of skin over the groins, axilla and beneath the jaws. If enlarged glands are seen, cut these in two and make smears by drawing the out surface of the gland thrice across a clean slide. Interpretation of reports. (1) If the rat is very putrid plague bacilli even if present have probably disappeared. The remark " many putrefactive organisms present" may be taken therefore as showing that the result of exam- ination means little. (2) If a rat found dead, but not markedly decomposed, shows no plague bacilli in the spleen it is probably not a plague rat. (3) In some cases owing to putrefaction, etc., the plague organisms cannot he diagnosed with certainty. Under such circumstances a guarded opinion has necessarily to be given. (4) In some cases organisms closely resembling plague occur in rats. Where typical plague bacilli are not present a guarded opinion will always be given. APPENDIX II-X. Rules for the Use of Cyllin. A. In disinfection for plague - ' 1. Directions for carrying out disinfection as laid down in the Plague Inspector's Manual should be followed in using the solution of cyllin exactly as though it were a solution of perchloride of mercury remembering that cyllin does not corrode metal and is easily miscible in water. 2. To prepare cyllin solution- (a) If cyllin be supplied in a drum, open this by cutting round the top of the bung with a hammer and chisel or with a tin-opener keeping close to the edge. Remove the cork with corkscrew; cut a wooden plug to fit the opening and keep plugged when not using the drum. (b) Fill an ordinary zinc bucket to within 2 inches of the brim with water-to this add an ounce measure-full of cyllin. This will make 2 gallons of 1 in 320 solution equivalent to the same quantity of 1-1,000 perchloride. Call this ordinary strength. (c) To make a larger quantity. Pour eight bucket-fulls of water (filled to within 2 inches of the brim) into a large receptacle; add 1 ollock (8 ounces) of cyllin; this will make a solution equal to 1-1,000 perchloride solution.
?116 (d) When required add two ounce measure-fulls of cylun to a bucket or two ollocks to eight bucket-fulls making a solution equal to 1-500 perchloride of mercury. Call this double strength. 3. To disinfect- Floors and Walls.-Use ordinary strength except in the case of a cowdung floor when strong solution should be used. Where plague discharges (sputum, blood, fces, etc.) have soiled the floor or other situation use strong solution ladling out the disinfectant freely and scouring the floor with a sweeper brush or other suitable substitute. Scrub articles of furniture, etc., with a scrubbing brush or cloth. Clothing.-Cast into ordinary solution for half an hour. Stir about once or twice and see that they are thoroughly soaked with the fluid. The solution will not injure ordinary clothing. Carts or other articles that require disinfection for plague by fluid disinfectant should be first drenched with ordinary solution and then thoroughly scrubbed over with a fresh supply of the same. Hands.- Use ordinary solution. B. For General Disinfection- 1 ounce of cyllin to 2 gallons of water will make disinfectant solution equivalent in strength to 1-1,000 perchloride of mercury. 2 ounces of cyllin to 2 gallons of water will make a disinfectant equivalent to 1-500 perchloride of mercury. Use the stronger solution for typhoid or choleraic stools or wher- ever the disinfectant is mixed with solid or liquid matter. For cleaning out latrines, flushing drains, disinfecting barracks, etc., use the weaker solution. For clothing use weaker solution. For instruments use weaker solution. APPENDIX II-Y. Description of the 'Success Knapsack Sprayer.' [A leaflet by Mr. H. M. LEFROY.] Among the many forms of spraying machine which have been produced and sold, the knapsack machine made also for use on the ground as a bucket machine is pre-eminent for all round usefulness. In India where spraying as a regular means of checking insect pests is almost unknown, this machine fills most needs and is the most useful pattern for general work. Its cost puts it beyond the reach of the cultivator, and its small size and simplicity prohibits its use on large trees; but for work on crops such as coffee, tea, cotton, cereals, oil-seeds, vegetables, etc., this machine is by far the most practical and efficient. Knapsack machines are made by a variety of firms in Europe and the United States. As a rule, the American machines are far ahead of others in efficiency, and especially one pattern of knapsack machine which can
?117 also be used on the ground. The combination of knapsack and bucket machine is a great advantage and has led to the selection of the Success machine as the best for introduction into India. The machine consists of a small brass pump with an air chamber fitted on to a copper reservoir holding four imperial gallons (one kerosene-tin-full). A length of rubber tubing terminates in a nozzle which breaks up the liquid into a fine spray. At the top of the reservoir is an opening for pouring in the wash, fitted with a fine strainer. For use as a knapsack it is placed on the back, the straps passing over each shoulder. The lever passes over the right or left shoulder as desired, and is worked in one hand, the nozzle being held in the other hand. For use on the ground the short handle is placed in position in place of the lever. Fully charged, the machine weighs about forty pounds The machine remains in good order for years; there are two rules for keeping it in order,- Pour in wash only through the strainer, pump clear water through the machine after use to clean it. The only repairs likely to be necessary are either to the gland at the top of the piston, which requires repacking or to the base of the reservoir, which may require resoldering if the iron is wrenched and torn out of the copper. As the whole apparatus is of brass and copper, insecticides and fungicides may be used in it without fear of corrosion. One man can carry the machine on his back, pump and do the spraying; in practice it is found better to employ two men, one to hold the machine and pump, the other to work the nozzle. When the machine is to be refilled, they change. From an acre of cotton to five acres of ground crops can be covered in one day. The machine can be obtained for Rs. 46 from MacDougal Bros., Oriental Buildings, Bombay.
?119 INDEX. A  PAGE RULE ABORTION. - Obligation to report cases of ... 17 47 ACCOUNTS. - Plague ...... .................. 52 142 ADMINISTRATIVE  STAFF 37, 38 103 AFFECTIONS OF THE LUNG.- Obligation to report cases of ...... 17 47 ALLOWANCES -   Plague ........................... 52 139, 140, 141 Statement showing rates of - to officers on Plague duty 89-94 ... Statement showing rates of - to plague Inspectors 94-97 ... AMBULANCE STAFF -Composition of ... ...... 21 58 APPOINTMENTS. - Plague 50 137 AREA UNDER OBSERVATION - Notification of 19 52 ARTICLES of FOOD AND DRINK. - Closing of places used for the supply and preparation of 97 97    ASSISTANT PLAGUE OFFICERS .. 37,38 103 B BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION.- Instructions for despatching material to the King Institute, Guindy, for ... ... ...  111-115  BEDDING. - Prohibition against the transmission of - used 19 50 BUILDINGS -   Acquisition of - for plague purposes 22,23 61 Collector's power of entry into ... ... . . 18 49 Occupation of buildings required for plague purposes 22, 24 61 & 65 Letting of infected - prohibited 36 92 Power of Collector to force open buildings for purposes of disinfection 43 115- A C CANAL BOATS. - Bales regarding ...... ......... 44 120 CANTONMENT.- Responsibility for carrying out plague measures in ... 41 110 CAUSE OF DEATH. - Certificate of ...... ............ 28 75 CERTIFICATE. - Improper use of - prohibited 44 118 COMPENSATION - for loss of property 43 116 CONTACTS -   Obligation to furnish information regarding ... 18 47-A Segregation of 24,62 67 Passes 33,74 85-A CONVEYANCES FOR THE CARRIAGE OF THE SICK AND INFECTED ARTICLES -   Provision of 24 66 CONVULSIONS. - Obligation to report oases of 17 47 CORRESPONDENCE -   Plague ... ... ... 49,50 131, 133-36 Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of Government 88 ... Relating to account matters ... ... ... ...  49 132 D DETENTION CERTIFICATE -   Form of 80 ... Persons under - bound to obey directions given to them 44 119 DISINFECTION 64-66 ... Mode of ... 43 115 Procedure in cases in which a closed house is to be disinfected 43 115-A
?120 E  PAGE  RULE EMERGENT WORK. - Collector's power to carry out ... 43 117 EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT ...... ............... 1 ... Powers under - delegated to Local Government ...  3 ... ESTABLISHMENT LIST ......... 51 138 ESTIMATES. - Plague 53-57  143-50 EVACUATION ............... ... ......... 62 ... F FAIRS AND FESTIVALS -   Form of statement to accompany proposals for restrictions on 81 ... Forms of notifications imposing restrictions on 82-83 ... Restrictions on the attendance at 16,17 40-45 FEMALE PASSENGERS. - Examination of .............. 12 23 FEMALE PASSPORT HOLDEKS. - Examination of ........... 14 33 FEVER WITH GLANDULAR SWELLINGS - Obligation to report oases of 17 47 FRONTIER INSPECTION STATIONS -   Establishment of ... 19 53, 54 Examination at 19 55 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. - Restrictions with regard to  31 81 G GOSHA WOMEN. - Examination of ... ... 14 33 GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS. - Occupation of - for plague purposes 24 65 GOVERNMENT MEDICAL SUBORDINATES ON PLAGUE DUTY -   Collector's power to punish 38 103-A Grant of casual or privilege leave to ... 38 103-B GOVERNMENT ORDERS. - Distribution of printed copies of 88 ... GRAIN -   Inspection of- from plague-infected areas 19 51 Inspection of - bazaars ... 19 51 H HEALTH CAMP. - Establishment of a ............  21,22 59,60 HEDJAZ. - Pilgrimage to the ............... 17 46 HOSPITAL CAMP. - Establishment of ............... 21,22 59,60 HOUSE SEARCH. - When permissible ............... 29 76,77 I INCAPACITATED PERSONS. - Obligation to take passport in the case of 10 13 INFECTED HOUSES -   Letting of prohibited 36 92 Destruction of 36 93 INOCULATION ........................ 28, 63, 64 74 Form of - certificate 74 ... Obligations of inoculated persons 45 122 Privileges of inoculated persons 44,45 121 INSPECTION SHEPS ON KAILWAY PLATFORMS. - Expenditure on ... 16 39 INTER-COMMUNICATION OF PLAGUE NEWS - Between British, Mysore and Hyderabad officials ..................... 48 130 INTIMATION -   Duties of district medical officer and tahsildar in regard to 10 12 Form of ..................... 79 ... of passengers from Bangalore Proceeding to Ceylon 15 37 of the move of a large body of troops, police or coolies 15 38 of travellers by rail .................. 8, 9 9,10 of travellers by road 9 11
?121 L  PAGE RULE LANDS. - Acquisition of - for plague purposes ......... 22 61 LOCAL AUTHORITY -   Definition of 5 2 Duties of 7, 8  7 Exemption from personal attendance before ............ 5 2 His register 8 8 M MILITARY - should obey plague regulations ... ...  41 111 MILITARY OFEICERS. - Procedure in obtaining the services of - for plague duty ........................... 39, 40 107 MINORS. - Obligation to take passports in the case of 10 13 MUNICIPALITIES. - Duties of Chairmen in ............... 10 14 N NATIVE MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS. - Employment of - at public and private hospitals ........................ 39 105 NUISANCES.-Abatement of 36 96 O OBSERVATION -   Ranges of - 5 and staff ............ ........ 20 56 Control of - staff ..................... 20 57 Duties of - staff ......... ...... 20, 21 57 List of areas under 24 66-A OBSERVATION CAMP. - Establishment of - near large towns threatened with plague ........................... 35 90 OFFICERS. - Treatment of the absence of - who suffer from plague or are segregated for plague ............. . ....... 42, 43 114 P PASSES -   Contract ... ... ... ... ... 33 85-A Forms of ... ... ..................... 71-74 ... General ... ... ... ... ...  32 84 Improper use of - prohibited .............. 44 118 Special ........................... 33 85 Register of permanent 75 ... PASSPORT -   Different kinds of ... ... ... ... ...  31, 32 82, 83 Erroneous issue of 14 32 Exemption from taking ... 34, 35, 76-78 89 ... Form of 70 ... Improper use of - prohibited ... , ............. 44 118 Intimation of the issue of 7 5 Notice in railway carirages regarding ... 10,11 15 Obligation to take ... ..................  5, 10, 31, 33 2, 13 82, 86-A PASSPORT EXAMINER. - Duties of ................. 7, 8 7 PASSPORT-HOLDERS. - Duties of .................. 6, 7 4 PASSPORT-HOLDERS WHO CHANGE THEIR RESIDENCE WITHIN THE OBSERVA.   TION PERIOD. - Procedure in respect of ............ 7 6 PASSPORT-ISSUING OFFICERS - defined 6 3 Duties of ... ... ... ... 34 87 PASSPORT ISSUING OTFICES -    Establishment of ........................ 33 86 PASSPORT RULES -   Penalty for infringement or evasion of 5, 34 2, 88 Relaxation of 76, 78 ... PLAGUE -   Discovery of 61 ... Measures to be taken on the occurrence of a case of ........ 24-27 67-72 Obligation to report cases of 17 47
?122  PAGE RULE PLASUE CAMPS.- Closure of .................. 36 99 PLAGUE CHARGES -   Classification of 57-60 152, 153 Statement showing classification of 97-101  Quarterly statement of - audited 57, 105-110 152 PLAGOK HOSPITALS. - Closure of 36 99 PLAGUE-INFECTED AREA -   Notification of 4 1 Obligation to report the arrival of persons from 18 48 PLAGUE MEASURES. - General remarks on ... 60,61  PLAGUE OFFICERS ..................... 37,38 103 Action to be taken on the occurrence of plague 26 71 Jurisdiction and powers of 38,39 104, 104-A & 104-B PLAGUE PATIENTS -   Collector's power to segregate or isolate 18 49 Their removal to hospital ... 29-31 78,79 & 80 PLAGUE RECORDS. - Destruction of ............ 87,88  PLAGUE REGULATIONS -   Penalty for the breach of 37 100 Procedure in case of evasion of - by giving false name or address.  37 102~ PLAGUE BEPORT.- Form of - by Collectors ......... 83, 84  Form of - by subordinate officers to Collector 84-87   PLAGUE SHEDS .--Grants towards construction of ... 23 64 PLAGUE STAFF. - Notice of discharge in the case of 42 113 Power of Collectors to punish 38,39 103-A & 104-B PREVENTIVE RANGES. - Formation of 28 73 PRIVATE HOSPITALS.- Sale-proceeds of ............ 23 63 PRIVATE PLAGUE CAMPS AMD HOSPITALS-   Government grants towards construction and maintenance of 23 62 Supervision of 23 63 Appointment of committee of non-official visitors 30 79-A PUBLIC CONVEYANCES. - Use of - by plague patients prohibited 35 91 PUNCH-MARKING of railway tickets ... 13, 14, 29-32 R   RAGS. - Prohibition against the transmission of 19 50 RAILWAY INSPECTION-   Appointment of - station 11 16 Attempts to evade 14,15 35,36 Detention - Certificate of ... 13,80 26 Duties of railway staff 11,12 19,20 Examination of passengers 11-13 17, 18, 21-25 Intimation in respect of passengers passing through - station ... 8,9 9,10 ,.  ,, from Bangalore to   Tuticorin via Jalarpet 15 37 Penalty for refusal to submit to examination ... 11 17 Powers of staff 13 28, 29 Time allowed for examination 80  RAILWAY PASB-HOLPERS. - Stationmaster's certificate as to place of departure in the case of 14 34 RAILWAY STAFF - Duties of .................. 41,42 112 RATS-   Destruction of 19, 66-69 51 Unusual mortality among- ...  17,18 47, 48-A Plague among 66-69  REPORTS AND RETURNS   45-49 123-130  83-87
?123 S    PAGE RULE SEARCH PARTIES -   Control of ... ... ... .,. ... ... 29 77 Organization of ... ... ... ... ... 29 76 SEGREGATION -   Of contacts 24-62 67 Persons under - bound to obey directions given to them 44 119 SOILED LINEN. - Prohibition against the transmission of 19 50 SUDDEN DEATH. -Obligation to report cases of ... 17 47 SUSPECT CAMPS. - Establishment of ............... 21,22 59,60 T   TROOPS -   Clothing for ..................... 57 151 Use of - for plague purposes 40 109 Movement of - from infected areas ... ... 15, 101-105 38 V   VOLUNTEER AGENCY. - Employment of ............ 39 105 W   WASHING OF CLOTHES. - Restrictions on the ... ...  36 98 WASTE PAPER.- Prohibition against the transmission of 19 50
