THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND STANDING ORDERS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN Revised up to 1st January 1924 MADRAS PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS PRICE, 3 annas.] 1924
THE  MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND  STANDING ORDERS  IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN  Revised up to 1st January 1924  MADRAS  PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT,  GOVERNMENT PRESS  1924
?CONTENTS.  PAGE I. The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 ............ 1 II. Plague regulations in force outside the Presidency town ... 2 III. Standing Orders 4 Appendix A.-Memoranda on plague-preventive measures 15  B.-Plague report to be submitted to the Collector ... 35  C.-Half-yearly list of officers on plague duty 36 ,, D.-Salaries of officers temporarily entertained for plague duty ... ...... 37 ,, E.-Pay and allowances of plague inspectors 37  F -Inoculation certificate 38 Index ...  i to v
?THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN.   I THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897) An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Short   title,   extent and commencement. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Epide- mic Diseases Act, 1897. (2)  It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of   Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3)  It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2.  (1) When at any time the  Governor-General in Council is satis- fied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any danger- ous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provi- sions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including compensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. Concurrent    powers   of Local Government. 2-A. When any Local Government is   satisfied that the province or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, and that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient to prevent the outbreak of  such disease or the spread thereof, such Local Government may   exercise all or any of the powers conferred by this  Act on the Governor-General in Council. * Inserted by the Devolution Act XXXVIII of 1920.
?2  Penalty.  3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this  Act shall be deemed to have committed an  offence punishable under section 188 of the  Indian Penal Code.  XLV of 1860.  Protection to persons  acting under Act.  4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall  lie against any person for anything done or in  good faith intended to be done under this Act.  II  The following regulations issued in G.O. No. 1140, P.H., dated the  7th July 1923, embody the special powers conferred on officers of the  Government and other persons and the special obligations laid upon the  public in connexion with plague: obstruction of the former or breach  of the latter renders a person liable to prosecution and punishment  under the law :-  PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN.  Whereas certain parts of the Presidency of Madras are visited by,  and other parts are threatened with, an outbreak of the dangerous  epidemic disease known as plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions  of the law for the time being in force in the Presidency are insufficient  for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease:  In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2-A of the Epidemic  Diseases Act, 1897, as amended by the Devolution Act XXXVIII of  1920, the Local Government are pleased to prescribe, in supersession of  all regulations previously issued on the subject, the following temporary  regulations to be observed throughout the Presidency except the City  of Madras for a period of one year from the 15th of July 1923 :-  1. In these regulations  (a) 'Infected area' means any area which is notified under  these regulations by the Local Government or, subject to their control  by the Collector of a district, to be infected with plague.  (b) 'A local authority' means the local medical officer or, if  there is no such officer, the village headman, the District Health  Inspector* or any other person appointed as a local authority for the  purposes of plague by the Collector of the district.  (c) 'Plague Officer' means the District Health Officer or the  District Medical and Sanitary Officer where there is no District Health  Officer and the Revenue Divisional Officer within his jurisdiction and  includes any other person who may be appointed by the Government  or by the Collector as plague officer over any definite area.  2. The Local Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George  Gazette, declare any place or area in which one or more indigenous  cases of plague have occurred, or in which the existence of plague among  rats has been proved, to be infected with plague. In similar circum-  stances, the Collector of the district may notify by tom-tom and by  publication in the district gazette that any place or area in his district  is infected with plague, informing the Government forthwith of the fact  that he has done so.  3.  In an infected area or in a district adjoining an infected area the  Collector may close any existing market and may appoint special places  * Designation since changed into 'health inspector,'
3  where markets may be held and may prescribe limits beyond which it  shall not be lawful for persons bringing articles for sale from or to an  infected area to pass.  4. In an infected area the Collector, or a plague officer with the  previous sanction of the Collector, may order the evacuation of infected  houses and houses in their neighbourhood, or generally of any infected  locality:  Provided that, before issuing or authorizing an order for compulsory  evacuation, the Collector shall either provide adequate and suitable  shelter within reasonable distance for the persons evicted, together with  the necessary water-supply and arrangements for watch and ward or  shall satisfy himself that such shelter and water-supply have been  provided by private agency. The Collector shall also satisfy himself  that the compulsory evacuation is necessary to avert the further spread  of the disease, or is in the interests of the effected population taking  account of climatic conditions.  The Collector may require all persons who evacuate their houses  voluntarily, or are evicted under this regulation, to reside in such place  as he may appoint.  Nothing contained in this rule shall be deemed to apply to persons  who have been successfully inoculated against plague during the nine  months prior to the declaration of a locality being infected or who get  themselves inoculated within 24 hours of such declaration.  5. In an infected area the Collector may enter upon, occupy and use,  or may depute any person to enter upon, occupy and use, without having  recourse to the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, any build-  ing or place which is required for, and is, in the opinion of the District  Health Officer or the District Medical and Sanitary Officer where there  is no District Health Officer, suitable for any purposes connected with  plague measures; provided that, if the building or place is occupied,  twenty-four hours' notice in writing shall be given to the occupier or  shall be conspicuously affixed on such building or place. The owner or  lessee of such building or place shall be entitled to a reasonable rent, to  be fixed by the Collector, for the period during which the ground or  building may be used for purposes connected with plague; and the  Collector shall, when any building ceases to be so used, cause it to be  thoroughly cleansed and, if the owner so desires, whitewashed internally  and externally.  6. If the Collector is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or  shed is necessary to prevent the spread of plague, he may take summary  measures, for the destruction of such hut or shed and of the materials  of which it is constructed.  7. The Collector may direct that any dwelling house or any landing  place or railway goods shed or any place used for the storage of grain  shall be inspected and that all rats found therein shall be destroyed;  and to facilitate the destruction of rats may order the temporary removal  of any grain or other merchandise.  8. The Collector may direct that at any place in his district any  consignment of grain, being conveyed by rail, road or otherwise, shall  be examined, and shall, if necessary, be unloaded and exposed to the  sun in such manner and for such period as he may fix.
?4 9. Every householder and every medical practitioner shall at once report to the nearest local authority any case of plague or any case of fever with glandular swellings or any unusual mortality among rats which may come to his notice. 10. The chairman of any municipal council or union panchayat, or the headman of any village in which there is no panchayat, may prevent any person suspected of coming from an infected place from entering the town or village for a period not exceeding two days unless his clothing and personal effects have been thoroughly exposed to the direct rays of the sun for not less than six hours. He may also prevent any consignment of grain from entering the town or village until the bags have been removed from the carts and every side of each bag has been exposed to the direct rays of the sun for not less than two hours. 11. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, coolie, scavenger or other menial servant employed to do duty in connexion with plague, shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and is discharged at the end of it. Similarly, every supplier of coolies shall be entitled to one month's notice before his coolies are discharged. (2) No such inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, coolie, scavenge\ill\ or other menial servant shall, in the absence of a written contract authorizing him to do so, and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice or shall neglect or refuse to perform any of his duties. In like manner, no supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall withdraw his coolies or servants without giving one month's notice. 12. When in consequence of the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these regulations any property is damaged or destroyed, the Collector shall pay to the owner by way of compensation such sum as he may consider sufficient to cover the cost of repairing the damage or replacing the property destroyed. Notes.-(1) The Plague Regulations being orders formally made and issued by Government under the Epidemic Diseases Act, no sanction is required as a condition precedent to prosecution for disobeying them (Judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 561 of 1899). (2) By Command Order No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the Madras Command have been directed to obey the Plague Regulations, and any infringe- ment of them is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have been warned (Superintendent's Circular No. II, dated 14th December 1898), that any disobedience or wilful neglect of the regulations or obstruction offered to any official on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Government as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith and the same reduced or permanently withdrawn. III STANDING ORDERS. The following are departmental instructions for the guidance of officers dealing with plague:- General control of plague measures. The general control of all measures connected with plague is vested in the Collector of the district, unless the Government in any case other- wise direct; and all officers of Government, of local boards and of municipalities, and all plague officers mast obey and carry out the
5  Collector's orders. With regard to the measures to be taken in any  particular town or locality the Collector has a wide discretion and may  associate with himself a small committee including the District Health  Officer, the District Medical Officer and the chairman of the munici-  pality or the president of the district or taluk board.  In a cantonment the military authorities are immediately responsible  for carrying out plague measures and the Collector should appoint a  representative of those authorities to be a plague officer for the canton-  ment.                                                                                        2. Two memoranda on plague preventive measures, one drawn up  by the Public Health Commissioner with the Government of India and  the other by the Director of Public Health under the Government of  Madras, are printed as Appendix A to these Standing Orders. The  greatest importance is attached to what may be called permanent pre-  ventive measures, which consist in making the people understand that  the presence of rats in their houses and godowns is dangerous, and in  persuading them to protect themselves from the risks involved in the  presence of rats in places used for human habitation and their property  from the loss and destruction caused by these animals at all times. It is  possible by making it difficult for rats to enter houses and godowns and  by making it difficult for them to find food when they do enter, to  bring about a very great reduction in the number of rats. Rats are  found in great numbers in markets and places used for the storage of  grain; if grain godowns were constructed in the manner set forth in  part II of the memorandum they would harbour much fewer rats than  at present and none would stay in them long. The municipal councils  of towns liable to plague infection should see that all godowns in their  own markets are constructed on the lines laid down so as to be rat-free.  The councils can, under the existing law, impose conditions with regard  to the construction of new buildings and they should do so in respect of  those intended for the storage of grain ; when the law is amended, it is  proposed to lay down that no person shall store grain or deal in grain  wholesale without a licence and it will be possible then for a council to  insist that grain shall be stored only in rat-free premises. In ordinary  houses if foodstuffs are shut up in receptacles to which rats cannot obtain  access and no garbage or refuse is allowed to lie about, there is less  likelihood of rat infestation. At present few people take any precau-  tions at all, Every endeavour should be made to warn all of the danger  of allowing rats to share their habitations. In some places lectures and  leaflets may be useful, but more can probably be done by the personal  influence of both officials and non-officials and both should be urged to do  \ill\ that they can to educate the more ignorant sections of the population.  Inspection  and sun-dis-  infection of  grain,  clothing, etc.  3. Under existing conditions much can be done to prevent the spread:  of plague from one place to another. Under regulation 8 the   Collector has power to order the breaking of bulk of any consignment  of grain in transit and under regulation 10 the municipal or village  authority may similarly ensure that no consignment of grain shall  enter a town or village until bulk has been broken and the grain has  been exposed to the sun. The mere breaking of bulk and the disturb-  ance caused by the unloading of the bags will generally be enough to  get rid of any rats they contain; but a bag may contain rats which are  perhaps too young or too sick to move and it may be necessary to  empty out bags of grain coming from infected places in order that such
?6  rats may be destroyed before the grain reaches its destination. Ex-  posure to the sun will kill fleas either in the personal effects of  travellers or in bags of grain, and to obtain this exposure it is not  generally necessary to empty the grain bags, since fleas, when separated  from rats, are not likely to burrow deeply into the bags. If the  weather is cloudy, the fleas cannot be killed in this way, but rat-fleas  are not likely to remain long either in bags of grain in which there are  no rats or in the clothing or on the persons of human beings and the  regulation provides that, in case exposure to the sun cannot be arranged  for, travellers and grain may be prevented from entering the town or  village for two days.  Rat destruc-  tion.  4. Where adequate measures have not been taken to exclude rats  from houses and godowns, other steps should be taken, when there is a  danger of plague, to reduce the number of rats by trapping and poison-  ing. If rat destruction is to do any good, it must be undertaken on  as large a scale as possible and under reliable supervision. The  catching or killing of a few rats in a locality can have little or no effect  on the total number and is mere waste of money; unless the operations  are intelligently and honestly supervised, there will be little rat  destruction, though the reports of the staff employed may indicate great  activity. Difficulties have been experienced in securing the co-oper-  ation of the people in rat destruction; baits are sometimes removed,  before the rats have had an opportunity of taking them and various  devices have been adopted to prevent rats getting into traps; but there  is reason to believe that the obstruction met with is often duo to fear of  the steps which may be taken by the plague authorities if infected rats  are found. It should therefore be explained carefully that the chief  object of the operations is to destroy the rats before they become  infected.  The best time to start a campaign against rats is the season when  there is no plague, generally the hot weather; but rat destruction is  also useful when plague is present. The finding of infected rats then  among those caught should not be allowed to cause the apprehension  that special measures will be taken in regard to the particular houses  in which they are.caught.  Inoculation.  5. When an area is actually infected or is imminently threatened,  inoculation should be encouraged in every possible way. In the office  of every District Medical Officer there should always be kept a sufficient  number of syringes. Haffkine's vaccine need not be kept in stock but  as soon as there are any signs of an epidemic, such as rat mortality or  an indigenous human case, a sufficient supply-say 1,000 doses-to  provide against a sudden rush for inoculation, should be ordered by  telegram from the Bombay Bacteriological Laboratory at Parel; and if  there are indications that people are likely to take to inoculation,  further supplies should be ordered without delay.  Where it is specially necessary to encourage inoculation; the col-   lector may grant subsistence allowances at rates not exceeding four \ill\  a day for an adult and two annas a day for a minor who may be tem-  porarily incapacitated for work as a result of inoculation. Such an  allowance should not be paid to any one individual for more than three  days.  Every person successfully inoculated shall be given a certificate by  the inoculating officer in the form shown in Appendix F.
?7  Evacuation.  6. When the existence of plague in a town or village has been  established, the lives of many of the inhabitants can be saved if they  leave their houses and take up their residence beyond the reach of  infected rats. In villages and smaller towns the people usually evacuate  their houses voluntarily on the appearance of plague and camp in the  neighbourhood and the practice should be encouraged. In larger towns  there is not the same readiness to evacuate, owing to the difficulty of  finding suitable camping grounds not too far away from the places  where the people have to work, to the absence of water-supplies and to  other inconveniences ; while the poorer inhabitants are often unable to  provide themselves with adequate shelter. On the other hand there is a  danger that, if no steps are taken, a panic will set in when the number  of cases of plague becomes large, and the people will scatter to neighbour-  ing villages and, by carrying with them infected fleas or merchandise  containing rats, disseminate infection. Under regulation 4 the Collector  has power to order the evacuation of any house or group of houses  in an infected area, but the power should be used with discretion and all  reasonable assistance should be given to persons evacuating their houses  whether as a result of such an order or of their own free will. Many  may not be able to provide themselves with shelter at short notice and  it is advisable, therefore, that arrangements should be made beforehand  so that hutting materials shall be either in stock or readily procurable  and shall, when evacuation is actually in progress, be issued in reason-  able quantities, free of charge to those who really cannot afford to pay for  them, and to others at cost price. Sites for camps should not be more  remote than is necessary to prevent invasion by infected  rats ; they  should be selected with due regard to water-supply and sanitation and  there should be as little interference as possible with the avocations of  the people. Police should be employed to protect the evacuated houses  against burglary and to patrol the approved camps ; and arrangements  may be made for the custody, free of charge, of the effects of persons  who have left their houses, but such custody should be entirely at the  risk of the owners.  Treatment of  plague pati-  ents ; and  plague hos-  pitals.  7. A plague patient like any other sick person should receive the  most careful attention and all efforts should be directed towards making  him as comfortable as possible. A person suffering from bubonic  plague is no more a source of danger than any other person who may  carry infected fleas. It is unnecessary therefore to construct special  plague, hospitals or to locate them in places remote from human  habitation. Patients can be treated best in the ordinary hospitals,  special wards being set apart for the purpose and additional temporary  accommodation being constructed if necessary ; nor is there any  objection to a patient being treated in his own house if he prefers to  stay there and his friends and relations are prepared to take proper  care of him. Patients suffering from pneumonic plague should not be  taken to the general ward of a hospital but should be treated in an  isolation ward if there is one.  Where private committees or individuals wish to establish hospitals  for particular communities, the Government will contribute half the  actual cost of construction and maintenance provided-  (a) that the cost of construction is considered reasonable and the  buildings are erected on sites approved by the Collector or plague
8  officer acting under his control; [in any case of doubt or dispute the  Government will have the right to have the value of the work done  estimated by the Public Works Department.]  (b) that the arrangements for sanitation and the supply of food  meet with the approval of the Collector;  (c) that such hospitals remain under the general supervision of  Government officials and all instructions that may be given by the  Director of Public Health or the Surgeon-General are observed; and   (d) that the sale-proceeds of such hospitals, when they are  dismantled, are divided proportionately between the Government and  the committee or individuals concerned.  The amounts will be paid monthly in arrears to the manager or  managers approved by the Collector.  Action to be  taken by  local officers  on the out-  break of  plague.  8. It is most important that early information should be received  of the appearance of infection in any place, both in order that remedial  measures may be adopted in that place and in order that it may not be  allowed to become a focus for the spread of infection. If the rats in a  town or village are infected, they may spread infection to other places  before any case of human plague occurs; and if a case of indigenous  human plague occurs, it may be regarded as certain that the local rats  have been infected for some time. It is the duty of heads of villages  and all other local authorities to watch the residences of persons  arriving from infected areas and to report at once any mortality of rats  or any human case of plague. Regulation 9 lays upon every house-  holder and medical practitioner the duty of informing the local  authority of rat mortality or of any illness with the appearance of  plague which comes to his notice; but in towns or villages which have  been, or are likely to be infected, the local authorities must themselves  be vigilant. If the local authority becomes aware of rat falls or of a  human case in a place not already declared infected, he should report  the fact at once to the chairman in the case of a municipality, and  to the tahsildar and the Health Inspector in the case of any other  town or village, and also to the plague inspector of the circle if  there is one. Pending the arrival of one of those officers or a medical  officer, he should, if any human being has been attacked, arrange as far  as he can for proper attendance on the patient. Thereafter he should,  on any day on which a seizure or death takes place, report the number  of seizures and deaths to the chairman or tahsildar as the case may be.  9. On receipt of information of rat mortality or human infection,  the municipal chairman or the tahsildar, as the case may be, should  report the fact to the Revenue Divisional Officer, the   District  Medical Officer or the District Health Officer and the Collector by the  quickest possible means, and should proceed at once to the spot, if  possible with a medical officer, and verify the facts. If he finds the  information to be correct and a detailed report has not already been  submitted by the plague inspector to the Collector, he should see that  such a report is submitted without delay and make arrangements for  the care of the patient or patients, if any, and for the protection, so far  as may be possible of the population generally. He should keep the  Collector and the tahsildars or deputy tahsildars of all the surrounding  taluks or divisions, not only of his own district but of adjoining districts  also informed from day to day of the number of seizures and deaths
?9  occurring within his jurisdicton with the wards (in the case of munici-  palities) or the villages (in the case of a taluk) in which they have  occurred.  Appointment  of plague  inspectors.   10. In any district in which any town or village has been declared  infected, or with the sanction of Government in any district threatened  with plague, the Collector may appoint plague inspectors who should, if  possible, be qualified sanitary inspectors, for the purpose of observa-  tion in addition to the health inspectors belonging to the district  health staff. In municipal areas it will generally be desirable to appoint  an inspector for each ward, though it may not always be necessary if  the wards are small; and a separate inspector should ordinarily be appoint-  ed for each non-municipal town with a population of 5,000 or more.  Elsewhere each inspector should be placed in charge of a circle of a size  which will admit of his visiting every portion of it within ten days or  less. Subject to the control of the Collector the inspectors will work  under the orders of the plague officer having jurisdiction over their  circles.  Duties of  plague  inspectors.  11. In the absence of special orders from the Collector, the duties  of a plague inspector are-  (1) to patrol the area under his charge for the purpose of obtaining  early information of rat mortality or of human plague;  (2) to proceed at once to any place from which infection is newly  reported; and, in the absence of a medical officer, to see that the best  possible arrangements are made for the comfort and treatment of any  patients whose relations cannot take care of them themselves;  (3) within 24 hours of receiving the first intimation, to submit a  detailed report (in the form given in Appendix B) to his immediate  superior and to the Collector with regard to every imported case and  with regard to each of the first three indigenous cases in the village;  (4) to examine any dead rats that may be found in a place not  already declared infected and, if he finds any enlarged glands and has  been instructed how to take smears, to send spleen or liver smears to the  King Institute at Guindy for examination;  (5) to visit frequently all infected areas in his range, to encourage  the people to get themselves inoculated and to leave their houses and  camp in some place where they will be away from the neighbourhood  of infected rats;  (6) to advise the people generally on the means of avoiding plague,  and especially as to the removal of all food and garbage from places  accessible to rats, and as to the destruction of rats; and  (7) when so directed by the Collector or plague officer to conduct  or assist in conducting a campaign for the destruction of rats.  Report to be  sent by Col-  lectors to the  Director of  Public Health  on the occur-  rence of the  first case of  plague.  12. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first discovered  in any place not declared infected, the Collector or, in his absence, any  gazetted officer at the headquarters station of the district, should  immediately intimate the fact by post to the Director of Public Health  stating whether the case was indigenous or imported, if the latter whence  it was imported, how the case was discovered, and any other further  particulars, with dates, which may appear necessary. In the case of  ports whence vessels sail for Europe, however, intimation should be sent  by telegram which should state whether any plague or unusual morta-  lity among rats was observed. Names of hamlets should not be tele-  graphed but only the names of villages to which such hamlets belong.  2
?10  Report of  plague oases  to be sent by  Collectors to  Government  and Director  Public.  Health.  13. All attacks and deaths should be reported daily by the Collector  to the Director of Public Health in the form prescribed in G.O.  No. 485 P., dated 10th March 1904. These reports may be sent by  post, unless, owing to a breach on a railway or any other cause, they  are not likely to be received within 48 hours, when they should be  telegraphed. Reports should be sent to the Government and the Direc-  tor of Public Health of-  (a) the first indigenous case occurring in a district previously free  from plague,  (b) the first three indigenous cases occurring in a town of 10,000  inhabitants or more, and  (c) the first three indigenous cases occurring in any port, by post  in the first two cases, and by telegram in the last case.  Collectors should also send telegraphic reports to the medical officers  of the Ceylon Government stationed at Tuticorin and Mandapam, of the  first indigenous case occurring in a district previously free from plague.  The cost of these telegrams will be debited to the Ceylon Government  by the Accountant-General. Every Collector declaring any place or  area in his district to be infected with plague should inform the Govern-  ment forthwith of the fact that he has done. so in order that the place  or area may be included in the list of infected areas published in the  Fort St. George Gazette.  Monthly  report on  plague to be  sent by  Collectors  to the  Director of  Public  Health.  14. The Collector of every district affected with indigenous plague  should forward to Government through the Director of Public Health  not later than the 15th of every month succeeding a quarter a consoli-  dated report for the previous quarter for the whole district. These  quarterly narratives should be prepared by the presidents of district  boards and chairmen of municipal councils and on the lines laid down in  paragraphs 4 to 9 of G.O. No. 897-A, P.H., dated 24th June 1922, and  should be consolidated by the Collector in consultation with the Presi-  dent of the District Board and the District Health Officer or, if there is  no such officer, the District Medical Officer. They should summarise  clearly for each municipality and taluk within the district the number  of deaths from plague in each month of the quarter and the particulars  enumerated in paragraph 9 of that Government Order and paragraphs  42-44 of the Memorandum of the Director of Public Health appended  to that Government Order. The reports for their own areas should be  transmitted by the chairmen of municipal councils concerned to the  Collector not later than the 7th of the month following the close of the  quarter reported on. Copies should be sent simultaneously to the District  Health Officer and the District Medical Officer and the President of  the District Board.  Communica-  tion of in-  formation  regarding  plague cses  to adjoining  district and  Native  States.  15. Collectors of infected districts should send weekly reports of  plague to the Collectors and District Health Officers of adjoining districts  in the form prescribed by G.O. No. 83 P., dated 16th January 1904.  Immediate report should however be sent of any case of plague or  suspected plague that may occur in any new place within their districts.  The Collectors of Nellore, North Arcot, Chittoor, South Arcot and  Chingleput should send a copy of the weekly plague report to the  President of the Madras Corporation, and should also report to him by  telegram immediately on its occurrence any case of plague or suspected  plague that may occur in any new place within their districts,
?11  Inasmuch as the Mysore Darbar has instructed the amildars and  deputy amildars in charge of taluks and sub-taluks of Mysore which  border on British districts to give immediate information of the occur-  rence of plague within their jurisdiction direct to the tahsildars of the  neighbouring British taluks, and as the Deputy Commissioners have  been similarly requested to keep the Collectors of adjoining British  districts promptly informed of the occurrence of plague in the neigh-  bouring districts in Mysore, Collectors of British districts bordering on  Mysore will accordingly arrange to give similar information direct to  the officials of the Darbar. Similar arrangements are in force with  regard to districts bordering on the Nizam's Dominions.  Control of  Collector  over medical  subordinates  on plague  duty.  16. The Collector may fine or suspend subordinates of the Govern-  ment medical department who are employed on plague duty within his  district, but against such punishment there shall be a right of appeal to  Government through the Surgeon-General. Before passing any order  regarding the punishment of a medical subordinate, the Collector should  consult the District Medical Officer. A copy of every such order should  forthwith be communicated to the Surgeon-General who may, in any  case in which he considers that the fault ascribed to the subordinate is  one which touches his professional conduct only, require that the order  shall not be carried into effect pending reference to Government. No  appeal to the Government will be entertained unless preferred within  three months from the date of the order appealed against.  17. The Collector may grant casual or privilege leave to subordinates  of the Government medical department whose services have been lent to  local boards or municipalities for plague duty. Intimation of the appli-  cation should, however, be made to the Surgeon-General before privilege  leave is sanctioned. Leave of all other descriptions, such as furlough or  sick leave, is granted by the Surgeon-General.  Control of  plague  officers over  the plague  staff.  18. Subject to the Collector's approval and general control, a plague  officer may appoint, fine, suspend, or remove from plague duty any  member of the plague staff except a medical subordinate or servants of  local boards or municipal councils.  Right of  appeal of  the plague  staff.  19. The order of any Collector or plague officer dispensing with the  services of a temporary plague subordinate shall have general effect  throughout the Presidency. The Collector's order of suspension or  dismissal shall be final with regard to officers lower in rank than that of  sanitary inspector. Sanitary inspectors shall have a right of appeal to  Government. The appeal should be forwarded to Government through  the Collector and the Director of Public Health. There shall be an  appeal to the Collector against any order of suspension or dismissal  passed by a plague officer.  Distribution  of plague  charges.  20. In connexion with measures to combat plague, expenditure will  ordinarily be necessary only on the following objects:-  (1) observation, including the pay of plague inspectors;  (2) inoculation;  (3) the provision of shelter for persons leaving their houses;  (4) police, to guard evacuated houses and approved camps;  (5) rat destruction, including the cost of traps and poison and the  pay of any staff employed;
12  (6) hospitals, appliances and staff for the care of patients; and  (7) measures taken to ensure the breaking of bulk of consignments  of grain.  Expenditure on the first four items will be borne from provincial  funds. The cost of the fifth and sixth will be borne by municipal funds  in municipal areas and by local funds in rural areas. That of the seventh  will fall on Provincial funds if the measures are undertaken by the  Collector under regulation 8 and on the municipal or local authority  concerned if they are carried out under regulation 10.  Powers of  Collectors  to incur  expenditure  on plague.  21. Collectors are authorized to incur expenditure up to Rs. 5,000  in anticipation of the sanction of Government when prompt action is  necessary under regulation 7 or regulation 8 or when, in consequence of  an outbreak of plague, it becomes necessary urgently to provide hutting  materials for persons evacuating their houses, or to pay compensation  for damage to property. Any expenditure so incurred should be  reported immediately and, except as provided in this order, no expendi-  ture should be incurred from Provincial funds without previous sanction.  Where a local board or municipal council finds it necessary to  incur at short notice expenditure on the care and accommodation of the  sick or on rat destruction, which has not been foreseen or provided for  in its budget, it should take immediate steps to rearrange its budget so  that funds may be available.  Sanction  for the  employment  of plague  establish-  ments.  22. All appointments in connexion with plague require the sanction  of Government. In the case of additional police required for plague  duty the application for sanction should be forwarded, through the  Inspector-General of Police, to the Secretary to Government, Judicial  Department. In other cases applications should be forwarded to the  Secretary to Government, Local Self-Government (Public Health)  Department through the Director of Public Health. Sanctions for  establishments employed under this rule will remain in force to the end  of the following March or September, whichever is earlier, unless for  special reasons a different date is specified in the order in any particular  case. On the 1st of March and on the 1st of September each Collector  will submit in a single communication proposals for the retention of such  of the establishments as, in his opinion, should be retained in the ensuing  half-year, clearly explaining the necessity in each case. Such proposals  should be accompanied by three copies of a statement showing all  existing plague establishments in the form in Appendix C, two copies of  the statement being forwarded at the same time to the Accountant-  General. Special sanction should be obtained for all additional  establishments which it may be found necessary to employ in the course  of the half-year, but in the absence of special instructions to the  contrary all such sanctions will expire at the end of the half-year.  Collectors will also effect from time to time such reductions in establish-  ments as may be feasible and report the fact to the Director of  Public Health for information.  Allowances  to officers  on plague  duty.  23. The Secretary of State has sanctioned the grant of extraordinary  pension to the families of police men who die of plague contracted in the  execution of their duties in plague-stricken localities, provided such  duties entail imminent risk from plague.
?13  24. The salaries attached to special temporary appointments created  on account of plague are shown in Appendices D and E. All question  relating to the grant of extra allowances should be referred for the  orders of Government.  Estimates of  plague  expenditure.  Board 3 of Revenue 22-E. General  (Land Revenue). Administration.  Director of Public 33-0. Public  Health. Health.  Surgeon-General .. 32. Medioal.  Inspector-General 26-C. Police.  of Police and the   Commissioner of   Police.   25. The Board of Revenue (Land Revenue), the Director of Public  Health and the surgeon-General,  the Inspector-General of Police and  the Commissioner of Police are  required to include in their Provin-  cial budgets under the respective  major and minor heads (vide margin)  consolidated estimates of plague  expenditure debitable to Provincial  funds. The Board of Revenue (Land Revenue) will obtain the estimates  for the districts from the Collectors, and the Director of Public Health  and the Surgeon-General the estimates for the districts and the City of  Madras from the Collectors and the Commissioner, Corporation of  Madras, respectively. The figures relating to plague charges should  appear under a separate sub-head " Plague expenditure."  Similarly each district board or municipal council should enter in  its budget under a separate sub-head the provision it makes for plague  expenditure.  Transferof  funds.  26. The Board of Revenue (Land Revenue), the Inspector-Genera]  of Police and the Surgeon-General can sanction reappropriation of funds  from one minor head to another within the same major head, provided  (a) that the expenditure is entirely under their control; (b) that the  transfer does not involve reappropriation either from or to the group  head 'Salaries'; and (c) that savings on non-recurring expenditure are  not reappropriated in order to provide for additional recurring expendi-  ture.  The Commissioner of Police, the Director of Public Health and  Collectors can sanction reappropriation of funds within the same minor  head where the expenditure is entirely under their control, subject to  the following conditions:-  (1) the total of the grants under their control shall not be  exceeded;  (2) savings under Salaries shall not be reappropriated to other  classes of expenditure; and  (3) savings on non-recurring expenditure shall not  be reappro-  priated in order to provide for additional recurring expenditure under  Salaries, Establishment, or on any other account.  NOTE.-The following items of expenditure should be treated as non-recurring:-  (1) Temporary establishments, unless the establishment, though  temporary, is in reality likely to be employed continuously.  (2) Grain compensation allowance.  (3) Dieting charges.  Fines.  27. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the Plague Regulations  should be credited to the head XVII-B. Administration of Justice  -General fees, fines and forfeitures.  Classifica-  tion of  plague  charges.  28. ' Direct ' plague expenditure is that exhibited in the Provin-  cial accounts under the head " 33-C. Public Health-Expenses in  connexion with Epidemic diseases." 'Indirect' plague expenditure
?14  includes all other extra expenditure due to plague but brought to  account under the ordinary appropriate service heads.  (i) All officers who draw bills for indirect plague expenditure  should write conspicuously at the head of each such bill, besides the  account head, the word 'Plague' in red ink. If only some of the items  in a bill are plague charges, the word 'Plague' should be written  against each such item instead of at the head of the bill.  (ii) Contingent expenditure on account of plague, e.g., stationery,  postage, telegrams, office furniture and such like, should be charged  against the heads of account to which the salaries of the officers incur-  ring such expenditure are debited.  (iii) The pay and allowances of officers and establishments form-  ing part of existing departments or services whose employment on  plague duty does not involve the payment of salaries to other persons  for the performance of their legitimate duties, or the payment to them  of extra allowances on account of plague, do not constitute indirect  plague charges (of course they are not direct plague charges) because  they do not involve extra expense.  Plague  correspond  ence and  destruction  of records.  29. All correspondence about plague should be addressed to the  Secretary to Government, Local Self-Government (Public Health)  Department, through the Director of Public Health and should be  marked with the word 'Plague' in red ink on the outside covers and on  the left-hand corner of the papers. Telegrams should be addressed to  ' Madras, Plague '. All references regarding account matters should be  addressed to, or forwarded through, the Accountant-General.  30. Plague correspondence should be entered in a separate current  register, and the papers shown against a new item ' Plague ' in the  half-yearly business returns. A separate series of numbers should be  given to the disposals, and the question of destroying or retaining them  should be dealt with in accordance with B.P. No. 101, dated 18th April  1898. Reports of plague cases and deaths received from authorities  outside the Presidency may be destroyed at the end of the month  succeeding that to which they relate; all other reports and returns  after one year.
?15  APPENDIX A.  [See Standing Order 2.]  Memorandum on Plague Preventive Measures.  Plague, as we know it in India, is a disease of rats in which man  and a few of the lower animals participate. The disease is caused by  the invasion of the body by the plague bacillus. The plague bacillus  is spread from rat to rat, and from rat to man, and to certain other  of the lower animals, by the bite of the rat-flea. The fact that man  is susceptible to the disease is the reason of course that the disease  is of such importance to the public health of India, but it must be  remembered that from the point of view of the plague bacillus, if  such an expression be permitted, man is relatively of small account.  An epidemic of plague among men is but an index of the epizootic  that is raging among the rat population of the community. Were  there no rats, or were rats less " domesticated," or were the habits  and customs of people in this country such that rats found it difficult  to obtain food and shelter in human habitation, plague, as a human  disease, would disappear from India. The fact that the association  between rats and man is so close in this country is the sole reason why  plague is so serious a factor in our vital statistics.  If the significance of these simple facts be grasped, measures for  the eradication of plague as a human disease suggest themselves.  Every effort should be made to induce the people of this country to  \ill\alize that the apathy with which they gladly suffer the rat to share  their food, and find shelter in their homes, is directly responsible for  the fact that they suffer and die from this disease. Once this lesson  has been driven home plague as a human disease will cease to afflict the  converted community.  In the meantime, it is necessary to consider what measures can be  undertaken most profitably to save the people in spite of themselves,  realizing that the degree of success obtainable must depend in some  measure on the amount of co-operation secured.  One of the most remarkable facts about outbreaks of plague in  India is the remarkably constant seasonal prevalence that the disease  exhibits in any given part of the country. For example, plague  epidemics always reach their height in the Punjab and the west of the  United Provinces in the month of April; in the east of the United  Provinces and in Bihar in the month of March; in the south of the  Bombay Deccan about October; in Bombay City, about March. This  phenomenon is explained by the fact that the rat plague, on which  the human epidemic depends, is most acute at that season of the year  when rat-fleas are most numerous. The number of rat-fleas is de-  pendent upon conditions of atmospheric humidity and temperature.  This dependence upon climatic conditions explains, not only why plague  has a constant seasonal prevalence in any given area, but also why the  disease is much more virulent and widespread in some years than in  others. Thus severe epidemics in the north of India have always been  preceded by abnormally damp weather in the cold weather months,
?16  In places where rats are very numerous plague may develop when  climatic conditions are adverse, i.e., when rat-fleas are scarce, but  plague tends to disappear with the advent of hot dry weather.  It cannot be too strongly emphasized that anti-rat measures, directed  towards the eradication of plague infection, can be prosecuted with  most chance of success in the hot dry months when plague cases and  foci of infection are fewest. The relatively plague-free season should  synchronize with maximum anti-plague effort and not be regarded as a  suitable time for a cessation of anti-plague measures.  Anti-plague measures can be grouped under four heads:-  (a) Rat elimination or the prevention of rat infestation. This  comprises such modifications in the habits, customs, and dwellings of  a community as will result in a diminished rat infestation in the homes  of the people and make the association between rats and men less  intimate than at present.  (b) Measures designed to protect the rat population of any given  town or village from plague infection. These entail a clear under-  standing of the manner in which plague infection is carried from  place to place.  (c) Rat destruction designed, as is (a), to diminish the chances  of infection, and to keep the rat population at so low a level that is  plague be introduced the severity of the resulting epidemic will be  appreciably diminished.  (d) If our efforts under these three heads fail to keep plague out  it is left to try and render the human population immune to attacks  of the disease by means of inoculation, or to remove the population  at risk from close association with infected rats. The latter involves  the evacuation of infected dwellings and the provision of temporary  accommodation outside the rat-infested, plague-infected area.  Measures included under (a), (b) and (c) can be carried out at any  season of the year; measures under (d) are generally applicable only  in the plague season.  Segregation of the sick is not essential. For all practical purposes  the patient suffering from bubonic plague is not capable of infecting  those in close attendance on him. Such a statement is not true of  pneumonic plague. Small outbreaks of this disease, which is extremely  infectious, are occasionally experienced in India. These are, however,  of infrequent occurrence and of small moment when compared with  the incidence of bubonic plague.  It will be noted that of the four 'components' of a plague  epidemic, viz., the plague bacillus, the rat-flea, the rat, and man, only  the rat and man have been specifically mentioned in this preliminary  discussion of preventive measures. The plague bacillus is so short-  lived outside the body of either the rat-flea, the rat, or man, that  for practical purposes it need not be considered as possessing an  independent existence. Similarly, the welfare of the rat-flea is so  dependent on the plentiful supply of rats which they parasitize, and  has so short a life apart from its proper host, especially if it be infected  with plague, that 'anti-flea' measures received no specific mention.  Such measures will be referred to when (b) is under detailed consi-  deration: they have very decided value and should in no wise be  overlooked.
?17  I.-RAT ELIMINATION.  A full knowledge of the habits and customs of the rat is essential  to the successful prosecution of anti-plague measures.  1. The rat.-The common Indian house rat, Mus rattus, is a very  domesticated animal and is rarely found far from human habitation  For shelter it seeks the darkest corners of the dwelling, especially if  such offer facilities for barrowing and a convenient supply of food.  Such dark corners are to be found in almost any Indian dwelling.  The rat possesses remarkable powers of climbing, and the ordinary  kutcha mud wall offers no difficulties. A hard, smooth vertical surface  free from irregularities and projections is not easily surmounted. A  water-pipe or a drain-pipe which can be grasped by the rat's legs and  tail is easily combined. A ledge, projecting horizontally nine inches  or more from the wall, if quite smooth and hard on the under surface,  presents an insurmountable obstacle. A rat may succeed in jumping on  to a ledge 21/2 feet high but not one 3 feet high.  Grain is the natural food of Mus rattus, which is very largely  vegetarian in its habit: in certain circumstances the house rat will  devour 'meat,' or even the dead bodies of other rats, but uncooked  grain is their chief article of diet. The variety of grain that is most  attractive to rats differs in different parts of the country, but the rats  of any given locality are remarkably conservative. Usually the rat  favours that variety of grain which forms the staple food of the human  population among which it dwells. Thus the rats of Poona prefer  bajri to anything else; the rats of Madras are rice-eaters; the rats of  Sholapur affect an equal preference for jowari and bajri. Very  remarkable, too, is the facility with which the rat is able to identify  dough made from the flour of the grain to which it is accustomed  when several varieties are offered in exactly similar form. The  addition of such substances as meat, fish, cheese, sugar, fats, condi-  ments or salt, as a flavouring to dough made of flour and water, does  not in any way render the mixture more palatable or attractive to the  rat. This statement is at variance with commonly accepted notions  and many will find it difficult to credit that a rat has no very great  partiality for cheese, for example. Nevertheless the above statement  is based on the results of numerous controlled observations designed  to determine this special point. It is not contended that rats won't  eat such substances as those enumerated above; at times they will  eat almost anything; nevertheless they exhibit universally a pre-  ference for grain, or flour made from grain in the form of a paste, in  preference to all else, and they like it best unflavoured. Finally, rats  must have water if their food be dry; sufficient water is obtainable  from fresh, or wet, vegetables or grass.  A rat becomes sexually mature at a little over two months; the  most common number of young at a litter is five. The sexes closely  approximate each other in number. So prolific are rats that given  sufficient food and shelter a pair of rats may become eighty pairs in  the course of a year.  In most parts of India the majority of Mus rattus burrow:  burrowing does not appear to be essential provided shelter and free-  dom from molestation can be secured, a state of affairs that is  everywhere found in Indian habitations.  3
?18  Rats do not commonly migrate far from their homes.  These then are the more important of the characteristics of the  Indian house rat which plays so important a part in the spread of  plague. Successful efforts at rat elimination and rat destruction  necessitate a display of intelligence, energy, persistence and a lively  understanding of their habits and customs as outlined above.  Before considering measures in detail it may be worth while to  refer to the economic aspects of the case. An adult rat consumes  upwards of 3/4 oz. of grain each day. Let us take the case of an  Indian town with a human population of a quarter of a million people.  Such a town at a very low estimate will have a rat population  amounting to half a million. Let us suppose that the rats of this  town have a preference for a grain selling at ten seers for the  rupee. The rat population of this town would consume grain each  day to the value of Rs. 1,170 and at the same time do a vast amount  of damage to human property of other kinds. (This sum is equivalent  to Re. 1-11-0 per head of population per annum, an amount which if  devoted to public health would insure freedom from plague and many  other diseases as well.) Truly the inhabitants of this country in so  gladly suffering the rat suffer in other ways than those of disease and  death.  2. Rat elimination.-Energetic and sustained rat-destruction  campaigns, carried out on lines such as those that will be described  hereafter and with due attention to detail, will do much towards  keeping the rat population at a low level with a consequent markedly  diminished risk of plague-infection and the certainty of a much  milder epidemic, should the disease gain a foothold, than would  otherwise be the case. Such measures have the great disadvantage  that they necessitate sustained effort which is very difficult to secure  in India when a few years' freedom from plague so commonly en-  genders a false sense of security. If half-heartedly carried out, the  results will be most disappointing and the number of those who claim  that rat-destruction campaigns are useless, and consequently waste of  funds, will be increased.  Moreover, rat-destruction campaigns are of only temporary benefit  and it is necessary first to consider whether the houses, habits, and  customs of the people cannot be so modified as to render the associa-  tion -between the rat and human population less close than it is at  present. As things are there is no limit to the amount of food and  shelter that the average Indian house affords to the rat. In this  connexion it would be well to draw attention to the fact that the two  terms 'rat-proof' and 'rat-free' as applied to dwellings and store-  houses are by no means synonymous. Very little advantage is gained  if the floors, walls and roof of buildings be so constructed as to make it  impossible for rats to burrow therein, if such erections offer no lack of  food and shelter to rats and if ingress and egress through doors and  other apertures be not prevented by some special device. This word of  warning is very necessary: in many parts of India one can see buildings  that have been made 'rat-proof,' harbouring, all the same, a very  large number of rats. Small wonder that such laudable endeavours  to abolish plague have met with a degree of success in no way  commensurate with the comparative large outlays that some such  schemes have involved.
?19  These remarks must not be construed as meaning that pucca build-  ings are not preferable in every way to kutcha, but the provision of  pucca walls and floors is not in itself sufficient to ensure freedom from  rats.  Even in kutcha buildings something can be done towards eliminat-  ing the rat. The rat population of any place is directly determined  by the amount of food and shelter that such place affords. All  measures that lessen the amount of food and shelter for rats automati-  cally effect a reduction in the number of rats. Protection of stores of  food from the depredations of rats, and efficient scavenging, are thus  anti-plague measures of the first importance.  II.-PROTECTION OF THE RATS OF A COMMUNITY FROM PLAGUE.  Before embarking on a detailed description of active rat-destruc-  tion measures it will be well to consider how best to protect the rat-  population of any town from becoming infected with plague or to  make the ever-present possibility of such an occurrence less likely.  To this end it is important to bear in mind the methods by which  plague-infection is conveyed from place to place.  1. Grain and plague.-It is a common experience to find plague in  towns and villages beginning in the close vicinity of markets and grain  stores, and it is important to have a clear conception as to why this  should be so. As things are at present the rat population of any given  town or village is very much larger in the neighbourhood of markets  and grain stores than in other localities, with the result that when  plague is present the rat epizootic is likely to be more widespread in  such localities than elsewhere. It follows that grain exported from a  plague-infected town to another, goes from a part of the town of  despatch where plague is most severe, to a part of the receiving town  where the rat population is at a maximum. Not only so but grain and  similar merchandise offer facilities for the transport of rats which  baggage consisting of personal effects rarely affords. Plague-infected  rats are likely to be much more harmful as plague-infecting agents  than are fleas alone which, apart from their definitive hosts, are short-  lived especially if infective.  From these and other considerations it follows that the methods  of grain storage and grain transport are of paramount importance in  plague-infected and plague-threatened India, where the grain trade is  in a very special sense a 'dangerous trade,' and as such demands very  close supervision. There is a large mass of epidemiological evidence to  show that the rate of diffusion of plague-infection is very slow when it  has to rely on the movements of the human population per se, but that  the movements of grain afford facilities for the dissemination of infection  equalled by no other agency. Were the grain stores of India kept  relatively rat-free a marked and rapid diminution of plague would most  assuredly result. Is such a consummation as impossible of attainment,  or as difficult, as is usually assumed ?  A great deal can be done with no prohibitive outlay. In discuss-  ing this matter it is important to bear in mind certain facts regarding  the habits of rats cited above. They explain the logical basis of the  following desiderata of grain stores:-  (a) Wherever possible the wholesale storage of grain should be  effected in buildings apart from those in which retail trade is carried on,
?20  (b) Wholesale grain stores should not be situated in close  proximity to densely-crowded areas of a city.  (c) Wholesale grain stores should never be utilized for purposes  of human habitation.  (d) Bearing in mind that water is essential for the life of the  rat, no water accessible to rats, or fresh vegetables should be allowed in  wholesale grain stores.  (e) As rats are unable to circumvent a smooth horizontal projec-  tion of nine inches, such a ledge surrounding a grain store on the top of  a plinth 3 feet high is effective in prohibiting the ingress of rats. On  the sides of the building in which the doors are situated this ledge can  conveniently be enlarged into a platform 2 feet or 2 feet 6 inches in  width. Reinforced concrete is a suitable material for such ledges and  platforms.  (f) The roof of the godown should overhang this platform and  ledge to prevent the accumulation of rain water thereon.  (g) No steps or similar means of facilitating ingress should be  allowed. In practice the inconvenience caused by the absence of such  steps will be found inconsiderable. For unloading sacks of grain  designed for such a store the bullock cart can be pushed close to the  platform, which is also at a convenient height to facilitate the deposit  thereon of sacks from a coolie's back.  (h) Rats will, from time to time, be introduced into such a store,  but they will be compelled to leave in search of water and should find  their return extremely difficult.  (i) In villages and places where the cost of such pucca buildings  is prohibitive relatively rat-free stores can be made of almost any  material, provided the roof is water-tight, by raising the floor on  uprights surmounted by rat guards similar in design to those commonly  employed on ships' cables. These uprights should be at least three feet  high and would support the beams on which the floor rests. The floor  might be made of wood. The space underneath the floor can be left  open and kept free from weeds and rank growth with but little trouble.  The above suggestions should be sufficient to enable 'rat-free'  godowns, suitable for any requirements, to be designed. Provided  the principles on which the suggestions are made be borne in mind,  suggestions which are all based on an appreciation of the habits of rats,  these godowns will be so constructed and kept as to ensure a remarkably  decreased rat population.  Other means of diminishing the risk of the conveyance of plague-  infection through the medium of grain and similar merchandise will  suggest themselves. The diminution of the facilities, at present  existing, for rats to enter goods wagons and carts; the breaking of  bulk of consignments of grain; the erection of pucca platforms on which  grain received loose can be bagged; these and similar measures all  require attention in certain cases. Enough has been said to draw  attention to the importance of the grain trade in the spread of plague  and the above suggestions and principles should suffice to indicate how  the dangers can be minimized, if not entirely averted.  2. Other means of conveying plague-infection.-Grain and similar  merchandise has been considered at length to emphasise their import-  ance, but it is not contended that they afford the only means of
?21  conveying plague-infection. Clothing and bedding from plague-  infected houses may contain infected rat-fleas: the chance, however, of  such finding a susceptible rat as a host, without which they cannot give  rise to an epidemic, is sufficiently remote to explain the fact that  merchandise is a more potent source of plague-infection.  When articles from a plague-infected source are of such a nature  as to render them likely to harbour fleas they can be rendered innocuous  by exposure to the direct rays of the sun. The ground used for the  purpose should be so chosen that the sun is able to shine on it for the  whole of each day. It should be flat, devoid of grass, stones, or any-  thing which might afford shelter to fleas. Preferably it should be  covered with a smooth layer of fine sand three inches deep. The surface  temperature of the sand should be at least 120 F. to ensure the  destruction of all fleas. One hour's exposure in such conditions is  sufficient for the purposes of disinfection. Thick coats and rezais should  be turned once or twice during the process. No articles should be  placed within three feet of the edge of this sand.  III.-RAT DESTRUCTION.*  Careful attention to detail and a knowledge of all that has been  said above regarding the habits and customs of rats are essential to  success in any rat-destruction campaign. Not infrequently rat destruc-  tion as a plague measure has been stigmatized as useless on the results  of attempts at rat-trapping with traps into which entry is difficult, and  from which escape is absurdly easy, or of attempts at poisoning with  substances which possess taste or smell, or both, which is positively  repulsive to rats.  1. Rat poisons.-Poison if intelligently used can accomplish much  by means of a 'poison campaign,' a rapid reduction in the rat  population can be effected. The chief disadvantage of the method is  the nuisance caused by the decomposing bodies of dead rats, a  nuisance which is small however when compared with the dangers of  plague that rat infestation denotes. The selection of a suitable poison  is the most important consideration. Most of the rat poisons on the  market will kill rats if the rats can be induced to swallow sufficient,  but most of them are distasteful or positively repulsive to rats. All  phosphorus poisons possess this disadvantage; their inflammable  nature also makes them objectionable. The most satisfactory of all  poisons, and happily the cheapest, is barium carbonate. Barium  carbonate  occurs in nature, unfortunately not in any quantity in  India, and is a heavy white tasteless inodourless powder that is almost  insoluble in water. As a rat poison it is certain in its action and  safe to handle. When mixed with flour and water it in no way makes  the mixture less palatable to rats who seem quite unable to detect its  * All that is new in the following paragraphs, relating to the use of poison baits, is  the outcome of numerous well-designed and carefully controlled experiments that have  been carried out in Poona by Dr. Chitre in the course of an inquiry that was planned  and commenced by Major J. C. G. Kunhardt, I.M.S., under the auspices of the Indian  Research Fund Association.   The carbonate is the only salt of barium that should be used. Barium sulphate  or barytes, the most common barium salt, is valueless as a rat poison.
?22  presence in spite of their singularly acute attributes of taste and smell.  Poison baits are best made as follows:-  One pound of powdered native barium carbonate is mixed  thoroughly in an enamelled basin with three pounds of flour made from  the grain which constitutes the staple food of the locality in which  operations are to be carried out. Sufficient water is added to make  the whole into a fairly firm paste. The resulting mass is sufficient for  some 2,400 baits, each containing three grains of poison, which are  conveniently rolled into pill form. Clean hands and dishes are  necessary to avoid imparting to the baits extraneous taste and odour  which may diminish their attractiveness. Baits should be made fresh  each day as a hard stale bait is rarely eaten by the rat.  Poison baits made in the manner described should be laid in the  evening, four baits on a small piece of paper being placed in situations  readily accessible to rats but not so readily accessible to children  and domestic animals.a Twelve baits, three groups, will be found  generally sufficient for an average sized Indian room. A careful  record of the baits set should be kept, and in the morning all  unconsumed baits should be collected and destroyed, note being made  of the number consumed wholly or in part, and the dead rats found  should be counted and destroyed. This process can be repeated daily  until no more baits are consumed. Another baiting of the village or  town can be carried out some two weeks later. When baiting is  being carried out special efforts should be made to encourage house-  holders to keep all other available food for rats covered up, especially  at night. In laying baits the presence of rat holes, or other indica-  tions of the presence of rats, will afford useful indications as to where  baits can be laid with most chance of success.  If rat poisoning be carried out with careful attention to all these  details, a very notable degree of success will be achieved, with very  appreciable benefit when plague threatens.  .2. Trapping.-To effect a considerable diminution in the rat  population and to keep it at a low level by means of trapping is a rela-  tively expensive measure and one that requires careful and intelligent  supervision if results commensurate with the outlay are to be secured.  It is a measure, however, that usually excites less opposition than does  the use of poison baits, and if trapping operations be conducted with  energy and with due regard to detail they are of very considerable  value as a plague-preventive measure.  Many rat-traps on the market are defective in design and construc-  tion. Traps selected haphazard have very varying degrees of  efficiency, and recent observations have shown that the size of the  trap, the size of the inlet, the strength of the trap, the accuracy with  which the flap fits the frame designed for its reception, are all  important points in determining the efficiency of the trap. Other  things being equal the larger the diameter of the inlet the more  satisfactory the trap. Experiments designed to determine the type of  trap best suited to Indian requirements are now in progress, and it is  hoped that specifications of the best all-round trap will soon be avail-  able.  a Fifteen grains of barium carbonate will frequently kill a cat; 20 grains is fatal to  chickens. Dogs can withstand a dose of 140 grains.
?23  Traps should be oiled only sufficiently often to ensure freedom  from rust. Frequent washing of the traps is not recommended: rats  are not attracted by cleanliness which appears to make them suspi-  cious.  The traps are best baited with a small quantity of the staple food-  grain of the community or of flour made therefrom in the form of  dough. In the hot months, fresh green vegetables, notably cucumber,  make an attractive bait.  To obtain the most economical results each house should be  trapped once each week. One trap for every two rooms of an Indian  house will probably suffice. All traps should be set over night and  collected early in the morning. All rats caught can be drowned or  destroyed in some human manner, their bodies being burnt. In the  presence of plague, when a rapid reduction in the rat population is a  matter of moment, more frequent trapping can be carried out with  advantage. For systematic trapping a number of traps equal to 3  per cent of the human population will be found sufficient. Frequent  inspection of traps, with the rejection for repair of all found defective,  is essential.  IV.-PROTECTION OF A COMMUNITY IN THE PRESENCE OF  RAT PLAGUE.  Inoculation and evacuation of infected dwellings.-When plague has  obtained a foothold in a town, or when plague threatens, it will be  necessary to press the claims of inoculation with plague vaccine. It  is not necessary to urge here the remarkable protection that inocula-  tion affords to the individual; this is now well recognized. In the  midst of an epidemic inoculation remains the most important of all  plague measures.  Evacuation of infected dwellings should also be encouraged provided  always that accommodation for the people rendered temporarily homeless  be provided in the vicinity. Wholesale indiscriminate emigration from  infected to uninfected places is productive of much harm and should be  actively discouraged. The inhabitants of towns and villages do well, in  their own interests, to accord such plague refugees a cold welcome.  As long as things remain as they are, these two measures, inoculation  and controlled evacuation, will be as necessary and as important as they  are at present. It must be remembered, however, that plague in India  is a disease of rats, first and last and that these very valuable measures,  inoculation and evacuation, designed to afford protection to the human  population do not strike at the root of the evil,  F. NORMAN WHITE, M.D., Major, I.M.S.,  Offg. Sanitary Commissioner with the  Government of India.
?24  Memorandum on Plague.  I.-THE DISSEMINATION OF PLAGUE.  1. The methods by which plague is disseminated should by this time  be known to all classes of the population. Briefly, to recapitulate,  plague is a disease of rats which can be communicated to man and to a  few of the lower animals by bites of rat fleas which have fed on plague-  infected rats. If there were no rats or if rats could not readily obtain  food and shelter in human habitations plague would   disappear.  Unfortunately the association between rats and human beings in India  is so intimate that an epidemic of plague among the rats of a commu-  nity is a deadly menace to the lives of the people whose homes they  infest.  2. The rat flea which carries plague cannot travel far on its own legs  and is of course most commonly carried by the rat itself, but, as rats  usually do not wander far from their holes, infection can only be spread  in this way to limited extent. Rats and fleas, however, are frequently  carried for long distances by road, by train or in ships, concealed in  grain bags, baggage, or clothing; and man also occasionally carries  the fleas on his person or clothing. In these ways infection is trans-  ported from district to district and even from province to province.  II.-HISTORY AND PERIODICITY OF PLAGUE.  3. The epidemics of the past twenty-five years have established two  facts about plague which are of vital importance to the proper organiza-  tion of preventive measures. These facts are-  (1) that plague tends to attain its maximum incidence at certain  seasons of the year, and  (2) that it is apt to reappear again and again in the same locali-  ties and even in the same houses.  4. A. Seasonal recrudescence.-The seasonal recrudescence of plague  is due to climatic conditions. Plague among rats is most acute when  rat fleas are most numerous. Rat fleas are most numerous when condi-  tions of atmospheric humidity and temperature are most favourable for  their propagation. Such conditions are more favourable at some seasons  than others and in some years than in other years. For example, the  worst epidemics in Northern India have always been preceded by  abnormally damp weather in the cold season. It may happen that  where the rat population is excessively large, plague may develop even  where conditions are not favourable to the flea, but everywhere the  intensity of plague declines with the advent of hot dry weather.  5. B. Local recrudescence.-The recurrence of plague in the same  locality or in the same building is due to causes which should be  ascertainable. Plague may be epidemic, i.e, cases may occur all the  year round, as they do in South Kanara.    On the other hand, plague  may be not epidemic but imported. Plague may repeatedly reappear  in the same locality because such locality is peculiarly attractive to rats,  or because it is peculiarly exposed to infection from outside. Both these
?25  causes are usually at work, as in the case of a grain godown customarily  used for the storage of grain brought from a place which is perennially  infected.  6. It is unfortunate that no accurate record exists for any town in  this Presidency of the genesis and history of the plague epidemics which  have afflicted it, nor has any special attention been directed to the loca-  lities and buildings in which the outbreaks began, or to the sources from  which infection has been imported. Yet these factors should be well  known to the local authorities, and should be the very foundation of  their preventive policy. Recent inquiries have, for example, elicited the  following facts :-  (a) Salem district is regularly infected from the Mysore State  through Hosur, and once plague appears in that town, it is a matter of  a few weeks or even days for it to make its appearance in Salem town  itself.  (b) In Coimbatore town, Uppilipalaiyam and the weavers' and  chucklers' quarters are well-known foci of infection from which plague  spreads year by year, and the town itself is periodically infected from  Mysore State or from South Kanara.  7. It is obvious that preventive measures which ignore fundamental  factors of the kind can have little practical value. It is a needless  extravagance, for instance, to attempt to destroy the rat population of  a whole town instead of concentrating effort on the localities where the  rat population is most dense, or where grain or cotton from areas  known to be infected is habitually stored. Until exact information is  on record for every town which is subject to epidemics, as to the foci  and channels of plague infection, the preventive staff is groping in the  dark.  8. The first duty of a health staff is therefore that of investigation.  To illustrate the kind of investigation needed, plague mortality figures  for the five towns, Bellary, Coimbatore, Salem, Mangalore   and  Vaniyambadi, have been collected for the twenty years, 1902-21, and  graphs have been prepared (attached to this memorandum), showing  the average monthly mortality in each. The first group demonstrates  the seasonal prevalence which plague exhibits everywhere. The second  group of graphs gives the actual deaths by months for the same period,  and illustrate the irregularity with which epidemics have appeared in  the towns in question. While perfect accuracy cannot be claimed for  the figures on which they are based, the graphs prove the need for  ascertaining why plague should break out in a given year and reappear  at irregular intervals of two, three or more years. There must be  some reasons for these irregularly occurring recrudescences and it is  only by intensive inquiry that the causes can be ascertained.  9. Experience proves that in towns and villages susceptible to  epidemics, infection usually spreads from grain dealers' stores, cloth  bazaars and petty shops which afford special facilities in the form of  food and shelter for the multiplication of rats. The first duty of a local  health authority is therefore to compile an accurate record of the  following points:-  (a) the location, method of construction of granaries for trade as  well as for household purposes, and their relation to the course of  epidemics,  4
?26  (b) the railway premises, their environment and the relation of  plague to such premises, and  (c) other contributory causes such as imperfect drainage, storage  of commodities or garbage conducive to the harbouring or feeding of  rats.  III.-PREVENTIVE MEASURES.  10. Preventive measures may be either A. Seasonal    or    B.  Permanent.  11. A. Seasonal Preventive Measures.-The seasonal measures to be  taken may be classed under four heads-(a) rat destruction, (b) cleanli-  ness, (c) control of movement of (i) goods and (ii) persons, and  (d) inoculation.  12. (a) Rat destruction.-It is doubtful whether rat destruction has  ever been thoroughly carried out in any district. There has been entire  lack of organization, there has been little supervision of ratters, and no  care has been taken to deal systematically with well-known infected  areas. In order to be effective, rat operations must be organized on a  large scale throughout the non-epidemic season and especially a month  or two before the date of probable reappearance. As already pointed  out, it is useless to attempt to destroy the whole of the rats in a town.  Intensive operations must be directed towards keeping down the rat  population in and around these areas known to be foci of plague  recrudescence. Traps and poison baits should be used alternately over  periods of about ten days, care being taken that baits and poison pills  are renewed daily. Energetic and sustained campaigns carried out on  these lines will help to keep the rat population at a low level, and a  reduced rat population, even if it remains -in proximity to man, is  incapable of maintaining a serious epizootic; but if sustained effort be  not secured, and if the campaign be not carried out systematically, the  results will be disappointing and will kindle the popular scepticism as  to the value of rat destruction. It is obvious that, if the best results  are to be obtained, the local health authorities must concentrate atten-  tion on these foci which investigation has shown to be the danger spots.  13. (b) Cleanliness.-Insanitary conditions and overcrowding favour  infestation by rats and are important factors in determining the  spread of plague, whilst persons who live under healthy and sanitary  conditions run but little risk. The habit of using the streets and lanes  as depositories for filth, refuse and garbage affords an abundant food  supply for the rats. Rats will not remain where they can get no food,  and special attention should therefore be paid to the systematic removal  of garbage and rubbish and the general cleanliness of dwellings, house-  drains, gullies, court-yards and their surroundings  The improvement  of conservancy in towns and villages is one of the primary duties of a  local body, and the health staff should take every possible step to ensure  that this factor in the spread of plague does not exist in the area for  which it is responsible.  14. It would be of immense advantage to the public health of India  if the people generally could be brought to realize the importance of a  periodic cleansing of the home. It is not a process that involves  expense, All that is needed is a little trouble. It should be within  the power of local health authorities to educate public opinion in this
?27  matter. The periodic exposure to the sun's rays of the bedding, cloth-  ing and general contents of houses situated in a known plague focus  has been known to prevent outbreaks of plague, and is a measure which  should be carried out regularly. If the houses were completely emptied  once a week for a month or so before the plague season sets in and all  the contents were spread out in the sun for 4-6 hours, not only would  rats be disturbed (nests of rats are often to be found in bundles of  old bedding and rags) but the rat fleas would be killed off.  15. (c) Control of movement-(i) Goods.-By far the most important  factor in the dissemination of rat infection is the grain trade. It would  hardly be an exaggeration to say that if once the movements and storage  of grain could be effectively controlled the danger of plague infection  would be almost negligible. In some districts the cotton trade, and  in others the jaggery trade, are also a source of danger, but it is the  movements of grain that require the closest attention of the preventive  staff.  16. The movements of grain both by rail and by road are more or  less seasonal and the sources from which a particular town ordinarily  derives its grain can generally be ascertained by local inquiry. It is  incumbent on the local health authorities to study closely the grain  movements on the area within their charge, and place on record the  areas from which and to which grain is ordinarily transported in each  month of the year. It should be possible, once the main mechanism of  the local grain trade is ascertained, to induce merchants and the railway  authorities to inform the preventive staff of any deviations from the  normal which may lead to the introduction of infection into, or its  dissemination within, the area in which they are operating.  17. It is not often possible or even desirable to prohibit the move-  ment of goods from an infected area. It should, however, be possible to  arrange for the examination of consignments from areas known to be  infected either before delivering to the consignee or in transport or at  the place of export before despatch. The last alternative is undoubtedly  the safest and best. But it cannot be provided for except by close  co-operation between the authorities of (a) the place of export, (b) the  place of import and (c) the railways.  18. Railways.-There is no doubt that the part played by rail-  borne grain in the spread of plague infection has received nothing like  the attention it demands.  19. Plague Regulations Nos. 7 and 8 lay down the measures which  railways can be compelled to carry out. The railway authorities at the  instance of the Government have in certain cases attempted to destroy  rats at infected stations, and have undertaken other preventive measures  such as inoculation, evacuation of infected houses and the erection of  temporary huts for the accommodation of those evacuated from the  infected area. But there is no record of any attempt at co-operation on  the part of either local bodies or railways. Preventive measures are  usually carried out by each spasmodically without any mutual consulta-  tion. As a consequence, the results obtained have been incommensurate  with the expenditure of money and energy involved, and have led to the  general belief that anti-plague measures are valueless. The failure of  these authorities to act in concert is a serious administrative defect. The  railway authorities in the Presidency have all agreed to do everything
?28  in their power to assist, and it is incumbent on all local health authori-  ties to keep the local railway officers in touch with the measures they  intend to take, and to invite their co-operation in so far as railway  colonies and station premises are concerned. As soon as the local health  authorities are ready with their plans of campaign, they should inform  the railway authorities of the steps they propose to take. Railway goods  yards and stores are frequently known foci for plague, and whenever a  local board or municipality carries out preventive measures in the  vicinity, identical measures should be conducted simultaneously in the  railway yards.  20. (ii) Persons.-Control of the movements of persons is of less  importance than that of grain. The passport system has been dis-  credited. The segregation of the sick is not essential. The disinfection  of clothes and baggage is not generally practicable. In the case of towns  it is well nigh impossible to give effect to the provisions of Plague  Regulation No. 10.  21. Village boycott.-In the case of the ordinary village, there is no  real reason why the headman should not compel persons suspected of  coming from an infected place to have his clothes and personal effects  sun-dried or, in the alternative, to remain outside for a couple of days.  Nor should he have difficulty in preventing grain consignments from  getting into his village until both grain and bags have been disinfected  by the sun. In some parts of the Presidency this system of 'village  boycott' has been adopted with success by the villagers on their own  initiative. But there is reason to believe that villagers are not generally  aware of the drastic powers with which their headmen are invested.  22. It is regrettable that in the past this very useful measure has  been almost entirely neglected, and there seems to be great need for  spreading information regarding this measure among the people of the  Presidency. Where it has been adopted, it has proved of the greatest  value, and all district health authorities should see that the people in their  districts are made fully aware of their powers in this respect and of the  value of these powers.  23. Evacuation may also be encouraged, but it rests with local bodies  to provide accommodation for those who have been rendered homeless.  Evacuation should be carefully controlled by the health staff who should  see that temporary huts are erected on a convenient and suitable site  and that they are occupied only after the bedding, clothing and other  personal effects from the evacuated houses have been well exposed to the  sun's rays. Emigration from infected to uninfected places is commonly  responsible for the spread of plague, and local bodies and their health  staffs should endeavour to control any such movement, and should en-  courage villagers and townsfolk to carry out the method of village  boycott already described. Plague refugees should at all times be  accorded a very cold welcome. The close supervision of all such move-  ments is, in any case, a very important duty devolving on district  health staffs, and the duty is not rendered any easier when the people  carry out these migrations, as they usually do, surreptitiously and during  the hours of darkness.  24. (d) Inoculation.-Once plague has occurred or threatens to break  out, no time should be lost in conducting an inoculation campaign. The  protection that inoculation affords need not be enlarged upon here, but
?29  the general population are either entirely ignorant of its value or look  on it with disfavour. District health staffs will find ample scope for  their energy and activity in carrying on propaganda work on the subject  of plague inoculation. It should be brought to the daily notice of the  people by ocular demonstration on the streets, if necessary. It is of little  use asking the ordinary person to go to the hospital if he wishes to be  inoculated. He will listen, and then find he has neither time nor incli-  nation to go so far. Opportunities to be inoculated must be brought to  the individual at a time suitable to him, and this means a considerable  concentration of staff and effort if any success is to be attained. That  this method can bear fruit was demonstrated by the campaign carried  out in Madura town in 1921 by Colonel Harley and his assistants.  In the course of eighteen weeks, they were able to perform 79,745  inoculations out of a total population of 123,894. Special inoculation  campaigns should be started a month or more before the plague season  begins, and effort should be concentrated on the population resident in  areas which are liable to infection or which have been infected in previous  years.  25. B. Permanent    Preventive  Measures:-Permanent    preventive  measures may be classed under five heads-(a) control over the location  of trades and industries which attract rats, (b) construction of rat-proof  and rat-free granaries, etc., (c) conservancy, especially drainage, sullage  and disposal of rubbish and filth, (d) better housing and (e) protection of  railway premises.  26. (a) Location of trades and industries.-There is reason to believe  that local bodies do not appreciate the responsibilities they undertake in  the issue of licences. They are apt to regard licences merely as a sort  of revenue which entail no obligations. This theory is quite wrong.  The grant of a licence under section 249 of the District Municipalities  Act, 1920, or 193 of the Local Boards Act, 1920, is intended to ensure  that certain classes of trades and industries which are dangerous to the  public safety or public health are brought under the control of a respons-  ible authority. In Schedule V of the District Municipalities Act and  Schedule VII of the Local Boards Act, these trades and industries are  specified, and the following items demand the particular attention of  the local health authorities who are responsible for rendering the areas  within their charge immune from plague-  (a) Washing soiled clothes and keeping soiled clothes for the  purposes of washing them, and washed clothes;  (b) boiling paddy or camphor;  (c) melting tallow or sulphur;  (d) storing or otherwise dealing with manure, offal, blood, bones,  rags, hides, fish, horns or skins;  (e) washing or drying wool or hair;  (f) making fish-oil;  (g) making soap, dyeing, boiling or pressing oil, making bricks,  tiles, pottery or lime;  (h) manufacturing or distilling sago; manufacturing artificial  manure;  (j) keeping a public halting place, choultry or other rest-house  for travellers, a hotel restaurant, eating house, coffee house, etc.;  (l) preparing flour or articles made of flour for human consump-  tion or sweetmeats;  5
?30  (o) selling grain or jaggery wholesale or storing grain or jaggery  for the wholesale trade;  (p) manufacturing jaggery or sugar-candy.  27. It is within the power of municipal chairman to prohibit any of  these manufactures or trades within the limits of his municipality, or  within three miles of such limits, except under licence. Similar powers  are given in the Local Boards Act to presidents of taluk boards. It is  open to the chairman, or taluk board president as the case may be, to  impose such conditions as the interest of public health may demand, and  to refuse altogether to grant licences for the location of such trades and  manufactures in areas where they are a menace to the public welfare.  It is unnecessary to point out that the location of such trades or manu-  factures in a densely populated area is likely to encourage the increase  of the rat population and to endanger the residential quarters in the  vicinity to an outbreak of plague.  28. Grain bazaars and wholesale grain godowns are usually situated  in the most densely populated areas of the towns and villages. From  the point of view of trade, this may be most convenient, but, as regards  prevention of plague, it is perhaps the worst possible arrangement which  could be imagined. Municipal councils and local bodies should make it  their policy to restrict the building of wholesale grain stores to specified  areas, which are not densely populated and which are not likely to  become so. The sites for these should be conveniently situated for  railway and road traffic and for traders.  29. A similar policy is needed in regard to other trades specified in  Schedule V of the District Municipalities Act which are dangerous to  the public health by reason of the stimulus they afford to rat-breeding.  30. (b) Rat-proofing.-In granting licences municipal chairmen and  taluk board presidents are empowered to insist on what conditions they  think fit. They may insist that no grain for wholesale trade is stored  anywhere within their jurisdiction in a godown which is not rat-free.  It is for them to decide whether or not they will avail themselves of the  provisions of the law which enable them to safeguard the population  within their jurisdiction. Local bodies may also undertake the con-  struction of bazaars and godowns of their own, and this is of special  importance in areas where foci of infection are known to exist. The  construction of suitable rat-proof godowns as well as of retail bazaars  should prove a remunerative investment for local bodies provided they  maintain, by an effective use of their licensing powers, control over the  location of private godowns. The grant of conditional licences for grain  bazaars and for godowns used for the storage of grain in localities  which are densely populated should enable the local authorities, by  adding to and stiffening the conditions year by year, to effect a steady  improvement in these 'plague spots' without undue irritation. In a  few years the traders would probably find it more convenient to rent  the godowns-built by the local body, and they should be encouraged to  do so in every possible way. In any case storage of grain in densely  populated areas should not be permitted except in rat-proof godowns,  and wholesale grain stores should under no circumstances be utilized  for purposes of human habitation. Here again what applies to grana-  ries applies with equal force to other trades and industries specified in  Schedule V of the District Municipalities Act.
?31  31. The goodwill of grain merchants could be easily won if they  could be brought to realize the enormous pecuniary loss they suffer  by the depredations of rats. A single rat devours a not inconsiderable  quantity of grain in a year, and if this amount be expressed in terms  of money, they would appreciate the fact that the storage of grain in a  building which is not rat-proof is not sound business. In this connexion  the following facts are of interest.  32. The opinions expressed by Boelter in his book The Rat Problem  have been arrived at after a series of experiments and are more or less  universally approved. He states that (a) there are at least as many rats  as there are human beings, and (b) each rat causes each day a loss by  the destruction of food and material of at least one farthing. Conditions  for the breeding of rats being more favourable in India than in Great  Britain, the application of the first statement to India errs only on the  side of leniency. The pre-war prices of articles in Britain, on which  the estimate of one farthing is based, will correspond in most cases with  the current post-war prices in India, and the above estimate may there-  fore be applied also to India without much hesitation. On the data  furnished by Boelter, every head of population in India incurs an econo-  mical loss of Rs. 3-12-0 per annum on account of the damage caused by  rats. In the above calculation, the exchange value of a rupee has been  taken as two shillings.  33. Major Norman White, in his Memorandum on Plague issued  with G.O. No. 256 P., dated 4th May 1918, states that even at a very  low estimate there are at least twice as many rats in India as there are  human beings and that each rat consumes upwards of three-fourths of an  ounce of grain each day, and that, assuming the price of the grain pre-  ferred by the rats at ten seers per rupee, a loss of Rs. 1-11-0 is caused  each head of the population by the consumption of grain by the rats.  besides damage to property of other kinds. Considering the present  prices of food-grains, Major Norman White's figures require revi-  sion. As the staple food-grain of the Madras Presidency, viz., rice,  sells at only about six seers per rupee, the loss caused per head of popu-  lation by the rat by destruction of grain alone would come to about  Rs. 2-13-0; and at least another 50 per cent may be added as the value  of other property damaged by the rat, making a total loss of Rs. 4-3  per head of the population in a year.  With reference to the above, it should be noted that Major Norman  White considers that there are twice as many rats as human beings;  while according to Boelter, the rat population approximates the human  population in its numbers.  34. In Resolution No. 637 of the Government of India, Department  of Education, issued with G.O. No. 160 P., dated 3rd November 1920,  after a prefatory remark that it would be hazardous to make any com-  putation of the damage caused by rats in India, it is stated that in  British India alone the number of black rats (exclusive of other species)  is about 375 millions-about 1.6 rats for every head of the human  population, and that the quantity of grain consumed by them in a year  would be one million tons, equivalent in value to about 16 crores of  rupees (one ton of grain costing on the average Rs. 160). This loss is  with reference to the grain consumed by black rats alone; a similar loss  caused by other rats and the damage to property being excluded, It is  6
?32  admitted in the resolution that the figure mentioned therein is very  conservative as compared with the estimate based on far more reliable  data for England (i.e., Boelter's statistics).  35. The evidence therefore proves fairly conclusively that the econo-  mic loss caused annually by rats in India amounts to the colossal sum  of Rs. 4 per head of the population, or something over Rs. 16 crores for  the Presidency of Madras.  36. Precautionary measures must, however, remain defective if  attention is not also directed to the methods of storing grain in private  houses. In houses where cattle are kept, rats find congenial conditions,  and if the floors are of mud, it is practically impossible to keep them  out. In many parts of the Presidency the type of grain-bin used for  the storage of grain for household purposes is also a direct attraction to  rats, and it must be left to local district health committees to carry out  experiments with improved types in order to minimize the danger which  these private stores now constitute. Different communities and different  districts use different types of bin and different methods of storage, and  local officers are best able to advise as to possible improvements. It  would be impossible to devise a type-design suitable for use throughout  the Presidency. Such a type might suit some districts, it would  certainly be quite unsuitable for other areas. All construction of grain  stores by private individuals should be carried out in accordance with  approved types and should be inspected before licences are granted.  The conversion of existing granaries into rat-proof or rat-free stores should  also be carried out on lines approved by the local health authorities.  37. (c) Conservancy.-The importance of improved conservancy has  already been remarked upon, and there seems little doubt that in order  to keep streets and lanes in better condition, a more progressive policy  on the part of municipal and other local bodies in the construction of  properly designed open and closed drains is urgently called for. Local  knowledge is the best guide to the selection of those areas which should  receive early attention, but generally speaking, the overcrowded bazaars  and the areas which are known to be foci for the spread of plague should  be first selected. The local or municipal council, with the advice of the  municipal or district health officer, should draw up a preliminary pro-  gramme and proceed with the necessary construction as funds permit.  By carrying out the programme in small sections, financial resources  will not be unduly strained, steady improvement will be effected, and  the benefits accruing will give the incentive to extend preliminary and  partial schemes into complete drainage systems.  38. The disposal of filth and rubbish is a problem that has not hither-  to been sufficiently studied. The matter is engaging the attention of a  special committee appointed by Government to investigate it. It is  impossible at the present stage to lay down any definite line of action  which local health authorities should take except that the relation bet-  ween filth and rubbish dumping grounds and the rat population should  be the subject of careful observation. It should also be practicable during  the dry season to render the less incumbustible forms of rubbish innocu-  ous by burning it.  39. (d) Better Housing.-The housing problem has hardly yet been  faced by local bodies in this Presidency, though great advances have been
?33  made in this matter in other parts of India, e.g., in Calcutta and Bom-  bay. Very large sums of money have been advanced during the past  seventeen years to municipal councils for town extension, but very little  work of permanent value has been achieved. The comparative healthi-  ness of new extensions is appreciated by those that reside in them and  particularly the relative immunity from plague. Local health authori-  ties should give special attention to this aspect of preventive work. In  the Town-Planning Act, 1920, local bodies are equipped with a potent  weapon against plague. It remains to be seen whether they will use it  or not. All schemes for town-planning and town improvement in places  where plague is rife should be drawn up with a view to eliminate the  risk of plague.  40. (e) Railway Premises.-Of all preventive measures, perhaps the  most urgently needed is the protection from infection of railway goods-  sheds, godowns and stores. Paripassu with the erection or improve-  ment of grain godowns in municipal and local areas the railway autho-  rities should be asked to carry out similar improvements in their premi-  ses. This will in many cases be very difficult, as railway yards are  open day and night, and work goes on, especially in the Jarger centres,  all through the twenty-four hours. Where godowns do exist however,  they should be made both rat-proof and rat-free, and if pressure is  brought to bear, it is probable that the necessary conversion will in time  be effected. Here as in deratisation campaigns close co-operation is  called for. If the local body shows itself to be in earnest in the matter,  the railways will be compelled to follow suit.  IV.-CO-ORDINATION.  41. It is clear from what has been said in the preceding paragraphs  that, to be effective, preventive effort must be intelligently directed to  the sources of infection. It is, for example, as futile to attempt rat  destruction in every hole or corner of a town as to attempt it simulta-  neously throughout the Presidency. Unless the foci and channels of  infection are discovered intelligent preventive work cannot begin.  42. (I) Investigation.-Investigation is therefore, as already pointed  out, the first obligation on every local health authority. Local foci are  locally ascertainable but the sources of infection cannot be verified with-  out a knowledge of facts and data outside the local area. An infected  town is a menace to the villages for miles around. But this is not all.  An outbreak of plague in one district may endanger not only the adja-  cent district but also districts and cities hundreds of miles away, the  people of which know nothing of the risk they run. Unless the sources  of infection and the channels along which they are likely to travel are  known the people are helpless and their preventive staff can do nothing  It is the duty of those responsible for the public health, the members  and executive officers of local bodies, to know when, whence and why,  infection has come and may reappear. Financial stringency is no  excuse for apathy in this matter. Investigation of the kind required  costs nothing but the expenditure of a little trouble, time and thought.  It is to be hoped that in future no local body will merit the reproach of  indifference.  43. (2) Vigilance.-Standing Order No. 8 of the Plague Standing  Orders lays down that ' it is the duty of heads of villages and all other
?34  local authorities to watch the residence of persons arriving from infected  areas and to report at once any mortality of rats or any human case of  plague'. Too often in the past no report has been made until an out-  break has made such progress that concealment was no longer possible.  To prevent similar occurrences in the future, all members of the local  bodies and of their health staffs must recognize it as one of their most  important duties to report to the proper authority all cases of infection  disease immediately they come to their notice, and to be constantly on  the alert for an outbreak of plague, especially at the season when such  outbreaks are likely to occur. The local health authority will then be  in a position to attack the sources of infection with a concentrated  health staff before the outbreak gets beyond control. A delay of twenty-  four hours may be a matter of life and death to hundreds of people  whose safety is committed to their charge. It is a matter in which  every member of the community can help.  44. (3) Propaganda.-The efforts of a preventive staff, however, will  be neutralized if they are thwarted by uninformed and unenlightened  public opinion. It is incumbent on the members and staff of local  bodies to remove this obstacle to the public well-being. Money is not  needed for the purpose. It is merely a matter of local exertion. In  particular through the medium of public lectures, ward and firka com-  mittees, schools, social, welfare associations, and any other organisation  that may exist, popular attention should be drawn (a) to the foci of  infection and the channels by which it is conveyed, (b) to the danger of  rats and grain transport, and the value of rendering houses, shops and  godowns rat-free, (c) to the dangers of dirt and garbage, and the need  for periodical cleaning up of all buildings and their surroundings, and  to the advantages of healthy housing, (d) to the powers given to villagers  under Regulation No. 10 to protect themselves by boycotting strangers  and (e) to the protection afforded by inoculation especially to the residents  of localities susceptible to epidemics.  45. The importance of co-ordination in these matters is plain. No  town or taluk or even district can be regarded as a self-contained unit of  administration. In the absence of any accurate history of previous out-  breaks of their genesis and ramification it is impossible for a Collector  to devote to plague prevention the attention it deserves, and responsibi-  lity must devolve more and more on local bodies. The appointment of  district health officers, and the creation of a permanent health staff for  each district under the control of the president, district board, should  largely solve the problem of co-ordination. A district health board, by  pooling resources and economizing staff, should be able to effect close  co-operation between the local bodies of a district, and, if need be, bet-  ween the local bodies of adjoining districts, and to concentrate  preventive effort when and where concentration is required.  46. Even in districts and municipalities not equipped with health  officers, the efforts of the preventive staff can be reinforced by the  formation of health committees of district, taluk and union boards, and  in municipalities by ward committees which can help in investigation  and do something towards educating public opinion.  47. Where local hospitals and dispensaries exist, the medical officers  in charge must assist the district health committees in their preventive  campaigns, especially in rat destruction, evacuation and inoculation.
?35  Local medical officers, especially those who have definite itineraries,  should take an active part both in the propaganda campaign and in  carrying out inoculation. Medical officers should also be able to supple-  ment their ordinary duty of medical relief by devoting some of their  spare time to the public health and preventive side of medicine. The  relationship between the two branches is inseparable and health officers  and medical officers must work together in closest concert.  A. J. H. RUSSELL, Major, I.M.S.,  Director of Public Health, Madras.  APPENDIX B.  [See Standing Order 11.]  Plague Report to be submitted to the Collector.  [To be submitted within 24 hours of discovery of a plague case.]  Hamlet-  Village-  Number in taluk map-  Population-  1. Name, age and caste of the patient.  2. (a) Date of commencement of illness,  (b) Date of death.  3. (a) Were there any plague cases or deaths by fever in the house  or family within the last 30 days; if so, when ?  (b) Did the patient visit any plague-infected locality; if so,  when ?  (c) Did any person from an infected area reside in his house;  if so, when ? Did he bring goods susceptible to infection  with him ?  (d) If answers to questions (a) to (c) are in the negative, to what  source can the infection be traced ?  4. (a) Date and hour at which inspector heard of the case and how  information was obtained; if from any official, state name  and designation.  (b) Date and hour at which inspector went to the village.  (c) Note date and hour at which first intimation of attack was  sent to-  (i) Nearest medical officer.  (ii) Plague officer.  (d) Explanation of delay between-  (i) Date of attack and date of despatch by the local autho-  rity of first intimation to superior officers;  (ii) Date of first intimation and date of despatch of detailed  report.  5. Was the case reported by the local authority ?  (a) (i) If not, what is his explanation ?  (ii) Did he keep the fever register properly, and on what date  was the case entered in it ?
?36 (b) (i) Who is the house-owner, or chief male member of the family ? (ii) Did he give information as required by Plague Regula- tion 9 and, if not, what explanation is forthcoming as to why he should not be prosecuted ? (c) Name and designation of the person who first reported the case and the date on which he did so. 6. (a) When did the inspector last visit the village ? (b) How many deaths were there in the village- (i) since the inspector's last visit ; and (ii) since the commencement of the preceding month ? (iii) How many of the deaths were registered as due to fever and to causes that you consider might be confused with suspicious cases of plague ? 7. Was the patient examined- (a) by any medical officer, and by whom and when ? What symptoms of plague were noticed ? (c) Brief history as given by medical officer or as ascertained be medical officer. 8. What steps were taken for the treatment and care of the patient ? 9. Are rats plague-infected ? 10. General remarks. APPENDIX C. [See Standing Order 22.] List of officers on plague duty in the district on the 1st March/ September 19 . Head of service. Number. Duties of office. Pay. Allowance. Date of commencement of appointment. Number and date of sanction. Date of expiry of sanction. Remarks. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Section I-Provincial. Section II-Local Section III-Municipal.
?37 APPENDIX D. [See Standing Order 24.] Salaries of officers temporarily entertained for plague duty. Designation. Salary. Remarks. A. Retired military assistant sur- geons. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement. The officers should be required to  produce certificates of physical fitness, and their appointments should, in the first instance, be made for periods not exceed- ing six months. B. Temporary civil assistant sur- geons. Pay Rs. 200 a month with travelling allowance to and from the place to which they are appointed. .... c. Private sub- assistant sur- geons. Pay assigned to the corrr- eponding grades of sub- assistant surgeons in Government service. .... D. Retired sub- assistant sur- geons. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement (in addition to their pension). .... E. Plague inspectors [As in Appendix E.] .... F. Other temporary subordinates including menial servants. Such rates as would be suffi- cient to induce persons to take up the appointments. Menial servants are not eligible for any allowances, and should be conveyed from place to place at the cost of Government. APPENDIX E. [See Standing Order 24.] Pay and Allowances of Plague Inspectors. Plague inspectors will be- I. Qualified sanitary inspectors ; or II. Sub-assistant surgeons. Plague inspectors for range work should primarily "be recruited from this class. A list of men available for duty will "be kept by the Director of Public Health by whom they will be posted for plague work on the requisition of, and in consultation with, Collectors. When once an inspector has been posted, further control on the part of the G.O. No. 1080 L., dated 27th September Director of Public Health will 1905. cease, and he should not be with- drawn or transferred by the Director of Public Health without the consent of the authority employing him.
?38 I.- Sanitary Inspectors. The pay of a qualified sanitary inspector on plague duty will be Rs. 60 per mensem. G.O. No. 232-P.H., dated 8th February 1923. When employed in the Nilgiri Plateau, the Shevaroys, Kodaikanal and Peermade he will be entitled to draw an allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem ; The sanction of the Government should be obtained in each case where it is proposed to appoint a sanitary inspector in local fund or municipal service for plague work to be paid from Provincial funds. II.-Sub-Assistant Surgeons. The pay of a sub-assistant surgeon employed as a plague inspector will be his grade pay. When employed in the Nilgiri Plateau, the Shevaroys, Kodaikanal and Peermade the sub-assistant surgeon will be entitled to draw an allowance of Rs. 20 per mensem. If employed in the Rameswaram Island, Cochin and the Laccadives, be will be entitled to draw an allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem. APPENDIX F. (See Standing Order 5). Counterfoil. Plague Inoculation Certificate.   No. No.   Name Certified that   Father's name. son /daughter of  resident of                                                 street, Street. (town) has been inoculated  by me and that his/her thumb mark was at the Town. time impressed before me.   Date. Space for left   thumb mark. Initials of operator.   Signature and  designation.  Dated
?INDEX.  Page. Regulation. Standing Order. A ACT- Epidemic Diseases - 1 ... ... Power delegated to Local Government under the Epidemic Diseases -  1 ... ... ADMINISTRATION - Administrative staff  4-5 ... 1 ALLOWANCES - Plague 12 ... 23-24 Statement showing the rates of - admissi- ble to officers on plague duty  37 ... Appx. D Statement showing the - admissible to plague inspectors 37-38 ... Appx. E Subsistence allowance to inoculated persons. 6 ... 5 APPEAL - Right of - of the plague staff against punishments inflicted on them 11 ... 19 B BARIUM CARBONATE 21 ... Appx. A BUDGET - Estimates of plague expenditure 13 ... 25 Transfer of funds  13 ... 26 BUILDINGS - Acquisition of - for plague purposes  3 5 ... Destruction of sheds 3 6 ... C CANTONMENTS - Responsibility for carrying out plague measures in -  4-5 ... 1 CARBONATE - BARIUM - 21 .. Appx. A CHARGES - Classification of plague -  13-14 ... 28 Distribution of plague -  11-12 ... 20 Power of Collector to incur expenditure on plague  12  21 Chitre, Dr. - 21 .. Appx. A CIRCLES - Plague Inspectors' -  9 .. 10 CLOTHES - Sun-disinfection of clothing 4, 6, 21 10 3, Appx. A COMMUNICATION - Communication of information regarding plague cases in a district to adjoining districts in this Presidency 10-11 ... 15 Inter-communication of plague news in this Presidency and in the adjoining territories 11 .. 15 COMPENSATION Award of - for loss of property 4, 12 12 21 CONTRIBUTION - Government - to private plague hospitals 7-8 .. 7 CORRESPONDENCE - Plague 14 ... 29-30
?ii INDEX  Page. Regulation. Standing Order. D DEFINITION - Definition of certain terms occurring in the Regulations  2 1 ... DELEGATION - Power delegated to Local Government under the Epidemic Diseases Act 1 ... ....  DISINFECTION - Sun - of clothing  4, 6, 21 10 3, Appx. A Sun - of grain.  3, 4, 5, 19 8, 10 3, Appx. A E EPIDEMIC - - Diseases Act  1  ... Power delegated to Local Government under the - Diseases Act  1 ... ... ESTABLISHMENTS - Administrative staff and control of plague Measures 4-5 ... 1 Collector's power to punish Government medical subordinates on plague duty 11 . . 16 Duty of plague inspectors and local officers  9 . . 11 Employment of plague - . . . . 9  10 Half-yearly lists of plague -  12 . . 22 Plague - that are entitled to and bound to give one month's notice  4 11  Power of Collectors to punish plague -  11 ... 16, 18 and 19 Power of plague officer to punish plague -  11 ... 18 Retention of plague -  12  22 ESTIMATES - Plague 13 ... 25 EVACUATION - Instructions on -  7,23 ... 6, Appx. A - of infected areas 3 4 ... F FUNDS - Transfer of funds  13 . . 26 Fines  13 ... 27 G GOVERNMENT MEDICAL SUBORDINATES ON PLAGUE DUTY - Collector's power to punish - 11 . . 16 Grant of casual or privilege leave to - 11  17 GRAIN - Inspection and sun-disinfection of - in transit 3, 4, 5, 19 8, 10 3, Appx. A Inspection of places used for storage of - . 3, 5 7 2 Quarantine of -  4,6 10 3 Rat free - godowns 5, 18-20 ... 2, Appx. A - trade  3, 5, 6, 19-20 7, 8 2, 3, Appx, A GRANTS-    Government - towards the construction and maintenance of private plague hospitals 7-8 ... 7 H HOSPITALS- Government towards the towards the  construction and maintenance of private plague - 7-8 ... 7 Removal of plague patients to - 7-8 ... 7 Sale-proceeds of private plague - 7-8  ... 7  Supervision of private plague - 7-8 ... 7 Cost of plague  7-8, 11-12 ... 7, 20 HOUSE-HOLDERS - Duty of - to report plague cases 4, 8 9 8
?iii  INDEX   Page. Regulation. Standing Order. I INCAPACITATED PERSONS - Allowances to -  5 ... 5 INFECTED AREAS - Definition of -  2 1(a) ... Evacuation of - 3, 7 4 6 Notification of areas to be infected with Plague 2, 10 2 13 INOCULATION - Instructions on -  6, 23 . . 5, Appx. A Subsistence allowance to inoculated persons. 6 .. 5 INSPECTION - Inspection of grain and the places used for its storage . . 3, 4, 5, 19 7, 8, 10 2, 3, Appx. A K KUNHARDT - Major, J. C. G. -  21 ... Appx. A L LANDS - Acquisition of - for plague purpose 3 5 ... LEAVE - Casual or privilege - to Government medi- cal subordinates on plague duty  11 ... 17 LOCAL AUTHORITY - Definition of -  2 1(b) ... Duty of -  8, 9 ... 8, 9 M MARKETS - Closure of - 2, 3 3 ... MEASURES - General control of plague - 4-5 ... 1 General preventive -  6-7, 8-9, 15-23 ... 2-6, S-9 Appx. A Measures to be taken by local officers on the occurrence of a case of plague 8-9 ... 8, 9 Measures to be taken by plague inspectors  9 .. 11 MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS- Duty of - to report plague cases 4, 8 9 8 MILITARY - Persons of all ranks in the - service should obey the Plague Regulations  4 12 (2) ... N NOTIFICATION - - of infected areas  2, 10 2 13 NORMAN WHITE - Major -'s Memorandum on plague mea- sures 15-23 ... Appx. A O OFFICERS - Definition of plague officer  2 1 (c) ... Grant of allowances to - on plague duty  12, 13, 37 ... 23-24 Appendices D and E OFFICERS - HALF-YEARLY LIST OF - Officers on plague duty  12, 36 ... 22 Appx. C 2
?iV INDEX  Page. Regulation. Standing Order. P PATIENTS - Removal of plague - to hospitals 7 ... 7 PLAGUE- Theory in regard to the outbreak and spread of plague and preventive measures  15-23 ... Appx. A PLAGUE CASES - Advantages of early discovery of plague cases  8 ... 8 Communication of plague news  8, 9,10,11 ... 8, 9, 12, 13, 15 Duty of all householders and medical practitioners to report - 4,8 9 8 PLAQUE INSPECTORS - Appointment of -  9 .. 10 Allowances to - 13,37 ... 24 & Appx. E Duties of -  9 ... 11 Punishment of -  11 ... 18, 19 POLICE- Employment of - for plague duty  7  .. 6 Extraordinary pension to - on plague duty. 12 .. 23 PLAGUE CIRCLES - Establishment to he employed in - 9 . . 10 Formation and size of - 9 ... 10 PROPERTY- Custody of the - of evicted persons  7 , . 6 Payment for damage or loss of -  4, 12 12 21 PUBLIC- Duty of householders and medical practitioners to report plague cases 4,8 9 8 Duty of the public to report deaths among rate. 4,8 9 8 PUNISHMENT - Power of Collectors to punish Government medical subordinates on plague duty 11 ...  16 Power of Collectors to punish plague Establishments 11 ... 18, 19 Power of plague officers to punish plague establishments 11 ... 18 Q Quarantine of travellers  4, 5-6 10 3 R RAILWAY - Inspection of grain carried by rail 3 8 , , Inspection of - goods sheds  3 7 . . RATS - Elimination and destruction, of rats  5,6, 15-23 . . 2, 4 , Appx. A Rat-fleas  5, 15-21 , , 3, Appx. A Traps 21-23 ... Appx. A Report regarding unusual mortality among rats 4, 8 9 8 RECORDS - Destruction of plague -  14 .. 30 REPORTS AND RETURNS- Communication of plague news  8,9,10, 11 .. 8,9, 12, 13,14,15 Detailed report of plague cases to be sent to the Collector by the plague inspector  9 , . 11 Form of plague report from subordinate officers to Collectors  35 . . Appx. B Half -yearly lists of plague establishments  36 .. Appx. C Obligation to report rat deaths 4,11 9 8
?INDEX V  Page. Regulation Standing Order. REPORTS AND RETURNS - cont. Plague estimates 13 ... 25 Report of plague cases to be sent by Collec- tors to Government and the Sanitary Commissioner 9,10 ... 12, 13 Report regarding cases of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness 4, 8 9 8 Report to be sent by the Collector to the Sanitary Commissioner on the occurrence of the first case of plague  9 ... 12 Monthly report on plague -  10 ... 14 - by local authorities 8, 9 . 8, 9 S SEGREGATION- Of plague patients 7 ... 7 SHEDS - Destruction of - 3 6 ... STAFF - Administrative 4, 6 ... 1 T TRAPS 22-23 ... Appx. A TRAVELLERS - Quarantine of - 4, 5-6 10 3
