THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND STANDING ORDERS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN (Revised up to 31st January 1915.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 8 annas.] 1915. [8 pence.]
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND STANDING ORDERS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN (Revised up to 31st January 1915.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1915.
?CONTENTS.  PAGE I. The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 1 II. Notification of the Government of India, Home Department (Sanitary-Plague) No. 2256, dated 22nd December 1906, delegating to Local Governments powers under the Epidemic Diseases Act 2 III. Plague regulations in force outside the Presidency town 3 APPENDICES TO THE PLAGUE REGULATIONS.  Appendix A.-Plague notification 13 ,, B.-Ex-officio exemption certificate 14  C.-General exemption certificate 15  D.-Detention certificate 15 ,, E.-Plague inoculation certificate 16 IV. Standing Orders-  Part I.-General 17  II -Instructions to be observed in areas under observation 18  III.-Instructions to be observed in infected areas 20  IV.-Appointment, punishment, control and discipline of plague staff 22  V.-Accounts 26  VI.-Reports and returns and correspondence 32 APPENDICES TO THE STANDING ORDERS.  Appendix A.-Notes on certain matters connected with plague-  (1) General remarks 37 (2) Advantages of early discovery of plague 38 (3) Evacuation 39 (4) Inoculation 39 (5) Disinfection 41 (6) Rat-plague and destruction of rats 43 ,, B.-Part I.-Allowances of officers deputed to plague duty 47 ,, II.-Salaries of officers temporarily entertained for plague duty 50 ,, C.-Pay and allowances of plague inspectors 52  D.-List of plague charges 55  E.-Half-yearly statements of plague charges to be submitted by the Accountant-General 59  F.-Plague report to be submitted to the Collector 62 ,, G.-Statement to accompany proposals for placing restrictions on fairs and festivals 65 a
?iv CONTENTS.  PAGE  Appendix H.-Notifications for placing restrictions on fairs and festivals 65 ,, I.-Half-yearly list of officers on plague duty 68  J.-Destruction of plague records 70  K.-Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of Government 71  L.-Distribution of copies of the notification regarding plague-infected areas and notification stations 71 ,, M.-Instructions for forwarding material to the King Institute, Guindy 73
?THE MADRAS  PLAGUE  REGULATIONS  IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. I THE  EPIDEMIC  DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897). An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Short title, extent and commencement. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargarna of Spiti); and (3) It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2. (1) When at any time the Governor-General in Council is satisfied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including com- pensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene- rality of the foregoing provisions,  the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and
?2 XLV of 1860. (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any  Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty 3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. Protection to persons acting under Act. 4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be done under this Act. II NOTIFICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT (SANITARY-PLAGUE), DATED CAL- CUTTA, THE 22ND DECEMBER 1906, No. 2256, DELEGATING TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIONS POWERS CONFERRED BY THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3) of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897), is pleased to direct that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised, to prevent the outbreak of plague or the spread thereof, by local Governments and Administrations with regard to their respective territories as follows:- (a) All the said powers by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governors of Bengal, Eastern Bengal and Assam and Burma; *                       *                        *                             * 2. The notifications of the Government of India in the Home Department, No. 302, dated the 4th February 1897, No. 834, dated the 6th March 1897, No. 1330, dated the 27th May 1898, and No. 4614, dated the 28th November 1898, are hereby cancelled.
?3 III THE following regulations issued in G.O. No. 292 P., dated 15th May 1914, embody the special powers conferred on officers of the Government and other persons and the special obligations laid upon the public in connection with plague: obstruction of the former or breach of the latter render a person liable to prosecution and punishment under the law:- PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. WHEREAS certain parts of the Presidency of Madras are visited by, and other parts are threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, and where- as the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease: In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub- section (1), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and delegated to him under sub-section (3) of the same section by the notification of the Government of India in the Home Depart- ment No. 2256 of the 22nd December 1906, the Governor of Fort St. George in Council is pleased to prescribe, in supersession of all regulations previously issued on the subject, the following temporary regulations to be observed throughout the Presidency except the City of Madras for a period of two years from the 1st day of June 1914:- 1. In these regulations, Definition. (a) "Area under observation" means any area which may be notified by the Governor in Council under these regulations to be under observation on account of its being imminently threatened with plague; (b) "Infected area" means any area which may be notified under these regulations by the Governor in Council or, subject to his control, by the Collector of a district, to be.infected with plague; (c) " Notification station " means any railway station or other station which may be notified as such under these regulations by the Governor in Council; (d) " Inspection station" means any railway station which is notified as such   under these   regulations by   the Governor in  Council for the observation and inspection of passengers; (e) " A local authority " means the local medical officer, or if there is  no  such officer, the village headman, and 1-A
4 includes any other person appointed as a local authority for the purposes of plague by the Collector of the district; (f) " Plague officer " means the district medical and sanitary officer in his district and the revenue divisional officer within his jurisdiction and includes any other person who may be appointed by the Government as plague officer over any definite area; (g) " Assistant plague officer " means in any municipal town the chairman of the municipal council and in other areas the tahsildar or deputy tahsildar each within his own revenue jurisdiction; and includes any other person appointed as such by the Collector of a district for any definite area. Notification of obser- vation areas. 2. The Governor in Council may, if it appears to him that any district, town, village or other area is imminently threatened with plague, issue an order declaring such district, town, village, or other area to be under observation. A copy of such order shall be published in the next issue of the Fort St. George Gazette. Notification of infected areas and notification and in- spection stations. 3. The Governor in Council may by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette declare any place or area in which one or more indigenous cases of plague have occurred, or in which the existence of plague among rats has been proved by bacteriological tests, to be infected with plague. In cases of emergency the District Collector may notify by tom-tom and by publication in the district gazette, as soon as possible thereafter, that any such place or area is infected with plague. The Governor in Council may in the same manner notify as a notification station any railway station or other place, which from its proximity to infected areas or otherwise is liable to be used or passed by persons leaving such areas and may notify as an inspection station any railway station which may be convenient for the inspection and observation of passengers by rail. Report regarding dead rats. 4. In areas under observation and infected areas every house-holder and every medical practitioner, who finds or becomes aware of the finding of a dead rat in his house, or in any public or private dwelling or place within the limits of the municipality, town or village in which he resides, shall be bound to give information of the fact with the least practicable delay to the nearest local authority. Closure of markets. 5. In areas under observation and infected areas, the Collector may close existing markets and may appoint special places where markets may be held and may prescribe limits beyond which it shall not be lawful for persons bringing articles for sale from or to an infected area to pass.
?5 Inspection a.nd desin- fection of grain and the places used for traffic in it. 6. In areas under observation and infected areas the Collector may direct that consignments of grain arriving from plague-infected areas and that landing places, railway goods-sheds, and bazaars used for traffic in grain shall be inspected; and that all rats found therein shall be killed and barnt, and the grain or place disinfected. Abatement of nuisances. 7. In areas under observation or infected areas the Collector or plague officer may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any premises, whether situated in a municipality or not, at any time during daylight and summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections 186, 220, 221 and 228 of the District Municipalities Act, 1884, or sections, 99 and 101 of the Local Boards Act, 1884. Closure of sheds likely to harbour rats. 8. In an infected area the Collector or plague officer may order that any shed used for accommodation of animals and likely to harbour rats shall be closed and shall not be reopened without his permission. Restrictions 011 the wash- ing of clothes. 9. In an infected area the Collector of the district may prescribe that no person undertaking for hire the cleansing of clothing or other laundry process shall store or wash or otherwise deal with clothing except at such places and at such times and under such conditions as he may direct. Evacuation and  disinfec- tion of infected areas. 10. (a) In an infected area the Collector, or a plague officer with the previous sanction of the Collector, may order the evacuation and disinfection of infected houses and houses in their neighbourhood, or generally of any infected locality; and no person shall re-occupy such house or locality without the express permission of the Collector or plague officer. (b) The Collector, or plague officer, may require the evicted people to reside in such place as he may appoint, under such restrictions as he may deem necessary. (c) The Collector, or plague officer, may make such arrangements as he thinks fit for the custody, free of charge, of the effects of persons so evicted, provided that the Govern- ment shall not be responsible for any loss or damage to them. Explanation.-Houses and localities in which plague-in- fected rats have been discovered may be treated as infected. House search. 11. In infected areas the Collector, with the previous sanction of Government, may organize search parties to visit houses for the purpose of detecting cases of plague, when there is reason to believe that the residents are attempting to conceal them:
?6 Provided that houses shall be allowed to be entered only by persons of the same caste or religion as the occupants and that women should be employed in examining women and searching any room or place exclusively occupied by them. Notification system. 12. (a) Every person leaving an infected area within the Presidency by rail from a notification station shall take out a notification paper in the form shown in Appendix A before being allowed to board a train. Passengers coming by rail from infected areas outside the Presidency shall take out a similar notification paper at the first inspection station they may come to before being allowed to proceed on their journey. (b) Travellers who enter this Presidency from the Mysore State by road through Sivasamudram in the Coimba- tore district, Hosur in the Salem district and Teppakkadu in the Nilgiri district, shall take out notification papers at those places in the form shown in Appendix A before proceeding. (c) Persons from infected areas  entering this Presi- dency by sea shall take out notification papers in the form shown in Appendix A before disembarking from the vessel in which they have travelled. (d) Other travellers by road or water are not  required to take out notification papers. Exception.-The following persons shall be exempt from the operation of this rule:- (i) All Government officers, or officers serving under any municipality, local board or railway company, and draw- ing a salary of not less than Rs. 100 per mensem; (ii) all pensioners drawing a pension of not less than Rs. 50 per mensem; (iii) all registered medical practitioners, title-holders, special or honorary magistrates, members of local boards or municipal councils; (iv) any other person to whom an exemption certificate in the form shown in Appendix C may be given by the Collector of a district, the President of the Corporation of Madras, the Collector of the Civil and Military Station, Bangalore, or by the Government. Duty of the notification- holder and the house- holder with whom he may reside. 13. Every person required to take out a notification paper shall declare truly his name, address and such other parti- culars as may be required by the officer issuing the paper. The notification-holder shall on reaching his destination deliver the paper by post or by hand to the local authority of that place. The notification-holder and the house-holder, hotel-keeper or person in charge of the building shall also
?7 report to such authority any unusual mortality among rats or any case of fever, or plague, or suspicious sudden illness occurring within one month of the arrival of the notification- holder in the house or building in which he resides. Explanations.-(1) In the case of incapacitated persons and minors who are under twelve years of age the duty of complying with this regulation shall devolve on their guar- dians. (2) In the case of chattrams which have no regular keeper the village headman shall be deemed to be the person in charge. Duty of railway passengers at inspection stations and powers of the inspect- ing staff. 14. Every railway passenger arriving at an inspection station shall be bound to deliver up his ticket on demand by any railway official or medical officer and shall also submit himself to such medical examination as the medical officer may deem necessary. The medical officer shall have power to detain for such period of time not exceeding three days, as he may deem fit, any such passenger who is, or is suspected to be, suffering from plague, or who has been in immediate contact with a case of pneumonic plague, and such passenger shall not continue on his journey without a certificate in the form shown in Appendix D. The medical officer shall have power to disinfect the baggage and goods of any passenger which he may consider to be infectious. Provided that female passengers shall under no circum- stances be compelled to undergo examination by men. Fairs and festivals. 15. When a festival, fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from an infected area is about to take place in an uninfected area, or when a festival, fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from healthy areas is about to take place in an infected area, the Governor in Council may by notification in the Gazette prohibit attendance thereat, and may, if neces- sary, stop temporarily the issue of railway tickets to persons from or to such infected areas. Observation and preven- tive range. 16. The Collector may divide an area under observation or the environs of an infected area into ranges, which may be called observation or preventive ranges as the case may be, and may appoint a plague inspector for each of them. Such plague inspectors shall have the powers of a local authority over that area and shall also have the powers of a police officer under rule 34. Duty of house-holders and medical practitioners to report plague cases, 17. Every house-holder and every medical practitioner shall at once report to the nearest local authority any case of plague, or any case of death with symptoms of plague, or
8 any unusual mortality amongst rats, which comes to his knowledge. Use of public conveyance by plague patients. 18. No owner, driver or person in charge of a public conveyance shall carry any person suffering from plague; nor shall any person suffering from the disease enter or be taken in a public conveyance. Restrictions on the letting of infected houses. 19. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has suffered or is suffering from plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected to the satisfaction of the medical officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf. Power to enter in- fected build- ings. 20. The Collector, plague officer or assistant plague officer may at any time enter, or authorize any one in writing to enter, any building or place in which plague is reputed or suspected to exist and may isolate any person suffering from or suspected to be suffering from plague and may also direct such building or place to be completely evacuated. Destruction of sheds. 21. If the Collector or plague officer is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of plague, he may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is constructed. Destruction of clothing and other articles. 22. The Collector of the district, a plague officer, or assistant plague officer, the medical officer attending a plague case or a plague inspector (or a revenue inspector, if no other revenue officer of higher rank is available) may destroy the clothing, bedding, rags and other articles found in possession of, or in the residence of, a person suffering from plague or suspected plague, as well as clothes worn on his person. The destruction of such clothing, etc., should, however, be resorted to only when effective means of disinfection are not available. Disinfection of buildings containing sick or dead rats. 23. The Collector or plague officer may order disinfec- tion of any building in which sick or dead rats have been found. Power to open closed houses for disinfection. 24. For the purpose of effecting the disinfection prescribed by these rules, the Collector or plague officer may, at any time during daylight, force open any closed house which, in his opinion, requires disinfection: provided that a notice calling upon the owner or tenant of such house to open the house before a specified time shall have been served on him, or posted on some conspicuous part of the building, and the
?9 house has not been opened accordingly; and provided also that as little damage as possible shall be caused to the house in the act of opening. Locked receptacles inside the house may be forced open by the same officers or officers similarly authorized. Privileges granted to inoculated persons. 25. Collectors shall provide all facilities for the inocula- tion of persons who may desire to be inoculated against plague and every person successfully inoculated shall be given a certificate by the inoculating officer in the form shown in Appendix E. Persons who hold inoculation certificates shall be entitled to the following privileges, provided that such certificates bear a date not earlier than nine months and not later than seven days previously:- (a) Unless suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any inspection station when travelling, except for such period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes, if those are considered suspicious. (b) Inoculated persons who have been living in an infected house or have otherwise been exposed to plague infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be required to evacuate the infected house and to have their clothes and personal effects disinfected. When, however, all the occupants of a house have been inoculated, neither the patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required to be segregated, provided arrangements are made to the satis- faction of a plague officer for the disinfection of the house and its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to the neighbouring dwellings. Duty of holders of inoculation certificates. 26. Every inoculated person who is exempted from segre- gation and detention under the preceding rule shall be bound, when called upon to do so by any public servant to produce his inoculation certificate and also to make an impression of his thumb-mark for the purpose of identification. Supersession of district board or municipality. 27. The Collector of a district may, in case of emergency or to save delay, provide for the execution of any work or the doing of any act which a district board or municipality is empowered or required to execute or to do in accordance with these regulations, and the immediate execution or the doing of which is in the said Collector's opinion necessary for the safety of the public and may charge the expense of executing the work or doing the act to the local board or municipality concerned.
?10 Acquisition of lands or buildings  re- quired for plague  pur- poses. 28. The Collector, plague officer or assistant plague officer may without notice enter upon, occupy and use, or may depute any person to enter upon, occupy and use, without having recourse to the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, any building or place which is required for and is, in the opinion of the district medical and sanitary officer or other medical officer deputed in this behalf, suitable for any purposes connected with plague measures, provided that if the building or place is occupied, twenty-four hours' notice in writing shall be given to the occupier or shall be conspicu- ously affixed on such building or place. The owner or the lessee of such building or place shall be entitled to a reason- able rent to be fixed by the Collector or plague officer for the period during which the ground or building may be so occupied: and the Collector, plague officer or assistant plague officer, as the case may be, shall, when the building or place ceases to be so occupied, thoroughly cleanse and disinfect it, and, if the owner so desires, shall whitewash internally and externally any building so occupied. Nothing in this rule shall authorize the chairman of a municipal council to enter upon, occupy or use any building or place which is the property of Government without the previous permission of the Collector. Regulations applicable to canal boats. 29. A canal boat shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to buildings and, in order to prevent the spread of the infection of plague either by or to a canal boat, the Collector of the district or any plague officer or any officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or may direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. Plague staff entitled to, and bound to give, one month's notice. 30. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, scavenger or other menial servant employed to do duty in connection with plague shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and is discharged at the end of it. Similarly every supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall be entitled to one month's notice before his coolies are discharged. (2) No such person shall, in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do and without reasonable
?11 cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice or shall neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. In like manner no supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall withdraw his coolies without giving one month's notice. Distribution of plague charges. 31. All expenses incurred in carrying out these regu- lations shall, subject to such orders as the Governor in Council may from time to time pass, be in the first instance paid- (a) within municipal limits-from municipal funds ; (b) within cantonments-from cantonment funds ; and (c) in other areas-from local funds. Provided that any expense incurred outside the limits of a municipality or a cantonment but for the benefit of such municipality or cantonment shall be met from such municipal or cantonment fund. Award of compensation for damage or loss. 32. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these regulations any damage or loss is caused, no person shall be entitled as a matter of right to claim any compensation, but the Collector of the district or a plague officer may award compensation at the cost of local, municipal or Provincial funds as the case may be, and shall do so when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circumstances, or may, in such cases, provide other necessary articles in the place of those destroyed or damaged and debit the charge to the proper funds. Duty o segregated or detained per- son. 33. Every person segregated or detained under any of these regulations shall obey the directions issued to him by the officer in charge of the place of segregation or detention and shall not leave such place except with the written per- mission of the said officer, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition. Power of a police officer. 34. If a Police officer has reason to believe that a person is evading these regulations by giving a false name or a wrong address, he may detain him until satisfied as to his true name and address and may act in accordance with the provisions of section 57 of the Criminal Procedure Code, Penalty for broach of Regulations. 35. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any of these regulations or obstructing any measure taken under the authority of these regulations, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be
?12 liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both. Note.-(1) The plague regulations being orders formally made and issued by Government under the Epidemic Diseases Act, no sanction is required as a condition precedent to prosecution for disobeying them (Judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 561 of 1899). (2) By Command Order, No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the Madras Command have been directed to obey the plague regulations, and any infringement of them is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have been warned (Superintendent's circular No. II, dated 11th December 1898) that any disobedience or wilful neglect of the regualtions or obstruction offered to any official on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Government as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith and the same reduced or permanently withdrawn.
?18 APPENDIX A. [See Regulation 12.] Plague Notification No. I , son/daughter of  aged, years, caste, residing in           village,              taluk,             district, proceeding to * do hereby bind myself to deliver this notification to the local authority of that place on my arrival and to report to him any case of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness or any unusual mortality amongst rats in the house occupied by me within a period of one month after my arrival.  (Signature or mark). (Date) (Station) (Signature of officer issuing the intimation form.) INSTRUCTIONS. This notification form may be sent by post or may be delivered in person or by messenger to the local authority concerned. 2. The local authority for the town of Madras is the Health Officer of the Corpora- tion and includes assistant health officers and plague inspectors and nurses appointed by the President of the Madras Corporation : in other places the local authority is- (a) the local medical officer, or if there is no medical officer, (b) the headman of the village, or (c) in special cases the person appointed by the Collector of the district. 3. If the holder of this notification fails to fulfil his obligations he will be liable to prosecution and punishment, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to Rs. 1,000 or both. * Give full address.
?14  APPENDIX B. [See Regulation 12.] Ex-officio Exemption Certificate. Signature. Under Mufassal Rule 12 (name and designation*) whose signature is exhibited in the   margin is hereby exempted from the plague notification rules. This exemption will also cover the undermentioned members of his family, subordinates and servants accompanying him:- Members of the family. Subordinates and servants. Name.  Age. Name.  Age. Date of issue.    Number in Collector's/President's  register.  Signature of the issuing officer.    Collector of/President of the Corporation of Madras.  Note.-(1) This certificate will be in force throughout the Presidency until revoked by the Collector of /President of the Corporation of Madras who may cancel it without assigning reasons. Any misuse of it by any person will entail its summary withdrawal. (2) This certificate will not exempt its holder and the persons specified in it from liability to have their effects disinfected if they are considered to be infectious. (3) The certificate must be exhibited by the bearer on demand to any officer authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or issue notifications or examine the health condition of travellers. (4) The holder of the certificate is bound to report immediately to the nearest local authority any case of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness   or any unusual mortality amongst rats occurring in the house or houses in which he or the persons mentioned in the certificate residen or reside within one month of the last visit to an infected area. * (Here enter the applicant's qualification for exemption.)
?15 APPENDIX C. [See Regulation 12,] Exemption Certificate. Signature. Under Mufassal Rule 12, (name) whose signature is exhibited in the margin, and who is employed as a , is hereby exempted from the plague notification rules. Date of issue Number in Collector's/President's register. (Signature.)  Collector of President of the Corporation of  Madras. Note.-(1) This certificate is valid up to the 31st March next and will be in force throughout the Presidency. It must be exhibited by the bearer on demand to any officer authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or issue notifications or examine the health condition of travellers. (2) The holder of the certificate is bound to report immediately to the nearest local authority any case of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness or any unusual mortality  amongst rats occurring in the house or houses in which he resides within one month of his last visit to an infected area. (3) This certificate may be withdrawn by the Collector or the President of the Corporation of Madras at any time without assigning any reason. APPENDIX D. [See Regulation 14.] Detention Certificate. Camp. 1. Name of passenger. 2. Number and description of ticket. 3. Detained from                            to 4. Name and designation of issuing officer.
?16 APPENDIX E. [See Regulation 25.] [COUNTERFOIL]  Playue Inoculation Certificate. No. Name. Father's name. No.   CERTIFIED that                                  , son of   , resident of                                          ,Street/Village Street/Village   Town/Taluk                                        , district   , has been inoculated   by   me,   and Town/Taluk that his thumb mark was at the  time impressed  before    me.   Space for left thumb-mark. District     (Signature and desig-      nation.) Date     Dated Initials of operator. Note.-Unless suffering or suspected to be suffering   from plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted   from segregation and from detention when travelling.   It does not, however, exempt him from liability to   evacuate an infected house, except in the case where all   the occupants of the house have been inoculated, or to   have his clothes and person disinfected when travelling.   This certificate is valid for a period of nine months.
?17 IV STANDING ORDERS. THE following are departmental instructions for the guidance of officers dealing with plague:- PART  I.-GENERAL. Theory in regard to the outbreak and spread of plague aptl the scope of the notification system. Plague is spread from place to place by movements of the population. Plague-infected fleas are conveyed by travellers in their baggage and on their person and in merchandise. On the arrival of the travellers or the goods at their destination these fleas desert the baggage or goods or clothes and attach themselves to the local rats. If these rats become infected, rat-falls may be expected in the place within a week. The disease will kill many of the rats. The flea, thus deprived of its natural host, will in a few days attack other animals or man. Man will thus become infected, and cases of plague in human beings will appear about three weeks from the date of the importation of infection. The first object of the plague regulations printed on pages 3 to 16 above is to secure as early information as possible of the actual introduction of infection in any locality so that that area may be isolated and the infection stamped out as effectively as possible. For this purpose a system of notification for travellers by rail has been devised. (Regula- tion 12 on page 6 above.) Travellers by road and river are watched by means of the observation circles referred to below. All railway stations in or in the neighbourhood of an infected area will be declared "notification stations," and no traveller will be allowed to board a train at these stations unless he produces a notification paper in the form prescribed in Appendix A on page 13 above. Passengers from infected areas outside the Madras Presidency will be given notification papers at the frontier inspection stations. These notifica- tion papers will be prepared in  triplicate. The duplicate will be retained by the traveller till he reaches his destination, when he should deliver it to the local authority; the triplicate will be sent by the issuing officer to the local authority con- cerned, except in. the rare cases where a traveller is unable to give sufficient information to enable the local authority to be traced, when the triplicate copy will be sent to the District Medical and Sanitary Officer of his district of destination for transmission to the local authority; and the original will be retained in the office of issue. The local authority receiving 2
?18 the triplicate must be on the alert for the appearance of any suspicious symptoms in the locality where the traveller may reside. 2. Regulation 17 on page 7 above imposes on every house- holder and every medical practitioner the duty of giving the earliest possible intimation to the nearest revenue or medical authority of any unusual mortality among rats or any suspected case of plague. If a person bearing a notification paper from an infected area stays in a house, the house- holder must also report any illness in the house within a period of one month from the arrival of the person. In areas under observation any one who finds or becomes aware of the finding of a dead rat must similarly inform the authori- ties. The authority first informed should at once pass on the information to his immediate superior. PART II.-INSTRUCTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN AREAS UNDER OBSERVATION. Formation of observation and pre- ventive circles. 3. The observation circles above referred to will be introduced permanently in the following areas; temporary observation or preventive circles may also be formed, when necessary, round any infected area in the Madras Presi- dency :- Districts. Taluks. Coimbatore Gobichettipalaiyam.   kollegal. Salem Hosur.   Krishnagiri. North Arcot Kangundi. Chittoor ... Madanapalle. ...   Palmaner.   Punganuru. Anantapur Kadiri.   Penukonda.   Dharmavaram.   Hindupur.   Kalyandrug.   Madakasra. Bellary... ...... Rayadrug.   Hospet.   Bellary....   Harpanahalli.   Siruguppa.   Kudligi.   Adni.   Hadagalli. Kistna . .. ...  Bezwada.
?19 Size of observation circles. 4. The size of each observation circle should admit of an inspector's visiting every portion of it in ten days. (a) For each non-municipal town with a population in excess of 5,000 a separate plague inspector should be appointed. (b) In a municipality observation circles should, as far as possible, follow the municipal wards. When any ward contains less than 1,200 houses or a population of less than 5,000 persons it may be combined with other wards to form one circle. Three circles should ordinarily form a division and each division should be placed under a divisional in- spector or supervisor.  Note.-The limits of population and extent laid down above may be varied according to local conditions. (c) As far as possible plague inspectors should be certificated sanitary inspectors, sub-assistant surgeons not below the third grade, or persons who have received a special training in dealing with plague. Sub-assistant surgeons, when available, may in all cases be employed in place of sanitary inspectors on plague work. Note.-Certificated sanitary inspectors include sanitary inspectors, assistant suitary inspectors and certificated sanitary inspectors under G.O. No. 1131 L., dated 4th September 1903-vide Appendix C. Size of preventive circles. 5. (1) The size of each preventive circle should be such as to enable the inspectors to visit every portion of it once in even days and the distance between its extreme limits should ever exceed 20 miles. (2) When an observation circle becomes plague infected it should be formed into a preventive circle and a \ill\ observation circle formed along the line of traffic and so on until the epidemic is under control. Duty of the observation staff. 6. (1) Subject to the control of the Collector or plague officer, who (see Regulation 1 (f) on page 4 above), is usually the District Medical and Sanitary Officer or the Revenue Divisional Officer, the observation staff should work under the District Medical and Sanitary Officer or other officer appointed by the Collector for the purpose. In municipali- \ill\ the Collector may place the staff under the control of the assistant plague officer, who (see Regulation 1 (g) on age 4 above) is usually the chairman of the council. The observation staff should constantly and systematically patrol the circle in order to gain the earliest possible information of any suspicious death or of the occurrence of any case of plague, \ill\ report immediately any such case or any suspected 2-A
?20 case and should remove with the aid of the ordinary conser- vancy establishment all defects in sanitation which would favour the propagation of plague, such as accumulations of filth, sewage, or the like. (2) The staff should also ascertain whether any special sickness or mortality has occurred among rats and examine any rats that may be found, in order to see whether any enlarged glands are present. Houses in which sick or dead rats are found should be disinfected. (3) The duties of the staff in preventive circles are similar to those of the observation staff.  (4) Inspectors for their respective charges and village  headmen for their villages should keep a record of all persons  suffering from continuous fever for more than twelve hours and inspectors should arrange with the village headman to have such persons inspected twice daily. PART III.-INSTRUCTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN INFECTED AREAS. Action to be taken by local officers on the occurrence of a case of plague. 7. In Appendix A below will be found general instruc- tions regarding evacuation, inoculation, disinfection and the destruction of rats. On the occurrence of an actual or  suspected case of plague in any place, the village headman  or other local officer should- (i) isolate the patient and order the evacuation the house;  (ii) send intelligence by express to the municipality chairman, tahsildar or deputy tahsildar and if plague inspectors have been appointed, to the nearest plague inspector, 8. If the patient is suffering from pneumonic plague and not otherwise, the village headman or other local officer should segregate in a separate camp or hut all persons who have been, or are suspected to have been, in contact with the patient. It is sufficient in cases of bubonic plague to disinfection their clothing and effects. Action to be taken by assistant plague officers and plague inspectors. 9. Upon receiving information of the occurrence of an actual or a suspected case of plague, the municipal chairman  tahsildar or deputy tahsildar should inform all superi\ill\ officers up to the Collector by the quickest possible mea\ill\ (for the form of the report-see rule 53 below) and should  at once to the infected locality with a sufficient staff constables and peons. He should arrange to be accompani  or followed by the nearest medical officer with a supply medicines and disinfectants.
?21 10. On arrival at the infected place, the plague inspector (or medical officer if there is no plague inspector), should supervise the isolation of the patient and the disinfection of his residence, clothing, sputa and excreta, and the clothing, and, at his discretion, the persons of all who have been in contact with the patient. Houses immediately adjoining that in which the case of plague has occurred should also usually be disinfected and as far as possible evacuated. 11. (1) The municipal chairman, tahsildar and deputy tahsildar on his arrival should see that the patient is kept properly isolated and that the house and everything in it and all contacts of the patient are or have been properly dis- infected. (2) He should also provide for the efficient maintenance of the segregation of contacts, if they have been segregated. Action to be taken by plague officers. 12. On receiving information of a case of plague, the duties of a plague officer (that is, see Regulation 1 (f), the District Medical and Sanitary Officer or the Revenue Divi- sional Officer), are as follows:- (1) To send telegraphic information to the Collector and a post copy of the telegram to the District Medical and Sanitary Officer if the outbreak is in a locality hitherto un- affected or when an existing epidemic suddenly assumes alarming proportions. (2) To go to the scene of outbreak and see that the measures mentioned in the last preceding rules have been duly carried out. (3) To see that a plague hospital, suspect camp and health camp are properly organized if necessary. (4) He may also, with the previous sanction of the Collector, direct the evacuation of the village or town or any part of it, and the removal of the inhabitants to a health camp, provided sufficient shelter is available. Evacuated houses should be surrounded by a cordon to prevent the return of the inhabitants without written permission. Removal of plague patients to hospitals. 13. Plague patients who are left without any one to look after them or who have no home should in all cases be removed to hospital. 14. Except as mentioned in the last preceding rule, the removal of patients to hospital should not be compulsory. Every effort should, however, be made to induce patients to go voluntarily to hospital and to lessen the aversion to hospital by the following means:-(1) by encouraging the establishment of private and caste hospitals; (2) by locating
?22 hospitals near to infected quarters; (3) by limiting the size of hospitals so that patients may receive more individual attention; (4) by arranging for the provision of an adequate number of medical attendants and nurses and of ample and comfortable accommodation for patients and their immediate relatives or friends; (5) by permitting at least two relatives or friends to be in attendance on each patient so that the patient may never be left alone; (6) by allowing the patients to have their own food and medicines and to receive visits from their relations, friends and religious instructors; (7) by taking care that all arrangements for observance of caste customs and for the comfort and convenience of patients and their attendants are completed before inviting removal to hospitals. 15. Moribund patients should never be removed to hospi- tal except at the express wish of the friends or relations of the patients. The risk of leaving in his house a patient whose case is so serious that the medical officer thinks he has not a fair chance of recovery is not great after the existence of the case has become known. 16. The pneumonic variety of plague being contagious, persons suffering from this type of the disease should not be removed to the general wards of plague hospitals, but should be isolated in separate wards of the greatest possible air space. It is further advisable that such cases should not be treated in private houses, unless in the opinion of the medical officer the room occupied by the patient is suited for his complete isolation and proper control over the number of attendants and enforcement of disinfection can be ensured. Officers suffering from plague or subjected to plague measures. 17. An officer not being on leave who is prevented from discharging his duties through segregation on account of plague may be treated as on duty on full pay. In the case of an officer who is segregated while returning from leave and thus overstays his leave, the period of detention may be treated as duty on half-pay. Officers who are suffering from plague should be dealt with in accordance with the ordinary rules. PART IV.-APPOINTMENT, PUNISHMENT, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE OF PLAGUE STAFF. Powers of Collectors to incur expenditure on plague. 18. Collectors may not incur expenditure from Provin- cial, Local or Municipal funds in connection with plague establishments or for carrying out works without the previous sanction of Government, except for the following purposes and subject to the existence of budget provision.
23 (1) Employment of temporary clerks and menials on daily wages for short periods for notification work or simi- lar purposes or for disinfection or rat-catching or attendance upon plague cases. (2) Purchase of fuel for disinfecting machines. (3) Purchase of disinfectants required for plague purposes and of serum for inoculation and of rat traps and rat poison. (4) Payment of rent for buildings or lands temporarily occupied for plague purposes and of compensation for destruction of grain, clothes, roofs of houses, etc., under Regulation 32 on page 11 above. (5) Contingencies, subject to the usual limits for Provincial contingent expenditure. Sanction for the employment of plague establish- ments. 19. All appointments in connection with plague require the sanction of Government. In the case of appointments which are added to an existing establishment in consequence of extra work occasioned by plague, and the cost of which is under the standing orders debitable to the ordinary service heads, the application -for sanction should be forwarded through the head of the administrative department concerned. Applications for additional establishments, the cost of which is debitable to 3-A. Land Revenue, should be submitted to Government through the Accountant-General and not through the Board of Revenue. Sanctions for establishments employed under this rule will remain in force to the end of the following March or September whichever is earlier, unless for special reasons a different date is specified in the order in any particular case. On the 1st of March and on the 1st of September, each Collector will submit in a single communi- cation proposals for the retention of such of the establish- ments as, in his opinion, should be retained in the ensuing half-year, clearly explaining the necessity for the retention of each establishment proposed to be retained. Such proposals should be accompanied by a statement showing all existing plague establishments in the form in Appendix I below. Special sanctions should, however, be obtained for all addi- tional establishments which it may be found necessary to em- ploy in the course of the half-year, but all such sanctions will expire at the end of the half-year unless otherwise directed. Collectors should also effect from time to time such reduc- tions in establishments as may be feasible and should certify in the establishment lists submitted by them that the establishments which it is proposed to retain are necessary.
?24 20. Applications for sanction to additional plague estab- lishments or additional plague expenditure, which cannot be met by reappropriation from the sanctioned budget estimate, should specify particulars regarding the additional allotment required. Allowances to officers and establish- ments on plague duty. 21. The conduct of plague operations in an infected district must be regarded as part of the general duty of the executive officers of the district. Save in exceptional cases no recommendation should be made for the grant of special salary, allowance or pension for plague duty. 22. The Government of India have authorized the grant of special allowances to medical officers for plague duty per- formed in addition to their ordinary work in cases where it is sufficiently arduous to deserve special remuneration. The Local Government may also sanction local allowances to officers of other classes provided their plague work lies entirely outside their ordinary and legitimate duties. The Secretary of State has also sanctioned the grant of extra- ordinary pension to the families of police-men who die of plague contracted in the execution of their duties in plague- stricken localities, provided such duties entail imminent risk from plague. 23. The special allowances given to certain classes of officers for plague duty and the salaries attached to special temporary appointments created on account of plague are shown in Appendices B and C. All questions relating to the grant of any extra allowances should be referred for the orders of Government. Adminis- trative staff. 24. The general control of all measures connected with plague is vested in the Collector of the district unless Government in any case otherwise direct, and all officers of Government, of local boards and of municipalities, and all plague and assistant plague officers must obey and carry out the Collector's orders. Plague measures in Cantonments. 25. In cantonments, the military authorities are imme- diately responsible for carrying out the plague measures, and Collectors should delegate to them the necessary powers under the plague regulations. Control of Collector over medical subordinates on plague duty. 26. The. Collector may fine or suspend subordinates of the Government medical department who are employed on plague duty within his district, but against such punishment there shall be a right of appeal to Government through the Surgeon-General. Before passing any order regarding the punishment of a medical subordinate, the Collector should
25 consult the District Medical and Sanitary Officer. A copy of every such order should forthwith be communicated to the Surgeon-General who may, in any case in which he considers that the fault ascribed to the subordinate is one which touches his professional conduct only, require that the order shall not be carried into effect pending reference to Govern- ment. No appeal to the Government will be entertained unless preferred within three months from the date of the order appealed against. 27. The Collector may grant casual or privilege leave to subordinates of the Government medical department whose services have been lent to local boards or municipalities for plague duty. Intimation of the application should, however, be made to the Surgeon-General before privilege leave is sanctioned. Leave of all other descriptions, such as furlough or sick leave, is granted by the Surgeon-General. Control of plague and assistant plague officers over the plague staff. 28. Subject to the Collector's approval and general control, a plague officer may appoint, fine, suspend, or remove from plague duty any member of the plague staff except a medical subordinate. The Collector may delegate any of the powers of a plague officer in this regard to any assistant plague officer. The chairman of a municipal council may not exercise any of these powers merely by virtue of his office as chairman or on the ground that the staff is paid out of municipal funds. He can only exercise these powers to the extent to which the control of the staff may have been vested in him by the Collector. Right of appeal of the plague staff. 29. The order of any Collector or plague officer dispens- ing with the services of a temporary plague subordinate shall have general effect throughout the Presidency. The Collec- tor's order of suspension or dismissal shall be final with regard to officers lower in rank than that of certificated sanitary inspector. Certificated sanitary inspectors shall have a right of appeal to Government. The appeal should be forwarded to Government through the Collector and the Sanitary Commissioner. There shall be an appeal to the Collector against any order of suspension or dismissal passed by a plague officer or assistant plague officer. Employment on plague duty of Government officials of the medical and police departments. 30. The employment on plague duty of Government officials of the medical and police departments should be restricted, and volunteer agency should be utilized as much as possible to assist in carrying out plague measures. Whenever practicable, public and private hospitals and camps may be placed in charge of native practitioners. Police
?26 officers should not hold enquiries into suspicious cases of plague. Small representative committees of the inhabitants may be appointed in various parts of a city to co-operate with the authorities and to bring to their notice matters requiring attention or inquiry. Class of persons to be employed on plague duty. 31. As far as circumstances permit, Hindus should be employed in those parts of a city where Hindus predominate and Muhammadans where Muhammadans are in a majority. Officers of all grades should show the greatest courtesy and consideration to the people, and should interfere as little as possible with their habits, feelings and religious prejudices. PART V.-ACCOUNTS. Distribution of plague charges. 32. Each municipality will bear its own plague charges. As regards district boards, the measures adopted in frontier districts proper, i.e., those districts which adjoin plague- stricken areas outside the Madras Presidency, not only benefit those districts themselves as being nearest the seat of infec- tion, but also protect other portions of the Presidency as well. This condition is also fulfilled, in some measure, by districts in which railway inspection stations have been established by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette. Expenditure incurred by district boards in such districts on plague preventive measures is therefore distributed by Gov- ernment in the ratio of one-third against the district in which the expenditure is incurred and the remaining two-thirds against the other districts of the Presidency rateably on their annual receipts as shown in their budget estimates for the year. The budget estimates should, however, provide for the gross expenditure to be incurred by each district board, credit for the contribution being taken subsequently on advice from the Accountant-General. Government contribution to private pingue hospitals. 33. Contributions towards the cost of the construction and maintenance of private plague hospitals and segregation camps in infected areas and areas under observation will be made by Government from Provincial funds in accordance with the following scale:- (a) For construction, half the cost will be paid by Government provided the charges are considered reasonable and the buildings erected on sites approved by the Collector or plague officer acting under his control. In any case of doubt or dispute the Government will have the right to esti- mate by means of the Public Works Department the value of the work done.
27 (b) For maintenance, grants not exceeding half the actual expenses will be sanctioned by Government on the following conditions. (1) the arrangements for the sanitation and supply of food must meet with the approval of the Collector; (2) the amounts will be paid, month by month, in arrears to the manager or managers approved by the Collector. Provided that such hospitals and camps will remain under the general supervision of Government officials and will observe any detailed instructions that may be given by the Sanitary Commissioner or the Surgeon-General; provided also that the sale-proceeds of such camps and hospitals will be proportionately divided between the Govern- ment and the plague committee concerned. Grants for t.he erection of sheds in rural areas. 34. In rural areas where evacuation of houses may be ordered under the Plague Regulations district boards may give poor people grants not exceeding Rs. 3 per household as a grant-in-aid towards building sheds. Such grants should be kept at as low a figure as possible and should be made as a rule only to those who are otherwise unable to furnish themselves with shelter. Subsistence allowance to inoculated persons. 35. To encourage inoculation, it is open to Collectors with the previous approval of Government to sanction to poor persons a grant not exceeding 8 annas a day for an adult and 4 annas for a minor who may be temporarily incapacitated for work as a result of inoculation for plague. Such grants should not be paid to any one individual for more than three days. Expenditure on inspection sheds on railway platforms. 36. Any expenditure incurred in providing inspection sheds on railway platforms in cases where there are no proper facilities in the railway station for the examination of passen- gers in accordance with the Plague Regulations will be borne by the civil department and not by the railway administrations. The construction of all such buildings will, in the absence of the orders of the Government to the contrary, be carried out ordinarily by the railway administration concerned, the civil department defraying merely the cost. Government grants to local bodies for plague expenditure. 37. If any district board or municipality finds its funds unequal to the burden of plague charges, it should revise its budget by omitting all avoidable expenditure and in the last resort may apply for an advance from Provincial funds or for a loan from the Government of India. Care should be taken
?28 that advances granted by Government to local bodies to meet plague expenditure are applied to the precise purposes far which the advances were made and are not utilized to relieve their ordinary funds of expenditure on sanitary, medical and other objects. Fines. 38. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the Plague Regulations should be credited to fines under Law and Justice. Classifictaion of plague charges. 39. Appendix D shows the proper classification of charges commonly incurred in connection with plague. 40. "Direct" plague expenditure means expenditure exhibited in the Government accounts under the head 24-D. MEDICAL - Grants for Medical Purposes-Expenses in connection with Bubonic Plague. "Indirect" plague expenditure means extra expenditure due to plague but brought to account under the ordinary appropriate service heads. (ii) The amount of indirect plague expenditure is therefore not ascertainable from the ordinary Provincial and incorporated local fund accounts and special statements are prepared in the course of audit by the Accountant-General in the case of expenditure from general revenues and by the treasury officer in the case of expenditure from incorporated local funds. (iii) To facilitate the preparation of these statements all officers who draw bills for indirect plague expenditure should write conspicuously at the head of each such bill, beside the account head, the word "Plague" in red ink. If only some of the items in a bill are indirect plague charges, the word "Plague" should be written against each such item instead of at the head of the bill. 41. It should be noted that pay and allowances of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments or services whose employment on plague duty does not involve the payment of salaries to other persons for the performance of their legitimate duties (even though they may be exclusively engaged on plague duties) and not receiving extra allowances on account of plague, do not constitute indirect plague charges (and of course are not direct plague charges) because they do not involve extra expense. A statement should be for- warded to the Accountant-General by the 20th of each month showing the pay and allowances, drawn in the previous month, of officers and establishments so employed. 42. From the above it will be seen that the distinc- tion between direct and indirect plague expenditure affects the accounts of incorporated local funds expenditure and
?29 Provincial expenditure. As regards excluded local funds this distinction is unnecessary and all extra expenditure, i.e., expenditure which would not have been incurred but for the occurrence or imminence of plague may be shown under the head Plague. 43. Contingent expenditure on account of plague, e.g., stationery, postage, telegrams, office furniture and such like, should be charged against the heads of account to which the salaries of the officers incurring such expenditure are debited. In regard to establishments newly entertained to deal with plague, the principle that officers of superior grades should be charged to PROVINCIAL, and those of inferior grades to LOCAL, should be applied. With regard to establishments dependent on officers newly employed to deal with plague, the principle that the charge should follow the pay of the officer on whom the establishment is dependent should hold both in regard to establishments and contingencies. The cost of tents supplied to officers on plague duty will follow the debit of the pay of the officers. Half-yearly statements of audited plague charges. 44. The Accountant-General should submit half-yearly statements of audited plague charges-direct and indirect- under Provincial, Local, Municipal and Cantonment funds in the form shown in Appendix E. The statements should show the rateable distribution by districts of plague expenditure among district boards and also all expenditure incurred in connection with plague which has not been brought to book as direct or indirect, e.g., the emoluments of officers and establishments forming part of existing depart- ments or services and not replaced by substitutes, but exclusively engaged on plague duties. These statements, which should cover the periods ending the 30th September and the 31st March in each financial year, should reach Government on the 12th of November and the 12th of May, respectively, five copies being submitted to the Financial Department and two to the Local and Municipal (Plague) Department. Estimates. of plague expenditure. 45. All Collectors, the Surgeon-General, the Inspector- General of Police and the Sauitary Commissioner are required to submit annually on the 5th November estimates of plague expenditure in the form prescribed below. The estimate submitted by the Surgeon-General should include provision for all medical officers and nurses (if any), who have been sent out by the Secretary of State and are temporarily attached to hospitals in Madras prior to their being posted to plague duties.
?30 Revised estimate for 191 -1 , and budget estimate for 191 -1 , of plague expenditure in the district of Detailed Account. Actuals of the previous year. Grants already sanctioned (for the current year). Actuals up to the 31st October (of the current year). Revised estimate (for the current year). * Budget estimate for the ensuing year. Explanatory remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7        * The figures in column 6 should be based on the conditions existing at the time of framing the estimate. 46. Budgeting officers should submit their estimates in print, getting them printed locally. No changes should be made in the form without the approval of the Government in the Financial Department. 47. The estimates should be submitted for all major and minor heads of account concerned and complete explanations for all variations in the columns of figures should be entered in a facing page opposite the figures themselves. They should be submitted in four main portions, viz. (1) Provincial, (2) Local, (3) Municipal and (4) Cantonment funds; but in order to expedite the disposal of the estimates, the Local, Municipal and Cantonment funds portions should be submitted to the Local and Municipal (Plague) Department direct, the Provincial portion being submitted to the Financial Depart- ment. The several portions should be submitted by bud- geting officers simultaneously and punctually. Orders on the entire estimate for each district will issue from the Financial Department. 48. The following instructions should be carefully attended to by budgeting officers :- (i) (a) When submitting plague estimates, budgeting officers should invariably reconcile the allotments proposed on account of Salaries and Establishments with the entries in the latest list of plague establishments and explain differ- ences, where such exist, in the page for explanatory remarks in the estimate. (b) Provision should, as a rule, be made in the estimates for existing establishments, but where such is not the case full explanation should be afforded.
31 (c) The necessity for any provision of Rs. 300 and upwards under Supplies and Services or Contingencies should be explained. (ii) If in any case the estimates as framed by budgeting officers under Local or Municipal exceed the provisions made in the annual budget of the district board or municipality concerned, it should be stated how it is proposed to meet the excess expenditure. (iii) The figures for each municipality should be given separately in the estimates. (iv) In framing the estimates the totals under each head of account should, as far as possible, be rounded to tens or to even hundreds of rupees, annas and pies being omitted. (v) The actual expenditure as reported by budgeting officers in the plague estimates under Local and Municipal should correspond with the figures communicated to the Accountant-General by the presidents of district boards and the chairmen of municipal councils. 49. Collectors, chairmen of municipal councils, and other officers concerned with the control of plague expenditure will be reminded that they are primarily responsible for making provision in the estimate for the necessary expenditure in each year; that expenditure can be incurred only against the allotments passed by Government; and that applications should be made for additional allotments immediately it is foreseen that the actual expenditure is likely to vary consider- ably from the estimate accepted by Government. Report regarding savings in the budget estimates. 50. At the same time these officers should keep Govern- ment informed of savings to the extent of Rs. 500 and above which are likely to accrue in the estimated expenditure in consequence of reduction of establishments or other causes. It should be remembered that savings arising from the fact that the plague estimates accepted during the year do not utilise fully the allotments existing in the sanctioned budgets of local bodies, should not be utilised by district boards and municipalities for purposes not connected with plague. Transfer of funds. 51. Collectors can themselves effect transfer of funds from one detailed head to another under the same minor head, and, subject to budget provision, they may also sanction all deviations and excesses in estimates previously sanctioned by Government up to a limit of 5 per cent. of the total amount of each estimate. In the case of urgent works and repairs costing Rs. 25 or less, estimates may be dispensed with pro- vided the bills are passed by the Collector, and the usual
?32 certificates are furnished by the officers responsible for the work being properly carried out. PART VI.-REPORTS AND RETURNS AND CORRESPONDENCE. Report to be sent by Collectors to the Sanitary Commis- sioner on the occurrence of the first case of plague. 52. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first discovered in any place not declared infected, the Collector or, in his absence, any gazetted officer at the head-quarters station of the district should immediately telegraph the fact to the Sanitary Commissioner, stating whether the case was indigenous or imported, if the latter whence it was imported, how the case was discovered, and any other further particu- lars, with dates, which may appear necessary. In the case of ports whence vessels sail for Europe, it should also be stated in the telegram whether any plague or unusual morta- lity among rats was observed. Names of hamlets should not be telegraphed but only the names of villages to which such hamlets belong. Cases of plague among contacts who have not been, within the preceding fortnight, in an infected place should be treated as indigenous and not as imported. Detailed report of plague cases to be sent to the Collector by the plague inspector. 53. The plague inspector, the tahsildar or other reporting officer should draw up his report to the Collector in the form prescribed in Appendix F, in respect of imported cases and the first three cases of indigenous plague in any village. The report should be submitted within 24 hours from the hour of the first intimation of plague in the case specified, and should not be delayed merely because full information on all points is not available. The form should be filled in as far as possible. Report of plague cases to be sent by Collectors to Government and the Sanitary Commis- sioner. 54. All attacks and deaths should be telegraphed daily by Collectors to the Sanitary Commissioner in the form prescribed by G.O. No. 485 P., dated 10th March 1904. Nil telegrams are not required. Telegraphic reports should also be sent to Government in the following cases:- (a) First indigenous case occurring in a district pre- viously free from plague. (b) First three indigenous cases occurring in a town of 10,000 or more inhabitants. (c) First three indigenous cases occurring in any port. Collectors should also send telegraphic reports to the medical officer of the Ceylon Government stationed at Tuticorin of the first indigenous case occurring in a district previously free from plague. The cost of these telegrams will be debited to the Ceylon Government by the Accountant- General.
?33 Communica- tion of information regarding plague cases to adjoining districts. 55. Collectors of infected districts should send daily reports of plague to the Collectors and District Medical and Sanitary officers of adjoining districts in the form pre- scribed by G.O. No. 83 P., dated 16th January 1904. The Collectors of Nellore, North Arcot, Chittoor, South Arcot and Chingleput should send a copy of the daily plague report to the President of the Madras Corporation, and should also report to him by telegram immediately on its occurrence any case of plague or suspected plague that may occur in any new place within their districts. Instructions for submit- ting proposals in regard to fairs and festivals 56. Proposals in regard to the prohibition of the attendance of pilgrims at fairs and festivals should be forwarded through the Sanitary Commissioner so as to reach Government a month and a half previous to the holding of the fair or festival. In order to avoid delay in their submission, Collectors should prepare in their office every month a list of all the fairs and festivals to take place during the ensuing three months, and should send by the 15th of each month their recommendations relating to religious and other gather- ings to be held in the next month but one. Notice of the prohibition of the issue of railway tickets should be given to the railway authorities at least a week previous to the date of commencement of the prohibition. Statements to accompany proposals relating to fairs and festivals. 57. The Collector's reports about fairs and festivals should be invariably accompanied by draft notifications under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and by a statement in the form shown in Appendix G. Skeleton notifications are printed as Appendix H. Special report to be sent to the Sanitary Commis- sioner regarding rat morta- lity. 58. Upon receipt of information of the occurrence of unusual mortality among rats, the chairman in municipal limits or the District Medical and Sanitary Officer, and in regard to non-municipal areas, the Collector or District Medical and Sanitary Officer, should forthwith forward a special report regarding rat-mortality to the Sanitary Com- missioner and may, if necessary, forward specimens of dead rats, under proper precautions, to the Director of the King Institute of Preventive Medicine for bacteriological examina- tion. Plague reports, sent by the Sanitary Commis- sioner. 59. The following reports and returns are sent by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of Madras:- (1) A monthly return in the form prescribed by G.O. No. 568 P., dated 25th August 1909, containing verified figures of deaths from plague to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India direct so as to reach him not later than the 15th of the second month after that to which 3
?34 the statistics relate. The return should be accompanied by a narrative giving a concise view of the situation as regards plague in the Presidency and a brief account of any events of importance connected with plague which occurred during the month to which the return relates. To enable the Sanitary Commissioner to prepare the monthly narrative referred to above, Collectors of districts affected with indigenous plague should forward to him, by the 15th of every month, a report for the previous month showing whether the disease was increasing or decreasing, what measures were taken to suppress it and with what degree of success, the attitude of the people towards evacua- tion, inoculation and other measures, what steps they were taking to help themselves and any other matters of interest. (2) An express telegram every Monday direct to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India showing separately the number of seizures and deaths from plague reported during the week ending with the previous Saturday, (1) in the Presidency town, (2) in each town of 50,000 or more inhabitants in each district, (3) in each port of the Presi- dency, (4) in the rest of the district and (5) in Native States. (3) A bi-monthly report direct to the Sanitary Commis- sioner with the Government of India showing what places previously included in the weekly statements of plague cases published in the Gazette of India have been declared to be free from plague. (4) A telegraphic report to the Government of India at the beginning of every month showing the total number of deaths from plague in the Presidency during the previous month. (5) Telegraphic intimation to His Majesty's Consul- General at Alexandria and also to the Government of India regarding the appearance or recrudescence of plague or of its cessation in the ports of this Presidency from which vessels sail for Europe. It should be stated in the telegrams sent to the Government of India whether any plague or unusual mortality among rats was observed. (6) A statement to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal Department, every Monday showing the plague cases in the Presidency in the form shown in appendix II to G.O. No. 424 P., dated 25th July 1913. Half-yearly statements of areas to be placed under or freed from observ- ation. 60. (1) Collectors of districts containing areas under observation should submit not later than the 1st of April and the 1st of October in every year, a statement showing separately the taluks and municipalities which should continue
?35 to be regarded as being under observation during the ensuing half-year and the areas which should be freed from observation. Government will then publish a single consoli- dated notification specifying all the areas in the Presidency which will remain under observation during the half-year, municipalities and taluks of districts being shown separately. (2) If any area not included in the half-yearly notifi- cation is imminently threatened with plague in the course of the half-year, proposals for placing it under observation should be submitted to Government immediately, the muni- cipal and non-municipal areas comprised in it being specified separately; but no proposal for rescinding a notification declaring an area to be under observation should ordinarily be submitted except on the dates specified in the previous paragraph. Half-yearly lists of plague establish- ments. 61. Collectors of districts should submit on the 31st March and 30th September of each year a printed list of officers of all classes employed on plague duty, in the form prescribed in Appendix I. The Inspector-General of Police should prepare similar lists of all police engaged in plague work. These lists should accompany the proposals for the retention of establishments submitted under Rule 19. Copies of the lists should be sent as follows:- Three copies to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal Department. Two copies to the Accountant-General. One copy to the Sanitary Commissioner. Inter-com- muni cation of plague news. 62. Inasmuch as the Mysore Darbar has instructed the amildars and deputy amildars in charge of taluks and sub- taluks of Mysore which border on British districts to give immediate information of the occurrence of plague within their jurisdiction direct to the tahsildars of the neighbouring British taluks, and as the deputy commissioners have been similarly requested to keep the Collectors of adjoining British districts promptly informed of the occurrence of plague in the neighbouring districts in Mysore, Collectors of British districts bordering on Mysore will accordingly arrange to give similar information direct to the officials of the Darbar. Similar arrangements are in force with regard to districts bordering on the Nizam's Dominions. 63. A system of intercommunication among the Sanitary Commissioners of the various provinces has been sanctioned by the Government of India with regard to news about the progress of plague. Under this system, the appearance of 3-A
36 plague should be telegraphed at once by the Sanitary Com- missioner in whose area cases occur to the other Sanitary Commissioners on receipt of a report of a first case in taluks and important towns. Plague correspond- ence. 64. All correspondence about plague should be addressed to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal (Plague) Department, and should be marked with the word " Plague" in red ink on the outside covers and on the left-hand corner of the papers. Telegrams should be addressed to "Madras, Plague." 65. All references regarding account matters should be addressed to, or forwarded through, the Accountant-General. 66. Plague correspondence should be entered in a separate current register, and the papers shown against a new item "Plague" in the quarterly business returns. A separate series of numbers should be given to the disposals, and the question of destroying or retaining them should be dealt with in accordance with Board's Proceedings, No. 101, dated 18th April 1898. Destruction of plague records. 67. Notification papers received by localauthorities should be filed together and destroyed at the expiry of six months. In Appendix J is given a list of plague records showing when each item may be destroyed. Distribution of copies of printed orders of Government. 68. Copies of printed Government orders relating to plague matters need not ordinarily be supplied to medical subordinates, sanitary inspectors or chairmen of unions, or to each member of a municipal council. Where necessary, district circulars embodying the purport of the Government orders should be issued to subordinate officers. Spare copies of Government orders are at present distributed in accordance with the statement printed as Appendix K. Distribution of copies of the lists of plague infected areas. 69. Copies of notifications of lists of plague-infected areas and notification stations are at present distributed as shown in Appendix L. The Superintendent, Government Press, should supply all Collectors with the required number of copies of the notifications for circulation with District Gazettes. Vernacular translations of these notifications may be obtained by the Collectors on indent from the Superintendent, Government Press. Intimation to be send by the medical officer at Jalarpet to the Ceylon medical officer at Tuticorin. 70. The inspecting medical officer, Jalarpet, should send telegraphic intimation to the medical officer of the Ceylon Government at Tuticorin when passengers pass from Banga- lore to Tuticorin. The cost of these telegrams will be recovered from the Ceylon Government by the Accountant- General.
?37 APPENDIX A. Notes on certain matters connected with plague. (1) GENERAL REMARKS. 1. In dealing with an outbreak of plague, a combination of the following measures is likely to produce the maximum of good:- (1) Prompt discovery and isolation of every case of plague. (2) Disinfection, and, in cases of pneumonic plague, segregation of contacts. (3) Evacuation of dwelling-houses. (4) Inoculation. (5) Disinfection of dwelling-houses. (6) Removal and destruction by burning of plague-infected rats, and the disinfection of the houses in which they are found. (7) Systematic destruction of rats generally. Of these measures the first is the most important. When once plague has obtained a footing in a large place or has spread to a number of villages it will be found very difficult to apply the measures of disinfection and segregation. The policy to be adopted at a particular place will depend on its physical features, the season of the year, the general sentiment and state of education of the people in regard to plague measures, strength of the staff available, and the influence of the local authorities. The systematic destruction of rats in a threatened locality as well as in an infected area is of the greatest value both as a preventive and an arrestive measure. 2. In the larger places, i e., towns with a population of more than 10,000, the measures that will be found most applicable are disinfec- tion, inoculation, the evacuation of specially infected quarters, and (so long as infection has not spread through the town) the isolation of the sick. In villages, the chief measure to be relied on is evacuation, but inoculation and disinfection should also be resorted to so long as there is sufficient staff to supervise those measures. Evacuation in both towns and villages should be conjoined with an opening up of houses sufficient for the admission of sunlight and air whenever this is required. In carrying out these measures it should be borne in mind that it will always be better to apply one method efficiently and thoroughly than to apply a number of methods with an inadequate and insufficiently trained staff. Another point of importance is that in places where plague is constantly recurring and the amount of plague is liable to great seasonal variations, plague measures should be carried out with special vigour at the season when the epidemic is at its minimum. 3. Experience has shown that it is hopeless to carry out effectively any system of plague administration which is not supported by the people, and in a widespread epidemic the resources of Government in the matter of funds and establishment being limited, much must neces- sarily be left to the people themselves. Steps should, therefore, be taken
38 to inform them beforehand of the measures they will be required to submit to, and to convince them of the utility of the particular methods selected, so that they may be induced to carry them out not by force but by the exercise of their own free-will and as a consequence of their appreciating and understanding the benefits to be anticipated there- from. The measures are new to the people, particularly in fresh areas of infection, and if injudiciously or over-zealously pressed, must defeat themselves by exciting opposition instead of securing the co-operation of the people. On the other hand, if the leading inhabitants are induced to assist the Government officials in carrying out measures which are clearly beneficial, it may often be possible, with their help, to carry out with good results measures which would be ineffectual or injurious if enforced by definite orders upon a population ignorant of their advantages and suspicious of the objects with which they are adopted. (2) ADVANTAGES OF EARLY DISCOVERY OF PLAGUE. 4. The most important and the most difficult matter in all operations against plague is to obtain early information regarding the cases that occur. The prompt discovery of an imported case of plague may enable the local authorities to prevent a local outbreak, and even where a few indigenous cases have occurred, early information regarding each new case may make it possible to prevent the outbreak from spreading beyond a confined area. Every endeavour should therefore be made to obtain information of each case of plague that occurs, as soon as possible after the patient has been attacked, or where this is not possible, soon after death. 5. For this purpose, the notification system as described in the Regulations should be mainly relied upon, and the co-operation of the people in working it should be secured by pointing out to them the advantage of protecting themselves by not mixing with persons com- ing from infected areas and by giving the authorities prompt notice of their arrival and of any cases of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness among them. In towns, one or more volunteers of each caste should be invited to assist the circle officers in prosecuting enquiries and discovering plague cases. The risk of concealment of cases is lessened where people see that their leaders have ranged themselves on the side of the authorities. 6. Besides carrying out the other measures prescribed in the Regu- lations, attention should be paid to the improvement of the existing system of registering deaths. In municipal towns special daily returns of mortality may be called for and checked with the aid of trustworthy subordinates posted at burning and burial grounds. In villages whenever the deaths reported are found to be more frequent than usual, or when any case of fever with glandular swellings is reported, the tahsildar with the nearest medical officer should at once proceed to the village and make inquiries with a view to ascertain whether plague exists in the village; and the medical officer and the tahsildar should report to the district medical and sanitary officer the facts and the reasons for the decision arrived at by them as to the cause of the mortality.
?39 (3) EVACUATION. 7. By evacuation is meant the emptying of all or some of the houses in an infected town or village, so that they may not be used as dwelling houses until it is believed that they can again be occupied without risk of infection, the people thus removed being lodged in temporary camps in the open country. To make such evacuation thoroughly effective, the following conditions are required: (1) the people should all be got out promptly; (2) their effects should be disinfected; (3) each new case of plague should be immediately isolated; (4) suitable accommodation should be available; (5) the people should be effectually prevented from visiting or sleeping in the infected houses until either the houses have been disinfected or until sufficient time has elapsed for the infection to disappear; and (6) lastly they should not be permitted to scatter and spread the infection in the neighbourhood. 8. Evacuation provides the most effective safeguard against the spread of plague that has yet been discovered. Its advantages are self-evident and it should be resorted to wherever practicable. In villages and small towns (population not exceeding 10,000) complete evacuation (i.e., evacuation of all the houses) will be found to be generally possible. In large towns, the extent to which it can be carried out will depend on the willingness of the people, the season of the year, the situation of the town, the facilities for providing camp accommodation, and the strength of the available staff. It will be found to be of the greatest value at the very commencement of the outbreak, for the removal of the small number of people affected will not present any great difficulties, and prompt evacuation of the infected quarter may save the rest of the town. 9. Evacuation is, however, likely to do more harm than good in the following cases:- (a) During the rainy season, when it is impossible to keep the people, after they have once been removed from their houses, from going back to them. In such circumstances, the people who are removed are exposed to great inconvenience and misery without any countervailing advantages being derived from evacuation. (b) When the infection is widely distributed among the inhabitants of a large place, it is then advisable to agitate the people as little as possible, especially when there are among them a consider- able number of artisans and traders who may lose their occupation by being removed from the town and are therefore likely to run away and infect other places. (4) INOCULATION. 10. The exhaustive inquiries made by the Indian Plague Commis- sion have established the fact that inoculation with Haffkine's vaccine lessens the liability to plague and greatly increases the chance of recovery from an attack of the disease, and disproved the statement that serious ill-consequences have resulted from such inoculation. The maximum period for which protection is afforded by inoculation has not yet been determined. For practical purposes, it has been fixed, for the present, at nine months, but it should be noted that
40 inoculation does not confer any great degree of protection within the first few days. 11. Inoculation should be encouraged wherever possible and in particular among disinfecting staffs and the attendants of plague hospitals. In places which, either owing to their nearness to plague- infected places or to their having previously suffered from an attack of plague, appear to be specially threatened with a visitation of the disease, no effort should be spared to explain to the people the advan- tage of being inoculated before the disease is among them and to secure the co-operation of the more enlightened members of the com- munities. At the same time, no compulsion of any sort, direct or indirect, should be used. An awkward attempt at persuasion is liable to create opposition, resistance, and occasionally, unfounded appre- hension, and great circumspection is necessary in introducing inocula- tion in places where there is no demand for it. The District Magistrate should be consulted before starting inoculation at any place and the people should be distinctly warned that inoculation is not a certain prophylactic, but that it considerably reduces the chances of getting plague, that an inoculated person when attacked has increased chances of recovery, and that the process, if properly conducted, is harmless. 12. Only trained and reliable persons should be entrusted with the actual operation of inoculation, and supervision should be exercised over them to ensure that they use only sterilized implements. To remove any possible ground for distrust as to the conveyance of disease from one person to another, the inoculation syringe should be sterilized in the presence of the person about to be inoculated. The sterilization should be effected by immersion in carbolic acid, or preferably carbolized oil kept hot by the flame of a spirit lamp underneath. After a bottle has once been opened and only a portion of its contents used, the remainder should invariably be thrown away. 13. Inoculated persons should be furnished with certificates in the prescribed form. The certificate should bear the left thumb mark of the person inoculated and should be issued immediately after one full dose has been given, but the recipient should be recommended to return for a second inoculation after ten days. The full dose should always be given at one time, unless for medical reasons it is con- sidered advisable to divide it. If it is necessary to do this, a certifi- cate should not be given until the equivalent of two full doses has been given. If, however, no undue reaction ensues after the first fractional dose has been taken, it is advisable to give the full dose at once on the second occasion, after which a certificate may be given. 14. The privileges attached to inoculation are mentioned in Regu- lation 25. They are not admissible in cases of persons who have recovered from plague. As a further encouragement the Government have authorized the grant of three days' extra casual leave on full pay to all public servants for the purpose of being inoculated. Students attending Government and aided schools, who undergo inoculation, will be marked in the registers for not more than three consecutive days as "under inoculation," and such an entry will be regarded as equivalent to attendance.
?41 15.  The Sanitary Commissioner is in charge of all measures con- nected with inoculation and will issue the necessary rules as to the conduct of the operation, supply of Haffkine's vaccine, inoculation syringes, etc. (5)  DISINFECTION. 16.  Recent research seems now to demonstrate, with one important exception, viz., pneumonic plague (a) that the number of bacilli that actually leak out of the bodies of plague patients and rats is very small, and (b) that having left the body of their host they do not survive the drying action of the atmosphere for longer than 24 hours. Hence the attempt to kill these bacilli is scarcely worth the trouble and cost involved. But there remains an agent capable of carrying about for a considerable number of days large numbers of virulent plague bacilli, namely, the rat-flea. This insect under normal condi- tions, lives in the fur of the rat's skin and feeds on the blood of the animal. But when the rat dies the flea leaves the dead body and goes in search of other living rats and in the event of a failure to find another passes to the body of man, bites him and thereby infects the individual with plague. Consequently the great object of disinfection should be to kill the rat-flea that has left the dead rat; and in order to do this a preparation that will kill fleas and not bacilli is required. But having obtained such a solution which will kill fleas, there are difficulties in its application. Where the houses are of the ordinary poor class where plague is most likely to occur, the fleas may easily escape in holes and crevices in the walls and escape the syringing of the solution; and in most such cases the application of the solution is useless. In the better class of houses of masonry and plaster walls, disinfection with the solution is more likely to be successful and should be applied. Rat-fleas however die of starvation in a week if deprived of blood from either rat or man; hence a vacated house slowly disinfects itself. An empty house moreover has no great attraction for rats especially if it is infected. 17. Disinfection of houses should be always carried out in the following cases:- (i) in houses where the occupants cannot or will not vacate, (ii) in well-built pucca houses and bungalows. In these cases disinfection should be done thoroughly and at the earliest possible moment after discovery of infection. 18. Plague authorities should manufacture locally kerosine oil emulsion and should supply it gratis to people who wish to disinfect their own houses but they need not keep up an expensive staff to do this work. 19. Breaking holes in roofs and walls and digging up mud floors should be discontinued. 20. The actual burning down of houses should not be resorted to except in the case of temporary structures which are of little or no value, or in the case of houses which are unfit for human habitation. 21. (a) The best disinfecting fluid for general use is an emulsion of kerosine oil. The emulsion is made as follows:- To each four cakes of sliced "sunlight soap " add half a gallon of water and boil until all the soap is dissolved.
?42 Pour half a gallon of the solution still hot into an open tub tilted to allow the fluid to be beaten up with a cocoanut spoon such as is in general use by Indians. Whilst stirring or beating up, add oil little by little at intervals of about a minute, taking care that all trace of free oil is absorbed into the frothy mass before fresh oil is added. After the addition of about three gallons proceed very carefully. If properly done, one half gallon of soap solution should emulsify a whole tin of kerosine containing four gallons. The only error likely to be made in the first attempt is that from inefficient stirring or too quick addition of the oil premature over-saturation should occur, a fact which is at once apparent to the maker. To make one brew of four gallons takes about half an hour. It is desirable to have a couple of coolies to each tub to take turn about stirring and pouring the oil. Each couple of coolies should in a day turn out at the very least four brews; in actual practice they will probably be able to turn out much more. Another way in which the emulsion can be made with great ease and rapidity is to do the mixing in a country churn such as is used for making butter. (b) The emulsion should be used in the strength of 1 part to 10 parts of water. (c) Perchloride of mercury should no longer be used for dis- infection of houses as it has little or no action on fleas. 22. Disinfection of personal effects should be carried out in the following cases:- (a) Indian crews, third class or deck passengers and Indian servants leaving infected or healthy ports for ports out of India. This should be done on shore. (b) Plague patients and contacts removed from infected houses, ships or railway carriages. (c) People vacating their houses on account of dead rats being found in their houses. As the disinfection of personal belongings is very unpopular, especially those of women, and as nothing should be done that is likely to endanger the speedy vacating of the house when dead rats are found, the disinfection should take the form of arranging for the owner to place all soiled clothes in water or a solution of cyllin and water, and of exposing the bedding and better clothes to the action of the sun for two days. 23. Disinfection of the person should be carried out in the case of inmates vacating a plague-infected house, but, for the reason given in paragraph 22, the inmates should be requested to take a bath and change their clothes. 24. There seems little danger of the spread of plague by means of ordinary articles of merchandise, and it is therefore not neces- sary to disinfect such articles. Gunny bags that have been in use to carry grain should be disinfected in a steam-steriliser before being received by railway companies if they come from a plague-infected area. This does not apply to new gunny bags packed in bales. 25. Any railway carriage from which a passenger who is suffering from plague has been removed shall be detached at the nearest
?43 convenient station, and shall be disinfected by the railway authorities as follows and, if that station is an inspection station, such disinfec- tion shall be effected to the satisfaction of the inspecting medical officer. (i) In the case of a third class or intermediate class carriage, the carriage should be thoroughly well swilled with a solution of kerosine oil emulsion and allowed to dry. (ii) In the case of a first or second class carriage, the carriage should be kept on a siding locked and shut up for seven days. It should then be carefully swept out and cleaned and may be taken into use again. (6) RAT-PLAGUE AND DESTRUCTION OF RATS. 26. It has been observed and proved by experiment that rats are the essential agents in the dissemination of plague amongst human beings and it is apparent that if rat destruction could be carried out effectively and the number of rats sufficiently reduced, the risk to man would be materially lessened. 27. The experience of the Punjab Plague Committee who have undertaken rat destruction on a large scale, however, shows this method for the prevention of plague to be ineffective unless carried out in a systematic manner with a sufficient establishment and under competent supervision. If these essentials cannot be guaranteed rat destruction should not be attempted. Desultory trapping with a small number of traps and small establishment over a wide area will not in any way diminish rat population. Rat-trapping should, there- fore, be confined to places where the whole rat population can be effectively dealt with, i.e., in landing places, railway goods-sheds, grain godowns, holds of ships and cotton mills. It may, in special cases, when the previous sanction of Government has been obtained, be carried out in selected areas where sufficient establishment, funds and supervision can be provided. 28. Rat-trapping may be carried out in two ways- (a) Continuous systematic trapping, i.e., carrying on the work for some months in such a manner that each house gets trapped regularly about once a week. (b) Rapid trapping with a large number of traps for a short period. 29. Continuous trapping.-The continuous method is suited to towns and large villages with a population of 4,000 and over. Work should be started at least three months before the usual time for the commencement of plague. It is essential that the trapping should be systematic and for this purpose the houses should be numbered or the census numbers used in order to prepare a register of houses to control the regular distribution of the traps. The town or village should be divided into four or five blocks of equal size and the work conducted simultaneously in each block. 30. A central office or depot should be arranged as the basis of operations. The traps will be stored in and baited at this depot and distributed to the different blocks.
?44 31. The number of traps* required should be equal to at least 2 per cent. of the population. They should be numbered consecutively and their distribution registered. 32. Baiting.-The best baits are- (a) Bread soaked in gingelly or other vegetable oil. (b) Green vegetable garbage. (c) Onions. (d) Cocoanut. (e) Dried fish (not so good). 33. The trap should be cleaned once a week by dipping in water and scrubbing with a hard brush, and smeared with cocoanut oil when dry. 34. Establishment required.-One cooly should be employed for each 30 traps used and one peon who can write in English or the vernacular should be employed for every four coolies. The castes of these coolies should be such that some of them can enter every class of house. 35. The traps can be carried along on bamboo poles, each cooly carrying 10 or 12 traps in this way. Where a large number of traps are required hand-carts may be used. 36. The trap should be set in the afternoon and collected in the morning and returned to the depot to be rebaited. The rats caught should be killed by a knock on the head and then burnt, cowdung cakes being purchased for this purpose. If preferred, the rats may be killed by immersing the traps in a tank of water. 37. Records.-The peon should keep the following registers:- (1) Daily register of traps showing- (a) traps set each day, (b) houses trapped, and (c) number of rats caught. From   this a weekly statement can be prepared showing the number of rats caught per 100 traps set. (2) Register showing how often each house has been trapped and the number of rats caught in each house. 38. Rapid trapping.-This method should be used in- (a) villages in which plague persists in the off-season; (b) villages in the neighbourhood of an infected area; (c) villages in which rat mortality has commenced. 39. Villages in which plague persists in the off-plague season are a source of danger as being likely to hand over plague to other places in the following plague season. 40. As an epizootic in the off-plague season is seldom severe, vigorous trapping affords a reasonable chance of stopping the spread of plague amongst rats. 41. In villages threatened with infection a successful rat cam- paign immediately at the commencement of the favourable season wil * The trap recommended is the Rawalpindi trap made with a weighted flap-not a spring flap.
?45 materially reduce the chances of infection and tide over the critical period. 42. The idea of these rapid trapping operations is to remove the largest possible number of rats in the shortest period. 43. The trapping should be carried out by special travelling parties who should be equipped with traps in sufficient number to permit of one trap being set daily in each house of the village visited. 44. The visit to each village should last two or three weeks and the village authorities should be warned to assist the party in their work. 45. One supervisor and three or four peons who have had previous experience of the continuous trapping should accompany each party. 46. Local coolies should be engaged in the proportion of one to every 30 traps or whatever number they can conveniently manage. They will bait and distribute the traps under the supervision of the peons who will keep the registers of distribution. 47. The general conduct of the operations will be similar to that followed in the continuous trapping of towns, with the exception that one trap will be set daily in each house. 48. Special care should be taken in trapping grain godowns and if many rats are found in these, the traps should be further concentrated in the godowns. 49. The number of rats caught per 100 traps set at the beginning of the operations contrasted with the number caught at the termina- tion will show roughly to what extent the rats have been reduced in number. 50. Trapping may be supplemented by poisoning, the baits being distributed right through the village once only at the commencement of the campaign. 51. Poisoning.-(a) Nearly all the most efficient rat-poisons are mixtures of phosphorus with flour flavoured and sweetened to attract the rodents. Hence they are poisonous to man and animals and a certain amount of care is necessary to see that children, fowls, dogs, etc., do not eat the baits. The best preparations are the poison made by the Punjab Government (The Punjab Rat Exterminator, price annas 12 per tin) and Mushicide (price Rs. 3 per tin). The former can be obtained by sending indents to the Sanitary Commis- sioner for Madras who will arrange for the supply, but as a large stock is not maintained notice of approximate requirements should be sent early. The latter can be obtained from Messrs. Jaggat Singh Son & Brother, Rawalpindi. (b) Procedure adopted in carrying out poisoning operations.-The following is the procedure adopted: the contents, 12 ounces, of a tin of the poison are thoroughly mixed with 2 lb. of jaggery or treacle sufficient flour being added to make a stiff paste; this is rolled into large pills and is sufficient to make 1,600 baits. Although general ignition of the poison cannot take place at high temperature, some slight sparking of particles may occur; to avoid this the mixing should not be done in the sun's rays, handling should be avoided as much as possible, hands should be kept wet with water. The pill method is superior to spreading the paste on bread because baits can
?46 be prepared more rapidly, the poison does not volatilise and the baits retain their poisonous qualities for some time; they are also less luminous in the dark, and, therefore, more readily taken by rats. These baits are placed about 20-40 to each house, in places that are practically only accessible to the rat, which excludes all danger to children and domestic animals; such places are in the rat holes them- selves, behind boxes, underneath corn bins, on the tops of the wall supporting the roof, etc. In any town or village as large an area as practicable should be treated in this way, at a single operation, in order to give as great a shock as possible to the rat population before they recognise the dangerous character of the bait. Baitings on successive days have been found to have no advantage over the single baiting method. Baits are prepared in the morning and laid in the afternoon and evening. For the preparation and placing of the baits a compounder and three coolies are usually employed. Such agency can ordinarily prepare and lay, in a day, from 9,000 to 12,000 baits, that is to say, they can thoroughly treat a village of 400 houses, approximate population 2,000-2,400. A sub-assistant surgeon or assistant surgeon should ordinarily be in charge of one or more gangs, such gangs operating in large villages or adjacent small villages. Where the active co-operation of the inhabitants is obtained, more work than this can be done. If the baits are properly placed, they may be allowed to remain, instructions being issued that all village sweepings for the next week should be burnt; otherwise baits will find their way to the village rubbish heap, where fowls, pigs, etc., may find and eat them. The dead rats found are collected and buried or burnt. A search for dead rats should be made every morning for six days after the poisoned baits are put down. (c) The frequency with which this procedure should be repeated depends on the rate at which the rat population recover from the shock caused by the poison, but on the whole a month should elapse before any fresh trial to poison rats of any particular neighbourhood is attempted. (d) This method of poisoning should be made use of whenever an epidemic is likely to occur, but in all places where a recrudescence is expected in the cold weather two attempts should be made, one in the month of October and the other in November. This should be done once only and not repeated for three months at least. 52. The charges incurred in the destruction of rats should be debited to local or municipal funds according to the area within which such charges are incurred.
?47 APPENDIX B. [See Rule 23.] PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty.  Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. *  A. Medical officers wholly employed on plague duty. (i) Officers   of  the   Indian Medical  Service  in military or civil employ. Consolidated   pay  according to the following scale : -      Rank.  Consolidated pay per. Mensem            RS.   Lieutenant               700   Captain     750   Captain after five       years' service.    800       Captain after seven      years' service. 850       Captain  after ten       years' service. 900       Major             1,000   Major after three      years' service. 1,100       Lieutenant-Colonel.    1,450  (ii)  Senior military   assist- ant surgeons with the honorary     rank       of Captain or Lieutenant. Rs. 5  per diem,  together   with house rent allowance (in lieu of free   quarters)  of Rs. 50 a month.           (iii) Military  assistant  sur- geons in civil or   mili- tary   employ   on pay exceeding Rs. 150. Rs. 3 a    day.                   (In   addition to any acting,    charge    or house allowance they may have been drawing at the time of their  deputation to plague duty and which  they   would have  continued to draw but for  such deputation.                  (iv) Military  assistant sur geons in civil or  mili tary  employ   on  pay not exceeding Rs. 150.              Rs. 2 a          day.                           (v) Civil    assistant surgeons. Rs. 2 a day.     (vi) Civil  apothecaries Rs. 25 a month or in the case of men, who at the   time of  their deputation were in independ- ent   charge,   the   full   charge allowance of their grades.               * Medical officers whose sole duty is the inspection of ships for plague purposes are not entitled to any special fee for conducting inspection in rough weather.  A port health officer will be entitled to a local allowance of one-thirtieth of a month's pay for each Sunday or close holiday on which he is unavoidably required to inspect vessels in connection with plague. Each member of the port health officer's staff will be entitled to a similar allowance in the same circumstances. The allowance will be given only in cases where no compensation holiday is granted and shall not exceed one-thirtieth of the salary of the officer whatever may be the number of inspec- tions made by him on the Sunday or close holiday.
?48 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-cont. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Medical officers wholly employed on plague duty - cont. (vii) Sub-assistant surgeons employed as plague inspectors. Vide appendix O.  (viii) Sub-assistant surgeons engaged on other plague duty. * Rs. 10 a month. This allow- ance will be in addition to house-rent or free quarters according to rule if employed on the plains. If employed on the hills, a consolidated hill allowance of one-third of the pay will be paid, but no house- rent or warm clothing allow- ance will be admissible. A pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem will be paid if the sub- assistant surgeon has other than purely stationary duties, provided a serviceable pony is maintained and used. If instead of a pony a serviceable bicycle is maintained and used with the permission of the Collector, a bicycle allowance of Rs.5 per mensem will be paid.                                                                B. Medical officers doing plague work in addition to their ordinary duties, (1)   Commissioned officers.  Such local allowance, not exceeding one-fifth of the salary, as may be fixed in each case by Government. The allowance should be given only to  officers whose additional plague work, such as that of medical inspection of passengers by road or railway, is entirely separate from, and outside the sphere of, their ordinary duties and not to officers whose ordinary and legitimate work, such as that of attending on the sick in hospital, has been increas- ed owing to the occurrence of plague.                                     (2)   Medical subordi- nates.                                        (3) Nurses or midwives.  * This allowance will be admissible irrespective of the fact whether the sub- assistant surgeon was in receipt of a charge allowance or not at the time of his depu- tation to plague duty. No separate allowance will, however, be paid in lieu of charge allowance nor can deputation allowance be drawn in addition.  An allowance of one-thirtieth of a month's pay may be drawn by a port health officer for every day certified by the port officer to be a day of bad weather on which he is unavoidably required to inspect a vessel in connection with plague. In the case of the port of Madras this allowance may be drawn only in case of inspection of vessels lying outside the Madras harbour. A double allowance, two-thirtieths, may be drawn by a port health officer when he is required to make this inspection involving special risk on a Sunday or close holiday, but in no case shall any port health officer draw any addi- tional allowance whatever may be the number of inspections made by him on that day.  See note  on page 47.  When the out-door plague work of a medical subordinate is so heavy as to necessitate the use of a conveyance, carts or jutkas may be provided for him by the local body concerned. The actual charges incurred in the payment of hire should be debited to "Contingencies."
?49 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-cont. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. C. Plague supervisors belonging to the salt, abkari and other departments. (i) Appointed in non-muni- cipal areas. Allowance of 25 per cent. of the pay + Rs. 30 fixed travelling allowance + Rs. 15 horse allow- ance, provided the permanent pay + 25 per cent. thereof does not fall below Rs. 80.                 (ii) Appointed in municipal towns. Same as in the case of C (i) but minus the fixed travelling allowance.       D. Compounders on ambulance staff. .... Allowance of 20 per cent. of the salary to be granted only when the ambulance staff is on active plague duty. Note.-(i) The instructions issued in G.O. No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904, as to the creation of temporary appointments and the grant of deputation allow- ances to servants employed on plague duty should be carefully followed. (ii) The language allowance of Rs. 2 per mensem granted under paragraph 210 of the Civil Medical Code is inadmissible in the case of sub-assistant surgeons on plague duty.
?50 PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty. Designation. Salary. Remarks. A. Retired commis- sioned medical officers. Rs. 500 a month (in addition to their pensions which will continue to be a mili- tary charge). The officer must have retired before 1st April 1898, and his re-employment must be either on plague duty or in a post which cannot be filled, in the ordinary way by reason of the officers, who would, in ordinary course, be available for it, being required for plague duty. The appointment requires the previous sanction of the Government of India. B. Temporary English doctors. Rs. 500 a month or such salary as may be fixed in their agreements with the Secretary of State.  C. Retired military assistant surgeons. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement + Rs. 100 allowance subject to a maximum of Rs. 350 a month. In special cases the local Government may raise the limit to Rs. 500. A retired honorary com- missioned officer of the Indian Subordinate Medi- cal Department is entitled to double first-class travel- ling allowance by rail, and eight annas a mile by road. The officers should be required to produce certificates of phy- sical fitness, and their appoint- ments should, in the first instance, be made for periods not exceeding six months. D. Uncovenanted medical officers. Such pay not exceeding Rs. 350 a month as the Surgeon-General may find necessary, with travelling allowances to and from the places to which they are posted at the rates of double second-class fares for journeys by rail and annas 4 a mile for journeys by road. The term of employment may, subject to their good conduct and efficiency, be for a period of three months, the engage- ment being terminable after the expiry of the first two months by a written notice given by either the Govern- ment or the officer. E. Temporary civil assistant surgeons. Pay Rs. 100 a month + allowance of Rs. 2 a day, with travelling allowance to and from the place to which they are appointed. .... F. Private sub-assis- tant surgeons. Pay assigned to the corre- sponding grades of sub- assistant surgeons in Government service [ + 50 per cent. thereof] with compensation for quarters. .... G. Retired sub-assis- tant surgeons. Pay of their grade at the time of retirement (in addition to their pension). ....
?51 PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks.  H. Lady nurses obtained from England. (a) Rs. 175 a month in addi- tion to free quarters, fuel, lights and punkah pullers, commencing from date of embarka- tion to India; If free quarters are not provided, an allowance of Rs. 3 a day should be paid.  (b) double first-class fare by rail when travelling on duty;   (c) first-class passage when proceeding by steamer from one part of India to another on duty.  I. Qualified Euro- pean, Eurasian orIndian nurses locally recruited. Such pay not ordinarily exceeding Rs. 75 a month with free quarters or Rs. 10 for house-rent. When the nurses attend on plague patients, a boarding allowance of Rs. 1-8-0 a day in the case of Europeans and Eurasians, or one rupee in the case of Indians should be paid. When employed on duties entailing a considerable amount of moving about within a limited area and necessitating the frequent hiring of vehicles, they may be paid actual convey- ance allowances irrespective of the five miles' limit prescribed in article 1055 of the Civil Service Regulations. For terms on which caste Indian nurses may be trained, see G.O. No. 1835 P., dated 23rd December 1899.  J. Private gentle- men appointed as plague supervisors in municipal towns. Rs. 2 a day + Rs. 15, horse allowance. Such supervisors should usually be Europeans or Eurasians. They need not be appointed un- less the outbreak of plague requires a special organization to deal with it. K. Private gentle- men appointed as plague supervisors in rural areas. Rs. 80 pay + Rs. 30, fixed travelling allowance, + Rs. 15, horse allowance.  L. Plague inspec- tors. [As in Appendix C.]  M. Other temporary subordinates including menial servants, Such rates as would be suffi- cient to induce persons to take up the appointments. Menial servants are not eligible for any allowances, and should be conveyed from place to place at the cost of Government. Note.-The pony or horse allowance admissible to officers under this appendix may, at the discretion of the Collector, be converted into an allowance for the upkeep of any other conveyance, provided that the allowance does not exceed Rs. 5 per mensem should the conveyance maintained and used be a bicycle. 4-A
?52 APPENDIX C. [See Rule 23.] Pay and Allowances of Plague Inspectors. Plague inspectors will be- I. Certificated sanitary inspectors ; II. Sub-assistant surgeons; or III. Men specially trained for plague duty. I.-Certificated Sanitary Inspectors. Certificated sanitary inspectors include sanitary inspectors, assis- tant sanitary inspectors and certificated sanitary inspectors under G.O. No. 1131 L., dated 11th September 1903. G.O. No. 1080 L., dated 27th September 1905. Plague inspectors for range work should primarily be recruited from this class. A list of men available for duty will be kept by the Sanitary Commissioner by whom they will be posted for plague work on the requisition of, and in consultation with, Collectors. When once an inspector has been posted, further control on the part of the Sanitary Commissioner will cease, and he should not be withdrawn or transferred by the Sanitary Commissioner without the consent of the authority employing him and in the case of a local fund official whose appointment is pensionable without the sanction of Government. Pay and Allowances. The pay and allowances of a certificated sanitary inspector on plague duty will be regulated as follows :- (i) When employed as a range inspector in a rural area.  Rs. 45 pay + Rs. 15 Pony allowance. When employed in  the municipalities of Ootacamund, Coonoor or Kodai- knal, or in rural areas in the Nilgiris, he will be entitled to draw a hill allow- ance of one-third of the pay.       (ii) When employed as a disinfection insp- pector in a rural area.   Rs. 45 pay.   When travelling on duty a daily allowance of As. 8 under article 1063 of the Civil Service Regulations up to a maximum of Rs. 8 a month, or a fixed monthly allowance of Rs. 8, at the discretion of the Collector.                          (iii) When employed as a divisional inspector in a municipality. Rs. 40 pay + Rs. 15 pony allowance.        (iv) When employed as a disinfection ins- pector in a munici- pality. Rs. 40 pay.           (v) When employed in a Union. Not more than what is ad- missible to him when employed in a Munici- pality.            Note.-(1) A Government servant transferred to local fund or municipal service for employment as a plague inspector will draw his permanent pay plus 25 per cent. thereof, provided that the aggregate is not less than Rs. 35 and not greater than Rs. 45, as well as the allowances admissible under this part of the appendix for the class of duties performed. (2) The emoluments of certificated sanitary inspectors deputed for plague work from local fund or municipal service, either temporary or permanent, will be regulated under the rules as to deputation allowances issued under G.O. No. 384, Finan- cial, dated 16th June 1904.
?53 II.-Sub-Assistant Surgeons. The allowances of a sub-assistant surgeon employed as a plague ins- pector will be as follows: ordinarily the service of only third-grade sub-assistant surgeons should be used for range work:- Grade pay + special plague al- lowance* of Rs. 10. In cases  where he has other than purely  stationary duties, he will be  given a cycle allowance of Rs. 5  or a pony allowance of Rs. 15  provided he maintains and  uses a serviceable pony.  If employed on the hills the sub-assist- ant Surgeon will be entitled to draw a consolidated hill allowance of one- third of the pay, but no house-rent or warm clothing allowance will be  admissible.   III.-Men specially trained for Plague Duty. These are men who are selected locally by the Collector for training and after being trained specially for plague duty by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner receive certificates from the latter as to their fitness for employment as plague inspectors. Their pay and allow- ances will be regulated as follows:- (i) (a) A member of the permanent establishment in superior service, whether belonging to the Revenue or other branches of the Government service, employed as a range inspector in a rural area will draw a minimum pay of Rs. 35 plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15. But when employed as a disinfection inspector in a rural area be will draw only a minimum pay of Rs. 35; no pony allowance will be granted, but when travelling on duty a daily allowance of As. 8 under article 1063 of the Civil Service Regulations up to a maximum of Rs. 8 a month or, at the discretion of the Collector, a fixed monthly allow- ance of Rs. 8 may be granted. (b) A member of the permanent establishment in local fund or municipal service employed as a plague inspector in a rural area will draw in addition to his salary in such service only a deputation allow- ance in accordance with the rules issued in G.O. No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904, plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem, if employed as a range inspector, or a daily allowance of As. 8 when travelling, under article 1063 of the Civil Service Regulations up to a maximum of Rs. 8 a month or at the discretion of the Collec- tor, a fixed monthly allowance of Rs. 8 if employed as a disinfection inspector. (c) A private person employed-as a plague inspector in a rural area will draw such pay not exceeding Rs. 30 as the Collector may fix. When employed as a range inspector, he may be paid a pony allowance of Rs. 15, and if employed as a disinfection inspector, he may be paid when travelling a daily allowance of As. 8 up to a maxi- mum of Rs. 8 a month, or a fixed monthly allowance of Rs. 8, at the discretion of the Collector. Note.-(1) A pay in excess of Rs. 35 can be granted to Government servants only if admissible under rule I of article 764 of the Civil Service Regulations. (2) All plague inspectors employed in the Nilgiris will be entitled to draw a consolidated bill allowance calculated at one-third of their pay. * The special plague allowance will be admissible irrespective of the fact whether the sub-assistant surgeon was in receipt of a charge allowance or not at the time of his deputation to plague duty. No separate allowance will, however, be paid in lieu of charge allowance nor can deputation allowance be drawn in addition.
?54 (ii) In the case of a person specially trained who is employed on plague duty in a municipality or a union the pay shall not ordinarily exceed the following scale :- (a) Range Inspector.-Rupees 25 for a charge of about 5,000 inhabitants (or 1,200 houses). Rupees 30 for a charge of about 6,500 inhabitants (or 1,500 houses). When employed in the Coonoor, Ootacamund or Kodaikanal Municipality he will be entitled to draw a hill allowance of one-third of the pay plus pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem. (b) Divisional Inspector.-Rupees 40 plus Rs. 15 pony allow- ance. When employed in the Coonoor, Ootacamund or Kodaikanal Municipality he will be entitled to draw a hill allowance of one-third of the pay. (c) Disinfection Inspector.-A range or divisional inspector appointed as a disinfection inspector will draw the pay he received as range or divisional inspector and no special allowances will be granted for doing disinfection work. (iii) A member of the permanent establishment in the superior service of Government who is specially trained for plague duty, will be paid the following emoluments when employed as a plague inspector in a municipality or union, subject to the maximum rates prescribed in clause (ii):- (1) When employed as a range inspector, a minimum pay of Rs. 25 per mensem. (2) When employed as a divisional inspector, a minimum pay of Rs. 30 plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem. (3) A pay in excess of the limits mentioned in clauses (1) and (2) can be granted only if admissible under rule I of article 764 of the Civil Service Regulations. (iv) A member of the permanent establishment in local fund or municipal service who is specially trained for plague duty and employed as a plague inspector in a municipality or union, will draw in addition to his salary in such service only a deputation allowance, in accordance with the rules issued in G. O. No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904. A pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem will be granted to him if he is employed as a divisional inspector. Note.-(1) The instructions issued in G. O. No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904, as to the creation of temporary appointments and the grant of deputation allow- ances to servants employed on plague duty, should be carefully followed. (2) The pony allowance admissible to officers under this appendix may, at the discretion of the Collector, be converted into an allowance for the upkeep of any other conveyance, provided that the allowance does not exceed Rs. 5 per mensem should the conveyance maintained and used be a bicycle.
?55 APPENDIX D. [See Rules 39-43.] List of Plague Charges. PROVINCIAL-INDIRECT. 3. LAND REVENUE-Charges of District Administration. General Establishments-  (1) Cost of additions to office establishments of revenue officers necessitated by plague. Salaries.   Establishment.   Allowances.   Contingencies. (2) Pay and allowances of tem-  porary additions to the revenue staff necessitated by plague.    Sub-divisional Establishments -   Establishment.  Allowances.   Contingencies.  15. POST OFFICE-District Post Charges. Establishments. (3) Additional post establish-  ments for serving plague camps. Allowances.   Contingencies.  18. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION-Civil Secretariats. Chief Secretariat -  (4) Extra establishment required for dealing with plague correspondence.    Establishment.   Local and Municipal Department -   Establishment.   19-A. LAW AND JUSTICE-COURTS OF LAW-Criminal Courts. Charges of Stationary Sub  Magistrates.  (5) Court required in consequence of plague.      Special Sub-Magistrate.   Temporary Establishment.   Allowances.   Contingencies.   20. POLICE. Presidency Police.  (6) Additional police employed  in consequence of plague. District Executive Force.  Railway Police.  24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment. District Medical and Sanitary  (7) Extra allowances on account of plague of medical officers and subordinates performing plague  duties in addition to ordinary duties. Officers-  Allowances.   Reserve Medical Subordinates -   Allowances.
?56 24-C. MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitary Department -  Establishment. (8) Extra establishment employ-  ed in the office of the Sanitary  Commissioner in connection with  plague work. 30-C. STATIONERY AND PRINTING. Government Press (9) Cost of printing at the  Government Press, notifications,  budgets, inoculation certificates,  certificates of exemption from  notification rules, detention cer-  tificates, detailed reports of  plague cases to be submitted by  plague inspectors and copies of the  Gazette notifications about plague  infected areas and notification sta- tions. PROVINCIAL-DIRECT. 24-D. MEDICAL-Grants for Medical Purposes. Salaries -  (10) Pay and allowances of medi- cal officers and subordinates includ- ing clerks and notification-issuing officers exclusively employed on plague duty in connection with the inspection and observation of tra- vellers by sea and by railway and the segregation and medical treat- ment of such as are affected or suspected to be affected with plague, at sea-ports, or at railway stations notified as railway inspection sta- tions in the Fort St. George Gazette. Salaries of Plague Commis- sioner, gazetted medical officers and military officers.      Plague allowances of gazetted medical officers and military officers.      Salaries of subordinate medical officers.    Plague allowances of subordi- nate medical officers.    Exchange compensation allow- ance.    House-rent allowances. (11) Temporary establishments entertained for the purposes men- tioned in No. (10). Local allowances.     Establishments. (12) Grants for the construction, etc., of private plague hospitals. Allowances - (13) Cost of construction of sheds and cost of medical stores, disinfect- ants, carbon paper, etc., required strictly for the purposes specified in No. (10). Tentage of officers.  Travelling allowances of gazetted officers.    Travelling allowances of non- gazetted officers and estab- lishments.   (14) Pay and allowances of Government officers other than those mentioned in item No. (10) whether belonging to the Indian Civil Service, Forest, Survey, Customs, Salt or other depart- ments, specially deputed by   Supplies and Services -  Petty construction and repairs of buildings.    Contribution to private hos- pitals.
?57 Dieting charges.  Government for employment in connection with plague measures, and clerks and servants attached to them; also the emoluments of medical men and nurses procured  from Europe and clerks and servants attached to them. Cost of instruments,  medicines and disinfectants.     Hospital clothing and bed- ding.     Other hospital equipment and  necessaries.     Contingencies -  (15) The extra allowances on  account of plague of commissioned medical officers in military employ performing plague duty in cantonments in addition to their own should be borne by the Military Department.   Tour charges.   Service postage.   Do. telegrams.   Purchase of furniture   Repairs of do.   Office expenses.   Miscellaneous.  LOCAL-INDIRECT.  18-J. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION-General Establishment of Local Funds. Establishments.  (16) Extra establishment employed in local fund offices.    Allowances.   Contingencies.  24-A. MEDICAL-Medical Establishment. District Medical and Sanitary  (17) Additions to the office establishment of district medical and sanitary officer.    Officers' establishment-  Establishments.   Allowances.  Contingencies.   24-B. MEDICAL-Hospitals and Dispensaries. Salaries.  (18) Extra expenditure in existing  hospitals and dispensaries due to  plague.    Establishments.   Allowances.   Supplies and Services.   Contingencies.  MEDICAL-Sanitation and Vaccination. Sanitation and Conservancy -  (19) Additions to the existing sanitary staff for plague work.   Establishment.   Allowances.   Supplies and Service.   Contingencies.  LOCAL-DIRECT. Salaries -  (20) Pay and allowances of medical subordinates, clerks and notification-  issuing officers employed in plague hospitals and at railway stations not notified as railway inspection stations  in the Fort St. George Salaries of subordinate  medical officers.     House-rent allowance.  Plague allowance.
?58 Establishment -  Gazette and at road frontier notifica- tion stations. Matrons and nurses.  Compounders. (21) Cost of observation staff consisting of plague supervisors, plague inspectors and their peons. Ward attendants and servants.    Storekeepers. (22) Ambulance staff. Establishments employed at plague camps and road frontier notification stations and at railway stations not notified as railway inspec- tion stations in the Fort St. George Gazette. (23) Cost of camp establishments, superintendents and gumastahs and menial servants.  (24) Cost of construction of plague hospitals and "observation," "sus- pect ," " health" and " staff " camps. The cost of sheds constructed in cantonments should be borne by cantonment funds.       Allowances -  Travelling allowances.  Supplies and Services - (25) Cost of stretchers, medical stores, disinfectants, comforts and furniture and clothing for plague hospitals. Petty construction and  repairs of buildings.    Funeral expenses.  Dietary charges. Nos. (20) to (25) must be understood as referring to expen- diture for purposes other than those specified in No. (10). Clothing and bedding.  Cost of medicines and instru-  ments and disinfectants.    Other hospital necessaries. (26) Rewards for the destruction of rats. Contingencies -  Purchase of furniture. (27) Cost of carbon paper sup- plied to notification-issuing officers at railway stations not notified as railway inspection stations in the Fort St. George Gazette. Repairs of furniture.  Tour charges.  Postage charges.  Telegraph charges.  Office expenses.  Miscellaneous.
APPENDIX E. [Form prescribed in G.o. No. 194, Financial, dated 12th May 1909, and referred to in Rule 44.] PROVINCIAL. Abstract of Direct and Indirect plague charges showing by districts the estimates for 191 - 1 and the expenditure under each head for the half-year ending the 191 .  Districts. 3. LAND REVENUE. 18. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. 20. POLICE.  Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year. Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year. Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13  RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. Total               Districts. 24-A. & C. MEDICAL including Sanitation and Vaccination. 24. D. MEDICAL. TOTAL.  Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year. Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year. Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year.  14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. RS. Total              The estimates in columns 2, 6, 10,14,18 and 22 should be the sanctioned estimates as contained in the Civil Budget Estimate. Columns 3, 5, 7, 9,11,13,15, 17,19, 21, 23 and 25 need not be filled up for the first half-year. 59
?APPENDIX E-cont. LOCAL. Abstract statement of Direct and Indirect plague charges showing by districts the estimates for 191 -1 and the expenditure under each head during and up to the half-year ending the 191 .  Districts. Indirect.  Direct.  Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year.  Estimates for the year 191 -1 . Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year.  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  RS. RS RS. RS. RS.  RS. RS. RS. Total          Columns 3, 5, 7 and 9 need not be filled up during the first half-year. 60
?61 APPENDIX E-cont. MUNICIPAL. Statement of plague expenditure showing the estimates for 191 -1 and the expenditure during and up to the half-year ending the      191 . Districts. Serial number. Municipalities. Estimates for the year 191 -1 .  Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure to the end of the half-year. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7    RS. RS. RS. RS.               Total       Columns 5 and 7 need not be filled up during the first half-year. CANTONMENT. Statement of plague expenditure showing the estimates for 191 -1 and the expenditure during and up to the half-year ending the          191 . Serial number. Cantonments. Estimates for the year 191 -1 .  Expenditure up to the commencement of the half-year. Expenditure during the half-year. Total expenditure up to the end of the half-year. 1 2 3 4 5 6   RS. RS. RS. RS.       Columns 4 and 6 need not be filled up during the first half-year.
?62 APPENDIX E-cont. Statement showing the charges on account of salaries of officers and establishments forming part of existing departments employed on plague duty but not replaced by substitutes for the half-year ending 191 Districts. Establish- Police. Salt and Abkri. Total.  ment     under the     Collector.         [Note.-Columns may be added, if necessary, if there are charges incurred in respect of departments other than those shown in this statement.] APPENDIX F. [See Rule 53.] [To be submitted within 24 hours of discovery of a plague case.] Hamlet-. Village-. Number in taluk map-. Population-. 1. Name, age and caste of the patient. 2. (a) Date of commencement of illness. (b) Date of death. 3. (a) Were there any plague cases or deaths by fever in the house or family within the last 30 days, if so, when ? (b) Did the patient remove any plague corpse or infected article ? (c) Was the patient in close contact with any plague cases ? (d) Did he obtain grain, clothing or other article from any infected house or shop ? (e) Did he visit any plague-infected locality, if so, when (f) Did any person from an infected area reside in his house : if so, when ? Did they bring goods susceptible to infec- tion with them ? (g) If answers to questions (a) to (f) be found in the negative to what source can the infection be traced ? 4. If he arrived from any infected locality by rail- (a) Did he deliver his notification ? (b) Was his arrival noticed by village munsif and, if not, what is his explanation? (c) At what hour did the village munsif send information as to the illness of the patient ?
?63 5. (a) Date and hour at which range inspector heard of the case and how information was obtained: if from any official, state name and designation. (b) Date and hour at which range inspector went to the village. (c) Note date and hour at which first intimation of attacks was sent to- (i) Assistant plague officer. (ii) Nearest medical officer. (iii) Plague officer. (d) Explanation of delay between- (i) Date of attack and date of despatch of first intimation to superior officers; (ii) Date of first intimation and date of despatch of detailed report. 6. Was the case reported by the village munsif ? (a) (i) If not, what is his explanation ? (ii) Did he keep the fever register properly, and on what date was the case entered in it ? (b) (i) Who is the house-owner, or chief male member of the family ? (ii) Did he give information as required by plague regula- tion 13 and, if not, what explanation is forthcoming as to why he should not be prosecuted ? (c) Name and designation of the person who first reported the case and the date on which he did so. (d) What action did the village munsif take before arrival of the range inspector to prevent spread of the disease ? 7. (a) When did the range inspector last visit the village ? (b) How many deaths were there in the village- (i) since the range inspector's last visit; and (ii) since the commencement of the preceding month ? (iii) How many of the deaths were registered as due to fever and to causes that you consider might be con- fused with suspicious cases of plague ? 8. Was the patient examined- (a) by any medical officer, and by whom and when ? (b) What symptoms of plague were noticed ? (c) Brief history as given by medical officer or as ascertained by medical officer. 9. (a) Was the patient isolated ? (b) What accommodation was provided for him ? (c) Is he treated, if so, by whom ? (d) What objections, if any, exist for his being removed to plague hospital or being treated by ambulance ? (e) Is it necessary to provide him with rations, if so, how was he provided for, pending orders ? (f) What rations were ordered ? 10. Note names of contacts, if known- (a) The relationship to the patient and age. (b) Which of the contacts are in actual attendance on the patient ?
?64 11. (a) Was the infected house evacuated, if so, when ? (b) Were the house, clothing and other property disinfected, if so, how ? (c) What "samans " were found in it and how were they dis- infected ? (d) Were all rags and rubbish burnt ? (e) Was the corpse buried or burnt ? 12. Are measures being taken to kill rats and destroy the carcasses by fire? Describe them and state degree of success. 13. Are rats plague-infected ? 14. Have steps been taken to verify the diagnosis of plague in the human being or rats by bacteriological examination or otherwise ? 15. General remarks. Date                                                        Range Inspector. Plague Report. From The range inspector. Date of despatch. Date of receipt by assistant plague officer. Remarks by assistant plague officer as to- (i) whether he inspected the case and supervised the opera- tions. (ii) If not, why not ? (iii) Any other remarks. Date of despatch to plague officer. Assistant Plague Officer. Date of receipt by plague officer. Remarks as to when he visited the village, where the ambulance is stationed, etc. Date Plague Officer.
?65 APPENDIX G. [See Rule 57.] Statement to accompany proposals for placing restrictions on fairs and festivals.    Name of festival or fair. Place where held Distance to nearest railway station. Date of beginning and termination of festival or fair. Average attendance during the past three years.  From what districts in the Madras Presidency and from what places outside the Presidency pilgrimage should be prohibited, and the number of people expected from each of such districts or places. 1 2 3 4 5 6        APPENDIX H. [See Rule 57.] Notifications for placing Restrictions on Fairs and Festivals. NOTIFICATION No. I. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held is infected.] WHEREAS there is plague at         , in the            taluk of the                 district, and whereas it is desirable to prevent its spread : The Governor in Council, in exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, prohibits pilgrimage to the ensuing                     festival of from the           to          , inclusive, [and also the holding of the usual cattle fair in connection with the said festival,] [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold at the station [s] of                    on the                                         Railway and the station[s] of                        on the  Railway for the station[s] of on the                                                            Railway and the station[s] of                       on the Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present at the said festival.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contraven- tion of this notification will be turned back. 5
66 NOTIFICATION No. II. [To be used when the village where the festival or fair is held lies in the vicinity of an infected area and it is necessary to prohibit all pilgrimage.] WHEREAS the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at                   in the taluk of the                                  district, if pilgrims are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing                         festival of                              [and the usual cattle fair is permitted to be held at that place] : In exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, the Governor in Council prohibits [the holding of the said fair and also the] pilgrimage to the said festival from the to                                    , inclusive, [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold at the station[s] of                    on the                  Railway and the station[s] of                                          on the Railway for the station[s] of                                   on the Railway and the station[s] of                            on the Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present at the said festival.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contraven- tion of this notification will be turned back. NOTIFICATION No. III. [To be used in cases where pilgrimage from infected areas is prohibited.] WHEREAS the Governor in Council is satisfied that there is danger of an outbreak of plague at                                              in the taluk of the                     district, if persons from the and other parts declared to be infected with plague are permitted to visit that place on the occasion of the ensuing festival [and cattle fair]; In exercise of the powers delegated to him under the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, the Governor in Council prohibits [the holding of the cattle fair and also] the attendance at the said festival [or fair] from the                                          to inclusive, of persons from the said parts, [and further directs that between the said dates no tickets to travel by railway shall be sold at the station[s] of                                                   on the Railway and the station[s] of                            on the Railway for the station [s] of                                                    on the Railway and the station[s] of on the                      Railway to any person intending or believed to be intending to be present at the said festival.] All persons proceeding to the said festival [or fair] in contra- vention of this notification will be turned back.
APPENDIX 1. Last of officers on plague duty in the               district during the half year ending 31st March 191 6
68 ?APPENDIX I. [Vide rules 19 and 61.] List of officers on plague duty in the                district during the half-year ending 31st March 191 . Head of service. Name or number. Office. Pay. Allowance. Date of commencement of appointment. Duties of office. Number and date of sanction. Date of expiry of sanction. Remarks. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 SECTION I. - PROVINCIAL.    RS. A.P. RS.      3. Land Revenue. One  Plague clerk,  Collector's  office. 20 0 0 15th Sept. 1898.  To attend to plague  correspondence in the Collector's office. G.O. No. 249  P., dated  18th April 1914. 30th Sept. 1914.   Plague Police. 20. Police  One  Head con-  stable. 15 0 0   19th Jan. 1898. For the inspection  station at Jalar- pet. G.O. No. 955,  Judl., dated  25th April 1914 31st May 1916.   Twenty Constables 160 0 0       Railway Inspection Station - Jalarpet. 24-D. Medical. Lieut. J. H.  Williamson, I.S.M.D. Retired Mili- tary Assist- ant Surgeon. 100 0 0 (a) 2 per diem. 11th Sept. 1914. Inspection of pass-  engers on the platform. G.O. No. 402  P., dated 4th August 1914. 31st May 1916. (a) Plague allowance.  Two  Peons 14 0 0  24th Aug. 1898. To attend on the  Assistant Sur- geon. Do. Do.
69 ?SECTION II. - LOCAL. 24-D. Medical. A. Murugesa Mudaliyar.  Specially train- ed Plague Inspector. 30 0 0 (b) 15 4th Sept. 1914. In charge of Tiruppattur circle. G.O. No. 454 P., dated 4th September 1914. 30th Sept. 1914. (b) Pony allowance.  One Peon 60 0 0  6th Sept. 1914.      S. G. Ponnu- swami Pillai. Certificated Sanitary In- spector. 45 0 0  (b) 15 14th Jan. 1911. In charge of Ralla- budugur circle. G.O. No. 402 P., dated 4th August 1914. 31st May 1916. Do. SECTION III.-MUNICIPAL. (1) Vellore Municipality. Municipal M. Amirta- nadham Pil- lai. Specially train- ed Plague Inspector. 30 0 0  29th Aug. 1914. For carrying on rat catching operations. G.O. No. 453 P., dated 10th Sep- tember 1914. 31st Mar. 1915   * * * * * * * * * * (2) Gudiyttam Municipality. * * * * * * * * * *
70 APPENDIX J. [See Rule 67.] Destruction of Plague Records. Description of records.  When to be destroyed. 1. Daily reports of plague cases and deaths in the Mysore State. At the close of the month succeeding that to which they relate.   2. Daily reports of plague cases and deaths in Bangalore.    3. Weekly reports of plague cases and deaths in the Bombay Presidency and the Hyderabad State.       4. Weekly returns of deaths in muni- cipalities. After one year. 5. Daily telegrams of plague cases received by the Collector.  6. Weekly diaries of plague super- visors and sanitary inspectors in charge of observation circles.  7. Daily reports of passengers in- spected and of those detained at railway inspection stations.  8. Weekly returns of inoculations received from the district medical and sanitary officer.  9. Weekly returns received from divisional officers of breaches of notification rules dealt with by them.  10. Plague notifications received by local authorities and the originals of such notifications. After six months.
?71 APPENDIX K. [See Rule 68.] Distribution of Spare Copies of Printed Orders of Government. A. Collector's office (three copies). B. Divisional officers (each one copy). C. Treasury deputy collector (one copy). D. Tahsildars (each one copy). E. Deputy tahsildars in independent charge (each one copy). F. District medical and sanitary officer and civil surgeons (one copy). N. Additional medical officer on plague duty (one copy). H. Medical officer in charge of plague inspection station (one copy). I. Special plague officers (each one copy). J. Municipalities (each two copies). K. President, district board (one copy). L. Taluk boards (each one copy). APPENDIX L. [Vide rule 69.] List showing the distribution of copies of the notification regard- ing plague-infected areas and notification stations. Serial number. Officers to whom copies should be distributed. Number of copies to be sent. 1.  Agent, Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway Company, Rayapuram. 30 2.  Head Clerk, Local and Municipal Secretariat (Plague Branch), Fort St. George. 15 3.  President of the Corporation of Madras, Madras 6 4.  Presidency Port Officer, Madras  5 5.  Sanitary Commissioner, Madras 4 6.  Surgeon-General, Madras 1 7.  Collector of Anantapur 21 8.   North Arcot, Vellore  30 9.   South Arcot, Cuddalore 24 10.   Bellary 22 11.   South Canara, Mangalore 19 7
?72 Serial number. Officers to whom copies should be distributed. Number of copies to be sent. 12.  Collector of Chingleput, Saidapet 19 13  Chittoor 19 14.  Coimbatore 26 15.  Cuddapah 21 16.  Ganjam, Chatrapur 26 17.  Godavari, Cocanada 30 18.  Guntur 25 19.  Kistna, Masulipatam  30 20.  Kurnool 24 21.  Madura  25 22.  Malabar, Calicut 37 23.  Nellore 24 24.  The Nilgiris, Ootacamund 11 25.  Ramnad, Madura 19 26.  Salem 24 27.  Tanjore 36 28.  Tinnevelly 25 29.  Trichinopoly 26 30.  Vizagapatam 36 31. General Officer Commanding Southern Brigade, Wellington. 8 32. General Traffic Manager, South Indian Railway, Trichinopoly. 250 33. Darbar Physician, Trivandram 2 34. General Officer Commanding the Southern District, Wellington. 12 35. Agent, Bengal-Nagpur Railway, Calcutta 10 36. Resident in Travancore and Cochin, Trivandrum  10 37. Agent and Manager to His Highness the Nizam's State Railway, Secunderabad. 7 38. General Officer Commanding the Belgaum District, Belgaum. 6 39. General Officer Commanding the Bangalore Dis- trict, Bangalore. 6 40. General Officer Commanding the Infantry Brigade, Bolarum. 6 41 General Officer Commanding the Cavalry Brigade, Bolarum. 6 42. The Hon'ble the Resident in Mysore, Bangalore  5 43. Lieutenant-General Commanding the Burma Dis- trict, Maymyo. 6 44. Officers in charge of the frontier railway inspection stations of Jalarpet, Hindupur, Bezwada, Hospet and Raichur. 2 each. 45. Chief Medical Officer, Ernakulam 2 46. Senior Medical Officer, Port Blair 1   7. Assistant Superintendent of Immigration, Ceylon Government, Pamban. 1 48. Notification issuing officers at the railway stations appearing in list B of the notification. 1 each.
?73 APPENDIX M. Instructions for the forwarding of material to the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy. PLAGUE. A.-HUMAN PLAGUE. Sources from which material suitable for examination may be obtained. 1. Spleen or liver- (a) In fatal cases. (b) Where it is possible to perform puncture of these organs during life. 2. Buboes.-In Bubonic plague. 3. Sputum.-In Pneumonic plague. 4. Peripheral blood.-When nothing else is available. The preparation of specimens. Material for cultural tests. This will be necessary only in special cases. It is essential in sending such material that it be surrounded by sufficient ice to ensure its reaching Guindy without decomposition. Such material will in general be sent only as a result of correspondence on the subject when special directions will be given. 2. In all ordinary cases "films" should be forwarded. Preparation of a film from the spleen. (a) Dip one or two slides in water and clean them thoroughly with a clean soft cloth. Lay the prepared slides on one side out of the way of dust, etc. (b) Remove the spleen or if a complete post-mortem examination is not made extract the spleen by passing the hand through an incision over the left costal margin. Remember that the spleen may be dragged backwards and upwards by the stomach if this organ is collapsed. When for any reason even a modified post-mortem examination is not possible one may resort to puncture with a large needle. In this procedure it is very difficult to be sure that the spleen has really been tapped. It is also extremely difficult as a rule to get blood from a spleen after death. It is best therefore, if driven to use a needle, to puncture the larger and more engorged liver. (c) With a knife or more conveniently still with a pair of scissors cut into and remove with the aid of a forceps a piece of the spleen about the size of a small pea. Holding this piece of tissue in the forceps wipe it thrice along one of the clean slides forming three separate streaks. Avoid excess of blood by "dabbing" the piece of tissue when this is necessary on the slide before proceeding to make the streaks. 7-A
?74 In the case of the spleen this is usually not necessary. (d) Wave the slide in the air until everything is quite dry. (e) Wrap the slide in white paper. Write particulars on the outside of the packet and despatch in one of the boxes provided by the Institute for the purpose.* Preparation of film from the liver. Adopt the same procedure as for the spleen taking care to get rid of an excess of fluid before smearing. To puncture the spleen during life - (a) Use an ordinary hypodermic needle. (b) Do not use any antiseptic but boil the syringe if necessary, (c) Eject a small drop of the blood obtained on to a slide and make a film as for peripheral blood. To obtain material for examination from buboes. (a) Clean several slides. (b) Clean the skin over the bubo with a little soap and water and a clean towel. This is important as the skin of the groin and axilla contains many organisms which are liable to increase the difficulty of diagnosis where a minute quantity of fluid only is obtained. (c) Steadying the bubo with the left hand plunge the needle well into the mass taking care to avoid such dangerous structures as the femoral artery. Before doing anything further allow the needle to remain a few moments in the tissues. Withdraw the point of the needle very slightly and pull out the piston of the syringe. It is often difficult to get any fluid whatever from a gland. In such cases the only procedure is to allow the needle to remain in for some minutes. (1) Do not draw the needle too far out. Nor mistake a little blood drawn in from the skin itself on the withdrawal of the needle for gland juice. (2) If there is any doubt as to the origin of the fluid obtained this should be stated on the specimen as it may be possible microscopi- cally to confirm or dissipate such doubts. An alternative method much to be preferred where it can be carri- ed out is to cut down upon the gland, divide it, and take a scraping * Note - Slides and boxes for forwarding specimens can be obtained by indenting on the King Institute. Envelopes should be marked "plague indent" and addressed "Director, King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy." The following form of indent is suggested:- Please supply to Slides A box will be sent with every two slides.                     Not more than 12 slides with 6 boxes will ordinarily be issued at a time, and when slides and boxes in excess of this number are required, they should be obtained from the Madras Medical Stores Dept. Telegraphic address " Institute."
?75 from the cut surface. In cases where diagnosis is of infinite importance this is by far the best procedure as it will yield almost certain evidence, both positive and negative, regarding plague. Do not be satisfied with pus from a dicharging bubo or from a suppurating bubo if less advanced buboes are present. Pus from an old bubo may very well contain no recognisable plague bacilli whilst pus from a bubo which has been discharging for some time is scarcely likely to contain bacilli. In fatal cases in addition to smears from the spleen any enlarged glands should invariably be incised and smears made from the cut surface. To prepare films of peripheral blood. (a) Clear one or two slides and rub up the shaft of a needle (surgical or sewing). (b) Clean a finger of the patient by rubbing it gently with a wet cloth and carefully drying it. (c) Hold the finger between the thumb and first finger of your left hand and compress gently to drive the blood to the tip where you are going to prick. (d) Prick, and when a drop about the size of a match head has exuded lower a clean slide upon it taking care not to "dab" the slide on the skin. (e) As quickly as possible, taking the slide in the left hand and the point of the needle in the right lower the shaft of the needle on to the drop and spread this over the slide in a thin film by passing the needle slowly and in one sweep from left to right. If the result is not satisfactory use another slide. (f) On another slide or if necessary on the same slide at one end collect another drop of blood and spread this with the head of the needle over an area equal to that of a two-anna piece. When quite dry wrap in paper and label. General cautions regarding films. (1) On no account cover any specimen with a slide or cover- glass. (2) Never use a slide without having first thoroughly cleaned and carefully polished it._ (3) Never omit to wrap film in paper before placing in the box for despatch. (4) Do not nail, paste over with paper or otherwise deface the box. All that is necessary is to tie it round with a piece of twine and wrap neatly in a wrapper. Interpretation of results. (1) Do not send a film of peripheral blood with the idea that you have done all that is required to enable the case to be diagnosed. The plague bacillus cannot as a rule be found in the peripheral blood of plague patients. The absence of the plague bacillus from such a specimen therefore really means very little and certainly does not exclude plague.
?76 As a rule the sending of peripheral blood only is an omission on the part of the Sub-Assistant Surgeon or other officer concerned who if more energetic could as a rule forward more likely materials such as smears from the spleen of fatal cases, smears from buboes, etc. (2) Sputum as a rule contains countless organisms some of them closely resembling in appearance the plague bacillus. Fortunately when plague bacilli are present at all they are in large numbers and give a characteristic appearance to the specimen which enables the pneumonic type of plague to be detected readily by microscopical examination. There is in sputum however always the possibility- (i) That it is not derived from the lungs at all but only from the throat or even the mouth. (ii) That plague organisms are scanty and cannot with certainty be detected on account of the multitude of other organisms. (iii) That bacilli bearing a close resemblance to plague may be present and so render a guarded opinion necessary. (3) Microscopical examination of a bubo prior to suppuration gives almost certain evidence as to plague. The only error likely to occur is that fluid supposed to be from the gland is really from the tissues around it or even blood from the skin sucked in when the needle is withdrawn. It is on account of the uncertainty attaching to puncture that cutting down upon the gland is so much to be preferred when a great deal turns upon the diagnosis. Old buboes which have become purulent may or may not show the plague bacillus since this organism is apt to be killed off. (4) The examination of specimens of the spleen or in default of this the liver of a fatal case is most likely to give definite results. Almost all fatal cases tend eventually to become septicmic and the absence of bacilli from the spleen and liver is extremely strong evi- dence against the case being one of plague. On the other hand in no examination except that of a fresh bubo can such definite positive evidence of plague be obtained as in films from an undecomposed spleen. Where decomposition is advanced a guarded opinion is often necessary since the plague bacillus rapidly disappears under such cir- cumstances and even if present is considerably altered in appearance. B.-RAT PLAGUE. (a) Whole rats should not be forwarded unless there are special reasons for such a procedure. If rats are sent whole they should be packed in sufficient ice to allow them to reach Guindy undecomposed. Rats may also be sent in spirit. In this case the abdomen should be opened and at least one pint of spirit be used for each rat. This method of sending material should only be adopted when no other procedure is possible. (b) Material sent for diagnosis should always, if possible, be in the form of films. To make a film from a suspected rat. (a) Lay the rat on its right side and with a pledget of wool dipped in weak spirit wipe over the side of the belly which lies uppermost. This will keep the hair from interfering with the subse- quent dissection.
77 (b) Pinching up a large fold of skin with a forceps and with a pair of scissors cut this off. If the whole thickness of skin and muscle over the abdomen be included in the fold one cut of the scissors will expose the viscera with the small elongate spleen lying upon them. (c) Remove the spleen with the forceps and lay it upon a slide. (d) Snip off a small piece about the size of a pea and make three streaks on a clean glass slide as described under " Human Plague." (e) Dry and wrap in paper. Pinch up and slice away with the scissors folds of skin over the groins, axilla and beneath the jaws. If enlarged glands are seen, cut these in two and make smears by drawing the cut surface of the gland thrice across a clean slide. Interpretation of reports. (1) If the rat is very putrid plague bacilli even if present have probably disappeared. The remark " many putrefactive organisms present " may be taken therefore as showing that the result of examination means little. (2) If a rat found dead, but not markedly decomposed, shows no plague bacilli in the spleen it is probably not a plague rat. (3) In some cases owing to putrefaction, etc., the plague orga- nisms cannot be diagnosed with certainty. Under such circumstances a guarded opinion has necessarily to be given. (4) In some cases organisms closely resembling plague occur in rats. Where typical plague bacilli are not present a guarded opinion will always be given.
?INDEX.  Page. Regulation. Standing Order. A ACT- Epidemic Diseases -  1   Power delegated to Local Government under the Epidemic Diseases -  2   ADMINISTRATION -    Administrative staff 24  24 ALLOTMENTS -    Application for allotment of funds 31  49 ALLOWANCES -    Plague 24  21-23 Statement showing the rates of - admissi- ble to officers on plague duty 47-51   Statement showing the rates of - admissi- ble to plague inspectors 52-54   Subsistence allowance to inoculated persons 27  35 ANIMALS -    Closure of sheds used for the accommoda- tion of - 5 8  APPEAL -    Right of - of the plague staff against punishments inflicted on them  25  29 ARICA UNDER OBSERVATION -    Definition of - 3 1 (a)  Notification of an area to be under observation 4 2  B BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION -    Instructions for despatching material to the King Institute, Guindy, for  73-77   BEDDING -    Destruction of - 8 22  BUDGET -    Revised and - estimates of plague expenditure 29-31  45-51 Savings in the - estimates 31  50 Transfer of funds 31  51 BUILDINGS -    Acquisition of - for plague purposes 10 28  Closure of sheds used for the accommoda- tion of animals and likely to harbour rats  5 8  Destruction of sheds 8 21  Disinfection of - containing sick or dead rats  8 23  Power of the Collector or Plague officer to enter into - for the abatement of nuisances  5 7  Power of the Collector or Plague officer to force open closed houses for disinfec- tion 8 24
?80 INDEX.  Page. Regulation. Standing Order. BUILDINGS - cont. Power of the Collector, Plague officer or Assistant Plague officer to enter into infected -  8 20  Restrictions on the letting of infected houses 8 19  C CANAL BOAT - Rules applicable to - 10 29  CANTONMENTS - Responsibility for carrying out plague measures in - 24  25 CERTIFICATE - Form of detention - 15   Form of ex-officio exemption - 14   Form of general exemption - 15   Form of inoculation - 16   CHARGES- Classification of plague - 28, 55 - 58  39-43 Distribution of plague -  11, 26 31 32 Half-yearly statement of audited plague -  29, 59-62  44 Power of Collector to incur expenditure on plague 22  18 CHATTRAMS - Person who should do the duties of a house-holder in regard to - 7 13  CIRCLES- Formation of observation - 7, 18 16 3 Formation of preventive - 7, 18 16 3 Size of observation - 19  4 Size of preventive - 19  5 CLOTHES - Destruction of clothing 8 22  Restrictions on the washing of - 5 9  COMMUNICATION - Communication of information regarding plague cases in a district to adjoining districts in this Presidency 33  55 Intercommunication of plague news in this Presidency and in the adjoining territories  35  62, 63 COMPENSATION - Award of - for loss of property  11 32  CONCEALMENT OF PLAQUE CASES- Measures to be adopted to prevent the - 5 11  CONTACTS - Segregation of - 20  8 CONTRIBUTION - Government - to private plague hospitals 26  33 CONVEYANCE - Use of public - by plague patients 8 18  CORRESPONDENCE - Distribution of spare copies of printed orders of Government 36, 71  68 Plague 36  64-66 D DEFINITION - Definition of certain terms occurring in the Regulations 3 1
?INDEX. 81    Page. Regula- tion. Standing  Order. DELEGATION -    Power delegated   to   Local   Government under the Epidemic Diseases Act 2 ... ... DETENTION -    Form of - certificate 15 ... ... Persons under - bound to obey directions issued to them 11 33 ... DISINFECTION -    Instructions on - 41-43 ... ... - of buildings containing sick or dead rats 8 23 ...  of grains and the places used for traffic  in grains 5 6 ... - of infected areas 5 10 ... Power of the Collector or Plague officers to force open closed houses for - 8 24 ... E EPIDEMIC -    - Diseases Act 1 ... ... Power   delegated   to   Local   Government under the - Diseases Act 2 ... ... ESTABLISHMENTS -    Administrative staff 24 ... 24 Collector's  power to  punish Government Medical subordinates on plague duty 24 ... 26 Control of plague 24, 25 ... 26-28 Duty   of the observation and preventive staff  19, 20 ... 6 Employment of plague -    23 ... 19 Half-yearly lists of plague - 35, 68, 69 ... 61 Plague - that are entitled to and bound to give one month's notice    10 30 ... Plague -  to be employed in observation and preventive circles 7, 19 16 4, 5 Power of a police officer 11 34 ... Power of assistant plague officer to punish plague 25 ... 28 Power of Collectors to punish plague -  24, 25 ... 26-28   Power of plague officer to punish plague - 25 ... 28 Restrictions in regard to the employment on plague duty of   Government officials of the medical and police departments  25  30 Retention of plague - 23 ... 19 ESTIMATES -    Plague 29- 31 ... 45-51 EVACUATION -    Instructions on - 39  ... ... - of infected areas  5 10 ... EXAMINATION -    Instructions for forwarding material to the King   Institute, Guindy, for   bacterio- logical - 73-77 ... ... EXEMPTION -    Form of ex-officio - certificate 14 ... ... Form of general - certificate 15 ... ... Persons who are eligible for - from the notification rules    6 12 ...
?82                                       INDEX .  Page. Regula- tion. Standing  Order. F FAIRS AND FESTIVALS -    Form of notifications imposing restrictions on -  33, 65, 66 ... 57 Form of statement to accompany proposals in regard to - 33, 65 ... 57 Imposition of restrictions on the attendance at - 7 15 ... Instructions for   submitting   proposals in regard to -  33 ... 56, 57 FEMALE PASSENGERS -    Examination of - 7 14 ... FUNDS -    Transfer of funds 31 ... 51 G GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS -    Occupation of - for plague purposes 9, 10 28 ... GOVERNMENT MEDICAL SUBORDINATES ON     PLAGUE DUTY -        Collector's power to punish - 24  ... 26 Grant of casual or privilege leave to -  25 ... 27 GRAINS-    Inspection   and   disinfection   of  - from plague infected areas 5 6 ... Inspection and disinfection of places used for traffic in grain 5 6 ... GEANTS -    Government - to   local bodies  for plague  expenditure 27 ... 37 Government - towards  the construction    and    maintenance   of   private  plague hospitals 26 ... 33 - for the erection of sheds in rural areas. 27 ... 34 H HOSPITALS-    Government contribution towards   the construction and maintenance of private plague -     26 ... 33 Means   of   lessening the aversion of the public to go into plague - 21 ... 14 Removal of plague patients to  -  21, 22  ... 13-16 Sale-proceeds of private plague - 27 ... 33 Supervision of private plague -    27 ... 33 HOUSE-HOLDERS -    Duty of - to report plague cases 7 17 ... Duty of - with whom notification holders may stay      6 13 ... HOUSE SEARCH -    Organisation   of   search parties to visit houses 5 11 ... I INCAPACITATED PERSONS -    Duty of complying with the Plague Regu- lations in the case of 7 13 ... INFECTED AREAS -    Definition of -  3 1 (b) ... Distribution of copies of the lists of plague - and notification stations         36, 71 ... 69
?INDEX.                                       83  Page. Regula- tion. Standing Order. INFECTED AREAS- cont.    Evacuation and disinfection of - 5 10 ... Notification of areas to be infected with plague 4 3 ... INFECTED HOUSES -    Letting of -  8 19 ... INOCULATION -    Duties of inoculated persons 9 26 ... Form of inoculation certificate 16 ... ... Instructions on - 39 ... ... Privileges of inoculated persons 9 25 ... Subsistence allowance   to inoculated persons 27 ... 35 INSPECTION -    Construction of - sheds on railway plat- forms 27 ... 36 Inspection of grains and the places used  for traffic in them 5 6 ... INSPECTION STATIONS -    Definition of inspection station 3 1 (d) ... Duty of travellers at railway inspection stations 7 14 ... Notification of railway stations   to be inspection stations 4 3 ... Power of the staff employed at - 7 14 ... INTIMATION -    Intimation of travellers proceeding from Bangalore to Tuticorin 30 ... 70 L LANDS -    Acquisition of - for plague purposes 9 28 ... LEAVE -    Casual    or   privilege   -  to   Government Medical Subordinates on plague duty  25 ... 27 LOCAL AUTHORITY-    Definition of 3 1  (e) ... Duty of - 17, 18 ... 1 M MARKETS -    Closure of -  4 5 ... MEASURES -    General remarks on plague measures 37, 38 ... ... Officers responsible for carrying out plague - in Cantonments 24 ... 25 Measures to be taken by local officers on the occurrence of a case of plague 20 ... 7, 8 Measures to be taken by plague inspectors and   Assistant   Plague   Officers  on the occurrence of ft case of plague   20, 21 ... 9-11 Measures to be taken by plague officers on the occurrence of a case of plague 21 ... 12 MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS--    Duty of all - to report plague cases 7 1 ... MILITARY -    Persons of all ranks in the - should obey the Plague Regulations    12 35 ... MINORS -    Duty of complying with the Plague Regu- lations in the case of -  7 13 ...
?84                                    INDEX.   Page. Regula- tion. Standing Order. N    NOTIFICATIONS -    Duties of notification holders 6, 13 13 ... Duties of officers issuing - 17 ... 1 Exemption from taking - 6 12 ... Form of - 13 ... ... Penalty for failure of the notification, holders to fulfil their obligations 13 ... ... NOTIFICATION STATIONS -    Definition of notification station 3 1 (c) ... Distribution of copies of the lists of plague infected areas and - 36, 71 ... 69 Notification of railway stations to be -    4 3 ... Road frontier - 6 12 (b) ... NOTIFICATION SYSTEM -    Regulation describing the - 6 12 ... Scope of the -  17 ... 1 NUISANCES -    Abatement of - 5 7 ... O    OBSERVATION -    Control of - staff 19 ... 6 Definition of area under - 3 1 (a) ... Duties of - staff 19 ... 6 Establishment to be employed in   observa- tion circles  7, 19 16 4 formation and size of - circles 7, 18, 19 16 3, 4 Half-yearly    lists   of areas to be placed under and freed from- 34 ... 60 Notification of areas to be under -  4 2 ... Size of observation circles 19 ... 4 Temporary   and     permanent   observation Circles 18 ... 3 OFFICERS -    Absence of officers on account of segrega- tion 22 ... 17 Absence of officers who are suffering from plague 22 ... 17 Definition of assistant plague - 4 1 (g) ... Definition of plague officer 4 1 (f) ... Grant of allowances to - on plague duty. 24 ... 21-23 Power of a police officer 11 34 ... Restrictions in regard to the employment on plague duty of Government officials of the medical and police departments 25 ... 30 P    PATIENTS -    Removal of plague - to hospitals  21, 22 ... 13-16 PENALTY -    Penalty for disobeying the plague   regu- lations 11 35 ... Penalty for failure of the notification hold- ers to fulfil their obligations 13 ... ... PLAGUE -    Theory in regard to the outbreak   and spread of plague     17 ... 1 PLAGUE CASES-    Advantages of early   discovery   of plague cases 38 ... ... Communication of plague news 33, 35 ... 55, 62, 63 Duty   of all   householders   and   medical practitioners to report - 7 17 ...
?INDEX.                                   85    Page.     Regula- tion. Standing Order. PLAGUE CASES - cont.    Measure  to  be adopted  to  prevent the concealment of - 5       11  ... POLICE -    Power of a - officer 11        34 ... PREVENTIVE CIRCLES -    Duty of the staff employed in preventive circles 20 ... 6 Establishment to be employed in - 7, 19 16 5 Formation and size of - 7, 18, 19 16 3, 5 PROPERTY-    Custody of the - of evicted persons 5        10   ... PUBLIC -    Duty of householders and    medical prac- titioners to report plague cases 7       17 ... Duty of householders with whom notifica- tion holders may stay 6       13 ... Duty of the public to report rat deaths 4               4 ... PUNISHMENT -    Power of assistant plague officers to punish plague establishments 25 ... 28 Power of Collectors to punish Government Medical Subordinates on plague duty  24 ... 26 Power   of   Collectors to   punish     plague establishments 24, 25 ... 26-28 Power of plague officers to punish plague establishments 25 ... 28 R RAILWAY STATIONS-    Notification   of - to   be   inspection   and notification stations 4               3 ... RATS -    Closure of sheds likely to harbour rats  5               8 ... Destruction of rats 5, 43-46 6 ... Disinfection of buildings containing sick or dead rats 8         23     ... Report regarding dead rats in houses 4               4 ... Report regarding unusual mortality among rats    7, 13 13, 17 ... Special report to be sent to the Sanitary Commissioner regarding rat mortality. 33 ... 58 RECORDS -    Destruction of plague 36,70 ... 67 Maintenance   of   records   of   all   persons suffering from continuous fever for more than 12 hours 20 ... 6 REPORTS AND RETURNS -    Communication of plague news 33, 35 ... 55, 62, 63 Detailed report of plague cases to be sent to the Collector by the plague inspector. 32 ... 53 Form of plague   report from subordinate officers to Collectors 62- 64 ... ... Half-yearly lists of plague establishments. 35  61 Obligation to report rat deaths 4                4 ... Plague estimates 29-31 ... 45-51 Report of plague oases to be sent by Collect- ors   to  Government and the   Sanitary Commissioner 32 ... 54 Report regarding cases of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness 7              13 ... Report   to   be   sent by   the Collector to the Sanitary Commissioner on the occur- rence of the first case of plague             32 ... 52
?86                                   INDEX.    Page. Regula- tion. Standing  Order. REPORTS AND RETURNS - cont.    Report to he sent by the Sanitary Com- missioner 33 ... 59 Special report to be sent to the Sanitary 33 ... 58 Commissioner regarding rat mortality     S SAVINGS-    Report regarding - in the budget estima- tes 31 ... 50 SEARCH -    Organisation of - parties to visit houses  5 11 ... SEGREGATION -    Absence of officers on account of - 22 ... 17 Persons   segregated   are   bound   to   obey 11 33 ... instructions issued to them    - - of contacts 20 ... 8 SHEDS -    Closure of sheds used for the accommodation 5 8 ... of animals and likely to harbour rats    Destruction of - 8 21 ... Grants for the   erection of - in  rural 27 ... 34 areas    Inspection sheds on railway platforms 27 ... 36 STAFF -    Administrative 24 ... 24 T TRAVELLERS -    Duty of travellers  at   railway   inspection 7 14 ... stations           Examination of female passengers 7 14 ... Intimation of - proceeding   from   Banga- lore to Tuticorin 36 ... 70 Notification system applicable to - 6 12 ... Obligation to take out notification papers    in the case of incapacitated persons 7 13 ... Obligation to take out notification papers 7 13 ... in the case of minors    W WOMEN -    Examination of female passengers 7 14 ... Examination of - 6 11 ... WORKS -    Collector's power to carry  out  emer- gent -         9 27 ...
