THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. (Revised by G.O. No. 292 P., 15th May 1914.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1914 [PRICE, 1 anna.]
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN, (Revised by G.O. No. 292 P., 15th May 1914.) MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1914.
REVISED PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. WHEREAS certain parts of the Presidency of Madras are visited by, and other parts are threatened with, an outbreak of a dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease: In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-sec- tion (1), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and delegated to him under sub-section (3) of the same section by the noti- fication of the Government of India in the Home Department, No. 2256 of the 22nd December 1906, the Governor of Fort St. George in Council is pleased to prescribe, in supersession of all regulations previously issued on the subject, the follow- ing temporary regulations to be observed throughout the Presidency except the City of Madras for a period of two years from the 1st day of June 1914:- 1. In these regulations, (a) "Area under observation" means any area which, may be notified by the Governor in Council under these regulations to be under observation on account of its being imminently threatened with plague; (b) "Infected area " means any area which may be notified under these regulations by the Governor in Council or, subject to his control, by the Collector of a district, to be infected with plague; (c) "Notification station" means any railway station or other station which may be notified as such under these regu- lations by the Governor in Council; (d) "Inspection station" means any railway station which is notified as such under these regulations by the Governor in Council for the observation and inspection of passengers ; (e) "A local authority" means the local medical officer, or if there is no such officer, the village headman, and includes any other person appointed as a local authority for the purposes of plague by the Collector of the district; (f) "Plague officer" means the district medical and sanitary officer in his district and the revenue divisional officer within his jurisdiction and includes any other person 1-A
?4 who may be appointed by the Government as plague officer over any definite area; (g) "Assistant plague officer" means in any municipal town the chairman of the municipal council and in other areas the tahsildar or deputy tahsildar each within his own rev- enue jurisdiction; and includes any other person appointed as such by the Collector of a district for any definite area. 2. The Governor in Council may, if it appears to him that any district, town, village or other area is imminently threatened with plague, issue an order declaring such district, town, village, or other area to be under observation. A copy of such order shall be published in the next issue of the Fort St. George Gazette. 3. The Governor in Council may by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette declare any place or area in which one or more indigenous cases of plague have occurred, or in which the existence of plague among rats has been proved by bac- teriological tests, to be infected with plague. In cases of emergency the district Collector may notify by tom-tom and by publication in the district gazette, as soon as possible there- after, that any such place or area is infected with plague. The Governor in Council may in the same manner notify as a notification station any railway station or other place, which from its proximity to infected areas or otherwise is liable to be used or passed by persons leaving such areas and may notify as an inspection station any railway station which may be convenient for the inspection and observation of passengers by rail. 4. In areas under observation and infected areas every house-holder and every medical practitioner, who finds or becomes aware of the finding of a dead rat in his house, or in any public or private dwelling or place within the limits of the municipality, town or village in which he resides, shall be bound to give information of the fact with the least practicable delay to the nearest local authority. 5. In areas under observation and infected areas, the Collector may close existing markets and may appoint special places where markets may be held and may prescribe limits beyond which it shall not be lawful for persons bringing articles for sale from or to an infected area to pass. 6. In areas under observation and infected areas the Collector may direct that consignments of grain arriving from plague-infected areas and that landing places, railway goods- sheds, and bazaars used for traffic in grain shall be inspected;
?5 and that all rats found therein shall be killed and burnt, and the grain or place disinfected. 7. In areas under observation or infected areas the Collector or plague officer may, when he considers necessary, enter upon any premises, whether situated in a municipality or not, at any time during daylight and summarily execute any work required under, or summarily abate any of the nuisances described or indicated in, sections 186, 220, 221 and 228 of the District Municipalities Act, 1884, or sections 99 and 101 of the Local Boards Act, 1884. 8. In an infected area the Collector or plague officer may order that any shed used for accommodation of animals and likely to harbour rats shall be closed and shall not be reopened without his permission. 9. In an infected area the Collector of the district may prescribe that no person undertaking for hire the cleansing of clothing or other laundry process shall store or wash or otherwise deal with clothing except at such places and at such times and under such conditions as he may direct. 10. (a) In an infected area the Collector, or a plague officer with the previous sanction of the Collector, may order the evacuation and disinfection of infected houses and houses in their neighbourhood, or generally of any infected locality; and no person shall re-occupy such house or locality without the express permission of the Collector or plague officer. (b) The Collector, or plague officer, may require the evicted people to reside in such place as he may appoint under such restrictions as he may deem necessary. (c) The Collector, or plague officer, may make such arrangements as he thinks fit for the custody, free of charge, of the effects of persons so evicted, provided that the Govern- ment shall not be responsible for any loss or damage to them. Explanation.-Houses and localities in which plague- infected rats have been discovered may be treated as infected. 11. In infected areas the Collector, with the previous sanction of Government, may organize search parties to visit houses for the purpose of detecting cases of plague, when there is reason to believe that the residents are attempting to conceal them: Provided that houses shall be allowed to be entered only by persons of the same caste or religion as the occupants and that women should be employed in examining women and searching any room or place exclusively occupied by them. 12. (a) Every person leaving an infected area within the Presidency by rail from a notification station shall take out a
?6 notification paper in the form shown in Appendix A before being allowed to board a train. Passengers coming by rail from infected areas outside the Presidency shall take out a similar notification paper at the first inspection station they may come to before being allowed to proceed on their journey. (b) Travellers who enter this Presidency from the Mysore State by road through Sivasamudram in the Coimbatore district and Teppakkadu in the Nilgiri district, shall take out notification papers at those places in the form shown in Appendix A before proceeding. (c) Other travellers by road or water are not required to take out notification papers. Exception.-The following persons shall be exempt from the operation of this rule:- (i) All Government officers, or officers serving under any municipality, local board or railway company, and drawing a salary of not less than Rs. 100 per mensem; (ii) all pensioners drawing a pension of not less than Rs. 50 per mensem; (iii) all registered medical practitioners, title-holders, special or honorary magistrates, members of local boards or municipal councils; (iv) any other person to whom an exemption certificate in the form shown in Appendix C may be given by the Collector of a district, the President of the Corporation of Madras, or by the Government. 13. Every person required to take out a notification paper shall declare truly his name, address and such other particu- lars as may be required by the officer issuing the paper. The notification-holder shall on reaching his destination deliver the paper by post or by hand to the local authority of that place. The notification-holder and the house-holder, hotel- keeper or person in charge of the building shall also report to such authority any unusual mortality among rats or any case of fever, or plague, or suspicious sudden illness occur- ring within one month of the arrival of the notification-holder in the house or building in which he resides. Explanations.-(1) In the case of incapacitated persons and minors who are under twelve years of age the duty of complying with this regulation shall devolve on their guardians. (2) In the case of chattrams which have no regular keeper the village headman shall be deemed to be the person in charge.
?7 14. Every railway passenger arriving at an inspection station shall be bound to deliver up his ticket on demand by any railway official or medical officer and shall also submit himself to such medical examination as the medical officer may deem necessary. The medical officer shall have power to detain for such period of time not exceeding three days, as he may deem fit, any such passenger who is, or is suspected to be, suffering from plague, or who has been in immediate con- tact with a case of pneumonic plague, and such passenger shall not continue on his journey without a certificate in the form shown in Appendix D. The medical officer shall have power to disinfect the baggage and goods of any passenger which he may consider to be infectious. Provided that female passengers shall under no circum- stances be compelled to undergo examination by men. 15. When a festival, fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from an infected area is about to take place in an uninfected area, or when a festival, fair or other public gathering which is likely to be attended by persons from healthy areas is about to take place in an infected area, the Governor in Council may by notification in the Gazette prohibit attendance thereat, and may if necessary stop temporarily the issue of railway tickets to persons from or to such infected areas. 16. The Collector may divide an area under observation or the environs of an infected area into ranges, which may be called observation or preventive ranges as the case may be, and may appoint a plague inspector for each of them. Such plague inspectors shall have the powers of a local author- ity over that area and shall also have the powers of a police officer under rule 34. 17. Every house-holder and every medical practitioner shall at once report to the nearest local authority any case of plague, or any case of death with symptoms of plague, or any unusual mortality amongst rats, which comes to his knowledge. 18. No owner, driver or person in charge of a public conveyance shall carry any person suffering from plague; nor shall any person suffering from the disease enter or be taken in a public conveyance. 19. No person shall let, or show for the purpose of letting, a building or part of a building in which he knows, or has reason to know, that a person has suffered or is suffering from plague, without having such building or part thereof, and every article therein likely to retain infection, disinfected
?8 to the satisfaction of the medical officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf. 20. The Collector, plague officer or assistant plague officer may at any time enter, or authorize any one in writing to enter, any building or place in which plague is reputed or suspected to exist and may isolate any person suffering from or suspected to be suffering from plague and may also direct such building or place to be completely evacuated. 21. If the Collector or plague officer is of opinion that the destruction of any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of plague, he may summarily take measures for the destruction of such hut or shed and the materials of which it is constructed. 22. The Collector of the district, a plague officer, or assistant plague officer, the medical officer attending a plague case or a plague inspector (or a revenue inspector, if no other revenue officer of higher rank is available) may destroy the clothing, bedding, rags and other articles found in possession of, or in the residence of, a person suffering from plague or suspected plague, as well as clothes worn on his person. The destruction of such clothing, etc., should, however, be resorted to only when effective means of disinfection are not available. 23. The Collector or plague officer may order the disin- fection of any building in which sick or dead rats have been found. 24. For the purpose of effecting the disinfection pre- scribed by these rules, the Collector or plague officer may, at any time during daylight, force open any closed house which, in his opinion, requires disinfection: provided that a notice calling upon the owner or tenant of such house to open the house before a specified time shall have been served on him, or posted on some conspicuous part of the building, and the house has not been opened accordingly; and provided also that as little damage as possible shall be caused to the house in the act of opening. Locked receptacles inside the house may be forced open by the same officers or officers similarly authorized. 25. Collectors shall provide all facilities for the inocula- tion of persons who may desire to be inoculated against plague and every person successfully inoculated shall be given a certificate by the inoculating officer in the form shown in Appendix E.
?9 Persons who hold inoculation certificates shall be entitled to the following privileges, provided that such certificates bear a date not earlier than nine months and not later than seven days previously:- (a) Unless suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, they shall not be liable to detention at any inspection station when travelling, except for such period as may be required to disinfect their baggage and clothes, if those are considered suspicious. (b) Inoculated persons who have been living in an infec- ted house or have otherwise been exposed to plague infection shall not be liable to be segregated, but may be required to evacuate the infected house and to have their clothes and personal effects disinfected. When, however, all the occu- pants of a house have been inoculated, neither the patients nor the other inmates of the house shall be required to be segre- gated, provided arrangements are made to the satisfaction of a plague officer for the disinfection of the house and its contents, and for the prevention of the spread of plague to the neighbouring dwellings. 26. Every inoculated person who is exempted from segre- gation and detention under the preceding rule shall be bound, when called upon to do so by any public servant to produce his inoculation certificate and also to make an impression of his thumb-mark for the purpose of identification. 27. The Collector of a district may, in case of emergency or to save delay, provide for the execution of any work or the doing of any act which a district board or municipality is empowered or required to execute or to do in accordance with these regulations, and the immediate execution or the doing of which is in the said Collector's opinion necessary for the safety of the public and may charge the expense of executing the work or doing the act to the local board or municipality concerned. 28. The Collector, plague officer or assistant plague officer may without notice enter upon, occupy and use, or may depute any person to enter upon, occupy and use, without having recourse to the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, any building or place which is required for and is, in the opinion of the district medical and sanitary officer or other medical officer deputed in this behalf, suitable for any pur- poses connected with plague measures, provided that if the building or place is occupied, twenty-four hours' notice in writing shall be given to the occupier or shall beconspicuo- usly affixed on such building or place. The owner or the
?10 lessee of such building or place shall be entitled to a reason- able rent to be fixed by the Collector or plague officer for the period during which the ground or building may be so occu- pied; and the Collector, plague officer or assistant plague officer, as the case may be, shall, when the building or place ceases to be so occupied, thoroughly cleanse and disinfect it, and, if the owner so desires, shall whitewash internally and externally any building so occupied. Nothing in this rule shall authorize the chairman of a municipal council to enter upon, occupy or use any building or place which is the property of Government without the previous permission of the Collector. 29. A canal boat shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to buildings and, in order to prevent the spread of the infection of plague either by or to a canal boat, the Collector of the district or any plague officer or any officer appointed by the Collector in this behalf may require such boat to alter its moorings or to stop during its passage and moor in such position as such officer may indicate, or may direct that it desist from plying until such time as may be stated in a notice placed on a conspicuous position of the boat. 30. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, cooly, scavenger or other menial servant employed to do duty in connection with plague shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and is discharged at the end of it. Similarly every supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall be entitled to one month's notice before his coolies are discharged. (2) No such person shall, in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice or shall neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them. In like manner no supplier of coolies or other menial servants shall withdraw his coolies without giving one month's notice. 31. All expenses incurred in carrying out these regula- tions shall, subject to such orders as the Governor in Council may from time to time pass, be in the first instance paid- (a) within municipal limits-from municipal funds; (b) within cantonments-from cantonment funds; and (c) in other areas-from local funds.
?11 Provided that any expense incurred outside the limits of a municipality or a cantonment but for the benefit of such municipality or cantonment shall be met from such municipal or cantonment fund. 32. When in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under these regulations any damage or loss is caused, no person shall be entitled as a matter of right to claim any compensation, but the Collector of the district or a plague officer may award compensation at the cost of local, munici- pal or Provincial funds as the case may be, and shall do so when the loss would fall upon people in very poor circum- stances, or may, in such cases, provide other necessary articles in the place of those destroyed or damaged and debit the charge to the proper funds. 33. Every person segregated or detained under any of these regulations shall obey the directions issued to him by the officer in charge of the place of segregation or detention and shall not leave such place except with the written per- mission of the said officer, who may take such steps as may be necessary to enforce this prohibition. 34. If a Police officer has reason to believe that a person is evading these regulations by giving a false name or a wrong address, he may detain him until satisfied as to his true name and address and may act in accordance with the provi- sions of section 57 of the Criminal Procedure Code. 35. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to submit himself to any of these regulations or obstructing any measure taken under the authority of these regulations, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or both. Notes.-(1) The plague regulations being orders formally made and issued by Government under the Epidemic Diseases Act, no sanction is required as a condition precedent to prosecution for disobeying them Judgment of the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 561 of 1899). (2) By Command Order, No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the Madras Command have been directed to obey the plague regulations, and any infringement of them is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have been warned (Superintendent's circular No. II, dated 14th December 1898), that any disobedience or wilful neglect of the regulations or obstruction offered to any official on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Govern- ment as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith and the same reduced or permanently withdrawn.
?12 APPENDIX A. Plague Notification No. (See Rule 12.) I , Son/daughter of aged,  years, caste residing in village, taluk, district, proceediag to * do hereby bind myself to deliver this notification to the local authority of that place on my arrival and to report to him any case of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness or any unusual mortality amongst rats in the house occupied by me within a period of one month after my arrival. (Signature or mark) (Date) (Station)  (Signature of officer issuing the intimation form.)  * Give full address INSTRUCTIONS. This notification form may be sent by post bearing or may be delivered in person or by messenger to the local authority concerned. 2. The local authority for the town of Madras is the Health Oificer of the Corpora- tion: in other places the local authority is- (a) the local medical officer, or if there is no medical officer, (b) the headman of the village, or (c) in special cases the person appointed by the Collector of the district. 3. If the holder of this notification fails to fulfil his obligations he will be liable to prosecution and punishment with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six- months or fine which may extend to Rs. 1,000 or both.
?13 APPENDIX B. Ex-officio exemption certificate. (See Rule 12.) Signature. Under Mufassal Rule 12 (Name and designation *) whose signature is exhibited in the margin is hereby exempted from the plague notification rules. This exemption will also cover the undermentioned members of his family, subordinates and servants accompanying him:- Members of the family Subordinates and servants.  Name. Age. Name. Age. Date of issue.     Number in Collector's/President's register.    Signature of the issuing officer.  Collector of/President of the Corporation of Madras NOTE.-(1) This certificate will be in force throughout the Presidency until revoked by the Collector of/President of the Corporation of Madras who may cancel it without assigning reasons. Any misuse of it by any person will entail its summary withdrawal. (2) This certificate will not exempt its holder and the persons specified in it from liability to have their effects disinfected if they are considered to be infections. (3) The certificate must be exhibited by the bearer on demand to any officer authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or issue notifications or examine the health condition of travellers. (4) The holder of the certificate is bound to report immediately to the nearest local authority any case of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness or any unusual mortality amongst rats occurring in the house or houses in which he or the persons mentioned in the certificate resides or reside within one month of the last visit to an infected area. * (Here enter the applicant's qualification for exemption.)
?APPENDIX C. Exemption Certificate. (See Rule 12.) Signature. Under Mufassal Eule 12, (name) whose signature is exhibited in the margin, and who is employed as a is hereby exempted from the plague notification rules. Date of issue Number in Collector's/President's register.   (Signature.)   Collector of/President of the Corporation of Madras. NOTE.-(1) This certificate is valid up to the 31st March next and will be in force throughout the Presidency. It must be exhibited by the bearer on demand to any officer authorized under the plague regulations to inspect or issue notifications or examine the health condition of travellers. (2) The holder of the certificate is bound to report immediately to the nearest local authority any case of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness or any unusual mortality amongst rats occurring in the house or houses in which he resides within one month of his last visit to an infected area. (3) This certificate may be withdrawn by the Collector or the President of the Corporation of Madras at any time without assigning any reason. APPENDIX D. Detention Certificate. (See Rule 14.) Camp. 1. Name of passenger. 2. Number and description of ticket. 3. Detained from to 4. Name and designation of issuing officer
?15 APPENDIX E. (See Rule 25.) [COUNTERFOIL.] No. Name. Father's name. Street Village Town Taluk District Date Initials of operator. Plague Inoculation Certificate. No CERTIFIED that , resident of , son of   , Street/Village  , Town/Taluk , District , has been inoculated by me, and that his thumb-mark was at the time impressed before me. Space for left thumb-mark.   (Signature and designation.)  Dated  NOTE.-Unless suffering or suspected to be suffering from plague, the holder of the certificate is exempted from segregation and from detention when travelling. It does not, however, exempt him from liability to evacu- ate an infected house, except in the case where all the occupants of the house have been inoculated, or to have his clothes and person disinfected when travelling. This certificate is valid for a period of nine months.
