THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND STANDING ORDERS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. Revised up to 15th July 1918. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. PRICE, 2 annas.] 1918. [2 pence.
THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS AND STANDING ORDERS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. Revised up to 15th July 1918. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1918.
?CONTENTS.          PAGE I. The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897     1 II. Notification of the Government of India, Home Department  (Sanitary-Plague), No. 2256, dated 22nd December 1906,  delegating to Local Governments powers under the  Epidemic Diseases Act       2 III. Plague regulations in force outside the Presidency town  3 IV. Standing Orders       6 Appendix A. - Memorandum on plague-preventive measures  20         B. - Plague report to be submitted to the Collector   30         C. - Half-yearly list of officers on plague duty   32         D. - Part I. - Allowances of officers deputed to plague  duty       33                        II. - Salaries of officers temporarily enter-                                      tained for plague duty        35         E. - Pay and allowances of plague inspectors   37 Index         40
?THE MADRAS PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. I THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT (III OF 1897). An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Disease. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic disease; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Short title, extent and commencement. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. (2) It extends to the whole of British India (inclusive of Upper Burma, British Baluchistan, the Santal Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti); and (3) It shall come into force at once. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. 2. (1) When at any time the Governor-General in Council is satisfied that India or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the Governor-General in Council, if he thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient for the purpose, may take or require or empower any person to take such measures and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary Regulations to be observed by the public or by any person or class of persons as he shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred (including com- pensation if any) shall be defrayed. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene- rality of the foregoing provisions, the Governor-General in Council may take measures and prescribe regulations for- (a) the inspection of any ship or vessel leaving, or arriving at, any port in British India and such detention thereof, or of any person intending to sail therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary; and
?2 (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected with any such disease. (3) The Governor-General in Council may, by general or special order, direct that all or any of the powers conferred by this Act may also be exercised by any Local Government with respect to the territories administered by it. Penalty. 3. Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. Protection to persons acting under Act. 4. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be done under this Act. II NOTIFICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, HOME DEPARTMENT (SANITARY-PLAGUE), DATED, CALCUTTA, THE 22ND DECEMBER 1906, No. 2256, DELEGATING TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIONS POWERS CONFERRED BY THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897. WHEREAS certain parts of India are visited by, and others threatened with, an outbreak of dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, the Governor-General in Council, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub-section (3) of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (III of 1897), is pleased to direct that the powers conferred by the said Act may be exercised, to prevent the outbreak of plague or the spread thereof, by local Governments and Administrations with regard to their respective territories as follows:- (a) All the said powers by the Governors of Fort St. George and Bombay in Council, the Lieutenant-Governors of Bengal, Eastern Bengal and Assam and Burma; *                  *                  *                  * 2. The notifications of the Government of India in the Home Department, No. 302, dated the 4th February 1897, No. 834, dated the 6th March 1897, No. 1330, dated the 27th May 1898, and No. 4614, dated the 28th November 1898, are hereby cancelled.
?3 III The following regulations issued in G.O. No. 331 P., dated the 11th July 1918, embody the special powers confer- red on officers of the Government and other persons and the special obligations laid upon the public in connexion with plague: obstruction of the former or breach of the latter renders a person liable to prosecution and punishment under the law:- PLAGUE REGULATIONS IN FORCE OUTSIDE THE PRESIDENCY TOWN. WHEREAS certain parts of the Presidency of Madras are visited by, and other parts are threatened with, an outbreak of the dangerous epidemic disease known as plague, and whereas the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force in the Presidency are insufficient for the purpose of preventing the outbreak or spread of the disease: In exercise of the powers conferred by section 2, sub- section (1), of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, and delegated to him under sub-section (3) of the same section by the noti- fication of the Government of India in the Home Department No. 2256 of the 22nd December 1906, the Governor of Fort St. George in Council is pleased to prescribe, in super- session of all regulations previouly issued on the subject, the following temporary regulations to be observed throughout the Presidency except the City of Madras for a period of five years from the 15th of July 1918:- 1. In these regulations Definition. (a) " Infected area" means any area which is notified under these regulations by the Governor in Council or, subject to his control by the Collector of a district, to be infected with plague. (b) " A local authority " means the local medical officer or, if there is no such officer, the village headman or any other person appointed as a local authority for the purposes of plague by the Collector of the district. (c) " Plague Officer " means the District Medical and Sanitary Officer in his district and the Revenue Divisional Officer within his jurisdiction and includes any other person who may be appointed by the Government or by the Collec- tor as Plague Officer over any definite area. Notification of infected areas. 2. The Governor in Council may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, declare any place or area in which one or more indigenous cases of plague have occurred, or in which the existence of plague among rats has been proved, 1-A
?4  to be infected with plague. In similar circumstances the  Collector of the district may notify by tom-tom and by publi-  cation in the district gazette that any place or area in his  district is infected with plague, informing the Government  forthwith of the fact that he has done so.  Closure of  markets.  3. In an infected area or in a district adjoining an infected  area the Collector may close any existing market and may  appoint special places where markets may be held and may  prescribe limits beyond which it shall not be lawful for  persons bringing articles for sale from or to an infected area  to pass.  Evacuation.  4. In an infected area the Collector, or a plague officer  with the previous sanction of the Collector, may order the  evacuation of infected houses and houses in their neighbour-  hood, or generally of any infected locality.  Provided that, before issuing or authorizing an order for  compulsory evacuation, the Collector shall either provide  adequate and suitable shelter within reasonable distance for  the persons evicted, together with the necessary water-  supply and arrangements for watch and ward, or shall satisfy  himself that such shelter and water-supply have been  provided by private agency. The Collector shall also satisfy  himself that the compulsory evacuation is necessary to avert  the further spread of the disease, or is in the interests of the  affected population taking account of climatic conditions.  The Collector may require all persons who evacuate their  houses voluntarily, or are evicted under this regulation, to  reside in such place as he may appoint.  Acquisition  of lands or  buildings  required for  plague pur-  poses.  5. In an infected area the Collector may enter upon, occupy  and use, or may depute any person to enter upon, occupy and  use, without having recourse to the provisions of the Land  Acquisition Act, 1894, any building or place which is re-  quired for, and is, in the opinion of the District Medical  and Sanitary Officer, suitable for any purposes connected with  plague measures; provided that, if the building or place is  occupied, twenty-four hours' notice in. writing shall be given  to the occupier or shall be conspicuously affixed on such build-  ing or place. The owner or lessee of such building or place  shall be entitled to a reasonable rent to be fixed by the Col-  lector for the period during which the ground or building  may be used for purposes connected with plagu; and the  Collector shall, when any building ceases to be so used, cause  it to be thoroughly cleansed and, if the owner so desires, white-  washed internally and externally.
?5  Destruction  of sheds.  6. If the Collector is of opinion that the destruction of  any hut or shed is necessary to prevent the spread of plague,  he may take summary measures, for the destruction of such  hut or shed and of the materials of which it is constructed.  Inspection  of places  used for  storage of  grain.  7. The Collector may direct that any dwelling house or  any landing place or railway goods shed or any place used  for the storage of grain shall be inspected and that all rats  found therein shall be destroyed; and to facilitate the de-  struction of rats may order the temporary removal of any  grain or other merchandise.                                              Inspection, of  grain  in  transit.  8. The Collector may direct that at any place in his district  any consignment of grain, being conveyed by rail, road or  otherwise, shall be examined, and shall, if necessary, be un-  loaded and exposed to the sun in such manner and for such  period as he may fix.  Duty of  householders  and medical  practitioners.  9. Every householder and every medical practitioner  shall at once report to the nearest local authority any case of  plague or any case of fever with glandular swellings or any  unusual mortality among rats which may come to his notice.  Quarantine of  persons and  sun-disin-  fections  articles  coming from  infected  areas.  10. The chairman of any municipal council or union  panchayat, or the headman of any village in which there is  no panchayat, may prevent any person suspected of coming  from an infected place from entering the town or village for  a period not exceeding two days unless his clothing and per-  sonal effects have been thoroughly exposed to the direct rays  of the sun for not less than six hours. He may also prevent  any consignment of grain from entering the town or village  until the bags have been removed from the carts and every  side of each bag has been exposed to the direct rays of the  sun for not less than two hours.  Plague staff  entitled to,  and bound  to give, oue  month's  notice.  11. (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary  every inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, coolie, scavenger  or other menial servant employed to do duty in connexion  with plague, shall be entitled to one month's notice before  discharge, or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he  is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified  term and is discharged at the end of it. Similarly every  supplier of coolies shall be entitled to one month's notice  before his coolies are discharged.  (2) No such inspector, maistri, peon, watchman, coolie,  scavenger, or other menial servant shall, in the absence of a  written contract authorizing him to do so, and without reason  able cause resign his employment or absent himself from his  duties without giving one month's notice or shall neglect or
?6  refuse to perform any of his duties. In like manner no sup-  plier of coolies or other menial servants shall withdraw his  coolies or servants without giving one month's notice.  Award of  compensation  for damage  or loss.  12. When in consequence of the exercise of the powers  conferred by or under these regulations any property is  damaged or destroyed, the Collector shall pay to the owner  by way of compensation such sum as he may consider suffi-  cient to cover the cost of repairing the damage or replacing the  property destroyed.  Penalty for  breach of  regulations.  13. Any person disobeying or contravening or refusing to  submit himself to any of these regulations, or obstructing any  measure taken under the authority of these regulations, shall  be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under  section 188 of the Indian Penal Code and shall be liable on  conviction to imprisonment of either description for a term  which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to  one thousand rupees or both.  Notes.-(1) The Plague Regulations being orders formally made and issued by  Government under the Epidemic Diseases Act, no sanction is required as a condition  precedent to prosecution for disobeying them (Judgment of the High Court in  Criminal Appeal No. 561 of 1899).  (2) By Command Order No. 687, dated 18th November 1898, all ranks in the  Madras Command have been directed to obey the Plague Regulations, and any in-  fringement of them is punishable as a military offence. Military pensioners have  been warned (Superintendent's Circular No. II, dated 14th December 1898) that any  disobedience or wilful neglect of the regulations or obstruction offered to any official  on plague duty will be treated as a breach of the good conduct required by Govern-  ment as a condition of the continuation of their pensions, and that any pensioner being  guilty thereof will be liable to have his pension stopped forthwith and the same  reduced or permanently withdrawn.  IV  STANDING ORDERS.  The following are departmental instructions for the  guidance of officers dealing with plague:-  General  control of  plague  measures.  The general control of all measures connected with plague  is vested in the Collector of the district, unless the Govern-  ment in any case otherwise direct; and all officers of  Government, of local boards and of municipalities, and all  plague officers must obey and carry out the Collector's  orders. With regard to the measures to be taken in any  particular town or locality the Collector has a wide discre-  tion and may associate with himself a small committee  including the District Medical and Sanitary Officer and the  chairman of the municipality or the president of the district  or taluk board.
7  In a cantonment the military authorities are immediately  responsible for carrying out plague measures and the  Collector should appoint a representative of those authorities  to be a plague officer for the cantonment.  Preventive  measures.  2. A memorandum on plague preventive measures, drawn  up by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of  India, is printed as Appendix A to these Standing Orders.  The greatest importance is attached to what may be called  permanent preventive measures, which consist in making the  people understand that the presence of rats in their houses  and godowns is dangerous, and in persuading them to protect  themselves from the risks involved in the presence of rats in  places used for human habitation, and their property from  the loss and destruction caused by these animals at all times.  It is possible by making it difficult for rats to enter houses  and godowns and by making it difficult for them to find food  when they do enter, to bring about a very great reduction in  the number of rats. Rats are found in great numbers in  markets and places used for the storage of grain; if grain  godowns were constructed in the manner set forth in Part II  of the memorandum they would harbour much fewer rats  than at present and none would stay in them long. The  municipal councils of towns liable to plague infection should  see that all godowns in their own markets are constructed on  the lines laid down so as to be rat-free. The councils can,  under the existing law, impose conditions with regard to the  construction of new buildings and they should do so in  respect of those intended for the storage of grain; when the  law is amended, it is proposed to lay down that no person  shall store grain or deal in grain wholesale without a licence  and it will be possible then for a council to insist that grain  shall be stored only in rat-free premises. In ordinary houses  if foodstuffs are shut up in receptacles to which rats cannot  obtain access and no garbage or refuse is allowed to lie  about, there is less likelihood of rat infestation. At present  few people take any precautions at all. Every endeavour  should be made to warn all of the danger of allowing rats to  share their habitations. In some places lectures and leaflets  may be useful but more can probably be done by the personal  influence of both officials and non-officials and both should be  urged to do all that they can to educate the more ignorant  sections of the population.  Inspection  and sun-dis-  infection of  grain,  clothing, etc.  3. Under existing conditions much can be done to prevent  the spread of plague from one place to another. Under  regulation 8 the Collector has power to order the breaking of
8  bulk of any consignment of grain in transit and under  regulation 10 the municipal or village authority may simi-  larly ensure that no consignment of grain shall enter a town  or village until bulk has been broken and the grain has been  exposed to the sun. The mere breaking of bulk and the  disturbance caused by the unloading of the bags will gene-  rally be enough to get rid of any rats they contain; but a  bag may contain rats which are perhaps too young or too  sick to move and it may be necessary to empty out bags of  grain coming from infected places in order that such rats  may be destroyed before the grain reaches its destination.  Exposure to the sun will kill fleas either in the personal  effects of travellers or in bags of grain, and to obtain this  exposure it is not generally necessary to empty the grain  bags, since fleas, when separated from rats, are not likely to  burrow deeply into the bags. If the weather is cloudy, the  fleas cannot be killed in this way but rat-fleas are not likely  to remain long either in bags of grain in which there are no  rats or in the clothing or on the persons of human beings  and the regulation provides that, in case exposure to the  sun cannot be arranged for, travellers and grain may be  prevented from entering the town or village for two days.  Rat, destruc-  tion.  4. Where adequate measures have not been taken to  exclude rats from houses and godowns, other steps should  be taken, when there is a danger of plague, to reduce the  number of rats by trapping and poisoning. If rat destruc-  tion is to do any good, it must be undertaken on as large a  scale as possible and under reliable supervision. The catch-  ing or killing of a few rats in a locality can have little or no  effect on the total number and is mere waste of money;  unless the operations are intelligently and honestly super-  vised, there will be little rat destruction, though the reports of  the staff employed may indicate great activity. Difficulties  have been experienced in securing the co-operation of the  people in rat destruction; baits are sometimes removed  before the rats have had an opportunity of taking them and  various devices have been adopted to prevent rats getting  into traps; but there is reason to believe that the obstruction  met with is often due to fear of the steps which may be taken  by the plague authorities if infected rats are found. It  should therefore be explained carefully that the chief object  of the operations is to destroy the rats before they become  infected.  The best time to start a campaign against rats is the  season when there is no plague, generally the hot weather;
9  but rat destruction is also useful when plague is present.  The finding of infected rats then among those caught should  not be allowed to cause the apprehension that special  measures will be taken in regard to the particular houses in  which they are caught. Inoculation.  5. When an area is actually infected or is imminently  threatened, inoculation should be encouraged in every possi-  ble way. In the office of every District Medical and Sanitary  Officer there should always be kept a sufficient number of  syringes. Haffkine's vaccine need not be kept in stock but,  as soon as there are any signs of an epidemic, such as rat  mortality or an indigenous human case, a sufficient supply-  say 1,000 doses-to provide against a sudden rush for inocu-  lation, should be ordered by telegram from the Bombay  Bacteriological Laboratory at Parel; and if there are indica-  tions that people are likely to take to inoculation, further  supplies should be ordered without delay.  Where it is specially necessary to encourage inoculation,  the Collector may grant subsistence allowances at rates not  exceeding four annas a day for an adult and two annas a day  for a minor who may be temporarily incapacitated for work  as a result of inoculation. Such an allowance should not be  paid to any one individual for more than three days. Evacuation.  6. When the existence of plague in a town or village has  been established, the lives of many of the inhabitants can be  saved if they leave their houses and take up their residence  beyond the reach of infected rats. In villages and smaller  towns the people usually evacuate their houses voluntarily  on the appearance of plague and camp in the neighbourhood  and the practice should be encouraged. In larger towns  there is not the same readiness to evacuate, owing to the  difficulty of finding suitable camping grounds not too far  away from the places where the people have  to work, to the  absence of water supplies and to other inconveniences;  while the poorer inhabitants are often unable to provide  themselves with adequate shelter. On the other hand there  is a danger that, if no steps are taken, a panic will set in  when the number of cases of plague becomes large, and the  people will scatter to neighbouring villages and, by carrying  with them infected fleas or merchandise containing rats,  disseminate infection. Under regulation 4 the Collector  has power to order the evacuation of any house or group of  houses in an infected area, but the power should be used  with discretion and all reasonable assistance should be given  Evacuation.
10  to persons evacuating their houses whether as a result of  such an order or of their own free will. Many may not be  able to provide themselves with shelter at short notice and  it is advisable, therefore, that arrangements should be made  beforehand so that hutting materials shall be either in stock  or readily procurable and shall, when evacuation is actually  in progress, be issued in reasonable quantities, free of charge  to those who really cannot afford to pay for them, and to  others at cost price. Sites for camps should not be more  remote than is necessary to prevent invasion by infected  rats; they should be selected with due regard to water  supply and sanitation and there should be as little interference  as possible with the avocations of the people. Police should  be employed to protect the evacuated houses against burglary  and to patrol the approved camps; and arrangements may  be made for the custody, free of charge, of the effects of  persons who have left their houses.  Treatment of  plague pati-  ents; and  plague hos-  pitals.  7. A plague patient like any other sick person should  receive the most careful attention and all efforts should be  directed towards making him as comfortable as possible. A  person suffering from bubonic plague is no more a source of  danger than any other person who may carry infected fleas.  It is unnecessary therefore to construct special plague  hospitals or to locate them in places remote from human  habitation. Patients can be treated best in the ordinary  hospitals, special wards being set apart for the purpose and  additional temporary accommodation being constructed if  necessary; nor is there any objection to a patient being  treated in his own house if he prefers to stay there and his  friends and relations are prepared to take proper care of him.  Patients suffering from pneumonic plague should not be  taken to the general ward of a hospital but should be treated  in an isolation ward if there is one.  Where private committees or individuals wish to establish  hospitals for particular communities, the Government will  contribute half the actual cost of construction and mainte-  nance provided-  (a) that the cost of construction is considered reasonable  and the buildings are erected on sites approved by the Col-  lector or plague officer acting under his control; [in any  case of doubt or dispute the Government will have the right  to have the value of the work done estimated by the  Public Works Department.]
11  (b) that the arrangements for sanitation and the supply  of food meet with the approval of the Collector;  (c) that such hospitals remain under the general super-  vision of Government officials and all instructions that may be  given by the Sanitary Commissioner or the Surgeon-General  are observed; and  (d) that the sale-proceeds of such hospitals, when they  are dismantled, are divided proportionately between the  Government and the committee or individuals concerned.  The amounts will be paid monthly in arrears to the  manager or managers approved by the Collector.  Action to be  taken by  local officers  on the out-  break of  plague.  8. It is most important that early information should be  received of the appearance of infection in any place, both in  order that remedial measures may be adopted in that place  and in order that it may not be allowed to become a focus  for the spread of infection. If the rats in a town or village  are infected, they may spread infection to other places before  any case of human plague occurs; and if a case of indigenous  human plague occurs, it may be regarded as certain that the  local rats have been infected for some time. It is the duty  of heads of villages and all other local authorities to watch  the residences of persons arriving from infected areas and  to report at once any mortality of rats or any human case of  plague. Regulation 9 lays upon every householder and  medical practitioner the duty of informing the local authority  of rat mortality or of any illness with the appearance of  plague which comes to his notice; but in towns or villages  which have been, or are likely to be infected, the local author-  ities must themselves be vigilant. If the local authority  becomes aware of rat falls or of a human case in a place not  already declared infected, he should report the fact at once  to the chairman in the case of a municipality, and to the  tahsildar in the case of any other town or village, and also  to the plague inspector of the circle if there is one. Pending  the arrival of one of those officers or a medical officer, he  should, if any human being has been attacked, arrange as far  as he can for proper attendance on the patient. Thereafter  he should, on any day on which a seizure or death takes  place, report the number of seizures and deaths to the  chairman or tahsildar as the case may be.  9. On receipt of information of rat mortality or human  infection, the municipal chairman or the tahsildar, as the case  may be, should report the fact to the Revenue Divisional  Officer, the District Medical and Sanitary Officer and
12  the Collector by the quickest possible means, and should  proceed at once to the spot, if possible with a medical officer,  and verify the facts. If he finds the information to be correct  and a detailed report has not already been submitted by the  plague inspector to the Collector, he should see that such a  report is submitted without delay and make arrangements for  the care of the patient or patients, if any, and for the protec-  tion, so far as may be possible, of the population generally.  He should keep the Collector informed from day to day of  the number of seizures and deaths occurring within his juris-  diction with the wards (in the case of municipalities) or the  villages (in the case of a taluk) in which they have occurred.  Appointment  of plague  inspectors.  10. In any district in which any town or village has been  declared infected, or with the sanction of Government in any  district threatened with plague, the Collector may appoint  plague inspectors who should, if possible, be certificated  sanitary inspectors, for the purpose of observation. In  municipal areas it will generally be desirable to appoint an  inspector for each ward, though it may not always be neces-  sary if the wards are small; and a separate inspector should  ordinarily be appointed for each non-municipal town with a  population of 5,000 or more. Elsewhere each inspector  should be placed in charge of a circle of a size which will  admit of his visiting every portion of it within ten days or  less. Subject to the control of the Collector the inspectors  will work under the orders of the plague officer having  jurisdiction over their circles.  Duties of  plague  inspectors.  11. In the absence of special orders from the Collector,  the duties of a plague inspector are-  (1) to patrol the area under his charge for the purpose  of obtaining early information of rat mortality or of human  plague;  (2) to proceed at once to any place from which infec-  tion is newly reported; and, in the absence of a medical  officer, to see that the best possible arrangements are made  for the comfort and treatment of any patients whose relations  cannot take care of them themselves;  (3) within 24 hours of receiving the first intimation, to  submit a detailed report (in the form given in Appendix B)  to his immediate superior and to the Collector with regard  to every imported case and with regard to each of the first  three indigenous cases in the village;  (4) to examine any dead rats that may be found in a  place not already declared infected and, if he finds any
13  enlarged glands and has been instructed how to take smears,  to send spleen or liver smears to the King Institute at Guindy  for examination;  (5) to visit frequently all infected areas in his range,  to encourage the people to get themselves inoculated and to  leave their houses and camp in some place where they will be  away from the neighbourhood of infected rats;  (6) to advise the people generally on the means of  avoiding plague, and especially as to the removal of all food  and garbage from places accessible to rats, and as to the  destruction of rats; and  (7) when so directed by the Collector or plague officer  to conduct or assist in conducting a campaign for the  destruction of rats. Report to be  sent by Col-  lectors to the  Sanitary  Commissioner  on the occur-  rence of the  first case of  plague.  12. When a case of plague, genuine or suspected, is first  discovered in any place not declared infected, the Collector  or, in his absence, any gazetted officer at the headquarters  station of the district, should immediately telegraph the fact  to the Sanitary Commissioner, stating whether the case was  indigenous or imported, if the latter whence it was imported,  how the case was discovered, and any other further particu-  lars, with dates, which may appear necessary. In the case  of ports whence vessels sail for Europe, it should also be  stated in the telegram whether any plague or unusual morta-  lity among rats was observed. Names of hamlets should not  be telegraphed but only the names of villages to which such  hamlets belong. Report of  plague cases  to be sent  by Collectors  to Govern-  ment and  Sanitary  Commis-  sioner.  13. All attacks and deaths should be reported daily by  the Collector to the Sanitary Commissioner in the form  prescribed in G.O. No. 485 P., dated 10th March 1904.  These reports may be sent by post, unless, owing to a breach  on a railway or any other cause, they are not likely to be  received within 48 hours, when they should be telegraphed.  Telegraphic reports should however be sent to the Govern-  ment and the Sanitary Commissioner of-  (a) the first indigenous case occurring in a district  previously free from plague,  (b) the first three indigenous cases occurring in a town  of 10,000 inhabitants or more, and  (c) the first three indigenous cases occurring in any  port.  Collectors should also send telegraphic reports to the  medical officers of the Ceylon Government stationed at Tuti-  corin and Mandapam, of the first indigenous case occurring
14  in a district previously free from plague. The cost of these  telegrams will be debited to the Ceylon Government by the  Accountant-General.  Monthly  report on  plague to be  sent by  Collectors  to the  Sanitary  Commis-  sioner.  14. The Collector of every district affected with indigenous  plague should forward to the Sanitary Commissioner by the  15th of every month a report for the previous month, show-  ing whether the epidemic was increasing or decreasing, what  measures were taken to combat it and with what degree of  success, the attitude of the people towards those measures,  and what steps they were taking to help themselves and any  other matters of interest.  Communica-  tion of in-  formation  regarding  plague cases  to adjoining  districts and  native  states.  15. Collectors of infected districts should send daily  reports of plague to the Collecters and District Medical and  Sanitary Officers of adjoining districts in the form prescribed  by G.O. No. 83 P., dated 16th January 1904.  The Collectors of Nellore, North Arcot, Chittoor, South  Arcot and Chingleput should send a copy of the daily plague  report to the President of the Madras Corporation, and  should also report to him by telegram immediately on its  occurrence any case of plague or suspected plague that may  occur in any new place within their districts.  Inasmuch as the Mysore Darbar has instructed the  amildars and deputy amildars in charge of taluks and sub-  taluks of Mysore which border on British districts to give  immediate information of the occurrence of plague within  their jurisdiction direct to the tahsildars of the neighbouring  British taluks, and as the Deputy Commissioners have been  similarly requested to keep the Collectors of adjoining British  districts promptly informed of the occurrence of plague in  the neighbouring districts in Mysore, Collectors of British  districts bordering on Mysore will accordingly arrange to  give similar information direct to the officials of the Darbar.  Similar arrangements are in force with regard to districts  bordering on the Nizam's Dominions.  Control of  Collector  over medical  subordinates  on plague  duty.  16. The Collector may fine or suspend subordinates of  the Government medical department who are employed on  plague duty within his district, but against such punishment  there shall be a right of appeal to Government through the  Surgeon-General. Before passing any order regarding the  punishment of a medical subordinate, the Collector should  consult the District Medical and Sanitary Officer. A copy of  every such order should forthwith be communicated to the  Surgeon-General who may, in any case in which he considers  that the fault ascribed to the subordinate is one which
15  touches his professional conduct only, require that the order  shall not be carried into effect pending reference to Govern-  ment. No appeal to the Government will be entertained  unless preferred within three months from the date of the  order appealed against.  17. The Collector may grant casual or privilege leave to  subordinates of the Government medical department whose  services have been lent to local boards or municipalities for  plague duty. Intimation of the application should, however,  be made to the Surgeon-General before privilege leave is  sanctioned. Leave of all other descriptions, such as furlough  or sick leave, is granted by the Surgeon-General. Control of  plague  officers over  the plague  staff.  18. Subject to the Collector's approval and general  control, a plague officer may appoint, fine, suspend, or  remove from plague duty any member of the plague staff  except a medical subordinate. Right, of  appeal of  the plague  staff.  19. The order of any Collector or plague officer dispens-  ing with the services of a temporary plague subordinate shall  have general effect throughout the Presidency. The Collec-  tor's order of suspension or dismissal shall be final with  regard to officers lower in rank than that of certificated  sanitary inspector. Certificated sanitary inspectors shall  have a right of appeal to Government. The appeal should  be forwarded to Government through the Collector and the  Sanitary Commissioner. There shall be an appeal to the  Collector against any order of suspension or dismissal passed  by a plague officer. Distribution  of plague  charges.  20. In connexion with measures to combat plague,  expenditure will ordinarily be necessary only on the following  objects:-  (1) observation, including the pay of plague inspectors;  (2) inoculation;  (3) the provision of shelter for persons leaving their  houses;  (4) police, to guard evacuated houses and approved  camps;  (5) rat destruction, including the cost of traps and  poison and the pay of any staff employed;  (6) hospitals, appliances and staff for the care of  patients; and  (7) measures taken to ensure the breaking of bulk of  consignments of grain.  Expenditure on the first four items will be borne from  Provincial funds. The cost of the fifth and sixth will be
16  borne by municipal funds in municipal areas and by local  funds in rural areas. That of the seventh will fall on Pro-  vincial funds if the measures are undertaken by the Collector  under regulation 8 and on the municipal or local authority  concerned if they are carried out under regulation 10.  Powers of  Collectors  to incur  expenditure  on plague.  21. Collectors are authorized to incur expenditure up to  Rs. 5,000 in anticipation of the sanction of Government  when prompt action is necessary under regulation 7 or regu-  lation 8 or when, in consequence of an outbreak of plague, it  becomes necessary urgently to provide hutting materials for  persons evacuating their houses, or to pay compensation for  damage to property. Any expenditure so incurred should  be reported immediately and, except as provided in this order,  no expenditure should be incurred from Provincial funds  without previous sanction.  Where a local board or municipal council finds it neces-  sary to incur at short notice expenditure on the care and  accommodation of the sick or on rat destruction, which has  not been foreseen or provided for in its budget, it should  take immediate steps to rearrange its budget so that funds  may be available.  Sanction  for the  employment  of plague  establish-  ments.  22. All appointments in connexion with plague require  the sanction of Government. In the case of additional  police required for plague duty the application for sanction  should be forwarded, through the Inspector-General of  Police, to the Secretary to Government, Home (Judicial)  Department. In other cases applications should be for-  warded to the Secretary to Government, Local and Muni-  cipal (Plague) Department. Sanctions for establishments  employed under this rule will remain in force to the end of  the following March or September, whichever is earlier,  unless for special reasons a different date is specified in the  order in any particular case. On the 1st of March and on  the 1st of September each Collector will submit in a single  communication proposals for the retention of such of the  establishments as, in his opinion, should be retained in the  ensuing half-year, clearly explaining the necessity in each  case. Such proposals should be accompanied by three  copies of a statement showing all existing plague establish-  ments in the form in Appendix C, two copies of the state-  ment being forwarded at the same time to the Accountant-  General and one copy to the Sanitary Commissioner.  Special sanction should be obtained for all additional esta-  blishments which it may be found necessary to employ in
17  the course of the half-year, but in the absence of special  instructions to the contrary all such sanctions will expire at  the end of the half-year. Collectors will also effect from  time to time such reductions in establishments as may be  feasible. Allowances  to officers  en plague  duty  23. The Government of India have authorized the grant  of special allowances to medical officers for plague duty per-  formed in addition to their ordinary work in cases where it  is sufficiently arduous to deserve special remuneration. The  Local Government may also sanction duty allowances to  officers of other classes, provided their plague work lies  entirely outside their ordinary and legitimate duties. The  Secretary of State has also sanctioned the grant of extra-  ordinary pension to the families of police men who die of  plague contracted in the execution of their duties in plague-  stricken localities, provided such duties entail imminent risk  from plague.  24. The special allowances given to certain classes of  officers for plague duty and the salaries attached to special  temporary appointments created on account of plague are  shown in Appendices D and E. All questions relating to the  grant-of extra allowances should be referred for the orders  of Government.  Board of Revenue (Laud 3-A. Land Revenue,  Revenue).  Sanitary Commissioner. 24-B. Sanitation.  Surgeon-General ... 24-A. Medical.  Inspector-General of 20. Police.  Police and the Commis-  sioner of Police. Estimates of  plague  expenditure.  25. The Board of Revenue (Land Revenue), the Sanitary  Commissioner, the Sur-  geon-General, the Inspect-  or-General of Police and  the Commissioner of  Police are required to  include in their Provincial  budgets under the respective major and minor heads (vide  margin) consolidated estimates of plague expenditure debit-  able to Provincial funds. The Board of Revenue (Land  Revenue) will obtain the estimates for the districts from the  Collectors, and the Sanitary Commissioner and the Surgeou-  General the estimates for the districts and the City of Madras  from the Collectors and the President, Corporation of  Madras, respectively. The figures relating to plague charges  should appear under a separate sub-head " Plague expendi-  ture."  Similarly each district board or municipal council should  enter in its budget under a separate sub-head the provision  it makes for plague expenditure.  2
18  Transfer of  funds.  26. The Board of Revenue (Land Revenue), the Inspect-  or-General of Police and the Surgeon-General can sanction  reappropriation of funds from one minor head to another  within the same major head, provided (a) that the expendi-  ture is entirely under their control; (b) that the transfer does  not involve reappropriation either from or to the group head  Salaries; and (c) that savings on non-recurring expenditure  are not reappropriated in order to provide for additional  recurring expenditure.  The Commissioner of Police, the Sanitary Commissioner  and Collectors can sanction reappropriation of funds within  the same minor head where the expenditure is entirely under  their control, subject to the following conditions:-  (1) the total of the grants under their control shall not  be exceeded;  (2) savings under Salaries shall not be reappropriated  to other classes of expenditure; and  (3) savings on non-recurring expenditure under Supplies  and Services, Contingencies and other detailed heads shall  not be reappropriated in order to provide for additional  recurring expenditure under Salaries, Establishment, or on  any other account.  Fines.  27. Fines recovered in prosecutions under the Plague  Regulations should be credited to the head XVI-Ab.-LAW  AND JUSTICE-Courts of Law-General fees, fines and for-  feitures.  Final  accounts of  plague  charges.  *Items 3 and 4 under  group R.F. XXXV-D.  Plague in Appendix XII  to the Madras Stationery  Manual.  28. The Accountant-General should submit in the  prescribed form * final accounts of  plague charges under Provincial (direct  and indirect) and Local funds for the  preceding financial year so as to reach  Government on the 15th September.  District boards and municipal councils should continue to  show in the accounts attached to their administration reports  the expenditure incurred by them on plague measures.  Classifica-  tion of  pingue  charges.  29. 'Direct' plague expenditure is that exhibited in the  Provincial accounts under the head 24-Bc. Sanitation-  Expenses in connexion with bubonic plague. 'Indirect'  plague expenditure includes all other extra expenditure due  to plague but brought to account under the ordinary appro-  priate service heads.  (i) All officers who draw bills for indirect plague  expenditure should write conspicuously at the head of each  such bill, beside the account head, the word 'Plague' in
19  red ink. If only some of the items in a bill are plague  charges, the word 'Plague' should be written against each  such item instead of at the head of the bill.  (ii) Contingent expenditure on account of plague, e.g.,  stationery, postage, telegrams, office furniture and such like,  should be charged against the heads of account to which the  salaries of the officers incurring such expenditure are debited.  (iii) The pay and allowances of officers and establish-  ments forming part of existing departments or services whose  employment on plague duty does not involve the payment of  salaries to other persons for the performance of their legiti-  mate duties, or the payment to them of extra allowances on  account of plague, do not constitute indirect plague charges  (of course they are not direct plague charges) because they  do not involve extra expense. A statement should be for-  warded to the Accountant-General by the twentieth of each  month showing the pay and allowances drawn in the previous  month by officers and establishments so employed. Plague  correspond-  ence and  destruction  of records.  30. All correspondence about plague should be addressed  to the Secretary to Government, Local and Municipal (Plague)  Department, and should be marked with the word 'Plague'  in red ink on the outside covers and on the left-hand corner  of the papers. Telegrams should be addressed to 'Madras,  Plague.' All references regarding account matters should  be addressed to, or forwarded through, the Accountant-  General.  31. Plague correspondence should be entered in a separate  current register, and the papers shown against a new item  'Plague' in the quarterly business returns. A separate  series of numbers should be given to the disposals, and the  question of destroying or retaining them should be dealt with  in accordance with B.P. No. 101, dated 18th April 1898.  Reports of plague cases and deaths received from authori-  ties outside the Presidency may be destroyed at the end of  the month succeeding that to which they relate; all other  reports and returns after one year.  2-A
20  APPENDIX A.  [See Standing Order 2.]  MEMORANDUM ON PLAGUE PREVENTIVE MEASURES.  Plague, as we know it in India, is a disease of rats in which man  and a few of the lower animals participate. The disease is caused by  the invasion of the body by the plague bacillus. The plague bacillus  is spread from rat to rat, and from rat to man, and to certain other  of the lower animals, by the bite of the rat-flea. The fact that man  is susceptible to the disease is the reason of course that the disease  is of such importance to the public health of India, but it must be  remembered that from the point of view of the plague bacillus, if  such an expression be permitted, man is relatively of small account.  An epidemic of plague among men is but an index of the epizootic  that is raging among the rat population of the community. Were  there no rats, or were rats less "domesticated," or were the habits  and customs of people in this country such that rats found it difficult  to obtain food and shelter in human habitation, plague, as a human  disease, would disappear from India. The fact that the association  between rats and man is so close in this country is the sole reason   why plague is so serious a factor in our vital statistics.  If the significance of these simple facts be grasped, measures for  the eradication of plague as a human disease suggest themselves.  Every effort should be made to induce the people of this country to  realize that the apathy with which they gladly suffer the rat to share  their food, and find shelter in their homes, is directly responsible for  the fact that they suffer and die from this disease. Once this lesson  has been driven home plague as a human disease will cease to afflict the  converted community.  In the meantime, it is necessary to consider what measures can be  undertaken most profitably to save the people in spite of themselves,  realizing that the degree of success obtainable must depend in some  measure on the amount of co-operation secured.  One of the most remarkable facts about outbreaks of plague in  India is the remarkably constant seasonal prevalence that the disease  exhibits in any given part of the country. For example, plague epi-  demics always reach their height in the Punjab and the west of the  United Provinces in the month of April; in the east of the United  Provinces and in Bihar in the month of March; in the South of the  Bombay Deccan about October; in Bombay City, about March. This  phenomenon is explained by the fact that the rat plague, on which  the human epidemic depends, is most acute at that season of the year  when rat-fleas are most numerous. The number of rat-fleas is de-  pendent upon conditions of atmospheric humidity and temperature.  This dependence upon climatic conditions explains, not only why plague  has a constant seasonal prevalence in any given area, but also why the  disease is much more virulent and widespread in some years than in
21  others. Thus severe epidemics in the north of India have always  been preceded by abnormally damp weather in the cold weather  months.  In places where rats are very numerous plague may develop when  climatic conditions are adverse, i.e., when rat-fleas are scarce, but  plague tends to disappear with the advent of hot dry weather.  It cannot be too strongly emphasized that anti-rat measures, direct-  ed towards the eradication of plague infection, can be prosecuted  with most chance of success in the hot dry months when plague cases  and foci of infection are fewest. The relatively plague-free season  should synchronize with maximum anti-plague effort and not be regard-  ed as a suitable time for a cessation of anti-plague measures.  Anti-plague measures can be grouped under four heads:-  (a) Rat elimination or the prevention of rat infestation. This  comprises such modifications in the habits, customs, and dwellings of  a community as will result in a diminished rat infestation in the homes  of the people and make the association between rats and men less  intimate than at present.  (b) Measures designed to protect the rat population of any given  town or village from plague infection. These entail a clear under-  standing of the manner in which plague infection is carried from  place to place.  (c) Rat destruction designed, as is (a), to diminish the chances  of infection, and to keep the rat population at so low a level that if  plague be introduced the severity of the resulting epidemic will be  appreciably diminished.  (d) If our efforts under these three heads fail to keep plague out  it is left to try and render the human population immune to attacks  of the disease by means of inoculation, or to remove the population  at risk from close association with infected rats. The latter involves  the evacuation of infected dwellings and the provision of temporary  accommodation outside the rat-infested, plague-infected area.  Measures included under (a), (b) and (c) can be carried out at any  season of the year; measures under (d) are generally applicable only  in the plague season.  Segregation of the sick is not essential. For all practical purposes  the patient suffering from bubonic plague is not capable ot infecting  those in close attendance on him. Such a statement is not true of  pneumonic plague. Small outbreaks of this disease, which is extremely  infectious, are occasionally experienced in India. These are, however,  of infrequent occurrence and of small moment when compared with  the incidence of bubonic plague.  It will be noted that of the four 'components' of a plague  epidemic, viz., the plague bacillus, the rat-flea, the rat, and man, only  the rat and man have been specifically mentioned in this preliminary  discussion of preventive measures. The plague bacillus is so short-  lived outside the body of either the rat-flea, the rat, or man, that  for practical purposes it need not be considered as possessing an  independent existence. Similarly, the welfare of the rat-flea is so  dependent on the plentiful supply of rats which they parasitize, and
22  has so short a life apart from its proper host, especially if it be infected  with plague, that 'anti-flea' measures received no specific mention.  Such measures will be referred to when (b) is under detailed consi-  deration: they have very decided value and should in no wise be  overlooked.  I.-RAT ELIMINATION.  A full knowledge of the habits and customs of the rat is essential  to the successful prosecution of anti-plague measures.  1. The rat.-The common Indian house rat, Mus rattus, is a very  domesticated animal and is rarely found far from human habitation.  For shelter it seeks the darkest corners of the dwelling, especially if  such offer facilities for burrowing and a convenient supply of food.  Such dark corners are to be found in almost any Indian dwelling.  The rat possesses remarkable powers of climbing, and the ordinary  kutcha mud wall offers no difficulties. A hard, smooth vertical surface  free from irregularities and projections is not easily surmounted. A  water-pipe or a drain-pipe which can be grasped by the rat's legs and  tail is easily climbed. A ledge, projecting horizontally nine inches  or more from the wall, if quite smooth and hard on the under surface,  presents an insurmountable obstacle. A rat may succeed in jumping  on to a ledge 21/3 feet high but not one 3 feet high.  Grain is the natural food of Mus rattus, which is very largely  vegetarian in its habit: in certain circumstances the house rat will  devour 'meat,' or even the dead bodies of other rats, but uncooked  grain is their chief article of diet. The variety of grain that is most  attractive to rats differs in different parts of the country, but the rats  of any given locality are remarkably conservative. Usually the rat  favours that variety of grain which forms the staple food of the human  population among which it dwells. Thus the rats of Poona prefer  bajri to anything else; the rats of Madras are rice-eaters; the rats of  Sholapur affect an equal preference for jowari and bajri. Very  remarkable, too, is the facility with which the rat is able to identify  dough made from the flour of the grain to which it is accustomed  when several varieties are offered in exactly similar form. The  addition of such substances as meat, fish, cheese, sugar, fats, condi-  ments or salt, as a flavouring to dough made of flour and water, does  not in any way render the mixture more palatable or attractive to the  rat. This statement is at variance with commonly accepted notions  and many will find it difficult to credit that a rat has no very great  partiality for cheese, for example. Nevertheless the above statement  is based on the results of numerous controlled observations designed  to determine this special point. It is not contended that rats won't  eat such substances as those enumerated above; at times they will  eat almost anything; nevertheless they exhibit universally a pre-  ference for grain, or flour made from grain in the form of a paste, in  preference to all else, and they like it best unflavoured. Finally, rats  must have water if their food be dry; sufficient water is obtainable  from fresh, or wet, vegetables or grass.  A rat becomes sexually mature at a little over two months; the  most common number of young at a litter is five. The sexes closely
23  approximate each other in number. So prolific are rats that given  sufficient food and shelter a pair of rats may become eighty pairs in  the course of a year.  In most parts of India the majority of Mus rattus burrow:  burrowing does not appear to be essential provided shelter and free-  dom from molestation can be secured, a state of affairs that is  everywhere found in Indian habitations.  Rats do not commonly migrate far from their homes.  These then are the more important of the characteristics of the  Indian house rat which plays so important a part in the spread of  plague. Successful efforts at rat elimination and rat destruction  necessitate a display of intelligence, energy, persistence and a lively  understanding of their habits and customs as outlined above.  Before considering measures in detail it may be worthwhile to  refer to the economic aspects of the case. An adult rat consumes  upwards of 3/4 oz. of grain each day. Let us take the case of an  Indian town with a human population of a quarter of a million people.  Such a town at a very low estimate will have a rat population  amounting to half a million. Let us suppose that the rats of this  town have a preference for a grain selling at ten seers for the  rupee. The rat population of this town would consume grain each  day to the value of Rs. 1,170 and at the same time do a vast amount  of damage to human property of other kinds. (This sum is equivalent  to Re. 1-11-0 per head of population per annum, an amount which if  devoted to public health would insure freedom from plague and many  other diseases as well.) Truly the inhabitants of this country in so  gladly suffering the rat suffer in other ways than those of disease and  death.  2. Rat elimination.-Energetic and sustained rat destruction  campaigns, carried out on lines such as those that will be described  hereafter and with due attention to detail, will do much towards  keeping the rat population at a low level with a consequent markedly  diminished risk of plague-infection and the certainty of a much  milder epidemic, should the disease gain a foothold, than would  otherwise be the case. Such measures have the great disadvantage  that they necessitate sustained effort which is very difficult to secure  in India when a few years' freedom from plague so commonly en-  genders a false sense of security. If half-heartedly carried out, the  results will be most disappointing and the number of those who claim  that rat destruction campaigns are useless, and consequently waste of  funds, will be increased.  Moreover, rat destruction campaigns are of only temporary benefit  and it is necessary first to consider whether the houses, habits, and  customs of the people cannot be so modified as to render the associa-  tion between the rat and human population less close than it is at  present. As things are there is no limit to the amount of food and  shelter that the average Indian house affords to the rat. In this  connexion it would be well to draw attention to the fact that the two  terms 'rat-proof' and 'rat-free' as applied to dwellings and store-  houses are by no means synonymous. Very little advantage is gained
24  if the floors, walls and roof of buildings be so constructed as to make it  impossible for rats to burrow therein, if such erections offer no lack  of food and shelter to rats and if ingress and egress through doors  and other apertures be not prevented by some special device. This  word of warning is very necessary: in many parts of India one can  see buildings that have been made 'rat-proof,' harbouring, all the  same, a very large number of rats. Small wonder that such laudable  endeavours to abolish plague have met with a degree of success in no  way commensurate with the comparative large outlays that some such  schemes have involved.  These remarks must not be construed as meaning that pucca build-  ings are not preferable in every way to kutcha, but the provision of  pucca walls and floors is not in itself sufficient to ensure freedom from  rats.  Even in kutcha buildings something can be done towards eliminat-  ing the rat. The rat population of any place is directly determined  by the amount of food and shelter that such place affords. All  measures that lessen the amount of food and shelter for rats automati-  cally effect a reduction in the number of rats, Protection of stores of  food from the depredations of rats, and efficient scavenging, are thus  anti-plague measures of the first importance.  II.-PROTECTION OF THE RATS OF A COMMUNITY  FROM PLAGUE.  Before embarking on a detailed description of active rat-destruc-  tion measures it will be well to consider how best to protect the rat-  population of any town from becoming infected with plague or to  make the ever-present possibility of such an occurrence less likely.  To this end it is important to bear in mind the methods by which  plague infection is conveyed from place to place.  1. Grain and plague.-It is a common experience to find plague  in towns and villages beginning in the close vicinity of markets and  grain stores, and it is important to have a clear conception as to why  this should be so. As things are at present the rat population of any  given town or village is very much larger in the neighbourhood of  markets and grain stores than in other localities, with the result that  when plague is present the rat epizootic is likely to be more widespread  in such localities than elsewhere. It follows that grain exported from  a plague-infected town to another, goes from a part of the town of  despatch where plague is most severe, to a part of the receiving town  where the rat population is at a maximum. Not only so but grain and  similar merchandise offer facilities for the transport of rats which  baggage consisting of personal effects rarely affords. Plague-infected  rats are likely to be much more harmful as plague-infecting agents  than are fleas alone which, apart from their definitive hosts, are short-  lived especially if infective.  From these and other considerations it follows that the methods  of grain storage and grain transport are of paramount importance in  plague-infected and plague threatened India, where the grain trade is  in a very special sense a 'dangerous trade,' and as such demands very
25  close supervision. There is a large mass of epidemiological evidence  to show that the rate of diffusion of plague infection is very slow when  it has to rely on the movements of. the human population per se, but  that the movements of grain afford facilities for the dissemination of  infection equalled by no other agency, Were the grain stores of  India kept relatively rat-free a marked and rapid diminution of plague  would most assuredly result. Is such a consummation as impossible  of attainment, or as difficult, as is usually assumed?  A great deal can be done with no prohibitive outlay. In discuss-  ing this matter it is important to bear in mind certain facts regarding  the habits of rats cited above. They explain the logical basis of the  following desiderata of grain stores:-  (a) Wherever possible the wholesale storage of grain should be  effected in buildings apart from those in which retail trade is carried  on.  (b) Wholesale grain stores should not be situated in close  proximity to densely-crowded areas of a city.  (c) Wholesale grain stores should never be utilized for purposes  of human habitation.  (d) Bearing in mind that water is essential for the life of the  rat, no water accessible to rats, or fresh vegetables should be allowed  in wholesale grain stores.  (e) As rats are unable to circumvent a smooth horizontal pro-  jection of nine inches, such a ledge surrounding a grain store on the  top of a plinth 3 feet high is effective in prohibiting the ingress of rats.  On the sides of the building in which the doors are situated this ledge  can conveniently be enlarged into a platform 2 feet or 2 feet 6 inches  in width. Reinforced concrete is a suitable material for such ledges  and platforms.  (f) The roof of the godown should overhang this platform and  ledge to prevent the accumulation of rain water thereon.  (g) No steps or similar means of facilitating ingress should be  allowed. In practice the inconvenience caused by the absence of such  steps will be found inconsiderable. For unloading sacks of grain   designed for such a store the bullock cart can be pushed close to the  platform, which is also at a convenient height to facilitate the deposit  thereon of sacks from a coolie's back.  (h) Rats will, from time to time, be introduced into such a  store, but they will be compelled to leave in search of water and  should find their return extremely difficult.  (i) In villages and places where the cost of such pucca build-  ings is prohibitive relatively rat-free stores can be made of almost any  material, provided the roof is water-tight, by raising the floor on  uprights surmounted by rat guards similar in design to those  commonly employed on ships' cables. These uprights should be at  least three feet high and would support the beams on which the  floor rests. The floor might be made of wood. The space under-  neath the floor can be left open and kept free from weeds and rank  growth with but little trouble.  The above suggestions should be sufficient to enable 'rat-free'  godowns, suitable for any requirements, to be designed. Provided
26  the principles on which the suggestions are made be borne in. mind,  suggestions which are all based on an appreciation of the habits of  rats, these godowns will be so constructed and kept as to ensure a  remarkably decreased rat population.  Other means of diminishing the risk of the conveyance of plague-  infection through the medium of grain and similar merchandise will  suggest themselves. The diminution of the facilities, at present  existing, for rats to enter goods wagons and carts; the breaking of  bulk of consignments of grain; the erection of pucca platforms on  which grain received loose can be bagged; these and similar measures  all require attention in certain cases. Enough has been said to draw  attention to the importance of the grain trade in the spread of plague  and the above suggestions and principles should suffice to indicate  how the dangers can be minimized, if not entirely averted.  2. Other means of conveying plague infection.-Grain and similar  merchandise has been considered at length to emphasise their import-  ance, but it is not contended that they afford the only means of  conveying plague-infection. Clothing and bedding from plague-  infected houses may contain infected rat-fleas: the chance, however,  of such finding a susceptible rat as a host, without which they cannot  give rise to an epidemic, is sufficiently remote to explain the fact that  merchandise is a more potent source of plague infection.  When articles from a plague-infected source are of such a nature  as to render them likely to harbour fleas they can be rendered inno-  cuous by exposure to the direct rays of the sun. The ground used for  the purpose should be so chosen that the sun is able to shine on it for  the whole of each day. It should be flat, devoid of grass, stones, or  anything which might afford shelter to fleas. Preferably it should be  covered with a smooth layer of fine sand three inches deep. The surface  temperature of the sand should be at least 120 F. to ensure the  destruction of all fleas. One hour's exposure in such conditions is  sufficient for the purposes of disinfection. Thick coats and rezais  should be turned once or twice during the process. No articles should  be placed within three feet of the edge of the sand.  III.-RAT DESTRUCTION.1  Careful attention to detail and a knowledge of all that has been  said above regarding the habits and customs of rats are essential to  success in any rat destruction campaign. Not infrequently rat destruc-  tion as a plague measure has been stigmatized as useless on the  results of attempts at rat-trapping with traps into which entry is  difficult, and from which escape is absurdly easy, or of attempts at  poisoning with substances which possess taste or smell, or both, which  is positively repulsive to rats.  1 All that is new in the following paragraphs, relating to the use of poison baits,  is the outcome of numerous well-designed and carefully controlled experiments that  have been carried out in Poona by Dr. Chitre in the course of an inquiry that was  planned and commenced by Major J. C. G. Kunhardt, I.M.S., under the auspices of the  Indian Research Fund Association.
27  1. Rat poisons.-Poison if intelligently used can accomplish much  by means of a 'poison campaign' a rapid reduction in the rat  population can be effected. The chief disadvantage of the method is  the nuisance caused by the decomposing bodies of dead rats, a  nuisance which is small however when compared with the dangers of  plague that rat infestation denotes. The selection of a suitable poison  is the most important consideration. Most of the rat poisons on the  market will kill rats if the rats can be induced to swallow sufficient,  but most of them are distasteful or positively repulsive to rats. All  phosphorus poisons possess this disadvantage; their inflammable  nature also makes them objectionable. The most satisfactory of all  poisons, and happily the cheapest, is barium carbonate. Barium  carbonate1 occurs in nature, unfortunately not in any quantity in  India, and is a heavy white tasteless inodourless powder that is almost  insoluble in water. As a rat poison it is certain in its action and  safe to handle. When mixed with flour and water it in no way makes  the mixture less palatable to rats who seem quite unable to detect its  presence in spite of their singularly acute attributes of taste and smell.  Poison baits are best made as follows:-  One pound of powdered native barium carbonate is mixed  thoroughly in an enamelled basin with three pounds of flour made from  the grain which constitutes the staple food of the locality in which  operations are to be carried out. Sufficient water is added to make  the whole into a fairly firm paste. The resulting mass is sufficient for  some 2,400 baits, each containing three grains of poison, which are  conveniently rolled into pill form. Clean hands and dishes are  necessary to avoid imparting to the baits extraneous taste and odour  which may diminish their attractiveness. Baits should be made fresh  each day as a hard stale bait is rarely eaten by the rat.  Poison baits made in the manner described should be laid in the  evening, four baits on a small piece of paper being placed in situations  readily accessible to rats but not so readily accessible to children  and domestic animals.2 Twelve baits, three groups, will be found  generally sufficient for an average sized Indian room. A careful  record of the baits set should be kept, and in the morning all  unconsumed baits should be collected and destroyed, note being made  of the number consumed wholly or in part, and the dead rats found  should be counted and destroyed. This process can be repeated daily  until no more baits are consumed. Another baiting of the village or  town can be carried out some two weeks later. When baiting is  being carried out special efforts should be made to encourage house-  holders to keep all other available food for rats covered up, especially  at night. In laying baits the presence of rat holes, or other indica-  tions of the presence of rats, will afford useful indications as to where  baits can be laid with most chance of success.  1 The carbonate is the only salt of barium that should be used. Barium sulphate  or barytes, the most common barium salt, is valueless as a rat poison.  2 Fifteen grains of barium carbonate will frequently kill a cat; 20 grains is fatal to  chickens. Dogs can withstand a dose of 140 grains.
?28  If rat poisoning be carried out with careful attention to all these  details, a very notable degree of success will be achieved, with very  appreciable benefit when plague threatens.  2. Tropping.-To effect a considerable diminution in the rat  population and to keep it at a low level by means of trapping is a rela-  tively expensive measure and one that requires careful and intelligent  supervision if results commensurate with the outlay are to be secured.  It is a measure, however, that usually excites less opposition than does  the use of poison baits, and if trapping operations be conducted with  energy and with due regard to detail they are of very considerable  value as a plague-preventive measure.  Many rat-traps on the market are defective in design and construc-  tion. Traps selected haphazard have very varying degrees of  efficiency, and recent observations have shown that the size of the  trap, the size of the inlet, the strength of the trap, the accuracy with  which the flap fits the frame designed for its reception, are all  important points in determining the efficiency of the trap. Other  things being equal the larger the diameter of the inlet the more  satisfactory the trap. Experiments designed to determine the type of  trap best suited to Indian requirements are now in progress, and it is  hoped that specifications of the best all-round trap will soon be avail-  able.  Traps should be oiled only sufficiently often to ensure freedom  from rust. Frequent washing of the traps is not recommended: rats  are not attracted by cleanliness which appears to make them suspi-  cious.  The traps are best baited with a small quantity of the staple food-  grain of the community or of flour made therefrom in the form of  dough. In the hot months, fresh green vegetables, notably cucumber,  make an attractive bait.  To obtain the most economical results each house should be  trapped once each week. One trap for every two rooms of an Indian  house will probably suffice. All traps should be set over night and  collected early in the morning. All rats caught can be drowned or  destroyed in some humane manner, their bodies being burnt. In the  presence of plague, when a rapid reduction in the rat population is a  matter of moment, more frequent trapping can be carried out with  advantage. For systematic trapping a number of traps equal to 3  per cent of the human population will be found sufficient. Frequent  inspection of traps, with the rejection for repair of all found defective,  is essential.  IV.-PROTECTION OF A COMMUNITY IN THE PRESENCE  OF RAT PLAGUE.  Inoculation and evacuation of infected dwellings.-When plague has  obtained a foothold in a town, or when plague threatens, it will be  necessary to press the claims of inoculation with plague vaccine. It  is not necessary to urge here the remarkable protection that inocula-  tion affords to the individual; this is now well recognized. In the
29  midst of an epidemic inoculation remains the most important of all  plague measures.  Evacuation of infected dwellings should also be encouraged  provided always that accommodation for the people rendered tempora-  rily homeless be provided in the vicinity. Wholesale indiscriminate  emigration from infected to uninfected places is productive of much  harm and should be actively discouraged. The inhabitants of towns  and villages do well, in their own interests, to accord such plague  refugees a cold welcome.  As long as things remain as they are, these two measures, inocula-  tion and controlled evacuation, will be as necessary and as important  as they are at present. It must be remembered, however, that plague  in India is a disease of rats, first and last, and that these very valuable  measures, inoculation and evacuation, designed to afford protection to  the human population, do not strike at the root of the evil.  F. NORMAN WHITE, M.D., Major, I.M.S.,  Offg. Sany. Commr. with the Govt. of India.
?30  APPENDIX B.  [See Standing Order 11.]  Plague Report to be submitted to the Collector.  [To be submitted within 24 hours of discovery of a plague case.]  Hamlet-  Village-  Number in taluk map-  Population-  1. Name, age and caste of the patient.  2. (a) Date of commencement of illness.  (b) Date of death.  3. (a) Were there any plague cases or deaths by fever in the house  or family within the last 30 days; if so, when ?  (b) Did the patient visit any plague-infected locality; if so,  when ?  (c) Did any person from an infected area reside in his house;  if so, when ? Did he bring goods susceptible to infec-  tion with him ?  (d) If answers to questions (a) to (c) are in the negative, to  what source can the infection be traced ?  4. (a) Date and hour at which inspector heard of the case and  how information was obtained; if from any official,  state name and designation.  (b) Date and hour at which inspector went to the village.  (c) Note date and hour at which first intimation of attack was  sent to-  (i) Nearest medical officer.  (ii) Plague officer.  (d) Explanation of delay between-  (i) Date of attack and date of despatch by the local  authority of first intimation to superior officers;  (ii) Date of first intimation and date of despatch of detailed  report.  5. Was the case reported by the local authority ?  (a) (i) If not, what is his explanation ?  (ii) Did he keep the fever register properly, and on what  date was the case entered in it ?  (b) (i) Who is the house-owner, or chief male member of the  family ?  (ii) Did he give information as required by Plague Regula-  tion 9 and, if not, what explanation is forthcoming  as to why he should not be prosecuted ?  (c) Name and designation of the person who first reported the  case and the date on which he did so.
?31  6. (a) When did the inspector last visit the village ?  (b) How many deaths were there in the village-  (i) since the inspector's last visit; and  (ii) since the commencement of the preceding month ?  (iii) How many of the deaths were registered as due to fever  and to causes that you consider might be confused  with suspicious cases of plague ?  7. Was the patient examined-  (a) by any medical officer, and by whom and when ?  (b) What symptoms of plague were noticed ?  (c) Brief history as given by medical officer or as ascertained  by medical officer.  8. What steps were taken for the treatment and care of the  patient ?  9. Are rats plague-infected ?  10. General remarks.
?32 APPENDIX C. [See Standing Order 22.] List of officers on plague duty in the                     district on the 1st March\September 19.        Head of service. Number. Duties of office. Pay. Allowance Date of commence-ment of appoint-ment. Number and date  of  sanction. Date of expiry  of sanction. Remarks. (1) (2) (3) (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)   Section I-Provincial. Section II-Local. Section III-Municipal.
?33 APPENDIX D. [See Standing Order 24.] PART I-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances. A. Medical officers  wholly employed on plague duty. (i)     Senior military   assist-ant surgeons with the honorary      rank      of Captain or Lieutenant. Rs. 5 per diem, together with  house-rent allowance (in lieu of free quarters) of Rs. 50 a month.  (ii) Military assistant sur- geons in civil or mili- tary employ on pay exceeding Rs. 150. Rs. 3 a day.     In addition to any acting charge or house allow- ance they may have  been drawing at the  time of their depu- tation to plague duty  (iii) Military  assistant sur-geons in civil or mili- tary employ on pay  not exceeding Rs. 150. Rs. 2 a day.    and which they would  have continued to  draw but for such  deputation.  (iv) Civil assistant   surgeons. Rs. 2 a day.   (v) Civil apothecaries  Rs. 25 a month or in the case of men, who at the time of their deputation were in independent charge, the full charge allowance of their grades.  (vi) Sub-assistant surgeons  employed as plague inspectors. Vide appendix E.  (Vii) Sub-assistant surgeons  engaged on other  plague duty. * Rs. 10 a month. This allow- ance will be in addition to  house-rent or free quarters according to rule if employed on  the plains. If employed on the  hills, a consolidated  hill allow- ance of one-third of the pay will  be paid, but no house-rent or  warm clothing allowance will be admissible. A pony allowance  of Rs. 15 per mensem will be paid if the sub-assistant surgeon has other than purely stationary duties, provided a serviceable  pony is maintained and used. If instead of a pony a serviceable bicycle is maintained and used with the permission of the Collector, a bicycle allowance of Rs. 5 per mensem will be paid.   * This allowance will be admissible irrespective of the fact whether the sub- assistant surgeon was in receipt of a charge allowance or not at the time of his depu- tation to plague duty. No separate allowance will, however, be paid in lieu of charge allowance nor can deputation allowance be drawn in addition. 3
?34 PART I.-Allowances of Officers deputed to Plague Duty-cont. Class of officers. Particulars. Allowances.   * Such    duty     allowance,    not exceeding    one-fifth    of     the salary, as may be fixed in each case     by     Government.    The allowance should be given only       to   officers    whose    additional      plague work   is entirely sepa-       rate    from,   and outside     the  sphere of, their ordinary duties and    not    to    officers     whose ordinary and  legitimate work such as that of  attending  on       the sick in hospital, has been      increased owing to the occur-    rence of plague.                     B. Medical officers (1) Medical subordinates ...   doing plague   work in addition   to their ordinary   duties.          (2) Nurses or midwives    ...  C. Plague supervi- (i) Appointed in non-muni- Allowance of 25 per cent   of  the sors belonging to  cipal areas. pay +   Rs.   80   fixed  travelling the salt, abkari  allowance + Rs. 15 horse  allow- and other depart-  ance,   provided   the  permanent ments.  pay + 25 per cent thereof does    not fall below Rs. 80.  (ii) Appointed in municipal   Same as in   the  case of C (i) but    towns. minus  the  fixed      travelling   allowance. D. Compounders on  .... Allowance of  20 per cent  of the    ambulance staff.  salary to be granted  only when   the ambulance staff  is on active   plague duty. Note.-(i) The instructions issued in G.O. No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904, as to the creation of temporary appointments and the grant of deputation allow- ances to servants employed on plague duty should be carefully followed. (ii) The language allowan e of Rs. 2 per mensem granted under paragraph 210 of the Civil Medical Code is inadmissible in the case of sub-assistant surgeons on plague duty. * When the outdoor plague work of a medical subordinate is so heavy as to necessitate the use of a conveyance, carts or jutkas may be provided for him by the local body concerned. The actual charges incurred in the payment of hire should be debited to ' Contingencies.'
?35 PART II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty. Designation.                               Salary. Remarks. A. Retired military Pay of their grade at the time The officers should be   required assistant  sur- of  retirement    +    Rs.    100 to produce certificates of phy- geons. allowance       subject    to     a sical fitness, aud their appoint-  maximum    of    Rs.    350    a ments    should,   in    the    first  month.    In special cases the instance, be made for periods  local Government may raise not exceeding six months.  the   limit    to  Rs.   500.    A   retired        honorary       com-   missioned     officer     of    the   Indian    Subordinate    Medi-   cal Department   is entitled   to double   first-class  travel-   ling allowance by  rail, and   eight annas a mile by road.  B.      Uncovenanted Such pay    not  exceeding Rs. The term  of  employment may, medical officers. 350 a month as the Surgeon- Subject to their good conduct  General may   find necessary, and efficiency, be for a period  with,  travelling    allowances of three months,   the engage-  to   and from the   places   to ment being  terminable    after  which  they  are   posted   at the    expiry of   the    first two  the rates  of double second- months by a    written   notice  class  fares  for journeys  by given by either   the   Govern-  rail   and annas 4 a mile  for ment or the officer.  journeys by road.  C. Temporary  civil Pay     Rs.   100  a   month    +  assistant allowance of  Rs.    2  a day,  surgeons. with travelling allowance to   and from the place to which   they are appointed.  D.  Private      sub- Pay   assigned   to  the   corre-  assistant sponding   grades;    of    sub-  surgeons. assistant        surgeons         in   Government service ( +   50   per    cent     thereof)      with   compensation for quarters.  E. Retired      sub- Pay   of   their   grade    at the  assistant time      of     retirement    (in  surgeons. addition to their pension).  F. Qualified     Euro- Such      pay     not     ordinarily When   the    nurses    attend   on peans,    Eurasian exceeding   Rs.   75  a month plague   patients,   a    boarding or  Indian nurses with free quarters or Rs.  10 allowance of Rs. 1-8-0 a day in locally recruited. for house-rent. the   case   of   Europeans   and   Eurasians, or one rupee in the   case of Indians should be paid.   When    employed    on   duties   entailing a considerable amount   of     moving   about   within   a   limited area end necessitating   the frequent hiring of vehicles,   they    may    be    paid    actual   conveyance   allowances    irre-   spective of the five miles' limit   prescribed  in   article 1055 of   the Civil  Service Regulations.   For   terms   on    which   caste   Indian nurses may be trained,   see G.O. No. 1835 P., dated 23rd   December 1899.
?36 PART  II.-Salaries of Officers temporarily entertained for Plague Duty-cont. Designation. Salary. Remarks. G. Private    gentle- men appointed as plague   super- visors in   munici- pal towns. Rs.  2   a  day + Rs.   15.   horse allowance. Such supervisors should usually be    Europeans   or   Eurasians. They   need   not  be   appointed unless the outbreak of plague requires a special organization to deal with it. H. Private   gentle- men appointed as plague super- visors in rural areas. Rs.   80  pay   +   Rs.  30,   fixed travelling       allowance,     + Rs. 15, horse allowance. ...... I. Plague      inspec- tors. [As in Appendix E.]  J. Other  temporary subordinates including   menial servants.                   Such   rates  as would  be suffi- cient  to  induce   persons to take up the appointments. Menial servants are not  eligible for any allowances, and should be   conveyed   from   place    to place  at the  cost  of Govern- ment. Note.-The pony or horse allowance admissible to officers under this appendix may, at the discretion of the Collector, be converted into an allowance for the upkeep of any other conveyance, provided that the allowance does not exceed Rs. 5 per mensem should the conveyance maintained and used be a bicycle.
?37 APPENDIX E. [See Standing Order 24.] Pay and Allowances of Plague Inspectors. Plague inspectors will be- I   Certificated sanitary inspectors; II. Sub-assistant surgeons ; or III. Men specially trained for plague duty. I.-Certificated Sanitary Inspectors. Certificated sanitary inspectors include sanitary inspectors, assist- ant sanitary inspectors and certificated sanitary inspectors under G.O. No. 1131 L., dated 11th September 1903. G.O. No. 1080 L., dated 27th September 1905. Plague inspectors for range work should primarily be recruited from this class. A list of men available for duty will be kept by the Sanitary Commissioner by whom they will be posted for plague work on the requisition of, and in consultation with, Collectors. When once an inspector has been posted, further control on the part of the Sanitary Commissioner Will cease, and he should not be withdrawn or transferred by the Sanitary Commissioner without the consent of the authority employing him. Pay and Allowances. The   pay and allowances of a certificated sanitary inspector on plague duty will be regulated as follows : - (i)When employed in a     rural area. Rs.  45 pay + Rs.   15 pony allowance. When employed in  the municipalities of Ootacamund, Coonoor  or Kodai- kanal,   or   in rural areas in the Nilgiris, he will be entitled  to draw a hill allow- ance of one-third of  the pay. (ii) When employed in a municipality. Rs. 40 pay + Rs. 15 pony allowance.   (iii)When employed in a  union. Not more than what is ad- missible to him when employed in a munici-  pality.                    Note.-The emoluments of certificated sanitary inspectors deputed for plague work from local fund or municipal service, either temporary or permanent, will be regulated under the rules as to deputation allowances issued under G.O. No. 384, Finan- cial, dated 16th June 1904. II.-Sub-Assistant Surgeons. The allowances of a sub-assistant surgeon employed as a plague inspector will be as follows ; ordinarily the service of only third- grade sub-assistant surgeons should be used for range work :- Grade pay + special plague  al- If employed on the hills the sub-assist- ant surgeon will be entitled to draw a consolidated hill allowance  of one- third of the pay, but no house-rent or warm clothing   allowance  will  be admissible.       lowance* of Rs. 10. In  cases   where he has other than purely   stationary  duties,   he  will be   given a cycle allowance of Rs. 5   or a pony allowance of  Rs. 15   provided be maintains and uses   a serviceable pony.  * The special plague allowance will be admissible irrespective of the fact whether the sub-assistant surgeon was in receipt of a charge allowance or not at the time of his deputation to plague duty. No separate allowance will, however, be paid in lieu of charge allowance nor can deputation allowance be drawn in addition. 4
?38  III.-Men specially trained for Plague Duty.  These are men who are selected locally by the Collector for training  and after being trained specially for plague duty by the Deputy  Sanitary Commissioner receive certificates from the latter as to their  fitness for employment as plague inspectors. Their pay and allow-  ances will be regulated as follows:-  (i) (a) A member of the permanent establishment in superior  service, whether belonging to the revenue or other branches of the  Government service, employed as a range inspector in a rural area will  draw a minimum pay of Rs. 35 plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15.  (b) A member of the permanent establishment in local fund  or municipal service employed as a plague inspector in a rural area  will draw in addition to his salary in such service only a deputation  allowance in accordance with the rules issued in G.O. No. 384,  Financial, dated 16th June 1904, plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15 per  mensem, if employed as a range inspector.  (c) A private person employed as a plague inspector in a rural  area will draw such pay not exceeding Rs. 30 as the Collector may fix.  When employed as a range inspector, he may be paid a pony allowance  of Rs. 15.  Note.-(1) A pay in excess of Rs. 35 can be granted to Government servants only  if admissible under rule I of article 764 of the Civil Service Regulations.  (2) All plague inspectors employed in the Nilgiris will be entitled to draw  a consolidated hill allowance calculated at one-third of their pay.  (ii) In the case of a person specially trained who is employed  on plague duty in a municipality or a union the pay shall not  ordinarily exceed the following scale:-  (a) Range Inspector.-Rupees 25 for a charge of about 5,000  inhabitants (or 1,200 houses).  Rupees 30 for a charge of about 6,500 inhabitants (or 1,500  houses).  When employed in the Coonoor, Ootacamund or Kodaikanal  Municipality he will be entitled to draw a hill allowance of one-third  of the pay plus pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem.  (b) Divisional Inspector.-Rupees 40 plus Rs. 15 pony allow-  ance.  When employed in the Coonoor, Ootacamund or Kodaikanal  Municipality he will be entitled to draw a hill allowance of one-third  of the pay.  (iii) A member of the permanent establishment in the superior  service of Government who is specially trained for plague duty, will  be paid the following emoluments when employed as a plague inspector  in a municipality or union, subject to the maximum rates prescribed  in clause (ii):-  (1) When employed as a range inspector, a minimum pay of  Rs. 25 per mensem.  (2) When employed as a divisional inspector, a minimum pay  of Rs. 30 plus a pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem.  (3) A pay in excess of the limits mentioned in clauses (1) and  (2) can be granted only if admissible under rule I of article 764 of the  Civil ServiceRegul ations.
?39  (iv) A member of the permanent establishment in local fund  or municipal service who is specially trained for plague duty and  employed as a plague inspector in a municipality or union, will draw in  addition to his salary in such service only a deputation allowance, in  accordance with the rules issued in G.O. No. 384, Financial, dated  16th June 1904. A pony allowance of Rs. 15 per mensem will be  granted to him if he is employed as a divisional inspector.  Note.-(1) The instructions issued in G.O. No. 384, Financial, dated 16th June 1904,  as to the creation of temporary appointments and the grant of deputation allowances  to servants employed on plague duty, should be carefully followed.  (2) The pony allowance admissible to officers under this appendix may, at the  discretion of the Collector, be converted into an allowance for the upkeep of any other  conveyance, provided that the allowance does not exceed Rs. 5 per mensem should the  conveyance maintained and used be a bicycle.
?INDEX.    Page. Regula- tion. Standing  Order. A ACT -    Epidemic Diseases -            ...        ..     1 ... ... Power    delegated   to    Local   Government under the Epidemic Diseases - 2 ... ... A DMINISTRATION -    Administrative staff 6-7 ... 1 ALLOWANCES-    Plague               ............ 17 ... 23-24 Statement showing the rates of - admissi- ble o officers on plague duty 33-36 ... Appx. D Statement   showing   the  -   admissible   to plague inspectors 37-39 ... Appx. D Subsistence allowance to inoculated persons. 9 ... 5 APPEAL -    Right   of - of   the   plague  staff   against punishments inflicted on them 15 ... 19 B BARIUM CARBONATE 27 ... Appx. A BUDGET-    Estimates of plague expenditure 17 ... 25 Transfer of funds 18 ... 26 BUILDINGS -    Acquisition of - for plague purposes 4 5 ... Destruction of sheds   ...         ...         5 6 ... C CANTONMENTS -    Responsibility   for    carrying    out    plague measures in - 7 ... 1 CARBONATE -     BARIUM -         ......         27-28 ... Appx. A CHARGES-    Classification of plague - 18-19 ... 29 Distribution of plague -      ...        ... 15- 16 ... 20 Final accounts of plague - 18 ... 28 Power of Collector to incur expenditure on  plague 16 ... 21 Chitre, Dr. -        ...........  26 ... Appx. A CIRCLES-    Plague Inspectors' - 12 ... 10 CLOTHES-    Sun-disinfection of clothing ... 5, 8, 26 10 3, Appx. A     COMMUNICATION -    Communication   of   information   regarding plague cases   in  a district  to   adjoining  districts in this Presidency 14 ... 15 Inter-communication   of   plague   news    in  this   Presidency   and   in   the   adjoining territories      ............... 14 ... 15
?INDEX                                    41    Page. Regula- tion. Standing  Order. COMPENSATION -    Award of - for loss of property     ...... 6, 16 12 21 CONTRIBUTION -    Government - to private plague hospitals. 10-11 ... 7 CORRESPONDENCE -    Plague   ...        ...        19 ... 30-31                                       D DEFINITION -    Definition of certain terms occurring in the Regulations   ... 3 1 ... DELEGATION -    Power   delegated   to   Local   Government  under the Epidemic Diseases Act 2 ... ... DISINFECTION -    Sun - of clothing 5, 7, 26 10 3, Appx. A Sun - of grain                  5, 7, 8, 26 8, 10 3, Appx. A                                      E EPIDEMIC-    - Diseases Act 1 ... ... Power   delegated   to    Local   Government under the - Diseases Act 2 ... ... ESTABLISHMENTS -    Administrative staff and control of  plague measures 6-7 ... 1 Collector's power   to  punish  Government medical subordinates on plague duty 14- 15 ... 16 Duty of plague inspectors and local officers. 11-13 ... 8, 9 and 11 Employment of plague -    12 ... 10 Half-yearly lists of plague -          16 ... 22 Plague - that are entitled to and bound to  give one month's notice 5-6 11 ... Power of Collectors to punish plague -   ... 14-15 ... 16, 18 and 19 Power of plague officer to punish plague - 15 ... 18 Retention of plague - 16-17 ... 22 ESTIMATES -    Plague    17 ... 25 EVACUATION -    Instructions on - 9- 10, 28, 29 ... 6-7, Appx. A - of infected areas     4 4 ...                                     F FUNDS -    Transfer of funds 18 ... 26 Fines      18 ... 27                                  G  GOVERNMENT     MEDICAL     SUBORDINATES     ON PLAGUE DUTY -    Collector's power to punish - 14-15 ... 16 Grant of casual or privilege leave to - 15 ... 17 GRAIN -    Inspection    and    sun-disinfection   of - in  transit     5, 7, 8 and 26       8 3, Appx. A Inspection of places used for storage of -    5, 7 and 8 7 2, 3 Quarantive of -      5 and 8 10 3 Rat free - godowns        7 23-26 ... 2, Appx. A - trade     5, 7, 8, 24, 25, 26 7, 8 2, 3. Appx. A GRANTS-    Government - towards the construction and maintenance of private plague hospitals    10-11 ... 7
?42                                                 INDEX    Page. Regula- tion . Standing Order.                      H HOSPITALS -    Government      contribution      towards     the construction and   maintenance of   private Plague -      10-11      ...      7 Removal of plague patients to -    ... 10 -11 ... 7 Sale-proceeds of private plague - ...... 10-11 ... 7 Supervision of private plague - 10-11 ... 7 Cost of plague   ............ 15-16 ... 20 HOUSE -HOLDERS -    Duty of - to report plague cases 5,11 9 8                     I INCAPACITATED PERSONS -    Allowances to - 9 ... 5 INFECTED AREAS -    Definition of - 3 1(a) ... Evacuation of - 4 4 ... Notification  of  areas  to  be   infected   with plague 3,4 2 ... INOCULATION -    Instructions on - 9, 28 and 29 ... 5, Appx. A Subsistence allowance to inoculated persons. 9 ... 5 INSPECTION -    Inspection of grain and the places used  for  its storage      ...        5, 7, 8, 24, 25     7, 8 23, Appx. A K KUNHARDT -    Major J. C.G. -           ........... 26  Appx. A L LANDS -    Acquisition of - for plague purpose 4 5 ... LEAVE -    Casual or privilege - to Government medi- cal subordinates on plague duty 15 ... 17 LOCAL AUTHORITY -    Definition of - 3 1(b) ... Duty of-         .............. 11, 12 ... 8 ,  ?                          M MARKETS -    Closure of - 4 3 ... MEASURES -    General control of plague - ... 6-7 ... 1 General preventive -  ...  7-9, 11, 20-29   2-6 Appx. A Measures to be taken by local officers on the occurrence of a case of plague 11,12 ... 8,9 Measures to be taken by plague inspectors . * 12,13 ... 11 MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS -    Duty of - to report plague cases 5,11 9 8 MILITARY -    Persons of all ranks in the - service should obey the Plague Regulations 6 13 ... N NOTIFICATION -    - of infected areas     ......... 3,4 2 ...  NORMAN  WHITE-    Major - 's memorandum   on   plague   mea- sures    ...        ......        ...... 20-29 ... Appx. A
?INDEX                                     43    Page. Regula- tion. Standing  Order. O OFFICERS -    Definition of plague officer    ......... 3 1(c) ... Grant of allowances to - on plague duty ... 17, 33-39 ... 23-24    Appendices D.    and E. OFFICERS HALF-YEARLY LIST OF -    Officers on plague duty           ...         16, 17, 32 ... 22 & Appx. C. P PATIENTS-    Removal of plague - to hospitals 10-11 ... 7 PENALTY -    Penalty   for   disobeying   the   plague   regu-lations 6 13 ... PLAGUE -    Theory in regard to the outbreak  and spread  of plague and preventive measures  20-29 ... Appx. A. PLAGUE CASES -    Advantages   of   early    discovery   of plague cases 11 ... 8 Communication of plague news 13,14 ... 8,9,12,13,15 Duty    of   all   householders   and    medical practitioners to report -    ... 5,11 9 8 PLAGUE INSPECTORS -    Appointment of - 12 ... 10 Allowances to - 17, 37-39 ... 24 & Appx. E Duties of -       ......        ...        ..... 12,13 ... 11 Punishment of - 15 . 18,19 Entitled to one month's notice         ...       5,6 11 ... POLICE -    Employment of - for plague duty ... 10 ... 6 Extraordinary pension to - on plague duty. 17 ... 23 PLAGUE CIRCLES -    Establishment to be employed in - ... 12 ... 10 Formation and size of - 12 ... 10 PROPERTY -    Custody of the - of evicted persons 10 ... 6 Payment damage or loss of -          ...... 6, 16 12 21 PUBLIC -    Duty of householders and medical   practi- tioners to report plague cases      ...... 5,11 9 8 Duty of the public to report deaths among rats. 5, 11 9 8 PUNISHMENT-    Power of Collectors to punish Government medical subordinates on plague duty 15 ... 16 Power   of   Collectors    to    punish    plague establishments 15 ... 18, 19 Power of plague officers  to  punish plague establishments 15 ... 18 Q Quarantine of travellers        ......... 5,8 10 3 R RAILWAY -    Inspection of grain carried by rail ... 5 8 ... Inspection of - goods sheds 5 7 ... RATS -    Elimination and destruction of rats          ... 8,9, 20-28 ... 2, 4, Appx. A Rat-fleas 8, 20-26 ... 3 Traps     .................. 28 ... Appx. A Report regarding unusual mortality among  rats    ...        ......        .. ........ 5, 11 9 8
?44 INDEX  Page. Regulation. Standing Order. RECORDS - Destruction of plague - 19 ... 31, Appx. A. REPORTS AND RETURNS - Communication of plague news 13, 14 ... 8, 9, 12, 13, 15 Detailed report of plague oases to be sent to the Collector by the plague inspector... 12, 13 ... 11 Form of plague report from subordinate officers to Collectors ... ... 30, 31 ... Appx. B. Half-yearly lists of plague establishments... 32  Appx. C. Obligation to report rat deaths 5, 9 9 8 Plague estimates 17 ... 25 Report of plague cases to be sent by Collec- tors to Government and the Sanitary Commissioner ... ...  13, 14 ... 12, 13 Report regarding cases of fever or plague or suspicious sudden illness 5, 11 9 8 Report to be sent by the Collector to the Sanitary Commissioner on the occurrence of the first case of plague ... 13 ... 12 Monthly report on plague - ......... 14 ... 14 - by local authorities ... 11, 12 ... 8, 9 S SEGREGATION- Of plague patients 10 ... 7 SHEDS- Destruction of- ......... 5 6 ... STAFF- Administrative ...... ...... 6-7 ... 1 T TRAPS .................. 28 ... Appx. A TRAVELLERS- Quarantine of- 5,8 10
