REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1878. PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, RANGOON.
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1878. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, British Burma, in the Judicial Department, ( 2 ) supply the largest number of cases. The Superintendent is of opinion that want of proper nourishment in previously debilitated subjects is the chief proximate cause of derangement. 6. The mortality of the year was greater than in any year since the institu- tion of the Asylum. Twenty-three deaths are reported, as against 11,REPORT ON THE KANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1878. From H. R. OSWALD, M.D., Deputy Surgeon-General, Indian Medical Department, British Burma Divi- sion, to the Junior Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, British Burma,( 2 ) greatly diminish the risk of accidents by putting too many together. The whole grounds of the Asylum are scrupulously clean, and in excellent order. They are beautifully laid out like gardens, and are the admiration of all who visit the Asylum. Mr. Robinson, the Overseer, spares no trouble in keeping the place in excellent order, and it affords light and healthy employment to the lunatics. II.: Water-supply.( 3 ) The following table will shew the statistics of admissions, discharges, and deaths during the year 1878 :( 4 ) Statement No. 2 shews the number of criminal lunatics under treatment. On the 1st January 1878, there remained of this class 38 males. During the year, 18 were admitted, namely, 17 males and one female. During the same period only one male and one female were discharged cured, and 5 males died, so that on the 31st December 1878, only 49 criminal lunatics remained. There are at present only 26 criminal cells to contain these 49 criminals, and there are a good many violent civil lunatics, who, for want of accommodation, have to be put there, so that it is obvious several lunatics have to be put in the same cell, thus running the risk of accidents from violence, one of which occurred this year, and which will be men- tioned further on. I hope that more accommodation will soon be given. I have already said that it has been sanctioned, but nothing has been done as yet, though some months have elapsed. The daily average strength was 44. Statement No. 3 shews the residence, religion, and sex of lunatics admitted during the year. As in previous years, the Burmese head the list, as might be expected ; next follow Hindoos, Mahomedans, other castes, Europeans, and East Indians. Statement No. 4 shews the occupation of those admitted during the year. Coolies give the greatest number of admissions, namely 13 ; next come those without any occupation, or unknown, giving 10; petty traders, 6; shop-keepers, 4 ; cooks,. 3 ; clerks, 3 ; cultivators, 7 ; and various others, one each. I do not know that any deductions can as yet be drawn from this, other than that coolies and those without any occupation, from bad nourishment and exposure, reducing them to a weak state, may render them more susceptible to causes tending to upset their reason. From the state in which most of them are admitted, one is inclined to think so. Statement No. 5 shews the ages of those admitted during the year. The greatest num- ber was admitted between the ages of 20 and 40, twelve between 40 and 60, only two were admitted below 20, and one above 60. Statement No. 6 shews the types of insanity. Of the total number treated (244), there were 94 suffering from acute mania, 25 from chronic mania, 35 melancholia, 35 acute dementia, 4 chronic dementia, 6 paralysis of the insane, 10 idiocy, and 34 imbecility, and one not insane, who was suffering from general paralysis,( 6 ) again tied by the ankle to the bars of the door to prevent him injuring himself. Up till 3 A.M. in the morning nothing happened, the tell-tale clock shewed that the night-watch- man had been on his rounds, and at 3 A.M. it was reported that all was well, and that the night-watchmen had just come from the cells. He then visited the rest of the Asylum, the civil male cottages and the female, and went back at 4 A.M., when he heard a noise in the cells, immediately rushed to the cell, and found one of the Burmese on the top of Lookoo, kneading him with his knees and elbows. He called the other two peons and separated them, and the Native Doctor and the Overseer, Mr. Robinson, were informed, and both lunatics were taken to the hospital. I saw both patients about 6 A.M., and I found Lookoo in a dying state, and the Burman all swollen and cut about the face. Lookoo died very soon, and the post-mortem revealed fracture of the ribs, rupture of the liver, and the cavity of the abdomen filled with blood. Tsan Doon, the Burman, had his face much swollen and his hands torn ; but he recovered in a few days, and has since been perfectly harmless and quiet. The other Burman who was in the cell, and who can talk pretty rationally at times, by name Shwe Gone, says that Lookoo was always climbing up the gate, and that Tsan Doon pulled him down, and that Tsan Doon persisted on lying on the top of Lookoo ; a quar- rel then ensued, and they fought, and Tsan Doon got Lookoo down and pounded him with his elbows and knees. I immediately sent for the Assistant Magistrate, Mr. Batten, who examined into the whole affair. He states in his remarks that he thinks the night-watchman delayed too long in not returning from 3A.M. till 4 A.M., as it would only take 15 or 20 minutes to go his rounds. At the same time, he states that he does not think it right that these three men should be shut up together in one cell, as Tsan Doon's case was only under observation, and that the night-watchman should be continually on his rounds. The Assistant Magis- trate says, in conclusion :( 6 ) this year 37. With one other exception( 7 ) No. 1.( 8 ) No. 1.( 9 ) No. 2.( 10 ) No. 4.( 11 ) No. 6.( 12 ) No. 8.( 13 ) No. 9.( 14 ) No. 11.1879. JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. PROGS. No. 192-1. Annual Report of the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum, 1878 From Deputy Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department No. 101C., dated 24th January 1879. FORWARDS the annual report and statements of the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum for 1878 duly checked and corrected in his office.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1879. RANGOON : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1880.
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1879. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, British Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) trouble, and 17 from loss of property. In 13 cases the lunacy is said to have been hereditary, in 11 cases it is said to have resulted from the use of opium, in 10 cases from "fright," and in nine cases from the use of spirits. Eighty-four cases are supposed to have resulted from physical and 73 from moral causes. Some improvement was effected in the mental condition of 14 per cent. of the patients whose lunacy was believed to have resulted from physical causes, and in five per cent. of those for whose lunacy a moral cause was assigned. 4. The mortality in the asylum was greater than usual, 25 deaths having occurred in the course of the year. But the general health of the patients was good, and the average number in hospital was only 5.25, as compared with an average of six in 1878 and of eight since the opening of the asylum. 5. The total expenditure of the year amounted to Rs. 17,771-14-4, making the annual cost of each patient Rs. 88-10-8. In the previous year the cost of each patient was Rs. 90-4-1. Contributions from the friends of patients amounted to Rs. 424-8-0. Allusion has already been made to the measures which have been adopted with a view to enforcing contributions in future from the relatives of patients. A total profit of Rs. 3,150-15-5 was made from the labour of the luna- tics,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1879. From J. M. JOSEPH, Esq., M.D., Deputy Surgeon-General, Indian Medical Department, British Burma Division, to the Officiating Junior Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, British Burma,( 2 ) A dead-house has also been sanctioned, but it is doubtful if there will be means to erect it this year. If possible it ought to be erected, for it is much required. The wall sanctioned for the enclosure of the eight acres of recreation-ground will not be undertaken this year, as funds are not available. The whole enclosure is flat, but the natural slope of the ground, together with open drains, seems quite sufficient to remove surface water and prevent stagnation during the rains. The grounds are neatly laid out in grass, with neatly cut gravel-paths running through, adorned on each side with flowering shrubs. Large trees are also scattered here and there, affording excellent shade and keeping the place cool. The keeping of these grounds clean and tidy affords excellent and healty light work to weakly lunatics. Mr. Robinson deserves credit for the excellent order the grounds are kept in. The whole has a very cheerful and pleasant appearance, and presents few or any of the appearances of a place of restraint. 2. Water-supply.( 3 ) be of great use, and if a shower-bath were erected in connection with it, this would be an additional means of treatment which we have not at present. At present they bathe at tubs filled with water placed at a distance from the wells to prevent contamination. All the lunatics are also inspected once a week by the Native Doctor for the purpose of detecting skin diseases or hidden sores. The whole enclosure is kept very clean, the gravel-paths are swept daily, and all decaying leaves and vegetable matters picked up and removed. The enclosure looks more like a pleasure-ground than a place of confine- ment. Mr. Robinson, the Overseer, takes great interest in the grounds, and spares no trouble in keeping them in good order. 6. Labour.( 4 ) The following table shows the statistics of admissions, discharges, and deaths during the year 1879 :( 5 ) The comparative number of deaths during the same period is as follows :( 6 ) then cultivators and carpenters, each six, unknown five, soldiers four, cooks two, and various others one each. Few deductions can be drawn from this statement. Coolies have always headed the list, and unless it may be that coolies and those without any occupation may, from want of good nourishment and exposure, be more susceptible to insanity, it is certainly sometimes wonderful how quickly a wretched and half starved creature will recover his reason without any other treatment than good diet. 14. Statement No. V. shows the ages of those admitted during the year. The greatest number admitted was between the ages of 20 and 40, viz., 41; between 40 and 60, 14; under 20, two; above 60, one. This statement merely shows the ages of the lunatics on admission, but it gives no idea at what age insanity most commonly commences. 15. Statement No. VI. shows the types of insanity of those under treatment in the asylum. Out of a total treated( 7 ) The total admissions during the year have been much fewer than in the year 1878. The total treated in 1879 was 84, against 110 of 1878 and 216 of 1877. The chief causes of admissions were ague, diarrh( 8 ) tamination beyond the small proportion that may come from those drawing water from the wells. The bathing of the lunatics has always been carried out at a distance from the wells, so I scarcely think the water could be contaminated in that way. Lunatics are fond of swallowing or putting in their mouths other garbage and impurities which might be the source ; however, during the present year the cause will be strictly searched for. Although the death-rate has been great, the post mortems showed that in most of the cases the cause of death was more from some severe chronic organic disease than from anything amiss with the sanitary condition of the asylum. At the close of 1878 I mentioned that there were a great many cases that were in such a weak and helpless state that they would soon succumb. The chief treatment has been confined to improvement of the general health and bodily disease of the insanes, and no emperical treatment of insanity, with the exception of the use of various lypnotics when they were necessary and beneficial. Little or any mechanical restraint has been used or has been necessary besides confining some of the insanes in their cells when they were violent or dangerous. Kind- ness and healthy occupation of mind and body diminishes the tendency to violence. 18. Statement No. IX. shows the annual expenditure during the year, viz., Rs. 17,688-7-4, or Rs. 380-7-9 in excess of that drawn in the previous year. This is due to an increase in the pay of the establishment of Rs. 27 per month, and also due to the larger number of European lunatics during the year, the cost of whose diet is much more. The highest number receiving European diet in 1878 was three, while in 1879 nine. The expenditure on establishment was Rs. 8,065-4-0, against Rs. 7,855-8-0 in 1878, due as I have said to increased pay of part of the establishment. The head jemadar's pay was raised by Rs. 5 and the 2nd jemadar and durwan by Rs. 4 respectively. One ayah was insufficient, so that another had to be engaged on Rs. 14 per mensem. Diet.( 9 ) necessary to raise the pay of the head jemadar by Rs. 5, 2nd jemadar by Rs. 4, and the durwan by Rs. 4, as their pay was less than those of a similar status in the jail, and it was impossible to retain their services or find others. All the attendants have worked well. The percentage of jemadars to males is 1.10, to females 10-20 ; male-keepers to males 2.70 and female-keepers to females 10.20. 20. Statement No. XI. shows the amount of profit derived from the industry of the insanes. From it it will be seen that only Rs. 146-4-0 was paid for raw material during the year. The net profit is Rs. 3,150-15-5, or Rs. 352-1-9 more than was obtained last year. The average number employed daily was 162 males and four females, or a total of 166. 21. General remarks.( 10 ) No. I.( 11 ) No. I.( 12 ) No. II.( 13 ) No. III.( 14 ) No. IV.( 15 ) No. VI.( 16 ) No. VII.( 17 ) No. VII.( 18 ) No. VIII.( 19 ) No. IX.( 20 ) No. X.( 21 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1880. RANGOON: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1881.
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1880. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, British Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) they were suffering, and the supposed causes thereof, present no features of special interest. The number of patients under treatment in the asylum is scarcely sufficiently large to justify any general deductions from these statistics. The attention of District Officers will be invited to the Superintendent's remarks in paragraph 11 of the report on the subject of the unnecessary committal of aged imbeciles to the asylum. 6. The Chief Commissioner has noticed with pleasure that Dr. Griffith is able to report a marked improvement in nearly every detail of the asylum manage- ment. The conduct of the establishment has been good, the health of the inmates has improved, and their general well-being has been most carefully and successfully provided for. There have been no escapes. Credit is due to Dr. Griffith and Mr. Robinson, the Overseer, for these results. Visitors of the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum. Superintendent, ditto ditto. Deputy Surgeon-General, Indian Medical Department. Sanitary Commissioner, British Burma. Commissioners of Divisions. Deputy Commissioners. Civil Surgeons. ORDER.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1880. From Surgeon-Major H. GRIFFITH, Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Rangoon, to the Deputy Surgeon- General, Indian Medical Department, British Burma division,( 2 ) A small ward, to be used as a hospital for the treatment of females, is still much needed. Those suffering from bodily ailments are now treated in the dormi- tories. Two or three wells are needed to irrigate the reclaimed land. 2. Water-supply.( 3 ) 7. Diet.( 4 ) The total number of cases treated during 1880, as compared with those of the previous seven years, is as follows :( 5 ) ing with propriety the duties belonging to his station in life, though it is not pre- tended but that sometimes perhaps, upon a minute examination, traces of mental disorder might still be detected. In the few cases likewise when a state of mania had supervened upon one of original imbecility the patient has been considered recovered when restored to the care of his friends in the state he was in before the attack. In a small number of cases likewise which have been removed in an advanced stage of convalescence from the desire of their friends, or from its being supposed in the particular case desirable, the patients have been considered recovered if the convalescence has been confirmed. In cases which, upon discharge, still required the particular care of their friends, though so far benefited by treatment that further residence in the institution was thought unnecessary, patients have been considered as discharged improved. 9. Statement No. II shows the number of criminal lunatics under treatment. On the 1st January 1880 there were 38 males and 2 females under treatment. During the year 9 males and 2 females were admitted, 2 males were re-admitted, making a total population of 53 : 49 males and 4 females. During the year 5 males and 1 female were discharged, one male transferred to the civil side, and 2 males died, leaving thus on the 31st December 1880 a total of 45: 42 males and 3 females. The daily average strength of criminals was 40.56 : 38.73 males and 1.83 females. The criminal admissions during the present year were one more than during last year. In a considerable proportion of the instances when persons indicted for crimes are placed in an asylum on the ground of lunacy there is a complete recovery from the disease in a comparatively short time. A large number of discharged criminal lunatics are now detained in the Rangoon Jail, who have been inmates of this house. In the majority of these cases the insanity follows excessive drinking and dissipation, combined with poverty and domestic trouble : kept absolutely sober with vigilant medical supervision, suitable diets, and regular habits, these are invari- ably very quickly restored to health. Feigned insanity seems common amongst them; and the difficulty of management, discipline, good order, and security of the institution, both as to person and property, are very seriously increased by the detention of criminal lunatics of very strong homicidal and suicidal propensities. In some of this class it is very difficult to say whether they are responsible or not. If their responsibility is to be tested by the existence or non-existence of delusions, or by the knowledge of right and wrong, I should unhesitatingly say that they are not irresponsible. If however the want of control, which renders them the creatures of the most violent and dangerous passions and impulses, be admitted as in itself evidence of insanity and irresponsibility, then certainly there are few, if any, of these cases that can be considered sane or responsible. 10. Statement No. III shows the residence, religion, and sex of the lunatics admitted during the year. From this statement it will be seen that Rangoon gives the largest number of admissions, giving out of a total of 36 admissions 20 : 17 males and 3 females. As usual, the Burmese head the list; then come the Hindus, Mahomedans, and Christians. During the year one soldier was admitted from the Rangoon Central Jail, where he was undergoing imprisonment. 11. Statement No. IV shows the occupation of those admitted during the year. Insanity has its victims amongst all trades and professions, and no social condition is exempt from its visitation; but from year to year there is an instruc- tive uniformity in the predominance of mental disorders in certain classes of the community. On the present as on former occasions, the unskilled labourers rank highest amongst the males; cultivators give the highest number of admissions, viz., 8; then unknown, 5; coolies and gharry-drivers, each 3; bazaar-sellers, carpenters, headconstables, and traders, each 2; boat-builders, boatmen, cattle- keepers, cooks, dhobies, pensioners, pone-gyees, tailors, and soldiers, each 1. Statement No. V is an instructive one, as it shows the ages of all the patients admitted during the year. Of those admitted the extreme of age was 2
( 6 ) reached, two being under 20, one being upwards of 60. The largest number of admissions occurred between the ages of 20 and 40, being altogether 22. I think greater care might be exercised by district officers in estimating the real necessity which may exist for sending to the asylum persons merely displaying the signs of decay and derangement of mind in the close of life. A just discrimination would seem proper between the violent and troublesome conduct, with dirty habits, of such and those of younger persons in whom such symptoms are truly characteristic of disease demanding special treatment for the common safety and its own cure. I find that five persons in their second childhood died within nine months of their admission, whilst probably a little more patience at home, guided by a per- ception of the real nature and prospect of the cases, would have shown the removal to be needless in some of these. It appears that not less than 37 persons suffering this sort of violent insanity, engrafted on imbecility, or arising out of the decay of nature, were received since the opening of the asylum. The asylum is growing so filled that it has become important to occupy no space in a light way or needlessly. 12. Statement No. VI shows the types of insanity. Of the total treated, 225, 100 were suffering from acute mania, 20 from chronic mania, 28 melancholia, 28 acute dementia, 4 chronic dementia, 4 paralysis of the insane, 8 idiotcy, 32 imbeci- lity, and 1 not insane. A marked increase is observed, both in the instances of repeated attack and of re-admission into the asylum. This was to be expected. It is not the modern practice to detain patients in asylums because, having been once insane, they lie under a great risk of becoming so again ; but when the cur- rent attack may be fairly said to have come to an end, and one period of observa- tion has been superadded to the confinement already borne as security against premature relapse, the patient is discharged as cured. This practice should lead us to look for more re-admissions, but not (or apparently only) for more repetitions of the attack. I do not know that it has as yet been shown that insanity once suffered is more prone to re-appear than certain other diseases not affecting the mind, but of a constitutional or hereditary character. 13. Statement No. VII shows the causes of insanity in those admitted during the year and also the total under treatment. Out of 36 admissions, only in eight cases was any alleged cause given. Among the alleged physical causes, fever was the only one. Loss of property, disappointment in love, and domestic troubles were the chief moral causes. 14. Statement No. VIII shows the hospital statistics during the year. There were fewer admissions into hospital than the previous year, with less mor- tality. Out of 36 admissions, 12 were in good health, 21 in indifferent health, and 3 in bad health. Great numbers of patients are admitted in a bad state of health, emaciated in body as well as incurably diseased in mind, and often in a condition of inde- scribable squalor and filth. These unhappy creatures come to the asylum literally to die, requiring to be carried or assisted to the bed from which they never rise. The total treated in 1880 was 57, against 84 in 1879, 110 in 1878, and 216 in 1877. The chief causes of admissions were fever, diarrh( 7 ) 15. Statement No. IX shows the annual expenditure during the year, viz., Rs. 16,577-10-7, or Rs. 1,110-12-9 less than that drawn in the previous year. The expenditure on the establishment was Rs. 8,142, against Rs. 8,065-4-0 of last year. This increase is owing to the increase in the pay of the peons sanc- tioned by the Chief Commissioner in letter No. 1091-342, dated the 29th July 1878. Diet.( 8 ) as increased confidence in those looking after them and reliance on their advice ; in a diminution of attempts to escape from the building, although the facilities to escape are great ; an improved bodily health, diminution of sickness, and dimi- nution of deaths. RANGOON : H. GRIFFITH, Superintendent. The 14th January 1881.
( 9 ) No. I.( 10 ) No. I.( 11 ) No. II.( 12 ) III.( 13 ) No. IV.( 14 ) No. VI.( 15 ) No. VII.( 16 ) No. VII.( 17 ) No. VIII.( 18 ) No. IX.( 19 ) No. X.( 20 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1881. RANGOON : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1882.
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1881. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, British Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) account of the methods adopted for relieving the mental meladies of the patients. The good effects of active employment are especially prominent. 4. The hospital statistics show that of the 89 patients who were admitted to the hospital during the year, 31 were suffering from cholera, 11 from diarrhREPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1881. From Deputy Surgeon-General W. PEARL, British Burma Division, to the Officiating Junior Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, British Burma,( 2 ) " and the surrounding soil without undergoing much efficient filtration. The only " other source of pollution I can think of is the fact of the insanes, when drawing " water, standing on the well-covers, and the effect of this arrangement is that drop- " pings and washings of the feet, legs, and of the loongyees must fall into the well, " and thus, when the wells are low, the water must be somewhat impregnated with " impurities." Means have been adopted to prevent this as much as possible. 3. Conservancy.( 3 ) instances during the past year, as in former years, been necessary for an attendant to remain by the side of the patient and to direct his every movement for days, and even weeks, and the results have fully recompensed the time, attention, and perseverance bestowed. Fourteen were thus aroused from their state of abstract- edness, and have become cheerful and good useful labourers; and several of them were ultimately restored to their families. In common maniacal cases, instead of the nervous excitement expending itself in the indulgence of mischievous propensities, in quarrelling and vociferation, it is carried out in useful labour. In the case of the melancholic the relief afforded renders him quite a different being, and instead of brooding over his imaginary crimes or real miseries he is comparatively cheerful and happy; and besides it keeps them in strong bodily health and thus better able to resist disease, as evidenced during the late epidemic of cholera, when almost every man of the regular working gang escaped both the cholera and diarrh( 4 ) POPULATION, ADMISSIONS, &C. Statement No. I.( 5 ) the mental disease. None of these 20 at least would have been admissible to asylums at home, where (except in pauper asylums) it is made a rule to exclude cases plainly incurable. Deducting therefore the 20 from the 46, the proportion of recoveries to the remainder is 60.71. The past year evinces that there is still much procrastination amongst Burmans, especially in conveying their insane to the asylum, in consequence of which it is much to be feared the disease is aggravated and often proves fatal. Not a year passes by that it is not regretted that some patient is placed in the asylum after the best period for restorative treatment has passed. The gene- ral proposition that recent cases of insanity are very curable, and that chronic ones are only occasionally so, may be considered as fully established, and ought at this day to be everywhere understood. The total number of cases treated during 1881, as compared with those of the previous seven years, is as follows:( 6 ) males re-admitted, making a total of 61 persons. Of these, five males and one female were discharged, transferred for trial, &c.; five males and one female died; and on the 31st December 1881 there remained 47 males and two females. The daily average number confined under treatment was 45.04 males and 3.43 females, or a total of 48.47. 10. Statement No. III shows the religion and sex of the admissions and the districts from which they came ; 30 were Burmans, one European, 10 Hin- dus, two Mahomedans two East Indians, three other castes, exhibiting a total of 48 admissions, being 40 males and eight females; 21 belonged to, or were found in, Rangoon, and the remainder came from the various stations in the province, Bassein sending six,Prome five, Moulmein four, Hanthawaddy three, Tharrawaddy two, Kyoukpyoo three, Thayetmyo one, Tavoy one, Akyab one, and Thonegwa one. 11. Statement No. IV shows the trade and occupation of the admissions. Of the 48, four were traders, three bazaar-sellers, one schoolmaster, one policeman, one clerk, one writer, two tailors; the remainder, 35, belonged chiefly to the labouring and cultivating classes. Statement No. V is a return showing the ages of the inmates received during the year. Of those admitted, the extremes of ages were reached and were as follows:( 7 ) enervated mind acquires strength, his broken spirits are recruited, and he cherish- es the feeling that he will be again restored to his friends. The waverings and instabilities of disordered minds and the sudden impul- ses to which they are liable are alone to be comprehended by experience in their management. When understood I do not believe that the danger to this very pitiable class is so great under active employment as when they are merely detained or engaged within the cells or wards. The chief number of suicides in the asylum have been committed in-doors when it was supposed very little, if any, opportunity could be given for the perpetration of such acts. I would here explain an entry in the table, where two imbeciles are noted as discharged recovered. These cases illustrated the difficulty of arranging the com- plicated facts under the cut-and-dry headings of a table. These cases were of imbecility complicated by a temporary attack of mania; the imbecility was the chief fact in the cases, yet the mania was the cause of their being sent to the asylum, and having recovered from the mania they were discharged recovered as regards the mania, not so, of course, as regards the imbecility. The entry chro- nic insanity might also be objected to as lumping together all sorts of cases. This is pretty unavoidable, as it is difficult in chronic cases to obtain accurate information as to what the original nature of the case was ; but, further, I think the entry is a proper one, as the chief feature of each case is now its chronic, and probably incurable, character. In the other classes admitted there has not been any material difference from former periods, and nothing remarkable or requiring comment has hap- pened to these admissions. 13. Statement No. VII shows the causes of insanity in those admitted. It is necessary to repeat in every report that the causes of insanity assigned in a very considerable proportion of the admissions are fallacious. When relatives, acquaint- ances, or those interested in the patients can be got at, personal enquiries are invariably made to ascertain the facts, not only as to the causes, but also to everything else likely to throw light on the various cases. The chief causes amongst the physical were ganja 17 and opium eight, loss of property 17, grief 17, and domestic trouble 16; among the moral causes, in 56 the cause of the insanity is not known. 14. Statement No. VIII shows the hospital statistics during the year. There were 87 admissions into hospital and two remained from last year, so the total under treatment was 89. Of these, 55 were discharged cured and nine remained in hospital at the close of the year. The number of deaths was 25, or 28.74 per cent. of admission. Of the deaths, 16, or more than one-half, were due to cholera (12) and diarrh( 8 ) 10 cases having been treated, an increase which seemed to arise chiefly among worn out and debilitated patients, and was attributed to the influx of a consider- able number of feeble chronic cases at the latter part of last year. With these exceptions the institution had presented no remarkable degree of sickness, and when cholera was prevailing in the town its inmates appeared likely to escape the infliction with the same remarkable immunity they have enjoyed since the house was opened in 1871. The first alarm as to the presence of cholera within the asylum was excited by the sudden illness of one of the inmates on the 18th November. This man was attacked with vomiting and diarrh( 9 ) The disease remained in the asylum from the 18th November until the 1st December, when it suddenly disappeared. The following statement shows the dates on which they were received into hospital:( 10 ) tions that might be floating in the wards, it was ordered that every part of the building should be separately fumigated by an atmosphere of chlorine gas. This was efficiently done under the superintendence of Mr. Robinson, a receptacle of the ingredients for evolving gas having been placed in each room during the temporary absence of the patients. In attempting to relieve the patients, I am glad to be able to report that Mr. Robinson and his family, and also the Hospital Assistant, appeared to vie with each other by availing themselves of every suggestion which their own experience or the recommendation of others rendered probable, and their directions, I have every reason to believe, were efficiently and perseveringly carried out by the sub- ordinate establishment. With reference to the causes of this invasion of cholera in the asylum and as to the mode of its development and of its imbibition into the system, I am sorry to say I am unable to offer a decided opinion. On this difficult point I have very little solution to offer, except such as may be deduced from a comparison of the meteorological register with the progress of the disease. But, even if any atmospheric changes be observed which appear parallel to other changes in the pathological record, the doubt remains, which attends all speculations on meteorological phenomena that have been advanced to account for cholera, namely, the want of proof that similar conditions do not often occur during the long series of years when the disease is unknown in the asylum. I am inclined to attribute the cause to a combination of circumstances, and chiefly to the very unusual weather we had in November. The barometer had been high in November, reading a daily mean of 29.965 from the 15th of the month and remaining above 30.033 during the rest of the month without any remarkable fluctuations. The thermometer was 80° from the 15th, falling to 75.5 on the 27th, the date on which the largest number of patients were admitted. The wet and dry bulb thermometers showed a greater amount of moisture in the air from the 16th than in October. The earlier part of the month was very hot and oppressive, and about the 16th it became unusually muggy and close, the prevailing wind from N. N. E., and a good deal of rain falling almost every day. The 27th was particularly oppressive, the air damp, foggy, and sultry, and just such a day as might be expected to aggravate pestilential mias- mata. The water in the wells was lower during the past hot season than during any year since the asylum was opened. The inference from this fact is that the water in the wells is after all principally surface drainage more or less filtered; it is possible that most of the soil-water drains down between the steining of the well and the surrounding soil without undergoing much efficient filtration. The only other source of pollution I can think of is the fact of the insanes, when drawing water, standing on the well-covers, and the effect of this arrangement is that droppings and washings of the feet and loongyees must fall into the well, and thus, when the wells are low, the water must be somewhat impregnated with impurities. The other defect in the sanitary arrangement, and which must predispose to the disease, is the state of the ground underneath the cottages, and especially the cottages occupied by the filthy lunatics. Much difficulty is always experienced when washing these cottages, which must be done daily, to prevent this water passing between the boards and the floor beneath, and it is considered that this is an evil which must be put a stop to as soon as possible; and I propose that the floors of each cottage be constructed on the same plan as the incurable ward at the General Hospital, namely, by using corrugated iron sheet flooring having on the surface concrete and asphalte, rendering the whole floor perfectly water-tight, with gutters at each side leading into a receptacle to collect the filth. There is no doubt that the earth under the cottages is, although constantly renewed, strongly impregnated with poisonous matter, and a very disagreeable odour abides, especi- ally in the morning; and no doubt the boards of the flooring are also thoroughly saturated with filth, which the strongest disinfectant often fails to remove. There should be no time lost in carrying out the latter suggestion.
( 11 ) In former years it has been found that the mortality is greatest during the latter months of the year, the unhealthy season in fact. In 1874 of the 10 deaths six occurred in October and November. In 1877 of the 11 do. nine ditto ditto ditto. In 1878 of the 23 do. 16 ditto ditto ditto. In 1879 of the 25 do. nine ditto ditto ditto. And I consider it to be especially necessary at this particular season not only to observe extra sanitary precautious as to cleanliness, drainage, and ventilation, but that all in feeble health, if not the entire population of the asylum, should have an abundant supply of animal diet ; and I would strongly urge on the Government, if the mortality is to be reduced, the necessity of permanently increasing the allowance of beef from the 15th October to the end of the year. Let every man in the asylum have 8 oz. of good fresh beef every day instead of 4 oz., which is now allowed every other day. 15. Statement No. IX shows the annual expenditure during the year. The expenditure on the establishment was Rs. 8,165-3-7, against Rs. 8,142 of last year, an increase of Rs. 23-3-7 owing to the promotion of the Hospital Assistant to the 1st grade. The amount expended for diet was Rs. 7,279-11-4, against Rs. 7,808-1-7. The amount expended on clothing and bedding was Rs. 87, against Rs. 40-4-0. The increase was due to the necessity for blankets for the sick. The amount expended for bazaar medicine was Rs. 44-9-3, against Rs. 48-15-6 last year. 16. Contingencies.( 12 ) from Rs. 150 to Rs. 200 per mensem, and that the designation of his office be changed to that of Deputy Superintendent. Had it not been for the occurrence of cholera amongst the inmates, I con- sider that at no period of its history has the asylum showed so well as during the year under review. The Commissioner of Pegu agrees with me in recommending the erection of two more cottages in the reclaimed ground at the back of the asylum enclosure, where several of the inmates might be moved at periods of epidemics. It was felt in November last that some additional accommodation at a dis- tance from the buildings in which the inmates are located would have been most desirable to treat and to completely segregate the convalescent patients from the rest of the population. RANGOON : H. GRIFFITH, Superintendent. The 10th January 1882.
( 13 ) No. I.( 14 ) No. I.( 15 ) No. II.( 16 ) No. III.( 17 ) No. IV.( 18 ) No. VI.( 19 ) No. VII.20 No. VII.( 21 ) No. VIII.( 22 ) No. IX.( 23 ) No. X.( 24 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1882. RANGOON : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1883.
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1882. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, British Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) the 12 men who from statement No. VI would appear to have been not insane at the time of admission. Of the 12 who were not insane when admitted 5 are said to have " recovered," but what they recovered from is not stated. At pages 6 and 7 of the report an interesting account is given of the medical treatment pur- sued by Dr. Griffith with the insanes. As in previous years, it was found that better results followed from the employment of the lunatics on useful labour in the open air than from any medicines or other forms of treatment. Out of 244 patients treated at the asylum during the year, 26 recovered (including the 5 above refer- red to) and 19 died. 6. The statements attached to the report have not been prepared quite so carefully as might have been wished. In statement No. III the headings of the columns are not those prescribed; in statement No. VIII the numbers by which the diseases are indicated in the nomenclature of 1868 have been omitted ; and in statement No. X, column 14 has been incorrectly filled in and the memorandum at the foot of the statement is in consequence misleading. 7. The strength of the establishment remained the same as in the previous year. The general condition of the asylum is creditable to Dr. Griffith and his subordinates. ORDER.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1882. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLAIR, M. B., Officiating Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Adminis- tration, British Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, British Burma,( 2 ) stores. Fifty per cent. of the deaths this year (according to the register at time of my inspection) were due to diarrh( 3 ) of the prison as it stands ceasing to be adequate to the wants of the pro- vince-. The Chief Commissioner has sanctioned the erection of a. wooden upper storey to one of the cell buildings, which will give additional accommodation to about 28 inmates. 2. Water-supply.( 4 ) " indulgence of vicious habits, all of which are often to be traced directly to " sedentary pursuits, in impure air, and an exercise of the mind totally dispropor- " tioned to that of the body. By these a state of the system is often engendered " that no course of medication without a total change of habits can remove." 6. Clothing.( 5 ) The percentage of cured to daily average strength was 14.67 as compared with 11.52 of 1881, or a preponderating difference of 3.15 of deaths to the aver- age strength, 9.03 males and 1.69 females, or a total of 10.72. Of cures as com- pared to admissions the percentage is 37.67 as opposed to 43.75 of the previous year ; in other words, a decrease of 6.08 and of deaths 27.53 as compared to 52.08 of 1881, or a lesser number by 24.55. It is worthy of remark that some of the deaths in January occurred in those who had cholera at the latter period of last year. The total number of cases treated during the year as compared with those of the preceding seven years is a follows :( 6 ) This department, which is in its object virtually a Government prison, presents little requiring remark or offering matters of interest to those whose duties are almost confined to the safe custody of the inmates and superintending the inter- nal economy of the department. The Chief Commissioner, upon whose warrant alone patients can be admitted or discharged, is furnished with periodical reports of the state of each lunatic. Such employment is furnished and recreation per- mitted as can be safely and properly given. It must be however obvious that the greatest circumspection must be used with a body of patients whose safe cus- tody is of the greatest importance, especially when it is recollected that the crimes which a large proportion of them have committed are of a very grave nature ; while in many other cases the degree of insanity of the inmates has either been greatly mitigated, or is less obvious to those who have charge of them than to the Judges and assessors whose verdicts have consigned them to lunatic asylums. It is unnecessary to add that these patients are treated in the same careful manner which pervades the other department( 7 ) acute to chronic insanity or dementia and in chronic melancholia with delusion to counter-irritation to the scalp, as recommended by Dr. Buckhill, has been found useful in a few cases. In cases of mania attended by much excitement, when the general means first mentioned either appeared inapplicable, or when tried have not been follow- ed by decided relief, pouring water on the head from a shower-bath or common gardening watering-can, or sponging the forehead and face with cold water, have not infrequently appeared efficacious in removing the excitement. The bromide of potassium in combination with chloral, preparations of opium, and particularly morphia and Dover's powders, hyoscyannes and other sedatives, are likewise fre- quently and successfully resorted to, in some cases of excitement, with the view of tranquillising the patient and producing sleep without being followed by those unpleasant symptoms which were formerly thought to arise from their employ- ment. In cases of melancholia the warm bath continues to be frequently found of great service, and when combined with cold effusion to the head has likewise sometimes been thought of use in tranquillising the patient in some forms of excitement. The shower-bath, both as a sedative and as a tonic, and either tepid or cold, has been usefully employed in certain cases of melancholia and in cases of chronic insanity with the purpose of rousing the patient and giving tone to the system. In a large proportion of cases, however, the medical treatment is necessarily limited to the removal of symptoms in other parts of the system which have only an indirect relation to the cerebral derangement. With these views, bitters, aperients, diaphoretics, eminmagogues, and other appropriate remedies are frequently found of service by acting upon, or restoring the functions of, the stomach, bowels, skin, and uterine organs. There have been a few cases in which from the first it has been found necessary to invigorate the tone or support the power of the system by the use of generous diet, quinine, chalybeates, or other tonics, and even by that of wine, ammonia, and other stimu- lants or cordials, and in which convalescence has speedily followed. In a few cases, when patients have absolutely refused their food, the stomach- pump has been employed. Statement VII.( 8 ) The causes of death are satisfactory in so far that the list contains no evidence of any epidemic disease, of which there was none in the year under review. The deaths from bowel-complaints occurred in the usual large proportion, account- ing for nearly one-half of all the deaths. We never had so many cases sent in a year in a weak, reduced, or exhausted condition as in the year 1882; altogether 36 of the 65, or 55.3 per cent., were recorded as being in that category. Almost every one of these required and got some food or stimulant extra to the ordinary dietary during the first part of their treatment. Beef-tea and milk were largely used, and the contingent bill is heavier than any year before, but not alarmingly so : the greater my experience becomes I tend more to substitute milk for stimu- lants. I do not undervalue the latter in suitable cases, but in the very acute cases, both of depression and maniacal exaltation, when the disordered working of the brain tends rapidly to exhaust the strength, I rely more and more on milk: one such case this year got a large quantity of milk given him and nothing else for some months and under this treatment recovered. I question whether he would have done so under any other. He was almost dead on admission, acutely delirious, absolutely sleepless, and very nearly pulseless. Solid food was placed in his mouth, where it remained, the patient having apparently lost the power of masticating, but milk poured into his mouth, and his head held backward, was swallowed. The examination of the body after death was performed in 15 cases. The number of inmates were 218 males and 26 females, or a total of 244; and the percentage of deaths among the males reached 9.03 as compared with 10.97 of the previous year; while the females was 1.69 against 2.74 for the same period. Statement No. IX includes the expenditure of the asylum for 1882. This increased over the previous year to Rs. 581-4-8, the disbursements for 1881 being Rs. 8,165-3-7 as against Rs. 8,746-8-3, owing to the salary of the overseer having been raised to Rs. 50 extra per mensem, as also to the promotion of the Native doctor, whose stipend was accordingly enhanced, and to an item of Rs. 74-8-3 included in the increase as arrears of pay due to the latter while on sick leave. The amount expended on diet was Rs. 6,809-13-5 against Rs. 7,808-1-7, a dif- ference of Rs. 998-4-2, due to the favourable state of the grain market during the year, as also to the lesser number of inmates provided for. The clothing and bedding account exhibits an expenditure of Rs. 363, while that of 1881 was but Rs. 87. This large excess was owing to the purchase of new bedding and blankets deemed necessary on hygienic principles. Bazaar contingencies amounted to Rs. 45-10-3 as against Rs. 44-9-3. Other contingencies equalled Rs. 696-3-0, while those of 1881 were Rs. 605-8-6. The cost per year for each patient was Rs. 96-14-8 as compared with Rs. 89-11-11, or Rs. 7-2-9 in excess of 1881. This is accounted for by the increase to the overseer and Native doctor's salaries, to the purchase of bedding, &c, and to something like Rs. 90 expended over and above the contingency bill of the previous year. To the friends and others of lunatics a sum of Rs. 125 is credited, a falling- off under this head of Rs. 304-9-3 as compared with the amounted collected in 1881. To arrive at the average cost of each patient it is necessary to deduct from the gross expenditure, namely, Rs. 17,179-2-11, Rs. 4,574-7-0, credited to profit derived from insanes, and Rs. 125, donations from friends, which gives Rs. 70-6-6 as against Rs. 46-0-6, or Rs. 24-6-0 over the preceding year. Statement No. X. contains the sanctioned establishment at close of the year, from which it will be seen that the percentage of jemadars to males is 1.80, to females 20.45, male attendants to males 5.40, females to their own sex 13.63. Statement No. XI.( 9 ) The following table affords in detail the particular sources from which profits accrued to the establishment:( 10 ) No. I.( 11 ) No. I.( 12 ) No. II.( 13 ) No. III.( 14 ) No. IV.( 15 ) No. VI.( 16 ) No. VII.( 17 ) No. VII.( 18 ) No. VIII.( 19 ) No. IX,( 20 ) No. X.( 21 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1883. RANGOON : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1884.
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1883. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, British Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) to work are kept employed. The proportion of these amounts to about 80 per cent. of the total number of patients. Nineteen patients were discharged as cured, a number somewhat below the average of the past ten years. Besides these 24 patients were otherwise discharged. It is noticeable that no patients are shown as having been made over to their friends during the year. 4. The health of the patients was good throughout the year. Although the daily average number of sick patients (5.06) was somewhat larger than in 1882, there were only 12 deaths as compared with 19 in the previous year. The pro- portion of deaths to the daily average strength (6.35) was less than in any year since 1877. 5. The total cost of the maintenance of the asylum was Rs. 19,551-13-3, of which Rs. 8,922 were on account of superintendence and establishment and Rs. 7,529-11-6 on account of diet. The strength of the establishment was unchanged, but the cost was somewhat higher than in 1882 as the overseer drew increased pay throughout the year. The gross cost was less by Rs. 4,203-0-5 than the cost in 1882, but the cost in that year was largely swelled by public works charges. The receipts of the asylum amounted to Rs. 6,310-9-11, includ- ing Rs. 6,073-9-11 received on account of the labour and produce of the labour of patients and Rs. 237 received from paying patients. The average gross cost of each lunatic under treatment was therefore Rs. 103-6-6 and the net cost Rs. 76-10-5. The profits on manufactures are returned at Rs. 4,821-0-11 as com- pared with Rs. 6,861-11-0 in the previous year. The cause of this decrease is not explained. The receipts from paying patients were nearly double the receipts on the same account in the previous year, but there can be little doubt that much more should be contributed by the friends and relatives of civil patients. Rules for the management of the asylum under Act XXXVI of 1858 are now being framed, and provisions will be entered in them on the subject of the amount to be paid on account of well-to-do patients and the means of recovering sums due on this account. 6. The Chief Commissioner desires to acknowledge the continued interest and attention with which Dr. Griffith has managed the asylum throughout the year and to record his appreciation of the good service performed by Mr. Robinson, the late Deputy Superintendent, whose death has occurred since the close of the year. In filling the post of Deputy Superintendent, attention will be given to the sug- gestion made by Dr. Sinclair that a medical subordinate should be appointed. Visitors of the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum. Superintendent, ditto ditto. Sanitary Commissioner, British Burma. Commissioners of Divisions. Deputy Commissioners. Civil Surgeons. ORDER.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1883. From the Officiating Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration, British Burma, to the Officiating Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, British Burma,( 2 ) 5. STATEMENT I.( 3 ) A careful digest of these morbid appearances might form an interesting chapter in future asylum reports as well as a valuable contribution to the pathology of insanity. 9. STATEMENT IX shows the cash account of the establishment for the year. The increased cost of bazar medicines and contingencies of manufactures alone remain unexplained in the Superintendent's report. The amount received from paying patients, Rs. 237, is Rs. 112 more than was received in 1882 ; but such a contribution is altogether disproportionate to the regard displayed (vide above) by friends and relatives to the mortal remains of their deceased connections. If in a position before complying with their request, they might fairly be required to give additional help to the funds of the institution. 10. STATEMENT X details the pay of the sanctioned establishment. The Overseer's pay is sufficient to command the services of an apothecary, and in my opinion a Medical Officer with better qualifications than a Hospital Assistant should be resident at the asylum. The Superintendent is also Civil Surgeon and has numerous other equally important duties with those connected with the insane to attend to and may not in an emergency (unavoidable contingencies in all institutions of the sort) be at hand. The inmates of an asylum should be constantly under the eye of a skilled observer. Diseases to which in the sane attention would be at once directed may go on to the end undetected in the insane. Intercurrent bodily ailments are exceedingly insidious with them and their characteristics are often obscured by the inertia which attends morbid states of the nervous system. Under these circumstances, and in view of the economy of the arrangement, as the services of the Hospital Assistant may then be dis- pensed with, I would advocate that the next permanent incumbent of the Over- seership or Deputy Superintendency be an apothecary. Mr. Robinson has fallen ill and is not likely ever to return to duty. His officiating successor is a quiet and sober man but, like his predecessor, is insufficiently educated to give intelli- gent supervision, or to understand, much less to keep, accounts or registers. Much of this work has consequently to be done by the jemadar, who of the sub- ordinate establishment is the most intelligent and best informed in all matters connected with the asylum. From a conversation with Dr. Griffith on this sub- ject, I learn he is himself in favour of the appointment of a Medical Deputy Super- intendent, if a suitable man can be found, about which I anticipate no difficulty. Annual Report on the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum for the year 1883. 1. Situation and buildings.( 4 ) " I regard the permanent enclosure of the recreation-grounds and gardens in the manner suggested of great importance as protecting the patients from improper observa- tion, keeping out intruders, enlarging the liberty of the insane generally, securing various improvements from injuries, and permitting labour to be used as a remedy for more patients than could otherwise be done." 2. Water-supply.( 5 ) The rations were well cooked and no change has been made in the scale of diet. The rations are inspected and passed by the Deputy Superintendent, both in their raw and cooked state, and every attention was paid to the diet. The meals have been issued at regular hours twice a day, and the same order and decency of conduct during meals have been enforced. Agreeably to instructions the allowance of meat is 8oz. from October to the end of December. POPULATION, ADMISSIONS, &c. Statement No. I.( 6 ) The total number discharged comparatively is shown thus:( 7 ) Statement No. V.( 8 ) connected behind by another strap so as to keep the elbows near the hips and prevent the abuse of the upper arm in striking persons, the forearms being free and allowing the patient to feed himself, &c. I am indebted to Mr. Robert Gor- don for an ingenious contrivance to keep the armlets secure: it consists of two screws screwing one into the other as sketched. The brass screw (A) is a right-handed one and is intended to be screwed into the leather or strap and remain there; the hole should therefore be cut a little less in size and the brass be driven with a screw-driver; then the steel screw (B) is a left-handed one, that is, it drives the oppo- site way and thus does not loosen the brass; they are of enormous strength. The object of the restraint was to provide for the general security against personal injury inflicted by the patients and as a means of protecting persons from his propensity to attack and injure them, less objectionable for the patient himself than very frequent seclusion would be, which very frequent seclusion would be otherwise necessary. Until the occurrence of this case I had always believed and held restraint worn on the person could only be necessary in a case of surgical injury putting on an unfavourable appearance from neglect or for a strictly medical purpose, e. g., to obtain the recumbent position when, as in a few particular instances, the choice lies between securing that or accepting death from exhaustion, or in a certain small number of cases demanding unusual precautions to frustrate attempts at self-injury. But the very exceptional nature of this case (to my experience) compelled me to disregard preconceptions never designed to embrace such and to treat it strictly upon its own merits, thus causing me for the first time to apply restraint for the prevention of violence offered by one patient to others. The history of this man's conduct ever since his admission is an almost unbroken series, daily repeated, of violent assaults, knockings-down, kicking, &c, of attendants and fellow-patients. After enduring or permitting this for a long period he was placed in seclusion. I became convinced that as my duty extended to the protection of the patients at large equally with that of each indi- vidual one, I was bound to limit this man's power of doing bodily mischief not less for his own than the general good. I therefore adopted the restraint I have described; and in applying it felt I was not acting inconsistently with that other duty of avoiding uncalled for expedients in the management of particular cases. I ought not to omit to mention in terms of praise the forbearing conduct of the various attendants who had the immediate charge of this case and who sustained many hurts in the course of their duties. Previous to the imposition of the restraint he was the terror and complaint of the patients in his ward: with one blow he shattered the ribs of an unfortunate patient. His build is admirable; he is light and of great muscular development and agility, seems to have the skill of a practical fighter, and under the impulse of his disease has no sense of fear. Judged by non-restraint as a principle permitting of no deviation in practice this case is of importance. I believe I am justified in deeming the case a rare one, not simply because of the violence displayed, that being a common feature in insanity amongst Burmans, but because the homicidal propensity was a ruling and unvarying passion, pursued without delirium, but in a cool, calculating way, and independently of provocation from without. In these respects it will be seen to differ widely from the irritable and transitory explosions of mania, with the shifting of the attention from object to object in that disease, as also from the perhaps still more dangerous blind but passing fury of the paroxysms of delirium which sometimes attend epilepsy. Statement No. VII.( 9 ) The causes are classified under the two heads " predisposing " and " exciting." Great difficulty attaches in practice to the determination of the causes of insanity, and with the exciting causes in particular early symptoms of the disorder may very rapidly be confounded. Hence the results which have been arrived at, though very carefully scrutinized, are only to be regarded as approximations to truth. The causes are further divided into the physical and moral, the moral pre- dominating to a great extent. In three cases ganja is reported to have been the exciting cause. Two of these patients were well-to-do Hindus, clerks in the employ of a man who is known to be a ganja-smoker. In these particular cases it is very doubtful whether the practice of smoking which had preceded the attack of insanity could really be regarded as its cause ; in both cases the amount of smoking was so small as justly to lead to doubt in this respect. It may be said that these are the only cases of insanity said to have had their origin in ganja-smoking which have been admitted into the asylum for years past. Statement VIII shows the hospital statistics during the year. There were 96 admissions into the hospital and 2 remained from last year, so the total under treatment was 98, out of which number 79 were discharged and 7 remained at the close of the period under review. I have to report the enjoyment of excellent general health throughout the year, there having been no sickness of importance except what was presented by the patients who eventually died, and the causes of whose deaths will bear a satis- factory inspection. The deaths recorded were 12, being 7 under the total of last year, or, in pro- portion to admissions, 21.43 per cent. It appears the mean mortality of the establishment for the last ten years has been about 9.4 per cent. In the year 1881 it amounted to 13.7, in 1882 10.7, and in the past year 6.3. Fluctuations of this kind will necessarily occur in all establishments; and in the experience of this asylum a year of excessive mortality has usually been compensated by a succeeding year in which the deaths have been few. The mortality was due to the following causes :( 10 ) females 28.3, against 1.80 and 20.45 respectively. There were 5.04 of male attendants to males and females to their own sex 18.87 against 5.40 and 13.63 respectively of 1882. Statement XI.( 11 ) No. I.( 12 ) No. I.( 13 ) No. II.( 14 ) No. III.( 15 ) No. VI.( 16 ) No. VII.( 17 ) No. VII.( 18 ) No. VIII.( 19 ) No. IX.( 20 ) No. X.( 21 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1884. RANGOON: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1885.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1884. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLAIR, M.B., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administra- tion, British Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, British Burma,( 2 ) " amongst the criminals." Can the preponderance of deaths on the civil side be a measure of the extent to which insanity is feigned on the criminal ? Calculated on the daily average population from 1873 to 1884, civil and criminal separately, the death-rate of the former exceeds the latter by about 27 per thousand. The same feature is observable in the returns for Bengal and Bombay as may be seen in the subjoined table prepared from the figures for the 11 years 1873 to 1883. For easy comparison Burma's ratios obtained from figures extending over the same period are appended :( 3 ) 8. In STATEMENT No. IX is given the cash account of the asylum for the year. Discrepancies in the financial statements between the figures in the appendix and those supplied by the Comptroller were discovered. These are explained by the Superintendent in footnotes. The amount received from paying patients, Rs. 548, is more than double what was received in 1883. The expenses for clothing and bedding are Rs. 685-15-0 against Rs. 337-4-0 for the previous year. The expendi- ture on English stores and medicines, Rs. 195, represents their cost in 1883 as the Superintendent, when submitting his report, could not ascertain the value of those supplied during 1884. In the Comptroller's accounts their cost for 1884 is put down as Rs. 537-3-3. In the subjoined statement is given the average cost for the year under review of each patient in the local asylum in relation to establishment, diet, &c., &c.; for comparison similar averages for Bengal, Bombay, and Burma for the previous year are introduced. Establish- ment. Diet. Bazaar medi- cines. Clothing, &c. Contingen- cies. Other charges. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Bengal 1883 .. 42 9 6 34 8 8 0 1 1 3 3 8 4 2 8 9 10 10 Bombay 66 9 2 64 14 3 0 8 4 9 9 7 11 11 4 19 7 8 Burma 47 3 0 39 12 11 0 10 11 2 0 0 10 7 1 3 4 4 Burma for 1884 ... 49 4 0 48 5 8 0 9 11 4 0 2 6 2 7 3 8 7 In examining this table it should be borne in mind that a considerable proportion of the insanes in Bombay are Europeans or Eurasians, and the cost is included in the foregoing figures for that presidency; whereas the cost of European and Eurasian insanes is not provided for in the figures for Bengal, and though included in those for Burma, the numbers are so small as not to affect very mate- rially the average cost. 9. STATEMENT Nos. X AND XI call for no particular remark. The money accounts at the asylum are not very complicated, and there is probably no great risk of confusion, but the mode of dealing with receipts, described towards the end of the Superintendent's report, is contrary to the system prescribed by the Account Code (vide volume I, Chapter I, paragraph 1) and should be discontinued. Annual Report on the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum for the year 1884. Situation and Buildings.( 4 ) The following table is a detailed statement of the present accommodation in the asylum :( 5 ) During the year 30 of the patients, who were when admitted utterly useless, have been instructed to do something, either pounding coir, basket-making, gardening, or carpentering, and every advantage is taken to advise those who can work to occupy themselves in doing something. There were scarcely if any idlers, or of those who would but from mental or physical fault could not work. A great number of men in bad health suffering from " general debility " were, however, present during the year; these of course did little besides picking leaves and roaming about the ground. Mr. Goodwin reports that he has three men being taught carpentry, and that two of them are likely to make firstrate carpenters ; and one Burman is already very good at his work and is of immense service to him in teaching the others. All persons conversant with insanity now admit the advantages arising from active bodily occupation in the treatment of the insane. In former years there were doubts respecting the prudence of the system pursued here of allowing the inmates so much freedom with dangerous weapons, and all sorts of calamities were predicted; but I do not recollect any accident or misadventure amongst the selected working gangs during the many years I have been in charge. It cannot be denied that the system is carried out with much boldness, and the greatest credit is due to the 1st Jemadar in particular for the vigilant and constant supervision which he maintains over this most essential part of the institution. Clothing and Bedding.( 6 ) In the same period a total of 45 inmates left the asylum, 25 of which were cured, namely, 22 males and three females ; 15, namely, 13 males and two females, were transferred to their friends improved, and the majority of them, had they re- mained a few days longer, would have been discharged cured. Four, namely, three males and one female, were discharged not improved under section X of Act XXXVI of 1858. The re-admissions were cases that had fallen ill again after having recovered formerly ; in the previous year there were three males re-admitted ; this year the re-admissions were the same in number, being two males and one female. Remained on 31st December 1883. Admitted during 1884. Total. Discharged cured. Discharged improved. Discharged unimprov- ed. Discharged otherwise. Total discharged. Died. Remaining. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. 176 14 55 5 231 19 22 3 13 2 3 1 1 ... 39 6 23 ... 169 13 The daily average number of lunatics during the year was 181.12, or 166.62 males and 14.5 females, or a decrease on the previous year of 7.96. The maximum number reached on any one day was 190, being 173 males and 17 females, on the 12th November ; while on the 23rd June the minimum was 175, of which 161 were males and 14 females, a decrease of 12 in the former and of three in the latter. One civil lunatic escaped during the year; he had recovered and would have been discharged had he remained. It will be observed that the number admitted was 57, or four more than in 1883. The total cured was six more than the preceding year, and the deaths were 11 in excess of that recorded in 1883. The percentage of cured to daily average strength was 13.8 against 10.05 of 1883, a difference of 3.75 in favour of this year. There were 12.7 per cent. of deaths to average strength against 6.35 of last year, the healthiest of the series, with two exceptions, 1876 and 1877, and against an average of 9.2 of the past 10 years, being an increase respectively of 5.35 and 3.5. The death-rate of 1884 was greater than any year of the series except that of 1881. Remarks will be made further on on this subject. Of cures as compared to admissions the percentage is 41.67 against 33.93 of the previous year, in other words an increase of 7.74, and of deaths 38.33 as compared with 21.43, or an increase of 16.9. The total number of cases treated during the year as compared with those of the preceding seven years is as follows :( 7 ) The total number discharged comparatively is as follows :( 8 ) circumspection must be used with a body of patients whose safe custody is of the greatest importance, especially when it is recollected that the crimes which a large proportion of them had committed are of a very grave nature; while in some other cases the degree of insanity of the inmates has either been greatly mitigated, or is less obvious to us than to the judges whose verdicts have consigned them to a lunatic asylum. Statement No. III.( 9 ) until they become troublesome and too violent to be looked after are steps taken to have them detained in the asylum. Early removal from home is important in most cases, but there are some that require it more certainly than others. Those whose attacks depend on some definite physical state, if early treated, are invari- ably cured in a very short time. To treat the insane it is important to know what we want to do, and what is possible, and every case has to be considered apart, and the knowledge of the cause of the insanity is of the utmost importance in the treatment; in fact, the cause is of much greater importance than the form of the disease, hence the necessity for a full history of cases when admitted. The cases, however, are seldom carefully got up, the cause is seldom given, and the whole history is most defec- tive in the information required. The first thing done after admission of a patient is to determine the condition of health he is in, and if pale and anæmic, and with feeble pulse, tonics are given, and to get the bodily functions into working order, easily digested food in the shape of nourishing soups is administered early; for all the functions are so dependent on healthy nerve-supply that permanent return to health precedes return to sanity. Amongst the simplest of general remedies is bathing; cold baths in the majority of cases in the hot months, and warm baths to patients suffering from melancholia, and in some cases of acute mania. Many cases of acute mania pass from the excited state to one of greater or less depression or dementia, and in these cases baths are of the most signal service; patients seem to improve from the first and steadily progress under their use. In some cases of acute mania occurring in young persons who are in fair general health, many of whom are noisy and destructive, shower baths are of the greatest service in checking the destructive tendencies, and the patients seem to be quiet and sleep better after them. In some cases of melancholia having periodic fits of depression attended with insomnia, morphia is given at intervals with great benefit. Chloral hydrate, in my opinion, is rarely of permanent benefit, except in epi- leptic cases. In states of maniacal excitement I have given the medicine, in doses beginning with 20 grains, three or four times a day, and have produced more or less quiet, but I cannot record a single case in which recovery seemed due to its use. In ordinary cases of sleeplessness and melancholia doses of from 20 to 40 grains were given at night. In recurrent mania I have given it in one dram doses three times daily and continued it for several days, and was only discontinued because the digestion began to suffer. In some puerperal and in sleeplessness of senile cases chloral is of service in preventing rapid exhaustion. Chloral combined with camphor is now recommended, as it is said that the prolonged use of chloral produces loss of appetite and of flesh, and that the addition of camphor obviates it. This combination as a rule produces more or less mark- ed quiet, though this quiet is generally but temporary. I have not had sufficient experience of its effect in checking the deleterious effects of chloral. I have not used either conium or hyoscyamus during the year. Purgatives are not given with the idea that we shall cure by these means ; but in all cases of acute insanity we begin with a purge, and cases have been met of violent maniacs whose bowels were confined becoming quiet for days after free purgation. Stimulants are rarely given except in cases accompanied by great debility ; in these they are of the utmost importance ; and in many anæmic cases quiet and sleep result from the glass of spirits given at night. Statement No. VII.( 10 ) by the police amongst strangers who know nothing of the previous history of the man. The principal physical factors of the insanity were ganja (now less frequent than formerly), opium, spirits, general bad health, injuries to the head, and epilepsy; and the chief moral causes were attributable to loss of property, grief, domestic troubles, fright, and poverty. I should explain that in last year's summary no cases due to epilepsy were shown, when five cases due to it were under treatment; these were erroneously placed under heading poverty. The mistake has been rectified by deducting five cases of epilepsy from the seven placed to poverty and entered under heading epilepsy. It will be seen that the moral causes predominate over the physical; of the former there is a total of 84, and of the latter 74. I am, however, of opinion that in those cases of which full and reliable information could be obtained the physi- cal cause was generally found ; that some changes in some part or parts of the organism preceded the earliest manifestation of mental disturbance; that in these cases some diseased condition of the body outside of the brain generally preceded the cerebral symptoms and the consequent insanity; in a very large number of cases, especially amongst Natives of India, the predisposing cause is placed to ill health. The history of most of these showed varied morbid conditions as co- operating causes, all tending to depress vital energy and to interfere with nutri- tion. In many the more remote causes continue as exciting or depressing factors acting on the brain, and must be arrested or removed by suitable treatment as an antecedent to mental restoration, the morbid state of the brain then often subsiding. This is particularly the case when disease of the lungs, uterine dis- eases, and disordered menstruation are the efficient causation. Here mania or melancholia may arise from disturbance of the circulation within the cranium, and from ill-nourished nervous centres and defective assimilation, and if these people are feeble, some slight final cause, as a severe cold in the lungs, overwork, anxiety, loss of sleep, domestic troubles, or money difficulties, causing undue activity in the brain, brings on nervous exhaustion, the action of the heart is dis- turbed, nutrition interfered with, and we have insanity as the final catastrophe. I should add that the cause of insanity in a large number of cases is placed to opium. The examining officer under whose care the patient comes first, if the patient states that he is an opium-eater, enters in the case that the disease is due to opium. Now, from frequent observations made after admission, it is found that the patients scarcely ever ask for the drug, and when offered is often refused, so that in the majority of cases the drug if taken at all must have been indulged in in very small quantities, certainly not in sufficiently large doses to produce any very disastrous results. Statement No. VIII shows the hospital statistics during the year. There were seven cases left from 1883 with a total of 101 admissions, making a grand total of 108. Of these 73 were discharged cured, 23 died, and 12 remained at the close of the year. The diseases in order of frequency treated during the year were intermittent fever, general debility (a very large number occurring amongst recent admissions), diarrh( 11 ) In the course of the illness other diseases may spring up, and the one under which the patient was admitted is, possibly, not the one of which he ultimately dies. The case of ulceration of the ( 12 ) He scarcely raised his feet, and had just enough sensation in his feet to know that they touched the ground. He maintained the power of discrimination in regard to hot substances; he could feel a hot spoon, though the usual delay in the appreciation of the warmth after the touch (which such cases always more or less exhibit) was characteristically marked. After about three months' detention the sensation of the face became impaired and the sensibility of the fauces too was so much diminished that food collected in his mouth, and he was not aware that it was there; the sense of taste was also vitiated, if not lost, the patient complaining that he could not distinguish one diet from another ; saliva would flow over his lips and at the angles of his mouth; he had cramps of the legs, ptosis of the right eye, and amblyopia. From this period the disease showed very markedly its characteristic progressiveness, and the patient took to his bed permanently. He, however, occasionally got up on the side of the bed, but when he tried to walk his feet swung about without control when- ever he tried to advance one or other of them, and when the feet touched the ground he was not now conscious of the fact. On the 19th November he had several abscesses in the left thigh and sloughing of both gluteal regions, he even- tually got several epileptiform seizures followed by paralysis of the mouth, lips, tongue, and pharynx, owing to which he was quite unable to take his food; he then became insane, talked or made a sound incoherently for hours together. On several occasions the bladder had to be emptied with the catheter, and to- wards the close of his life his urine and fæces were constantly passed involuntarily and unconsciously. On the 7th February symptoms of carbuncle at the back of neck manifested themselves, going on through the usual course. He eventually became comatose, and so died on the 19th March 1884. It was a matter of great regret to me that I was not allowed to examine the brain and cord; the friends of the patient objected to a post-mortem examination being made. The special feature in the case was the absence of insanity until very late during the progress of the malady. The mortality as calculated on the daily average strength was 12.7, or 6.35 per cent. more than in 1883, and 3.5 higher than the average of the last ten years; it is therefore (apparently only) the most unhealthy of the series excepting 1881. Fluctuations of this kind will necessarily occur in all establishments for the insane, and in the experience of this asylum a year of excessive mortality has usually been compensated by a succeeding year in which the deaths have been few. The majority of those who died had been for years in bad health, kept alive by nourishing food and careful nursing, so that their deaths were expected; the greater number of these having succumbed this year we may look for less mor- tality in 1885. Of the total of 23 deaths one was admitted in a moribund state and death occurred three days afterwards. Steers was incurably ill with progressive paralysis when admitted. A man named Nga Su had a complication of disorders when received, and died 25 days after admission. Another, a Chinaman named Lun Khay, was affected with paralysis, dropsy, and chronic lung affection when admitted, and died a month after admission. Bangyo, a general favourite with all in the asylum and one of the first admitted into it in June 1871, may be said to have died of old age; he had been in bad health for years. Nga Myat Hman, who had unusually severe epilepsy, died in one of the fits, and was not a patient in hospital at the time of his death. Old Maung Tuk, entered in the register as 70, must have been con- siderably over 80 years of age; and a man named Jagean showed greater age than that recorded in the register, namely, 65, so that after analysis it will be found that the mortality is very nearly about what it should be, namely, 8.2 per cent. The mortality was due to the following diseases : paralysis one, diarrh( 13 ) Statement No. IX, Finances.( 14 ) This of course was irregular, but it had to be done as ready money was urgently required to purchase the above. Conduct of Establishment.( 15 ) No. I.( 16 ) No. I.( 17 ) No. II.( 18 ) No. III.( 19 ) No. VI.( 20 ) No. VII.( 21 ) No. VII.( 22 ) No. VIII.( 23 ) No. IX.( 24 ) No. X.( 25 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1885. RANGOON: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1886.
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1885. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) in the pay of one of the jemadars. The expenditure under the heads of diet, cloth- ing, and bazaar medicines decreased. The receipts from paying patients were less by Rs. 93-8-0 than in 1884. The net proceeds from the farm and from manu- factures amounted to Rs. 5,046-0-1 as against Rs. 4,885-13-3 in 1884. The making of furniture, having been found to be unprofitable, was abandoned and a dairy was started. The experiment appears to have been a financial success. The total net cost to Government of each patient was Rs. 84-9-6 as against Rs. 81-14-3 in 1884. By order of the Chief Commissioner, E. S. SYMES, Offg. Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1885. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLAIR,M.B., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration, British Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, British Burma,( 2 ) Diet.( 3 ) to average strength against 12.7 of last year and against an average of 9.76 of the past 10 years, being a decrease respectively of 6.4 and 3.46. It will be seen that last year, with two exceptions, the years 1877 and 1876, is the healthiest of the series. Of cures as compared to admissions the percentage is 20.83 against 41.67 of the previous year, in other words a decrease of 20.84; and of deaths 16.7 as com- pared with 38.33, or a decrease of 21.63. With reference to the large number of inmates discharged improved, it must be stated that these cases, the majority of them, were so far restored as to appear fully capable of performing with propriety the duties belonging to their station in life, but upon a minute examination traces of mental disorder might still be detected. The total number of cases treated during the year as compared with those of the preceding 10 years is as follows:( 4 ) The daily average, comparatively, for the same period is( 5 ) women are sent into the asylum for treatment: the Burmese, apparently, dislike to send their women insane here. Statement No. VI.( 6 ) medicines, &c. In the case of a good many it is very evident on their admission into the asylum that their death is but a question of days or weeks. Out of the 12 deaths, five only had been in the asylum for a number of years, some a few months, and one 12 days, the rest had only been in for two years. Statement No. IX, Finances.( 7 ) a clear profit of Rs. 891-4-6 after paying for feeding and for the man in charge. The poultry farm realized a profit of Rs. 117. Conduct of Establishment.( 8 ) No. I.( 9 ) No. I.( 10 ) No. II.( 11 ) No. III.( 12 ) No. VI.( 13 ) No. VII.( 14 ) No. VII.( 15 ) No. VIII.( 16 ) No. IX.( 17 ) No. X.( 18 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1886. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. APRIL 1887. [Price, Re, 0-8-0.]
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1886. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) debility. One patient committed suicide during the year by hanging himself with a strip of gunny torn from his bed covering. This death does not appear to have been facilitated in any way by lax supervision on the part of the Asylum authorities. 4. The financial management of the Asylum during the year under review was satisfactory. The total expenditure amounted to Rs. 21,731. Rs. 9,634 were spent on establishment, Rs. 8,499 on diet, and Rs. 624 on clothing. The total cost of each lunatic was Rs. 100-5-11 as against Rs. 111-4-8 in the previous year. Rupees 545 were received from paying patients and Rs. 7,037 were earned by the patients of the Asylum during the year. The net cost of the institution to Government was consequently Rs. 14,149. The average net cost of each patient was Rs. 65, or Rs. 19 less than in the previous year. It is satisfactory to notice that the receipts from paying patients increased by nearly Rs. 100. The principal occupations carried on in the Asylum are basket and broom making, market gardening, and the keeping of a dairy. The latter establishment has proved a success, the net profit during the year having amounted to Rs. 1,545. The total profit from manufactures including the dairy was Rs, 7,037 as against Rs. 4,649 in 1885. By order of the Chief Commissioner, E. S. SYMES, Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1886. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLAIR, M.B., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) overlooked. It is not, however, desirable that in an asylum for the labouring classes these should assume a prominent character, or be allowed to interfere with the ordinary business of the establishment. POPULATION, ADMISSIONS, &c. Statement No. 1 shows the principal statistical events of the year 1886 and, for the sake of comparison, those of the preceding ten years are also given. The statistics of the year under review may be considered to be on the whole satisfac- tory when compared with those of the preceding years, as it will be noticed that there has been a low death-rate (8.31 per cent.) as compared with the average death-rate (9.69) of the preceding years ; on the other hand there were a larger number admitted than in any of the preceding ten years and seven more than in 1885. The proportion of cured is rather small, being 11.08 against an average of 11.78 of the preceding years, but it is 3.28 better than in 1885. The asylum population on the 1st January 1886 was (males 188, females 14) 202 and was more than on the corresponding date of 1885 by (males 19, female 1) 20. The admissions (males 73, females 6 = 79) exceed those of 1885 by seven. There were (males 3, female 1) four re-admissions, the cases being as in former years those of recurrent insanity chiefly due to intoxication. The total population was (261 males, 20 females) 281, being 27 more than last year, and 43.7 more than that of the average of the preceding decennial period and of any year in it. It thus appears that the admissions continue to increase steadily, and there is a corresponding accession to the number remaining on hand, of whom the great majority will never be removed but by death, as they are persons whose insanity had existed so long prior to admission as to shut out all hope of their restoration to reason. During the year 24 males were discharged as cured, or at the rate of 11.93 to daily average strength, and this proportion, as regards the total number cured, is lower than was observed in any year of the preceding decennial period with the exception of that of 1877, 1878, 1881, 1883, and 1885 ; and the reason for this is that this figure will naturally rise and fall as the admission figure falls and as the asylum population comes to consist more largely of criminals and chronic cases. There were (males 8, female 1) nine patients sufficiently improved in their mental condition to be made over to the care of their friends, three (males 2, fe- male 1) civil lunatics escaped, and 18 died. On the 31st December the asylum population was (males 210, females 17) 227, which shows a marked increase in the number remaining, particularly of male patients, on the first day of the year. The mean daily average strength present during the past year was (201.14 males, 15.37 females) 216.51, and as the capacity of the asylum calculated at 50 superficial feet per patient will accommodate 219 males and 36 females, there was no overcrowding. The maximum number of lunatics confined on any one night was (males 212, females 17) 229 on the 9th December 1886. Statement No. II.( 3 ) The residual population of criminal lunatics on the 31st December 1886 was (males 68, females 4) 72 and was considerably higher than that registered in the preceding years; there was an increase during the year of the male criminal lunatics by 10, and the female criminals were of the same number as last year. The daily average strength of criminal lunatics during this year was (males 63.54, females 4.1) 67.64 and formed (males 31.59, females 26.68) 31.24 per cent. of the mean asylum population. Statement No. III.( 4 ) In former years the proportion was about 35.8 per cent. on admission, but this I believe to be no fair representation of the real case, for persons were classified as being in good health whose health was not indisputably bad. It is evidently of considerable importance, however, to have correct information upon this point, for the condition of the health has much to do with the issue of the case. The chances of recovery, as one might expect, are less where the condition of the health is bad, though not remarkably so, the proportion being 55.4 to 62. per cent., but the chances of death are much greater, the percentage of deaths being only 4.7 where the health was good and 13.6 where it was bad. Every one of those admitted required and got some food or stimulant extra to the ordinary diet during the first part of their treatment. We have an abundant supply of milk and it has been used very freely as a restorative. The general treatment of the patients has not varied materially from that recorded in former reports. Statement No. VII.( 5 ) The following are the facts recorded about the patients who died :( 6 ) occupied by a clot of blood, which also infiltrated the surrounding cerebral sub- stance. (13) General debility.( 7 ) The expenditure on account of diet was Rs. 8,499-4-10 against Rs. 8,146 of last year, or an increase of Rs. 353-4-10; this was owing to there being a larger number of patients under treatment. Rs. 624-2-0 was spent on clothing and bed- ding against Rs. 205-5-7 of last year, being an increase of Rs. 418-12-5 ; this was also owing to there having been a larger number under treatment and to our having had to pay more for the stuff. In former years bedding, clothing, canvas, &c., were purchased very economically from the Commissariat Department, but last year there were no sales and we had to purchase cloth, &c., in the bazaar. Bazaar medicine cost Rs. 78-0-6 as compared with Rs. 74-8-11, or an increase of Rs. 3-7-7 ; this also was owing to there being a larger population. Contin- gencies amounted to Rs. 983-15-0 against Rs. 854-2-0, being an increase of Rs. 129-13-0. In this amount, however, is included the price of two cows, costing Rs. 200 ; and if we deduct this amount, there is really a decrease of Rs. 70-3-0 last year under this head. The total cost of each lunatic in 1886 was Rs. 100-5-11 as compared with Rs. 111-4-8 in 1885, or Rs. 10-14-9 less than the cost of the previous year. Statement No. X contains the sanctioned establishment at the close of the year and requires no remarks. Statement No. XI.( 8 ) No. I.( 9 ) No. I.( 10 ) No II ( 11 ) No. III.( 12 ) No. VI.( 13 ) No. VII.( 14 ) No. VII.( 15 ) No. VIII.( 16 ) No. IX.( 17 ) No. X.( 18 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1887. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. MARCH 1888. [Price, Re. 0-8-0.]
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1887. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) 3. The total expenditure on the Asylum during the year under report was Rs. 23,497 as against Rs. 21,731 in 1886. The increase in cost was mainly due to an increase of some Rs. 1,300 in cost of dieting. The Superintendent of the Asylum appears to be in error in attributing the whole of this increase to the increase in the number of patients. The average cost of each lunatic increased by Rs. 4-10-5 during the year under review. As other heads of expenditure were almost the same as in the previous year, it is clear that more money was spent on dieting each patient in 1887 than in 1886. The necessity for careful supervision of the expenditure on diet is commended to the attention of the Superintendent and of the Committee of Management. The manufactures car- ried on in the Asylum were the same as in former years and call for no special remarks. By order of the Chief Commissioner, C. G. BAYNE, Officiating Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1887. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLIAR, M.B., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) not well supported by the facts given in the foregoing statement. None of those on the list would seem to have been admitted to hospital within a fortnight of their coming to the asylum and only two within a month ; all the others had been from about two months and upwards in the asylum before the fatal attack set in. The two cases of diarrh( 3 ) Endeavours were made to remove a great many more, but we failed because no friends or relatives could be found or, if found, they were not in a position to undertake the charge of them. Causes of Insanity, Statement VII.( 4 ) Rs. 983-15-0, or a decrease of Rs. 246-14-9. In last year's report it was noted that the price of two cows was included under this heading. If we then deduct Rs. 200, being the amount paid for the cows, we get the real sum expended last year on contingencies proper, namely, Rs. 783-15-0, or Rs. 46-14-9 more than that expended this year; this was owing to the price of kerosine-oil being less in 1887 than in 1886. The subjoined statement shows the average daily number of lunatics for 1887, the total yearly expenditure, average cost of each insane, and the average cost of each item of outgoings per individual during the year:( 5 ) The dairy, although very troublesome to manage, has been of very great use to the asylum as well as a source of profit. Establishment.( 6 ) No. I.( 7 ) No. I.( 8 ) No. II.( 9 ) No. III.( 10 ) No. VI.( 11 ) No. VII.( 12 ) No. VII.( 13 ) VIII.( 14 ) No. IX.( 15 ) No. X.( 16 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1888. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. MARCH 1889. [ Price, Re. 0-8-0. ]
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1888. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) 3. There was a large increase during the year in the receipts from pay- ing patients. This was due to the orders issued in 1887 and 1888 requiring Municipal and Town Committees to pay for the lunatics sent to the Asylum from their towns. Two Committees, namely, the Municipal Committees of Prome and Moulmein, have as yet failed to discharge their liabilities to the Asylum. The attention of the Commissioners of Tenasserim and Pegu will be invited to the matter, and they will be requested to see that the requirements of the law and the orders of Government are complied with by the Committees concerned. By order of the Chief Commissioner, C. G. BAYNE, Officiating Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1888. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLAIR, M.B., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration. Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) (b) The sickness judged by the total treated (132) and by the daily aver- age number sick (15.44), though the figures are higher than for the preceding year, and in the latter case double the mean of the preceding ten years, is not such as would cause serious anxiety. The mortality, however, has been excep- tionally heavy. In all 30 died, being 13.02 per cent. of the daily average strength compared with 10.28 for 1887 and 10.30, the mean of the preceding decennium. Cholera, dysentery, and tubercle are responsible for 8, 7, and 7 deaths respectively. In 1887, when general debility, epilepsy, and diarrh( 3 ) amounted to 77 males and 19 females, giving a total of 96. There were two re- admissions. The total population was therefore 289 males and 34 females. Of this number 49 males and 11 females were discharged, of whom 37 males and 8 females were cured, and 10 males and 3 females discharged improved, 2 escaped, 30 died, and at the close of the year 233 remained. The daily average strength was 214.03 males and 16.40 females against 208.35 males and 15.39 females of last year, it being considerably above that of last year. Criminal Lunatics.( 4 ) the general deterioration of the system and combination of diseased actions so general in new admissions into the jails and hospitals of this province, is indefinite. It has therefore become the practice to take the most prominent disease on admission into hospital and enter it in the nominal register of sick. In the course of the illness other diseases may spring up and the one under which the patient was admitted is probably not the one of which he ultimately dies. This practice simplifies there turns ; but, unless understood, it vitiates the com- parison between one set of statistics and another. Dysentery is the most intractable disease treated in the Asylum. Ulcer- ation is generally found at the descending colon and sigmoid flexure; the glan- dular structures are as a rule atrophied, and the ulcers seemed to be for the most part without vitality and are mere sloughing sores. In a few cases only is thickening of the walls found. Abscess of the liver is very rare as a consequence of dysentery amongst insanes here ; occasionally nothing is found but a trans- verse streak of vascularity. Scurvy is rarely found in the Asylum, but it is frequently discovered in new admissions. The number of patients admitted with dysentery was 13 and more than half of them died, or 53.85 per cent. I have paid particular attention during the year to the diet, and especially to the clothing supplied to the inmates, in the hopes of ascertaining whether the disease was owing to any deficiency or scarcity of any of these. My observations have not as yet proved that the prevalence of bowel-complaints is due to any of these causes. Believing the fall in temperature at the beginning of the rains and at the close of the year had something to do with the prevalence of this disease, as a precautionary measure the whole of the Asylum inmates were clothed in flannel, and it is certain that none of them suffered from the cold; notwithstand- ing the mortality from this cause was just the same as it was during the year 1887. The type of dysentery prevalent is that which is not benefited by ipe- cacuanha. Indeed I have reason to believe that this remedy causes such exhaus- tion very difficult to get over. The disease generally begins with diarrh( 5 ) It is supposed that the disease was brought into the Asylum by a patient admitted from Upper Burma. This man was sickly on admission and was re- ceived into the hospital the day he was admitted into the Asylum; his disease is entered in the register as bronchitis, but he was also suffering from watery diarrh( 6 ) No. Name. Date of admission into asylum. Date of last admission into hospital. Date of death. Cause of death. State of health on admis- sion. 1 Ramayah ... ... 13th June 1886 ... 25th June 1887 ... 19th January 1888 ... Paralysis ... ... Bad. 2 Wee Shun ... ... 5th December 1887 ... 1st January 1888 ... 5th January 1888 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Fair. 3 Chin Kwe ... ... 23rd December 1887 ... 1st January 1888 ... 22nd January 1888 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Bad. 4 Nga Kyat Gyi ... ... 19th March 1875 ... 20th January 1888 ... 15th February 1888 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Good. 5 Bhujna ... ... 27th September 1887 ... 23rd October 1887 ... 27th April 1888 ... General debility ... Bad. 6 Tha Zan U ... ... 18th April 1886 ... 15th March 1888 ... 28th April 1888 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Good. 7 Nga Paw ... ... 5th January 1888 ... 3rd May 1888 ... 9th May 1888 Remittent fever ... ... Fair. 8 Nga Tha Yauk ... ... 2nd January 1887 ... 18th June 1888 ... 22nd June 1888 ... Dysentery ... ... Bad. 9 Nga Shwe Yan ... ... 3rd June 1886 ... 22nd June 1888 ... 28th June 1888 ... Dysentery ... ... Fair. 10 Tein Laung ... ... 30th January 1885 ... 15th March 1888 ... 18th July 1888 ... General debility... ... Fair. 11 Nga Tun Aung ... ... 14th August 1883 ... 20th April 1888 ... 16th July 1888 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Fair. 12 Nga Shwe Hla ... ... 6th December 1887 ... 2nd June 1888 ... 9th July 1888 ... Hepatitis ... ... Good. 13 Ack Ah ... ... 8th November 1871 ... 9th July 1888 ... 27th July 1888 ... Dysentery ... ... Good. 14 Veeran ... ... 15th May 1888 ... 10th July 1888 ... 15th July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Bad. 15 Ma Bôk ... ... 11th June 1888 ... 11th July 1888 ... 22nd July 1888 ... Dysentery ... ... Bad. 16 Unknown ... ... 6th June 1888 ... 11th July 1888 ... 12th July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Bad. 17 Nga Kwe ... ... 7th September 1886 ... 12th July 1888 ... 16th July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Fair. 18 Nga Shwe Sung ... ... 2nd June 1883 ... 15th July 1888 ... 16th July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Bad. 19 Nga Tun Gyaw ... ... 1st April 1886 ... 16th July 1888 ... 23rd July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Fair. 20 Manay Sarkie ... ... 26th June 1888* ... 8th July 1888 ... 9th July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Bad. 21 Kitu ... ... 7th December 1886 ... 8th July 1888 ... 9th July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Bad. 22 Nga Yit ... ... 3rd October 1887 ... 9th July 1888 ... 10th July 1888 ... Cholera ... ... Bad. 23 Unknown ... ... 11th February 1886 ... 4th December 1887 ... 7th October 1888 ... General debility ... Fair. 24 Nga Le O ... ... 15th August 1888 ... 18th August 1888 ... 9th October 1888 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Bad. 25 Nga Shwe Pu ... ... 1st August 1888 ... 1st September 1888 ... 26th October 1888 ... General debility ... Bad. 26 Narayanasawmy ... ... 26th July 1884 ... 14th October 1888 ... 23rd November 1888 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Fair. 27 Nga Shwe Kyu ... ... 14th July 1877 ... 1st December 1888 ... 5th December 1888 ... Dysentery ... ... Good. 28 Ibrahim ... ... 18th June 1883 ... 10th December 1888 ... 6th December 1888 ... Epilepsy ... ... Bad. 29 Nga Po Thu ... ... 26th March 1888 ... 23rd November 1885 ... 16th December 1888 ... Dysentery ... ... Good. 30 U Le Hpaw ... ... 30th March 1877 ... 8th December 1888 ... 21st December 1888 ... Dysentery ... ... Fair. *N.B.( 7 ) Of the total number of deaths given in the above table (30) eight were received into the Asylum in 1888, 6 in 1887, 7 in 1886, 1 in 1885, 1 in 1884, 3 in 1883, 2 in 1877, 1 in 1875, and 1 in 1871, so that the majority of those who died, or 70 per cent., had not been in the Asylum more than three years. Of the 30 deaths 14 are recorded as being in bad health, 10 in fair health, and 6 in good health when they were first received into the Asylum. Of the 21 recent admissions who died 12 were in bad health, 6 in fair health, and 3 in good health. Cash Account, Statement IX, Finance.( 8 ) Statement X contains the sanctioned establishment at the close of the year and requires no remarks. Statement XI.( 9 ) No. I.( 10 ) No. I.( 11 ) No. II.( 12 ) No. III.( 13 ) No. VI.( 14 ) No. VII.( 15 ) No. VII.( 16 ) No. VIII.( 17 ) No. IX.( 18 ) No. X.( 19 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1889. RANGOON : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. FEBRUARY 1890. [ Price,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1889. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) support of pauper patients and from the friends of other patients for their maintenance increased. The earnings of the Asylum diminished, but the de- crease is satisfactorily explained. The Committees at Tharrawaddy and Thatôn, which have failed to pay for the support of the lunatics from those places, will be requested to discharge their liabilities. 4. The Chief Commissioner desires to place on record an expression of his appreciation of the services of Brigade-Surgeon H. Griffith, who has held charge of this Asylum for 18 years, and will soon leave his present charge on promotion to a higher sphere of duty. The Chief Commissioner is pleased to recognize also the good services rendered by the officers of the Asylum named by the Super- intendent in the last paragraph of his report. By order of the Chief Commissioner, F. C. GATES, Officiating Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1889. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLAIR, M.B.. Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) There were discharged improved 12 males and three females ; 10 of these were civil lunatics handed over to their friends under section 10 of Act XXXVI of 1858. Five were criminals (four males and one female); the four males were discharged under Rule 7 of the " Rules for the guidance of Executive and Judicial Officers in dealing with criminal lunatics ;" and, with reference to para- graph 9 of " B, unrecovered criminal lunatics,'' the female was discharged in accordance with the provisions of section 475, Criminal Procedure Code, her friends giving security to take proper care of her. There were 17 deaths, and at the close of the year there remained 236 males and 22 females. It should be mentioned here that eight criminals were transferred under the above mentioned rules to the civil side of the Asylum, but by order to be kept on the criminal register; on the other hand there are 14 criminals considered sane and who would, in former years and before these rules were adopted, have been discharged, but who must be kept in the Asylum under Rules 3 and 6 for several years before any action can be taken in their cases. It will be seen from this what effect these rules are likely to have in increasing the population of the Asylum. The daily average strength was 242.53; in 1888 it was 230.43, and the average for the last 10 years was 197.16. As compared with the previous year there were exactly the same number admitted, while six less were discharged cured. There were 13 fewer deaths. During the whole of the year the number in the Asylum was but little under the maximum (255) which it can accommodate without overcrowding. Dates of admis- sion of those who were cured. Discharged cured. Dates of admis- sion of those who died. Died. 1874 ... 1 1873 1 ... ... 1881 1 ... ... 1882 1 ... ... 1885 2 1886 ... 1 1886 1 1887 ... 4 ... ... 1888 ... 13 1888 4 1889 ... 20 1889 7 Agreeably with former experience the movements towards termination and discharge of cases in what- ever way has been mainly con- fined to the admissions of late years as exhibited in the table given marginally. Amongst patients received within the last three years the movement was active, nearly the whole came from them. Thus four were admitted in 1887, 13 in 1888, and 20 in 1889, while only one was admit- ted in 1874 and one in 1886. The deaths, instead of following an opposite rule, as might be expected in the mere course of time, keep some measure with the recoveries. Thus there were 11 deaths of patients of two years' standing to six of pa- tients above that period. The year whose admissions contributed 20 recoveries gave seven deaths, that from which there were 13 recoveries gave four deaths, the increase under both heads being, although not pari passu, still signally progressive. Escapes.( 3 ) One cured and transferred to the civil side on expiry of sentence. One cured and transferred to the Rangoon Jail. Five were discharged improved, namely,( 4 ) No. Name. Criminal or civil. Date of admission into Asylum. Date of last admission into hospital. Date of death. Cause of death. State of health on admis- sion. 1 Subayah ... ... Civil ... 23rd April 1888 ... 6th October 1888 ... 1st January 1889 ... Dysentery ... Bad. 2 San U ... ... Criminal ... 1st October 1885 ... 11th January 1889 ... 23rd January 1889 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Good. 3 Shwe Deo ... ... Civil ... 11th July 1881... 5th February 1889 ... 18th February 1889 ... Fever intermittent ... Fair. 4 John White ... ... 14th July 1886 ... 28th October 1886 ... 6th March 1889 ... Debility ... ... Bad. 5 Matan Baw ... ... 14th July 1888 ... 8th November 1888 ... 27th May 1889 ... Old age ... ... 6 Ainuddin ... ... 28th May 1873 ... 20th October 1888 ... 11th July 1889 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Good. 7 Nga Shwe Hpin... ... Criminal ... 6th April 1882 ... 23rd June 1889 ... 1st July 1889 ... Fair. 8 Nga So ... ... Civil ... 29th March 1889 ... 12th April 1889 ... 25th August 1889 ... Bad. 9 Sunder Singh ... ... Criminal ... 2nd April 1889 ... 8th July 1889 ... 16th August 1889 ... Debility ... ... 10 Adeaya ... ... 27th September 1888 ... 14th October 1888 ... 24th September 1889 ... 11 Nga Talôk ... ... Civil ... 3rd December 1888 ... 16th August 1889 ... 21st September 1889 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... 12 Chinnasawmy Naidu ... Criminal ... 1st May 1889 ... 14th August 1889 ... 30th September 1889 ... Debility ... ... 13 Mari ... ... Civil ... 2nd September 1889 ... 14th October 1889 ... 22nd October 1889 Fever remittent ... 14 U San Da ... ... Criminal ... 2nd April 1889 ... 28th October 1889 9th November 1889 Beri-beri ... ... 15 Lata ... ... Civil 25th March 1885 ... 9th November 1889 ... 16th November 1889 ... Foreign body in æso- phagus. Fair. 16 Chu Lu... ... 4th November 1889 ... 9th November 1889 ... 6th December 1889 ... Debility ... ... Bad. 17 Chane Suan ... ... 27th May 1889 ... 8th July 1889 ... 9th December 1889 ...
( 5 ) Medical Treatment.( 6 ) This was owing to our having had to purchase coal-tar, earth-oil, and lime for whitewashing the criminal cells ; and in 1888 there was a large quantity of coal-tar and earth-oil left after finishing the contract we had with the Public Works Department for earth-oiling the cottages in 1887, hence the small expendi- ture in that year under contingencies proper. The subjoined statement shows the daily average number of lunatics for 1889, the total yearly expenditure, average cost of each insane, and average cost of each item of outgoings per individual during the year:( 7 ) Establishment.( 8 ) No. I.( 9 ) No. I.( 10 ) No. II.( 11 ) No. III.( 12 ) No. VI.( 13 ) No. VII.( 14 ) No. VII.( 15 ) No. VIII.( 16 ) No. IX.( 17 ) No. X.( 18 ) No. XI.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1890. RANGOON : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. MARCH 1891. [ Price,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1890. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) and less carefully compiled than the reports of previous years. The Chief Com- missioner trusts that there will be an improvement in the style and matter of future reports. By order of the Chief Commissioner, H. THIRKELL WHITE, Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1890. From Surgeon-Major D. SINCLAIR, M.B., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) The whole grounds are well laid out and well kept, the walks always clean and tidy, Mr. Goodwin, the Deputy Superintendent, paying great attention to this and the garden, so that the premises have a cheerful appearance. 2. Water-supply.( 3 ) months they get 8 ounces of meat on the four days and for the rest of the year 4 ounces. An abundant supply of fresh vegetables is given all the year round and in the cold season European vegetables. In addition to the above scale of diets there is also the hospital diet, where any extra that may be deemed necessary is given. The cost of extra diet for the present year has been high on account of the great number of debilitated subjects who required a nourishing diet. A certain number of insanes every year refuse to take food of any descrip- tion and have to be fed by the stomach-pump or enemata of strong soup or beef tea. There is a small dairy kept in connection with the Asylum. At present there are eight cows and nine calves. These cows supply the milk for such patients as may require it, and a good amount is sold to any one who may wish it outside. The milk is extremely good and there is a great demand for it in families, and it yields a fair profit. The demand for the milk lately has been very great and, I think, if we had 12 cows instead of eight, we would have difficulty in supplying the demand ; but it is difficult to get good cows here at a reasonable rate. This year there has been a great loss in the milk-supply, the cows having had the foot-and-mouth disease for nearly two months, and of course the supply of milk had to be stopped. One cow died during the year. During the rains there is a plentiful supply of grass, but certain extras have to be given the cows. * Also seven re-admitted,( 4 ) The total number treated during 1890 compared with the previous seven years is as follows : Year. Males. Females. 1883... ... ... ... ... 228 17 1884... ... ... ... ... 231 19 1885... ... ... ... ... 234 20 1886... ... ... ... ... 261 20 1887... ... ... ... ... 298 25 1888... ... ... ... ... 289 34 1889... ... ... ... ... 297 36 Average ... 262.57 24.43 1890... ... ... ... ... 315 39 The total number of discharges comparatively is as follows: Year. Males. Females. 1883 ... ... ... ... ... 40 1884 ... ... ... ... ... 39 6 1885 ... ... ... ... ... 35 5 1886 ... ... ... ... ... 34 2 1887 ... ... ... ... ... 66 9 1888 ... ... ... ... ... 49 11 1889 ... ... ... ... ... 46 12 Avarage ... 44.14 6.85 1890 ... ... ... ... ... 49 8 The comparative number of deaths during the same period is as follows : Year. Males. Females 1883 ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... 1884 ... ... ... ... ... 23 ... 1885 ... ... ... ... ... 11 1 1886 ... ... ... ... ... 17 1 1887 ... ... ... ... ... 22 1 1888 ... ... ... ... ... 29 1 1889 ... ... ... ... ... 15 2 Average ... 18.43 .86 1890 ... ... ... ... ... 35 5 The comparative daily averages are as follows: Year. Males. Females. 1883 ... ... ... ... ... 178.48 10.60 1884 ... ... ... ... ... 166.62 14.50 1885 ... ... ... ... ... 179.19 11.96 1886 ... ... ... ... ... 201.14 15.37 1887 ... ... ... ... ... 208.35 15.39 1888 ... ... ... ... ... 214.03 16.40 1889 ... ... ... ... ... 221.09 21.44 Average ... 195.56 15.09 1890 ... ... ... ... ... 234.80 24.66 It will thus be seen that the inmates of the Asylum are gradually increas- ing, and this at present is to be expected since the annexation of Upper Burma. 10. Statement II shows the number of criminal lunatics under treatment. On the 1st January 1890 there were 99 criminals, namely, 95 males and 4 females. During the year under review there were admitted 12, namely, 11 males and 1 female, and there were also 2 females re-admitted, making a total of 113, namely, 106 males and 7 females. During the year 11 were discharged, i.e., 10 males and 1 female. Five were cured. Of these( 5 ) regulations given by the Government of India regarding the discharge of crimi- nal lunatics. About 20 criminal lunatics, now declared to be sane for various periods, are awaiting the completion of their terms according to their crimes and types of insanity. As already stated two escaped, but were re-captured. The two peons in charge were heavily fined. 11. Statement III shows the residence, religion, and sex of the lunatics ad- mitted during the year. Rangoon gives the largest number of admissions, Moulmein next, and then Akyab. The Burmese, as formerly, head the list, then the Hindus and Mahomedans. 12. Statement IV shows the occupation of those admitted during the year. Generally their occupations are not known, many have none; they are mere waifs and strays without any history and without friends. Of those known, coolies form one-fourth the admissions, then come cultivators, and one or two from the various other occupations and trades. No conclusions can be drawn from this except that the poorer and worst fed and nourished people give the greatest number of admissions. 13. Statement V shows the ages of those admitted, the greatest number being between 20 and 40 out of 96 admisssions, but it can give no idea of the commencement of the insanity. 14. Statement VI shows the types of insanity of those under treatment in the Asylum. Out of a total of 354 treated 122 were mania acute or chronic, 120 melancholia, 50 dementia, 1 idiocy, 11 epileptic mania, 14 gunja-smoking, 6 opium-smoking, 1 opium-eating, and 12 spirit-drinking, 5 brain disease, 3 consecutive insanity, 4 other forms, and 5 not diagnosed. The admissions during the year follow much the same order of frequency: mania 38, melancholia 36, dementia 9, epileptic 3, spirit-drinking 3, gunja- smoking 2, opium-smoking 2, others 2, and consecutive 1. These, I may say, are the usual types of insanity here in frequency of admis- sions, but even in mania it is unusual, unless in a very few cases, to find the lunatics violent. Any history of the lunatic before his admission is in most cases nil. Most of those brought are waifs without relations or friends, and are only brought to the Asylum when they are in a helpless state or are violent and troublesome. Most of the admissions are in a wretched state of health when brought; many are carried from the gharry or dooly bringing them into the hospital at once. The Burmese do not trouble themselves much about their lunatics so long as they are quiet and harmless, and give no trouble, but as soon as they are violent and become helpless through sickness and disease, they send them to the Asylum in a wretched state of health to die and swell the mortality of the Asylum. With the exception of a few the admissions have been quiet and harmless, and no serious accidents have occurred during the year. 15. Statement VII shows the causes of insanity of those admitted during the year and also of the total treated. This statement is a very unsatisfactory and an unreliable one in Rangoon. As before stated, in almost every case no history is given, and that given is both meagre and untrustworthy. Among physical causes gunja-smoking, opium- smoking, spirit-drinking, fever, and epilepsy give the most frequent causes of admission during the year; among moral causes grief, loss of property, and domestic troubles. Few or any deductions can be drawn from this statement from want of reliable information. 16. Statement VIII shows the hospital statistics and death-rate during the year. It is with regret that I have to bring forward the high mortality during the year, and the more so that since I have taken charge I am unable to point out any particular cause for the death-rate being above previous years or that it was due to any particular cause that could have been avoided. Certainly there was nothing in the diet, water, or sanitation or cleanliness of the lunatics or cottages that could be pointed out. No doubt the state of health on admis- sion has a good deal to do with the high mortality. 2
( 6 ) When I took charge of the Asylum from Brigade-Surgeon Griffith, who has held charge of the Asylum since it was opened, and who may be said to have brought it to its present efficiency, he told me when he handed over charge in May that the deaths up to date were already the same as that of the previous year, being 17, and that I would find many more who would not live much longer. I inspected the convalescent gang and at once placed 25 on one side who evidently would not last till the end of the year. Of these 20 have died and the rest will not last out the month of January. Many have also been admitted in a wretched state of health during the past six months, three of whom have died. Of the 25 picked out 12 were already found far advanced in tubercular phthisis and beyond all remedy, whilst many others showed signs of lung disease, but have temporarily improved under codliver oil and maltine. I attach a table of the mortality with the dates of admission into the Asylum hospital, deaths, type of insanity, state of health on admission, and the post-mortem appearances, &c. From Statement VIII it will be seen that the greatest number of admissions into hospital during the year was from intermittent fever, namely, 44, next comes general debility 39, with 11 deaths; most of these from post- mortem examinations were tubercular phthisis; then follow seven deaths from tubercular phthisis admitted as such, and then six from diarrh( 7 ) and tonic treatment sometimes do well, but many of them have already so much organic change, either in disease of the nervous system or the consecu- tive results due to such as phthisis or other organic changes, that when admitted into the Asylum they are hopeless. From medicines I have seen benefit from the hypophosphites, codliver oil, and maltine. What I have experienced of the action of sulphonal has been favourable in most cases ; in some it acts very favourably, in others indifferently, and in some apparently not at all, but I hail it as an efficient medicine in certain cases. The other treatment has been as much as possible healthy occupation, good food and clothing. Pleasant labour, such as gardening in the Asylum grounds or extra-mural, basket-making, broom-making, and coir-pounding, are, in my opinion, in most cases the best medicines. Gardening is a most pleasant work to the lunatics; it is neither too laborious nor fatiguing to the delicate, and at the same time they seem to like it if an interest is taken in the work by those who superintend the work. The post-mortems do not show this year what I have seen formerly in this Asylum, the tendency to worms ; in fact I have not seen in the post-mortems any worms at all. The daily average sick was 21.10 as against 15.44 of 1888 and 15.69 in 1889. As usual the greatest number of cures was among recent admissions. 18. Statement IX, Cash Account.( 8 ) Average expenditure of each patient in relation to( 6 ) No. I.10 No. I.( 11 ) No. II.( 12 ) No. III.( 13 ) No. VI.( 14 ) No. VII.( 15 ) No. VII.( 16 ) No. VIII.( 17 ) Deaths during the year 1890. No. Name. Date of admission into asylum. State of health. Date of last admission into hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. 1 Maung Nga Bwin ... ... 26th July 1887 ... Bad ... 29th June 1889 ... 35 1st January 1890 ... Paralysis ... ... Paralysed for years. No post-mortem. 2 Yetchymah ... ... 7th November 1889 ... do. ... 9th November 1889 ... 25 2nd January 1890 ... General debility ... Under treatment from admission. 3 Nga Po Thein ... ... 2nd June 1889 ... do. ... 1st January 1890 ... 23 12th January 1890 ... Phthisis ... ... Tubercular infiltration and abscesses of lungs. 4 Shwe O ... ... 4th September 1878 ... Fair ... 14th September 1889 ... 42 5th January 1890 ... General debility ... Cirrhosis of liver and tubercular infiltration. 5 Nga Po Aung ... ... 1st January 1889 ... Bad ... 1st January 1890 ... 41 5th January 1890 ... Dysentery ... ... Congestion and ulceration of colon ; tubercular deposits. 6 Shwe Tha ... ... 16th August 1884 ... Good ... 10th December 1889 ... 40 17th January 1890 ... Pneumonia ... ... Croupous inflammation of both lungs. 7 Mahomed Yacoob ... ... 21st June 1871 ... Bad ... 3rd January 1890 ... 49 1st February 1890 ... Leprosy ... ... Leper for years. No post-mortem. 8 Maudiah ... ... 15th July 1871 ... Good ... 3rd February 1890 ... 49 6th February 1890 ... Perforation ... ... Ulcer of stomach and perforation. 9 Nga Ngè Dun ... ... 28th November 1889 ... Bad ... 1st January 1890 ... 56 20th February 1890 ... Phthisis ... ... Both lungs infiltrated with tubercle. 10 Nga Sè ... ... 23rd February 1889 ... Fair ... 19th September 1889 ... 36 10th March 1890 ... Dysentery ... ... Intestines throughout congested; ulceration of colon. 11 Nga Hlaing ... ... 1st January 1890 ... Bad ... 1st January 1890 ... 50 20th March 1890 ... Phthisis ... ... Extensive tubercular deposits in both lungs. 12 Thanamah ... ... 23rd March 1890 ... do. ... 24th March 1890 ... 24 20th April 1890 ... do. ... ... Tubercular deposits and cavities in the lungs. 13 Sit Sin ... ... 2nd January 1889 ... do. ... 2nd January 1890 ... 33 3rd May 1890 ... Paralysis ... ... Liver atrophied ; lungs congested. 14 Kurrim Ali ... ... 2nd April 1888 ... do. ... 26th April 1890 ... 26 5th May 1890 ... Pneumonia ... ... Pneumonic consolidation of both lungs. 15 Nga Kya ... ... 1st January 1888 ... do. ... 18th January 1890 ... 36 7th May 1890 ... Diarrh( 18 ) No. IX.( 19 ) No. X.( 20 ) No. XI.( 21 ) Abstract of Cash Account. ESTABLISH- MENT. DIET. CLOTHING AND BEDDING. MEDICINES. CONTINGENCIES. GRAND TOTAL. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Rs. 10,033. Rs. 38-10-8. Rs. 14,140-10-4. Rs. 54-8-0. Rs. 729-3-0. Rs. 2-12-11. Rs. 363-13-6. Rs. 1-6-5 Rs. 2,290-11-2. Rs. 8-13-3. Rs. 27,557-6-0. Rs. 106-3-4. 6 G. B. C. P. O.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1891. RANGOON : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. MARCH 1892. [ Price,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1891. Extract from the proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) 4. The detailed statement of expenditure does not show the amount spent on the maintenance and repair of the Asylum buildings. Several matters in con- nection with the condition of the buildings and enclosures need careful exami- nation. Four lunatics escaped in 1891 and have not yet been re-captured, and in 1890 there were three such escapes. Steps are now being taken to re-build and raise the surrounding wall of the female enclosure, which is in a particularly bad state of repair. 5. The report for the present year was circulated amongst the visitors before submission to the local Government, and is said to have been approved by them. The visitors have not, however, recorded any remarks on the report, though they were invited to do so in paragraph 3 of last year's resolution. By order of the Chief Commissioner, D. H. R. TWOMEY, Officiating Junior Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1891. From Surgeon-Major P. W. DALZELL, Officiating Inspector-General of Prisons with Civil Medical Adminis- tration, Burma, to the Junior Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) The grounds are well kept by the lunatics under the careful superintendence of Mr. Goodwin. Water-supply.( 3 ) in regard to the number of lunatics remaining at the close of the year. Six more lunatics were shown as in the asylum than was actually the case. The figures have been corrected in this report. On the 31st December 1890 there were under treatment 251 insanes, namely, 225 males and 26 females. *Of these two were re-admissions, one civil, one criminal. During the present year there were 84 * admissions, 70 males and 14 fe- males, making a total of 335 (295 males and 40 fe- males). Of the 84 admissions 25 were in good health, 17 in fair health, and 42 in bad health. In the year under review 32 were discharged cured (25 males and 7 females). There were also discharged improved six (four males and two females) ; these were handed over to their friends under section 10 of Act XXXVI of 1858. Dis- charged otherwise there were 21 (16 males and five females) : 13 were transferred to the Madras Lunatic Asylum. 4 were transferred to the Dullunda Asylum. 4 escaped and have not as yet been recaptured (one criminal and three civil). The following table will show the statistics of admissions, discharges, and deaths during 1891 :( 4 ) Total number of deaths( 5 ) Statement V shows the age of those admitted. As usual the majority are aged between 20 and 40 years, but in the absence of any history in most cases it is impossible to say at what age insanity was developed. Statement VI shows the types of insanity. Of a total of 335 treated 128 suffered from acute or chronic mania, but it must be noted that this number refers to the description of insanity under which these patients were admitted and many of the 128 are now suffering from sim- ple dementia, next comes melancholia 112, then dementia 44, toxic 26, (includ- ing ganja-smoking 12, spirit-drinking 8, opium-smoking 5, opium-eating 1) epi- leptic 10, and idiocy one. Of insanity due to morbid changes in the brain there are 5 cases, " Other forms" 4, and not diagnosed 5. The admissions during the year follow much the same order of frequency. Mania 41, melancholia 26, ganja-smoking 5, spirit-drinking 5, dementia 4, epileptic, opium-smoking, and other causes, 1 each. There is very little to guide one in the histories of those sent from other stations than Rangoon, and, even in the cases from Rangoon, we can glean little or no information regarding antecedents. The majority of those admitted every year are those who wander about friendless or whose friends, in finding the lunatic a burden to them, send him to the asylum and take no further notice of him. The number of violent cases is few in comparison to the admissions. No accident has occurred during the year. The chief difficulty in each case is to determine whether it is a " first attack " or otherwise, as the prognosis as to the chances of recovery rests on this ; most recoveries occur among the first and recent attacks. It certainly seems that the greater proportion of cases is incurable. Recoveries in order of the type of insanity during the year under review were mania 15, melancholia 7, toxic 7 (including ganja-smoking 3, spirit-drinking 3, opium-smoking 1,) dementia 2 and other varieties 1. Statement VII shows the causes of insanity of those admitted during the year. Of the total number of admissions 84, 15 come under the heading physical causes, 28 under moral causes, and unknown 41. Under physical causes are included ganja-smoking, spirit-drinking, and opium, with one case from fever, and one from epilepsy. Among the moral causes, grief comes first, then loss of property, fright, poverty, and disappointment in love. From the result of this table no certain conclusion can be drawn as doubt exists as to the accuracy of the infor- mation given. It is odd, seeing what a powerful factor in the production of insanity heredity is in Europe, that no case was admitted in which any history of here- dity could be traced. Statement VIII is the return of the sick from other diseases than insanity treated in the Asylum Hospital. From this it will be seen that the general health of the lunatics was good during the year, the admissions being much fewer than last year( 6 ) Loss of appetite, distaste for, and finally refusal of food is a frequently occurring chain of events in cases of melancholia. In such cases nourishment has to be supplied by means of the stomach pump or nutrient enemata are used. To combat sleeplessness it is desirable, in the first place at any rate, to use hygenic measures in preference to the use of soporifics, which too frequently interfere with digestion. In acute cases if sleep can be induced the hope of cure is greater than in cases of developed insanity unattended by insomnia. Of drugs for the treament of sleeplessness, sulphonal is preferable for several reasons. It is odourless and tasteless and, so far as experience goes, its use is not followed by any undesirable symptoms. Moreover, if its continued use is necessary, the dose need not be increased but may be diminished. A dose of from 15 to 20 grains is sufficient to procure about eight hours' sleep. Chloralamide has also been used, but sufficient experience has not yet been gained to warrant an expression of opinion as to its usefulness. Chloral and bromide potassium are useful in many cases. In melancholia and the insomnia of the aged Cannabis Indica has been found most useful, especially in cases of melancholia attended by great depression. Other medicinal treat- ment has been chiefly in the way of tonics, such as codliver oil, maltine, and the hypophosphates. Statement IX. Cash Account.( 7 ) Statement X shows the sanctioned establishment during the year and requires no remarks. Statement XI.( 8 ) The Hospital Assistant Jeycela Rao also has been attentive to the patients in the hospital and has been careful in detecting cases of patients who begin to fail in health and in giving them improved diet and treatment. Some of the peons were careless and allowed escapes, but they were punished. During the year there have been 12 monthly meetings of the Committee of Visitors, when they have examined the accounts and inspected both the civil and criminal lunatics as well as the asylum generally. RANGOON : The 29th February 1892.
( 9 ) No. I.( 10 ) No. I.( 11 ) No. II.( 12 ) No. III.( 13 ) No. VI.( 14 ) No. VII.( 15 ) No. VII.( 16 ) No. VIII.( 17 ) Deaths during the year 1891. No. Names. Date of admission into the asylum. State of health. Date of last admission into the hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. 1 Shwe Yauk ... ... 11th July 1871 ... Good ... 10th September 1890 ... 60 1st January 1891 ... General debility ... No post mortem. 2 Chanthama ... ... 21st December 1885 ... Fair ... 6th February 1890 ... 38 3rd January 1891 ... Phthisis pulmonalis ... Great emaciation ; extensive tubercular deposits with cavi- ties. 3 Ti Wi ... ... 25th November 1889 ... Bad ... 5th August 1890 ... 28 5th January 1891 ... Tubercular phthisis ... Extensive congestion of the lungs; tubercular deposits. 4 Nga Ngwe Tha ... ... 2nd October 1889 ... Do. ... 23rd December 1890 ... 45 9th January 1891 ... General debility ... Emaciation; effusion into both ventricles; tubercular de- posits in left lung. 5 Nga Myat San ... ... 28th September 1888 ... Very bad 1st August 1890 ... 57 15th January 1891 ... Do. ... Emaciation ; disease of heart; atheroma of aorta and dis- ease of brain. 6 Nga Kyi ... ... 9th August 1871 ... Good ... 13th February 1891 ... 45 14th February 1891 ... Epilepsy ... ... Lungs congested, disease of brain ; right kidney two calculi spleen atrophied. 7 Mrs. Laidlaw ... ... 28th December 1888 ... Bad ... 20th May 1890 ... 24 23rd February 1891 ... Paralysis ... ... No post mortem. 8 Mi Lan ... ... 4th September 1879 ... Good ... 20th March 1890 ... 49 23rd February 1891 ... Do. ... ... Emaciation; brain hard, diseased, serous effusion. 9 Nga Po Thaung ... ... 23rd December 1890 ... Bad ... 4th February 1891 ... 58 5th March 1891 ... General debility ... Emaciation; serous effusion, liver and spleen enlarged. 10 Ah Si ... ... 1st August 1888 ... Do. ... 24th February 1891 ... 45 15th April 1891 ... Chronic dysentery ... Lungs congested; extensive ulceration of great intestine; spleen very small. 11 Maung Kyi ... ... 17th August 1890 ... Fair ... 2nd April 1891 ... 48 18th April 1891 ... Ascites ... ... Cirrhosis of the liver. 12 Nga Pya ... ... 17th March 1886 ... Do. ... 9th January 1890 ... 57 18th April 1891 ... Cancer and diarrh( 18 ) No. IX.( 19 ) No. X.( 20 ) No. XI.( 21 ) Abstract of Cash Account. ESTABLISH- MENT. DIET. CLOTHING AND BEDDING. MEDICINES. CONTINGENCIES. GRAND TOTAL. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Rs. 9,969 Rs. 40-1-6 Rs. 15,167-12-11 Rs. 61-0-2 Rs. 692-2-11 Rs. 2-12-7 Rs. 343-10-6 Rs. 1-6-1 Rs. 2,119-5-3 Rs. 8-8-5 Rs. 28,291-15-7 Rs. 113-12-9 6 G. B. C. P. O.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1892. RANGOON : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. MARCH 1893. [Price,RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1892. Extract from the proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,( 2 ) in the previous year, the necessity for this heavy expenditure being attributed to the high cost of food-grains prevailing during the year. The Chief Commis- sioner desires to draw the special attention of the Committee of Visitors to this matter, and trusts that steps will be taken in future to purchase the year's supply of food-grains at the beginning of the season when rates are low. The income from the industries practised in the Asylum amounted to Rs. 2,784. This total is considerably below the sums realized in past years, but the decrease is partly accounted for by the introduction of a more correct method of credit- ing receipts under this head. Both the vegetable garden and dairy, which are two of the main sources of income, gave satisfactory results, but the Chief Com- missioner concurs with the Inspector-General of Jails in thinking that further remunerative employment can be found for the inmates by expanding the scope of the present industries and reviving the manufacture of baskets and brooms. 4. The Committee of Visitors have read the report for the year and have recorded a few remarks, mainly on the subject of the improvements required in the Asylum buildings. This subject is being dealt with in the Public Works Department. By order of the Chief Commissioner, D. H. R. TWOMEY, Officiating Secretary.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1892. From Surgeon-Major P. W. DALZELL, Officiating Inspector-General of Jails with Civil Medical Administra- tion, Burma, to the Junior Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) damp and cold. Most of the clothing in use was made in the asylum from material purchased from the jail and elsewhere. Diet.( 3 ) Statement IV.( 4 ) source of mental aberration appears to be " grief," under which head may be grouped the emotions arising from the loss of property, disappointment in love, domestic trouble, poverty, &c. Statement VIII.( 5 ) matter was not reported to him until 4 P.M. of the day following, or about 18 hours after the occurrence. The investigation made by him at the time con- vinced him that the offence had been committed; and he states that the watch- men in question were by his orders placed within the criminal enclosure pending the arrival of the police. A night watchman named Shaik Fareed was placed in charge of them, but they escaped over the wall with the aid, it is believed, of the watchman in question. At any rate he gave the alarm after they had got away and a search in the neighbourhood was then made. Soola- man was arrested, but Ramswamy got away and still remains at large. Both Soolaman and Shaik Fareed were charged and tried: the former for rape and the latter for allowing the accused to escape from custody, but both were dis- charged by order of the Court. 1891. 1892. Rs. Rs. Superintendence ... ... 3,000 3,000 Establishment ... ... ... 6,969 7,405 Diet ... ... ... 15,168 17,584 Clothing ... ... ... 692 1,156 Bazaar medicine ... ... 139 83 Forms and stationery ... ... 100 ... English stores ... ... ... 205 *204 Contingencies ... ... ... 1,152 442 Total ... 27,425 29,874 * Incorporated by book entry and therefore not shown in Satement IX. Statement IX,( 6 ) Comparative statement of the establishments of the Colaba, Dullunda, and Rangoon Lunatic Asylums. Establishment. COLABA LUNATIC ASYLUM, BOMBAY. DULLUNDA LUNATIC ASYLUM, BENGAL. RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM. No. Montly wages. No. Monthly wages. No. Monthly wages. Rs. A. Rs. Rs. Superintendent ... ... ... 1 625 0 1 ... 1 250 Deputy Superintendent ... ... ... ... ... 1 250 1 200 Apothecary or Assistant Surgeon ... ... 1 230 0 ... ... ... ... Hospital Assistant ... ... ... ... ... 1 10 1 75 Head Overseer ... ... ... 1 70 0 ... ... ... ... Second Overseer ... ... ... 1 60 0 ... ... ... ... Steward ... ... ... ... 1 60 0 ... ... ... ... Matron ... ... ... ... 1 45 0 1 50 ... ... Clerk ... ... ... ... 1 40 0 1 60 ... ... Compounder ... ... ... ... 1 18 0 ... ... ... ... Head Jemadar ... ... ... 2 28 0 1 20 1 40 1 15 2 20 Second Jemadar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 20 Male-keeper, 1st class ... ... ... 12 144 0 ... ... 7 98 Male-keeper, 2nd class ... ... ... 20 200 0 ... ... 1 13 Male-keeper, 3rd class ... ... ... ... ... 22 176 2 24 Female Warder ... ... ... 5 60 0 ... ... 2 28 Washermen ... ... ... 2 30 0 1 12 ... ... Master cook ... ... ... 1 14 0 1 10 ... ... Ordinary cook ... ... ... 3 30 0 1 7 ... ... Watchmen ... ... ... ... 2 32 0 ... ... 2 30 Watchmen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 84 Bhisti ... ... ... ... 2 20 0 1 10 ... ... 1 7 Barber ... ... ... ... 3 27 0 1 8 1 12 Sweeper ... ... ... ... 9 111 8 ... ... ... ... Carpenter ... ... ... ... 1 18 0 ... ... ... ... Mason ... ... ... ... 1 15 0 ... ... ... ... Tailor ... ... ... ... 1 10 0 ... ... ... ... Store-boy ... ... ... ... 1 12 0 ... ... ... ... Durwan ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 16 1 18 Lamp-lighter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 15 Mallee ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 10 ... ... Baker, head ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mehter ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 56 ... ... Mehtrani ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 40 ... ... Hurkara ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 6 ... ... Darogah ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ward-boy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Milkman ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 15 Mehter, head ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 10 ... ... Total ... 73 1,899 8 55 793 29 922 Daily average of males ... 224.5 216.40 237.79 Daily average of females ... 56.2 44.75 26.88 280.7 261.15 264.67 Jemadar to males ... ... ... 1 to 112.2 1 to 54.10 1 to 118.89 Jemadar to females ... ... ... 1 to 28.1 1 to 11.19 1 to 13.44 Male-keeper to males ... ... ... 1 to 7.0 1 to 9.83 1 to 23.78 Female-keeper to females ... ... 1 to 11.2 1 to 8.95 1 to 13.44 Statement XI.( 7 ) The payments into the treasury of money realized by the sale of asylum products and asylum labour amount to Rs. 2,784-4-3, which is considerably less than the realizations of the year previous. The amount is made up of the follow- ing items, which are placed side by side with the figures of the previous two years :( 8 ) It is satisfactory to note an improvement in the receipts under carpentry, but this is discounted by the falling off of the receipts under extramural labour. The Superintendent has ventured upon no explanation of this. I believe there is considerable scope for the development of this mode of finding remunerative employment for the inmates of the asylum. Gardening, drawing water, and keeping compounds clear of rank vegetation may be undertaken for people in the cantonments by yearly contract. The credits noted in columns 7 and 8 have been ascertained after a careful inventory of the present stock of raw materials, manufactured articles, live stock, plant and machinery. The debits in columns 10, 11, and 12 correspond with the closing credits of the previous year, but in stock-taking they were found to be altogether wrong and misleading. The figures appear to have been brought forward year after year, and apparently the various officers in charge of the asylum have taken them for granted without verification. The total of the credits for the year is therefore Rs. 5,868-15-1, from which, taking the debits as stated Rs. 3,792-4-6, is left an excess credit balance of Rs. 2,076-10-7. This resolves itself into a net profit of only Rs. 819-8-7 as shown in column 19. General.( 9 ) No. I.( 10 ) No. I.( 11 ) No. II.( 12 ) No. III.( 13 ) No. VI.( 14 ) No. VII.( 15 ) No. VII.( 16 ) No. VIII.( 17 ) Deaths during the year 1892. No. Name. Date of admission into the asylum. State of health. Date of last admission into the hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. 1 Nga Lugle ... ... 21st January 1890 ... Bad ... 1st January 1892 ... 32 5th January 1892 ... Paralysis and intermit- tent fever. Serous effusion in ventricles of brain, brain substance soft, liver and lung congested. 2 Nga Hpaw ... ... 9th January 1889 ... Fair ... 19th August 1891 ... 30 6th January 1892 ... Chronic diarrh(18) No. IX.( 19 ) No. X.( 20 ) No. XI.( 21 ) Abstract of Expenditure. ESTABLISHMENT. DIET. CLOTHING AND BEDDING. MEDICINES. CONTINGENCIES. GRAND TOTAL. Total cost. Cost per head of aver- age strength. Total cost. Cost per head of aver- age strength. Total cost. Cost per head of aver- age strength. Total cost. Cost per head of aver- age strength. Total cost. Cost per head of aver- age strength. Total cost. Cost per head of aver- age strength. Rs. 10,405 Rs. 39-5-0 Rs. 17,584-4-1 Rs. 66-7-0 Rs. 1,155-15-0 Rs. 4-5-10 Rs. 286-12-6* Rs. 1-1-4 Rs. 1,362-6-6 Rs. 5-2-4 Rs. 30,794-6-1 Rs. 116-5-7 * Includes Rs. 203-14-9 cost of English medicines incorporated by book entry and therefore not shown in Statement IX. Note by the Committee of Visitors, dated the 31st December 1892. THE Committee had before them the annual report of the asylum for the year 1892 and they made the following remarks :