REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1893. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1894. [ Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1893. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1894.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. RESOLUTION BY THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER. Para. Page Changes made in Asylum establishment ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Insufficiency of accommodation in Asylum owing to adoption of certain Bengal Rules in connection with criminal lunatics ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. Asylum statistics ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ib. Average of criminal lunatics confined in the Central Jail temporarily ... ... 4 2 Expenditure and establishment ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ib. Enquiry as to maintenance of pauper lunatics by Municipalities in Upper Burma ... 6 ib. Remarks in Visitors'book ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ib. Services of officers ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 3 REPORT ON THE LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. Page. Prefatory remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Situation, buildings, accommodation, &c ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. Accommodation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Water-supply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 Conservancy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Drainage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. Clothing and bedding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. Diet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 The Asylum vegetable and flower gardens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. The Asylum dairy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 General treatment of lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 Hygienic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. Medical ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. Forcible feeding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 Escapes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. Relating to the statements submitted with the report ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Mortality ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 Concluding remarks ... ... ... ... ... 23 APPENDICES. Page. Statement No. 1.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1893. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. percentage of 16.9. Although considerable attention has been devoted to this mortality, its causes remain obscure. The clothing of the inmates should be carefully looked to during the coming wet season. It is noteworthy that only seven of the deceased lunatics had been over five years in the Asylum, and there is no reason to believe that any defect in the sanitary condition of the Asylum caused the high mortality. 4. Owing to insufficient accommodation in the Asylum, a daily average number of 63 criminal lunatics was, during the year under review, detained in the Rangoon Central Jail. When the present extension is completed there will be sufficient accommodation for all lunatics, both civil and criminal, including those now detained in the Rangoon Central Jail, and they will be placed under the care of the same medical officer. 5. The expenditure is shown as Rs. 31,408, including Rs. 31,189 drawn from the treasury and Rs. 218 spent on English stores and medicines. The cost of buildings and repairs and of forms and stationery is not given. It is evident that a return which excludes all Public Works Department expenditure gives a very inadequate idea of the burden imposed on the State by the care of lunatics. If the figures for the calendar year are difficult to obtain, the inclusion of those for the preceding financial year would be less misleading than leaving the columns blank. In the preceding year the expenditure out of the treasury was Rs. 30,640 for a daily average strength of 265, while in 1893 the daily average strength was 255. There was a decrease in cost of food from Rs. 17,584 to Rs. 15,911, but the cost of establishment shows an increase, which, after considering page 22 of the report, is hard to understand. The greatest increase was in contingencies and miscellaneous items, which rose from Rs. 1,362 to Rs. 2,602. This may have been due to extra issues of clothing, but the growth of this miscellaneous expendi- ture must be carefully watched and checked. The principle according to which column 4 of Statement IX has been left blank is not understood, and the figure of Rs. 742 entered in column 4 of Statement XI does not tally with the figures regarding vegetables and milk given at pages 8 and 9 of the report. The matter is further complicated by the fact that the Asylum had to buy both milk and vegetables from outside and by a change in the system of accounts. The pro- duce of the Asylum industries, including both what was consumed in the institu- tion and what was sold to the public, realised Rs. 4,776 against Rs. 4,254 in the preceding year. The improvement is small. Floriculture, than which no better employment for lunatics can be desired, should be at once resumed, and the culti- vation of vegetables should be extended. 6. The Chief Commissioner does not consider that Municipalities in Upper Burma, except that of Mandalay, can yet afford to pay for pauper civil lunatics. The Rangoon Municipality receives a contribution from the Port Fund which may perhaps be supposed to cover, among other things, the maintenance of lunatic ex- sailors. Enquiry will be made as to the practice in other Indian ports and orders will then be passed regarding the particular case mentioned by the Superintend- ent. It would have been more convenient if the Superintendent had referred the question separately. 7. The visitors have recorded some practical remarks on the report. The Chief Commissioner will bring to the notice of Magistrates the desirability of col-
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 3 lecting and sending to the Asylum all available information about a lunatic's pre- vious history which indicates the cause of his insanity. 8. The report is both interesting and well written. Surgeon-Lieutenant- Colonel Baker, though he had been only in charge of the Asylum for the last six weeks of the year under report, evidently took great pains to make himself master of all the details of its working, and the Chief Commissioner is satisfied that the management of the institution is now in good hands. The late Superin- tendent of the Asylum, Surgeon-Major Dantra, also devoted much time and attention to it and pointed out the reforms which he considered necessary. By order of the Chief Commissioner, F. C. GATES, Secretary.
From Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel D. SINCLAIR, M.B., Inspector-General of Jails with Civil Medical Administration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) 5. Recently, when visiting one of the largest and best managed asylums in Scotland, the Physician Superintendent, a gentleman of exceptional experience and of world-wide renown as a specialist, assured me that he looked on the management of institutions for the treatment of the insane where no escapes took place with grave suspicion, as the best results were obtainable where fewest re- strictions were imposed. He was speaking of non-criminal insanes. I saw from the arrangements obtaining in his asylum that the principle just enunciated was given full effect to, but whilst I concur in the view of the Committee that keepers should not be too readily punished for negligence on occasions of escape, I think it would be unwise in this country to do anything which would tend to lessen in their minds the importance of constant vigilance. The other points referred to by the Committee do not seem to me to call for remarks. 6. There remain to be noticed some few matters which are dealt with in the body of the report:( 3 ) the vicinity of dwellings and wells, without endangering health or polluting the water-supply, and, if properly gone about, with little or no discomfort or un- pleasantness. On a piece of garden land in front of the Rangoon Central Jail, measuring 9½ acres, besides enormous quantities of organic refuse of every de- scription from the prison cook-house and work-yard, some 30,000 or 40,000 tons of human excreta( 4 ) during 1892 and 1891, and that 2 of those admitted during 1892 (Nos. 9 and 33 on the casualty-roll) went almost straight to hospital, which they never quitted. Only 5 on the roll are shown as having been received into the asylum in good health. Fluctuating and high death-rates are characteristic of all asylum returns, but it is sincerely to be hoped that the efforts now being made to reduce mortality will prove successful. (i) The comments by the Superintendent on Statements IX, X and XI seem to need little or no criticism. Municipalities in Upper Burma are still too poor, I fear, to maintain their pauper lunatics. In industries requiring any degree of skill the asylum cannot hope to compete with the Jail. The Superintendent should give his attention to farming and horticulture and such unskilled labour as compound cleaning, &c. The average cost of each inmate of the asylum comes to Rs. 123, whereas natives in the Rangoon Central Jail cost under Rs. 70 per head.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1893. Prefatory remarks.2 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. The buildings are for the most part suitable. The condition, however, of the cottages for civil males requires notice. Several of these houses are becom- ing much the worse for constant wear, and, although they are suited to the wants of cleanly and quiet lunatics, they are not any longer fit for the accommodation of insanes who are dirty in their habits or liable to become violent in their be- haviour. The floors are so uneven that, when soiled with excrement, it is difficult to clean them, and the walls so weak that any lunatic can kick them down at will. Consequently the cottages are sometimes ill-smelling, and occasionally lunatics break their way out, and escape from them. When the Chief Commissioner visited the Asylum on the 14th June last, he remarked : " The pucca floors of the cottage barracks crack and are difficult to keep clean. The cement should be removed when funds will allow and be re-placed by zinc plates." But the Superintending Engineer has reported : "The buildings are not worth spending much money on. I would request your opinion on this subject, when an estimate for the work necessary will be prepared and sent in." This matter has now been referred to the Inspector-General of Prisons for the favour of his opinion, and, as soon as his reply is received, the subject will be laid before the Asylum Committee of Management. Comprised among the many buildings in the civil male enclosure are three small detached structures, formerly used for the accommodation of supposed insanes and called " observation cells," but styled, on the plan which accom- panies this report, " cottages formerly padded" (vide Nos. 19, 20, and 21). The designation " observation cells " is singularly inappropriate, since, unless the doors are open, it is not possible to see inside these cells. Their construction is such that they defeat the very object for which they were used, and they are not occu- pied by the lunatics. Reference is made to these cells for the purpose of invit- ing attention to the fact that there is not in the whole Asylum any place in which supposed insanes, sent for medical observation, can be suitably accommodated. This matter is of some importance, seeing it has become a very common prac- tice to send persons suspected of being lunatics into the Asylum for medical observation. Major Raikes, C.I.E., Officiating Commissioner of Pegu, on finding, when he visited the Asylum in August 1893, that there was no separate accommodation for supposed lunatics in the female enclosure, made the following remarks on the subject in the Visitors' Book:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 3 shows that there exists a need for a suitably constructed and favourably situated observation ward. There are no cells in the Asylum for the confinement of violent female insanes, and consequently, when any of the female lunatics become uproarious, they have to be taken into the civil male enclosure and confined in the cells provided for turbulent males. The matter was represented to the Managing Committee at the last monthly meeting. The Asylum is not provided with any strong-rooms, and, although cells are, in a sense, strong-rooms, they are not suitable places for the confinement of insane persons bent on self-destruction. The most suitable kind of strong-room for this country is to be seen in the General Hospital, where there are two such rooms. The walls should be 10 feet high and lined on the inside with polished planks, very accurately set; on two sides of the room the walling should be cut away at the bottom for a height of one foot from the floor, and the space so made closed with an iron grating. The inside of the door should be lined in a similar manner to the walls, so that the whole interior of the strong-room should, excepting for the grated openings, present a perfectly smooth and even surface. The requirements of the Asylum in this direction can economically be sup- plied in either of the two following ways : 4 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. ned. When the Chief Commissioner inspected the Asylum in June 1893 he pointed out that the hospital accommodation was both inadequate and defective, and he determined that a new hospital should be forthwith built. I am unable to say why no demand for this urgently necessary reform had been made at an earlier date ; but I am competent to state that many years ago the use of the hospital was abandoned and the building suffered to remain empty. At the period to which I refer the hospital was held in one of the civil male insane cot- tages. Two of these cottages were set apart for the purpose, and the sick were removed, day after day, from one cottage to the other. In concluding this notice of the Asylum buildings it is to be observed that the additions being made to the Asylum do not provide for any of the wants to which I have drawn attention. On the contrary, these wants will grow more acute in proportion to the increase of the Asylum population. The province of Burma contains, I believe, the most extensive jail to be found in the eastern dominions of the British Empire, and it now stands in a fair way of securing the distinction of also possessing the largest lunatic asylum in the whole of India. Accommodation.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 5 Table showing accommodation of Asylum Buildings. Class. Description of accommodation. No. Superficial area in square feet. Capacity at 50 su- perficial feet per inmate. Total ac- commoda- tion. Remarks. Males, crimi- nals Cells ... 76 ... ...... ... 76 Males, ci- vils. Cells ... 10 ... ...... ... 10 12 1 35'6" × 19' = 674' ... 14 168 Hospital cottage. European cot- tage, now used for natives. 2 2 (17'6" × 17') = 595' 12 3 18' × 36' = 648' ... 13 4 18' × 36' = 648' ... 13 5 18' × 36' = 648' ... 13 6 18' × 36' = 648' ... 13 Cottages ... 7 18' × 36' = 648' ... 13 8 18 × 36' = 648' ... 13 9 18' × 36' = 648' ... 13 10 18' × 36' = 648' ... 13 11 30'8" × 30'8"= 940... 19 Built for conta- gious diseases, now used as dormitories. 12 30'8" × 30'8" = 940. 19 Total accommodation for civil males. ... 178 Females of both classes. Cottages ... 3 1 2(18'4" × 18'4") = 672' 14 38 2 35'6" × 17'6" = 621' 12 3 35'6" × 17'6" = 621' 12 GRAND TOTAL ... ... 292 Water-supply.6 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. desirable to subject this water to further analysis during the rainy season, when percolation through the excreta-laden soil will be in active operation:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 7 suitable and sufficient clothing and bedding to the inmates of an asylum is an important administrative unit in asylum management. No scale of clothing and bedding for the use of the lunatics confined in the Rangoon Asylum has ever been authoritatively laid down; at any rate I can find no record of any such scale, and the subordinate officials of the Asylum deny its existence. Shortly after assuming charge of the Asylum I drew up the following scale for future guidance :8 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. According to the diet scales published in previous annual reports the European insanes are not supposed to get any vegetables or cooking oil. This is, I think, an oversight; and I need hardly say that a sufficiency of vegetables and cooking oil is and always has been issued to them, although the supplies have not hitherto been charged for in the diet bills. It would seem that during the past year the vegetable known as " roselle " was issued with such monotonous frequency that certain of the inmates in possession of their senses asked to be supplied with some other kind for a change ; they tersely said, so the Assistant Surgeon explains, that they " could. not possibly eat roselle morning and evening any longer." This bears out the statement of the present overseer that the vegetable " roselle " was largely culti- vated to the exclusion of other varieties. Labour.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 9 The first claim on the produce resulting from the cultivation of its garden rightly belongs to the Asylum, and outside sales should not take place until this legitimate demand is satisfied. It may not have been easy to produce through- out the year a daily supply corresponding to the daily demand ; but the difficulty is one which can, I think, with a little more attention to detail, be overcome. In former years there were fairly large sales to the public of flowers grown in the flower garden of the Asylum, and a substantial sum of money was realized by the sale of Asylum flowers. It is hard to understand why this pleasure-yield- ing and profitable industry has been suffered to decline during the last few years. In the Asylum report for 1890 the Superintendent of the institution refers to the Asylum grounds in the following terms : They " are well laid out and well kept, " the walks always clean and tidy, the Deputy Superintendent paying great atten- " tion to this and the garden, so that the premises have a cheerful appearance." The aspect of the Asylum grounds at the present time is not calculated to promote cheerfulness. There are very few flowering shrubs to be found in the Asylum demesne, while the rose trees have almost entirely disappeared. The front portion of the garden has been largely denuded of its flowers from their being transplanted in order to clear the ground for grass plots. While unfortu- nately but very few of the plants survived the ordeal of transplanting, the grass plots for which they made way are too small in extent to be either useful or ornamental. Efforts will be made, as soon as the rains have set in, to resuscitate Asylum floriculture. The Asylum dairy.10 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. The net results of the Asylum milk business for the last three years are contrasted in the table below :REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 11 treated in the usual way; and apart from these cases there has not been during the year of report any very active administration of drugs. Easton's syrup, an invaluable tonic, consisting of phosphate of iron, quinine, and strychnine, has been extensively used both to promote appetite and counteract debility. Sedatives, of which bromide of potassium is the most popular, have found their usual sphere of usefulness. Since I assumed charge of the Asylum the sedatives most frequently em- ployed have been a combination of bromide of potassium and cannabis sativa for use during the day, and either sulphonal or hyoscyamine by hypodermic injection at night. These are all very reliable medicines, both as sedatives and hypnotics. In the annual report of the Asylum for the year 1889 there are some interesting remarks on the action of sulphonal. The writer, Surgeon-Colonel Griffith (retired), therein states that according to his experience the dose of sulphonal requires to be " increased frequently " and that " when discontinued a more excited form of sleeplessness results." Inasmuch as these opinions are the very opposite of the views held by all recognized authorities on therapeutics who have investigated the action of sulphonal, they are certainly very curious. This observer further states he has found sulphonal useful in the " furore of epilepsy," but as the expression " furore of epilepsy" is liable to be misunderstood the addition thus made to the literature of sulphonal loses much of its value. Forcible feeding.12 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. Statement of Lunatics who escaped from the custody of the Asylum authorities during the year 1893. Serial No. Names. Civil or crimi- nal. Nature of madness. Mental condition at time of escape. Date of admission to Asylum Date of escape. Date of re-capture. Remarks. 1 Abbas Ali ... Civil... Imbecility ... Insane, but quiet and hardworking. 27th May 1892. 2nd January 1893. 4th January 1893 Escaped from the compound of Government House, where he was cutting grass along with five other lunatics in charge of one warder. The warder was fined Rs. 20 by the Junior Assistant Magistrate. 2 Nga Waing ... Do ... Melancholia... Insane, quiet and hardworking. 28th April 1885. 18th January 1893. Escaped from the Asylum garden. The warder in charge was sentenced to one month's simple imprisonment by the Junior Assistant Magistrate. 3 Abdool ... Do ... Mania Insane; quiet, but very lazy and re- fused to work. 19th November 1892. 28th January 1893. 10th February 1893. Escaped from the criminal enclosure at about II A.M. by climbing over the wall with the assistance of two large night- soil tubs. The warder on duty was sentenced to one month's simple imprisonment. 4 Nga Po Kyin... Do ... Do Sane ... ... 11th January 1893. 14th April 1893. Escaped from the Asylum cookshed where he was employed in whitewashing. The warder in charge was fined Rs. 20 by the Junior Assistant Magistrate. 5 Nga Shwe Oh... Do ... Do Insane, but very talk- ative and harmless. 10th November 1892. 28th May 1893. 16th August 1893 This lunatic, along with another, was sent out in charge of a warder with food for a gang of six lunatics employed in cleaning the Royal Artillery Mess compound. When near the Shwe Dagôn Pagoda, Nga Shwe Oh wandered away. The warder was sentenced to one month's simple im- prisonment. 6 Dorasawmy ... Do ... Melancholia... Insane; quiet, harm- less, but refused to do any work. 10th May 1893. 4th July 1893. Escaped during the night from cottage No. 5 by breaking out a plank in the walling. The warder on duty was sentenced to one month's simple imprisonment. 7 Seo Golam ... Do ... Do Insane and very troublesome. 21st June 1893. 13th April 1893. 4th October 1893 Escaped during the night through one of the hospital win- dows (seven weeks later he re-appeared at the Asylum gate and asked for some money that was due to him. He was then sent back into the Asylum). Six warders who were on duty that night were each fined 14 days' pay. None of them could tell at what time or how the escape took place. The open window furnished the only evidence. 8 Kong Chaing ... Do ... Mania Insane, but quiet and harmless. 10th November 1891. 1st December 1893. 12th December 1893. Escaped in the early morning from the Asylum garden. The warder in charge, a careless man, was fined half a month's pay and dismissed.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 13 Two other lunatics made unsuccessful attempts to escape, of which the following description may be given : (1) In the early morning of the 3rd December, while the female lunatics were being led out from their cottages to the work-shed, Ma Gyi managed to get on the top of the enclosure wall close to the well. She jumped down into the garden outside and, in so doing, sprained her left ankle severely. She was seen, followed, and overtaken. (2) Nga Lo, a civil lunatic, on the 19th December at 7 P.M., broke out two planks in the walling of the cottage No. 7 in which he was confined and ran away carrying in his hand a broken piece of one of the planks. The Overseer followed and caught him before he had got far from the gate. The remarks in the table of escapes show that four of these runaways were employed extramurally at the time of their escape and that four got away from the Asylum buildings. The escape from the criminal enclosure was not credit- able, and the warder in charge was, I think, justly punished. But, unless there is very strong evidence that the warders from whose custody lunatics may have escaped have been guilty of the grossest negligence, I should not for several reasons consider it either just or wise to prosecute them criminally. It will be seen that no criminal insane escaped during the year. Now there are several criminals who are perfectly sane, and it is a singular circumstance that not one of their number made so much as an attempt to escape. That the obstacles to escape by the criminal lunatics are far from insur- mountable is shown by the fact that a civil insane effected his escape from the criminal section of the Asylum by easily scaling the wall. The wall of the criminal enclosure is high only in a relative sense; it is not high enough to imprison sane men bent on escaping, nor are the gates of the enclosure anything like secure enough to prevent determined men forcing them. It may, I think, be allowed that the sane criminals in confinement in the Asylum could escape if they were so minded. Then why don't they go ? The answer is, I think, to be found in the circumstance that these men hope by good conduct in the Asylum to obtain their liberty and be sent back to their homes. It is true they are criminals in the eyes of the law, but they are not habitual thieves, nor dacoits, nor are they a curse to society, and they look for ultimate pardon. By escaping they would not only forefeit all claim to clemency, but being unknown outside the Asylum, excepting at their own homes and villages, they would be forced to return to their relatives, where prompt re-capture would await them. Convicts who attempt to escape from jails are not deterred by such like considerations. Since the Asylum was first occupied in 1871, only two criminal lunatics who had become sane have escaped. Unless they are imprisoned like convicts a certain number of lunatics will escape from the custody of their attendants. When no escapes take place from an Asylum it may, I am informed, be safely inferred that the institution is not properly conducted. Relating to the statements submitted with the report.14 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. Statement II, which relates only to criminal lunatics, demonstrates that at the beginning of the year there were 81 of this class in the Asylum and at the close 84, while the daily average number was 80.93. To arrive at the number of civil insanes in confinement the figures from Statement II must be deducted from those taken from Statement I. By doing this it is found that at the beginning of the year the number of civil lunatics in the Asylum was 184 and at the end of the year 169, while the daily average number was 173.81. The following table exhibits the results of similar calculations for the past decade:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 15 a report on their mental condition and, when this document reaches the Magis- trate concerned, he, guided by it, either orders the persons in question to be detained in the Asylum or to be set at liberty; and until the Magistrate's orders are received the individuals under observation are designated " supposed lu- natics." The following table shows the results of police intervention in Rangoon in this matter during the past three years:16 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. Statement III, showing the religion, sex, and residence of patients admitted into the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 17 in last year's figures, I had them examined and compared with the Register of admissions. The figures given in the first line of the statement for this year are now in correspondence with the Asylum Registers as they stood on the 31st December 1892 with two exceptions. One of the changes made consists in transferring from column 7 to column 8 an Austrian prostitute who was removed to the Asylum from the General Hospital, where she was under my treatment for syphilitic disease of the brain ; and the other in taking a patient from column 4, a criminal male insane who recovered his reason shortly after his admission to the Asylum. This man was on the one hand said to be suffering from a type of incurable insanity, while on the other he was declared and reported to be sane by the Asylum visitors. For a man to be suffering from the incurable mental malady " Im- becility acquired," which is the diagnosis in the case book, and yet to be in full pos- session of his senses was indeed a surprising anomaly. He has been placed in Column II, Mania, and the necessary corrections both in his case and in that of the Austrian prostitute have been made in the Register of admissions. It is to be hoped further mistakes will not occur, since correcting them entails a considerable amount of labour. In considering the errors noted here and elsewhere, some of which are of long standing, it must not be forgotten that the returns' of this Asylum have hitherto been compiled by an industrious but untutored Jemadar. Although the types of disease shown in the return are now in agreement with the entries given in the registers, I have not, excepting for the cases quite recently admitted, any share in the responsibility of diagnosing these types. Notwithstanding that the accurate diagnosis of mental derangements often abounds in difficulties, no special skill is required for the recognition of general paralysis of the insane, a physical as well as a mental malady, characterized by pathognomonic symptoms which are to be easily observed. I should not have referred to this subject were it not that, although general paralysis of the insane is unknown to occur among Natives of India domiciled throughout their lives at home, no less than three cases of this disease are re- corded in the return under consideration. One of the subjects is a Eurasian male who presents typical symptoms of the malady. But in respect of the other two, a Chinaman and a Burmese female, errors have obviously been made in diagnosis, for neither of these persons has any of the symptoms of general paralysis of the insane. The Chinaman suffers from some gross lesion of the brain, of which the most prominent symptom is hemiplegia, while the Burmese female is afflicted with ataxy of an obscure kind in association with insanity. Whereas in general paralysis death, as a rule, takes place within three years from the onset of the disease, both the patients whose cases are cited have al- ready been inmates of the Asylum for close on four years. From the circumstances related it may, I think, be concluded that Burmans born and brought up on their native soil are, similarly with Natives of India, as yet exempt from general paralysis of the insane. The absence of correspondence between the causes of insanity shown in Statement VII and the types of insanity resulting from these causes shown in Statement VI invites remark; but I am not able to enter into a consideration of this interesting question. Spirit-drinking which is stated (vide admissions in Statement VII) to have caused insanity in 11 instances has contributed the following figures to State- ment VI,18 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. Of the 69 admissions the cause was ascertained in only 31 instances. The most instructive feature in this relationship is that among the cases wherein the cause was discovered " drink " was responsible for no less than 35.5 per cent. of the admissions and that insanity having its origin in the abuse of opium was conspicuous by its absence. Statement VIII, showing the return of sick in the hospital of the Lunatic Asylum, Rangoon, for the year 1893.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 19 The results were arrived at from a consideration of the statistics of the Metropo- litan District Asylums and the general London population. The following table gives the causes of mortality in the Asylum during the year of report:20 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. The perusal of the registers and journals of the institution affords little or no instruction, and of oral testimony there is practically none, for so many changes have taken place in the personnel of the Asylum establishment that of the subordinates of a superior grade who were in office at the beginning of the year only one remains. It will be seen then on what slender foundation any conclusion I may draw of the prevalence of this disease must rest. If any changes in the general management and treatment of the insane population likely to conduce to the prevention of dysentry had been adopted and had been followed by a decided diminution of the disease, the task before me would be easy of performance. No change in the direction indicated has, however, been introduced, nevertheless there is little or no dysentery in the Asylum at the present time. A special enquiry into the condition of the bowels among such of the Asylum population as had lost weight and were showing indications of failing health was recently undertaken, but the investigation did not lead to the detection of a single case of dysentery. The mortality from general debility does not call for any special conside- ration. Dementia and debility are closely related, and the true cause of death in many of these so-called cases of debility is probably insanity. The tendency to death among cases of dementia cannot be overcome and, in spite of all that is or can be done, early death is often inevitable. The health of insanes will frequently fail from causes quite beyond control; with them disease is not a necessary precursor, or associate, of death. Progres- sive extinction of life will often occur without the presence of any definite disease. The inmates of a lunatic asylum should be regarded as sick persons requir- ing special care. They should be well-housed, well-clothed, well-fed, and pro- vided with an ample staff of attendants. I do not think that sufficient attention is paid to the wants of the lunatics in some of these matters. There are only two small sheds in the Asylum for the accommodation throughout the day of about 220 male insanes, and overcrowding is inevitable. These sheds, consisting of open-battened walls with shingled roofs, are well adapted for the hot weather, but in the cold weather and in the rains they afford but poor protection to the lunatics. The Chief Commissioner recognized the necessity for more worksheds when he visited the Asylum in June 1892. Additional and better sheds are urgently required. The lunatics are not provided with clothing suited to the varying conditions of the year, and indeed no definite and fixed scale of clothing or bedding for in- sanes has, as far as I can discover, ever been adopted. Their destructive ten- dencies largely interfere with the issue of more than one suit of raiment at a time, and in the cold and rainy weather they are doubtless often insufficiently clad. In marching to and from their cottages, which are scattered over the Asylum grounds, at the close and opening of the day, they must occasionally become exposed to rain and get chilled and wet. During the cold weather, with the thermometer in the early morning often standing at 6o° Fahrenheit, or less, exceptional precautions to obviate chill are called for. Seeing that the sheds used by them during the day afford but little or no protection against the cold, the lunatics should not be taken from their relatively warm dormitories at too early an hour, and such as are, through enfeeblement or mental incapacity for work, condemned to idleness should be very warmly clad. The strength of the Asylum establishment is unequal to the requirements of the lunatics. Many of the insanes need a great deal of attention, and such as are too infirm to work require to have facilities given them for the exercise of their limbs. Nearly all the warders are fully employed on strictly administrative duties, so that the number available as attendants on the insane is inadequate. The warder staff requires increasing. Statement IX, showing the cash account of the Lunatic Asylum for the year 1893.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 21 present available, and since it does not closely relate to the working of the Asy- lum, it is thought desirable to submit the statement in its present form rather than delay any longer the submission of the report. The sum of Rs. 11,249-6-8 shown under receipts from paying patients con- sist of the following:22 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. diem. Possibly the cost of his maintenance would be more properly defrayed out of funds at the disposal of the Port Trust. I mention the matter in order that it may come to the attention of the authorities concerned. I cannot help thinking that Magistrates should not issue orders for the State to take charge of and indefinitely maintain civil lunatics without first obtaining the clearest evidence that the guardians of the lunatics in question are unable to pay for or contribute towards their maintenance. There is a Eurasian congenital idiot in the Asylum whose maintenance charges of Re. 1 per day are paid by the Rangoon Municipality. He is occasionally visit- ed and supplied with clothes by those who formerly had charge of him. Possi- bly they could, if requisitioned, contribute towards his maintenance. The outlay under Contingencies proper is abnormally large owing to the cost of providing the Asylum with 121 new locks to replace old ones considered inse- cure and unserviceable. Statement X, showing the sanctioned establishment of the Rangoon Lunatic Asylum as it stood on the 31st December 1893.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1893. 23 not been a success during the past year, and more attention is now being paid to their development. Extramural labour realized Rs. 174-0-11 in excess of last year's results, and a supply of fuel, obtained from the Asylum grounds, was sold to the contractor for the respectable sum of Rs. 547-5-3. In comparing the results of this with previous years, which is done in the fol- lowing table of cash receipts from all sources, it must be pointed out that the practice of making cash sales of vegetables and milk to the Asylum was put a stop to during the year of report. The sums of Rs. 178-3-2 and Rs. 358-3-0 representing respectively the value, adjusted by book transfer, of vegetables and milk supplied to the Asylum during 1893 are not shown in this statement, which relates only to cash actually deposited by the Asylum in the treasury. 1893. 1892. 1891. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A P. Manufactures and industries. Vegetables ... 651 11 7 1,135 11 4 1,013 11 6 Flowers ... 37 13 9 9 0 0 15 11 6 Coir ... 14 6 0 31 8 0 35 0 0 Milk ... 1,184 13 0 1,677 7 9 1,558 0 0 Baskets ... 83 4 0 5 6 0 1,627 10 0 Carpentry ... 274 9 9 484 6 9 202 2 0 Insane labour ... 1,084 10 2 910 9 3 1,280 0 0 Total ... 3,331 5 0 4,254 1 1 5,732 3 0 Miscellaneous Maintenance ... 11,249 6 8 11,383 14 11 11,471 4 4 Broken rice ... *155 3 10 ... 67 8 0 Fuel ... ... 547 5 3 ... ... Oil tin ... ... *0 12 3 ... 9 2 0 Fines ... ... 30 12 6 ... 86 0 0 Total ... 11,983 8 6 11,383 14 11 11,633 14 4 GRAND TOTAL ... 15314 13 6 15,637 15 0 17,366 1 4 Concluding remarks.APPENDICES.
APPENDICES. iii. STATEMENT No. I.iv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. I.APPENDICES. v. STATEMENT No. II.vi. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. III.APPENDICES. vii. STATEMENT No. VI.viii. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VII.APPENDICES. ix. STATEMENT No. VII.x. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VIII.APPENDICES. xi. Deaths during the year 1893. No. Names. Date of admission into the Asylum. State of health. Date of last admission into the hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. 1 Marriam Bee ... ... 5th January 1892 ... Fair ... 15th August 1892 ... 28 1st January 1893 ... Intermittent fever ... No post mortem owing to objection of relatives. 2 Nga Me Lo ... ... 4th November 1890 ... Do ... 1st January 1893 ... 32 2nd January 1893 ... Pneumonia ... Congestion of the right lung (under treatment from 4th September 1892 for diarrhxii. APPENDICES. Deaths during the year 1893APPENDICES. xiii. STATEMENT No. IX.xiv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. X.APPENDICES. xv. STATEMENT No. XI.xvi. APPENDICES. Remarks on the Annual Report of the Asylum for the year 1893 recorded by the Committee of Visitors,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1893. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1894. [Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1894. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1895. [ Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1894. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1895.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. RESOLUTION BY THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER. Para. Page. Changes in the subordinate management of the asylum ... ... ... 1 1 Remarks on the formation of cells ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. Population of the asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Expenditure during year ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ib. Maintenance of lunatic ex-sailors ... ... ... ... ... 5 3 Recognition of Dr. Baker's services ... ... ... ... ... 6 ib. REPORT ON THE LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. Introductory remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Changes in subordinate staff ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. Appointment of Assistant Surgeon Reilly as Deputy Superintendent ... ... 3 ib. Transfer of criminal lunatics from Rangoon Jail to asylum ... ... ... 4 ib. Epidemic diseases during year ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ib. Sanitation, buildings, accommodation, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 6 ib. Numerous and extensive additions made to asylum ... ... ... ... 7 ib. Alterations made in male criminal enclosure ... ... ... ... 8 ib. Additions to male civil enclosure ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ib. Additions to female enclosure not taken in hand ... ... ... ... 10 2 Improvements in asylum building ... ... ... ... ... 11 ib. Increased accommodation in asylum ... ... ... ... ... 12 ib. Classification of accommodation and population ... ... ... ... 13 ib. How lunatics are housed at night ... ... ... ... ... 14 ih. Remarks on asylum cells ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 3 Flooring of asylum cottages ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 ib. Wood flooring to be adopted for asylum cottages ... ... ... ... 17 ib. Several cottages renewed with wood-flooring ... ... ... ... 18 ib. Remarks on flooring ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 ib. Cottage walls in future to be made more secure ... ... ... ... 20 ib. Lunatics how employed during day ... ... ... ... ... 21 ib. More strong-rooms necessary for dangerous or violent lunatics ... ... ... 22 ib. Wood preferred to brick in construction of strong-rooms ... ... ... 23 ib. Plan for construction of a new hospital laid before Committee ... ... ... 24 ib. Water-supply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 4 Analysis of samples of water from asylum wells ... ... ... ... 26 ib. Conservancy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 ib. Disposal of night-soil ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 ib. Conservancy of the asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 ib. Drainage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 5 Clothing and bedding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 ib. Cost of clothing and bedding supplied during last three years ... ... ... 32 ib. Diet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 ib. Extra diet allowed in special cases ... ... ... ... ... 34 ib. Industries carried on in asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 6 Working of asylum ... ... ... ... ... 36 ib. Lunatics how employed ... ... ... ... ... ... 37 ib. Employment of female lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 ib. Gardening unsuccessful during year ... ... ... ... ... 39 7 Asylum cattle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 ib. Result of the asylum milk business ... ... ... ... ... 41 ib. General treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42 ib. Lunatics employed as asylum servants ... ... ... ... ... 43 8 Efforts made to encourage extra-mural labour ... ... ... ... 44 ib. No cases of self-inflicted injuries during year ... ... ... ... 45 ib. Medical treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46 ib. Remarks on forcible feeding in special cases ... ... ... ... ... 47 ib. Case of abdominal tumour ... ... ... ... ... ... 48 ib. Drugs used in treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... 49 ib. Purchase of an iron-bath for use of patients ... ... ... ... ... 50 ib. Escapes during year ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 ib. Punishment of warders in connection with escapes from asylum ... ... ... 52 ib. Admissions and discharges ... ... ... ... ... ... 53 10 Number of civil insanes admitted into asylum ... ... ... ... 54 ib. Remarks on number admitted ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 ib. More accommodation at present for civil than criminal lunatics ... ... ... 56 ib. Supposed lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 57 11 Remarks on supposed lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... 58 ib. Particulars relating to criminal lunatics ... ... ... ... ... 59 ib. Remarks regarding religion, sex, &c., of lunatics ... ... ... ... ... 60 12 European and Eurasian patients under treatment ... ... ... ... ... 61 ib. Remarks on a lunatic suffering from extreme acute mania ... ... ... 62 ib. Statements IV and V call for no remarks ... ... ... ... ... 63 ib. Different types of insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... 64 ib.
ii. CONTENTS. Para. Page. Remarks on delirious mania ... ... ... ... ... ... 65 13 Remarks on toxic insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... 66 ib. Toxic insanity attributed to abuse of ganja ... ... ... ... ... 67 ib. Remarks on the excessive use of liquor and ganja ... ... ... ... 68 ib. Lunatics subject to relapses of insanity ... ... ... ... ... 69 ib. Alleged causes of insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 ib. Transfer to asylum from the jail of criminal lunatics ... ... ... 71 14 Causes of insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... 72 ib. Religious mania of acute type ... ... ... ... ... 73 ib. State of health of lunatics ... ... ... ... ... 74 ib. Admissions to hospital from different causes ... ... ... ... ... 75 ib. Number of admissions to hospitals and deaths during past three years ... ... 76 ib. Death from rupture of spleen ... ... ... ... ... ... 77 ib. Epidemic of influenza ... ... ... ... ... ... 78 15 History of beriberi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 79 ib. RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1894. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. wooden floors on to the ground below the cottages and collects there, and if it is impossible to carry it off except at a cost which the Committee considers prac- tically prohibitive, there would seem to be additional reasons for adopting the earth-floor system generally in all the cottages tenanted by lunatics of specially uncleanly habits. The matter is commended to the attention of the Committee. The Asylum visitors have pronounced the shed accommodation for the shelter of the insanes during the day time to be still insufficient. The question of the provision of additional day sheds should be taken up without delay. In view of the observations above recorded in regard to wooden floors, the suggestion of the Inspector-General of Jails that the space under some of the cottages should be enclosed and used as day sheds does not at first sight commend itself to the Chief Commissioner, but the matter may be considered. 3. The population of the Asylum on the 31st December 1893 was 253, that on the 31st December 1894 was 331. The increase was mainly due to the transfer from the Rangoon Jail of the criminal lunatics (62 in all) referred to in the first paragraph of this Resolution. During the year 152 lunatics in all were admitted or re-admitted, 48 were discharged, cured or otherwise, or made over to their friends, and 26 died. The percentage of deaths to the daily average strength (9.96) was lower than in 1893 and compares on the whole favourably with the figures of previous years. The death-rate was swelled by an epidemic of beriberi which attacked the Asylum in October and carried off seven victims. The origin of the outbreak is doubtful and the reason of its severity obscure, but it seems clear that it cannot be attributed to any special sanitary defect in the Asylum. An epidemic of influenza, which visited the Asylum in March, was attended with no fatal results. The construction of the new hospital has not yet been taken in hand, but the work will be commenced before long. When the hospital is finished there will be accommodation for 400 lunatics within the Asylum walls. The reports on the Asylum water-supply are on the whole re-assuring. The Chief Commissioner would be glad to learn the final opinion arrived at in regard to the water from the one well on the premises which has been unfavourably reported on. The water of this well is chiefly used for irrigating the garden and it does not appear to be required for drinking and is not apparently used for that purpose. 4. The total expenditure of the year amounted to Rs. 35,568 as compared with Rs. 31,408, the corresponding figure for 1893. This is exclusive of a sum of Rs. 88,682 charged on account of work performed by the Public Works Department for the Asylum. The cost of bazaar medicines rose from Rs. 76 to Rs. 240, and the expenditure on account of contingencies from Rs. 1,797 to Rs. 2,815. The enhancement under the latter head is attributed mainly to the fact that a large number of locks had to be purchased for the new buildings. Beyond the transfer of the Assistant Surgeon in August, there was no change of import- ance in the strength of the Asylum establishment until the 62 criminal lunatics were transferred from the Rangoon Jail, when it was found necessary to obtain the services of six additional warders to guard this addition to the Asylum population. The total cost of the establishment proper was Rs. 8,457 as compared with Rs. 8,494 in 1893. The result of the dairy transactions of the year are a satis- factory feature of the report. The figures show a net profit of Rs. 1,059 under this head. The Chief Commissioner observes with regret that the efforts to promote
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 3 floriculture in the Asylum have not hitherto been attended with success. The Inspector-General of Jails should see if the services of some subordinate of the Rangoon Jail who has a knowledge of gardening cannot be again placed temporarily at the disposal of the Asylum authorities. A beginning has been made in introducing the manufacture of textile fabrics in the Asylum. In view of the expressed wishes of the Government of India in the matter, the Chief Com- missioner desires that a sustained effort should be made to promote weaving among the insanes. The statement of receipts and expenditure on account of manufactures in the Asylum shows a net profit of Rs. 3,600 as against Rs. 3,283 in 1893. The expectation that the increase in the income from manufactures during the year would be appreciable has not been realized. The failure to obtain better results was caused partly by the sickness that prevailed during the year, partly by the negligence of the Burmese Assistant Surgeon, who has since been transferred. It is hoped that the Asylum industries will thrive under the care of the new Deputy Superintendent. 5. After enquiry into the practice prevailing in Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay in regard to the maintenance of lunatic ex-sailors sent to the Asylum from ships in the port of Rangoon, the Chief Commissioner has decided that the charges for such persons shall be paid by the Rangoon Municipal Com- mittee. 6. The Asylum was throughout the year in the charge of Surgeon-Lieut- enant-Colonel Baker, to whom the Chief Commissioner is indebted for an inter- esting and instructive report and for the care and attention he has devoted to the management of the Asylum, which has been greatly improved in respect of the accommodation provided for its inmates, and also of the treatment they receive whilst under detention within it. By order of the Chief Commissioner, C. C. LOWIS, Officiating Secretary.
From Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel D. SINCLAIR, M.B., C.M., Inspector-General of Jails with Civil Medical Administration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1894. Introductory Remarks.2 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. Europeans, and 30 new cells for natives, 10 of which are built on to, and in a line with, the old cells, the other 20 standing in a single row by themselves. 10. The contemplated addition to the female enclosure, whereby cell accommodation for 4 women will be provided, has not yet been taken in hand. 11. All the asylum buildings have, during the past year, been carefully mea- sured by the Executive Engineer in charge, and the capacity of the various habit- ations accurately determined. A painted board has been affixed to each building, bearing an inscription giving its number, designation, and accommodation. Former estimates of the accommodation of the asylum at variance with the results now shown must be ignored, and the capacity of the premises, as set forth in the following table of accommodation drawn up from the inscriptions on the boards, should be regarded as authoritative, and, in respect of the buildings con- cerned, final:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 3 15. The asylum cells are on the whole satisfactory tenements for the crim- inal lunatics. I think it would have been better if the cells in the new block had been arranged so as to be back to back and to open out on to front veran- dahs, instead of being built, as is the case, face to face with a central corridor separating them. More sunlight and fresh air, agents of destruction to the bacillus of tubercle4 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 25. Water-supply.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 5 repugnances to certain occupations ; that, for instance, they had an almost uni- versal objection to touch night-soil; also that they would not eat with midwives, whom they considered a degraded order of beings. By desire of the Committee the sane criminals in confinement in the asylum were invited, under promise of a gratuity of Rs. 3 per mensem, to undertake the asylum conservancy, but not a single volunteer was forthcoming. Some members of the Committee were of opinion that it was not right to impose duties on lunatics which, if they were sane men, they would not, except on compulsion, perform. It was, however, finally resolved that the lunatics should still be employed for collecting and burying the night-soil, but that paid sweepers should be entertained for carrying out the conservancy of the hospital. Two warders of the sweeper class were therefore engaged. 30. Drainage.6 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. out, which is a constant quantity, nevertheless, whenever loss of weight takes place, extras are issued. Lunatics receiving extras are classed as convalescents, and each one has given him, in addition to the ordinary diet of the asylum, a tin of conjee and a cup of milk in the morning and some soup, bread, and jaggery at 2 P.M. The number of so-called convalescents in the asylum is generally about 20 per cent. of the population. The list is revised monthly in accordance with the results of the monthly weighments. The cost of extra diet supplied during the year to members of the convalescent gang was as under:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 7 ably among the best that can be found for lunatics, it was not considered ex- pedient to attempt the introduction of textile manufactures generally. 39. The lunatics were, as far as possible, provided with employment of a profitable kind, but that the work given them to do should be beneficial as well as profitable was steadfastly held in view. Large numbers were employed in the gardens both in the raising of vegetable produce and in floriculture, but the ut- most disappointment was here met with. The rose trees planted out withered, and the vegetables, sown in the most fertile of soils, rotted or were devoured by grubs. None of the asylum officials possessed any special knowledge of gar- dening, and, as misfortune and ignorance were joined together, it is not surprising the results obtained were unsatisfactory. The services of a warder skilled in gardening were, through the kindness of the Superintendent of the Jail, lent to the asylum, but before he had been long at work it was found necessary to recall him. The importance of encouraging the various branches of horticulture adapted to the intelligence of the lunatics has been strongly impressed upon the present Deputy Superintendent. 40. Asylum cattle.8 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. the sane, is even more detrimental to the insane, every endeavour is made to provide the lunatics with suitable occupations. 43. Apart from the large number employed as asylum servants, the exten- sive area of the asylum premises affords ample scope for gardening operations, of which full advantage is taken. Patients incapable of performing work of any kind are led out of the various sheds twice daily and given walking exercise in the open air. 44. When efforts were made in the early part of the year to encourage the extra-mural employment of the lunatics, it was found it could not be extended, not for the reason that there was no work for the men, but because there were no more men for the work. Permission was subsequently obtained to employ, under certain conditions, some of the criminal, as well as the civil, lunatics extra- murally. 45. No kind of mechanical restraint, setting aside confinement in cells, has been made use of, and the asylum does not possess a single implement or garment of restraint. Strong-rooms lined with or made of wood, such as exist in the Civil General Hospital, were on two or three occasions felt the want of, nevertheless no lunatic hanged himself during the year of report or suffered from self-inflicted injuries of more than a trifling kind. One lunatic, who subsequently recovered his sanity and was discharged from the asylum, contrived to drop down a well, but he was rescued without being any the worse for his suicidal act. 46. Medical treatment.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 9 Statement of lunatics who escaped from the custody of the asylum authorities during the year 1894. Serial No. Names. Class. Disease. Mental condition at the time of escape. Date of admission into the asylum. Date of escape. Date of recapture. Remarks. 1 Kaw Warrah ... Civil ... Toxic insanity Insane; was sick in hospital. 23rd May 1873 14th March 1894 15th March 1894 Escaped from the asylum hospital. The warder at fault absconded. 2 Nga Shwe Hpaw Do. ... Dementia ... Insane; employed in gardening. 3rd January 1888. 20th March 1894 At large ... Escaped from No. 2 garden, where he was employed in draw- ing water. The man is still at large. 3 Ko Y10 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 53. Statements I and II, showing the admissions, discharges, &c.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 11 The number of criminal lunatics in confinement in Burma on the 31st De- cember 1894 is shown to have been 154. To ascertain, however, how many there were at the close of previous years, it is necessary to bring together the returns of the jail and those of the asylum. Number of criminal lunatics in confinement at the close of each year for the past three years. 1892. 1893. 1894. Asylum ... ... ... ... 81 84 154 Jail ... ... ... ... ... 65 62 ... Total ... 146 146 154 57. Supposed lunatics.12 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 60. Statement III, showing the religion, sex, &c.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 13 65. The type of insanity which preponderates in the asylum is mania, and several striking examples of this disease have been admitted during the past year. The abbreviated notes of the case of Nga Oung Dun, a delirious maniac, may be of interest. " The lunatic's wife, Ma Yit, stated she had been married to him for 10 years, and that he had never shown any symptoms of insanity until a day or two ago, when, after an absence from his house of a few hours' duration, he came back a maniac." On admission to the Bassein Jail on the 15th November he was in an acutely maniacal state, " violent, incoherent, extremely excited, and filthy in his habits." On the 27th December he was transferred to the Lunatic Asylum. When seen the following day he was delirious in a high degree, roaring, shouting, gesti- culating, lying naked on the ground; his entire muscular system was in incessant motion. In this condition he remained, restless by day, sleepless by night, constantly muttering, never quiet for a single moment; he became weaker and weaker, more and more emaciated, until, reduced almost to a skeleton and mentally exhausted, he passed on the 4th March into a condition of profound depression, which ended four days later, ten weeks in all from the date of his admission, in death. Warm-baths, sedative drugs, hypnotics and forcible feeding were all resorted to in vain. 66. Two cases of mania and two of toxic insanity, due entirely or in a large measure to the abuse of ganja, were received into the asylum during the year. One of the patients, after he had recovered his sanity, stated he had smoked ganja and drunk whisky for about a year. Five days before admission he was compelled to forego the whisky for want of funds wherewith to purchase it, so he increased his consumption of ganja. He bought one and a half tickels a day, costing 3 annas. The leaves were moistened with water, bruised and made into a paste, which he smoked from a "chillum " until he ceased to retain con" sciousness. About three and a half years ago he had an attack of insanity, last- ing for six weeks, the result of eating dhatura surreptitiously administered to him in his food by a rival fakir. He was a fakir himself in those days. He had also undergone a term of imprisonment in the Aden jail for embez- zlement, and during an emeute, in which it seems he took an active part, his right hand was amputated by a blow from a tulwar. 67. In a case of toxic insanity attributed wholly to the abuse of ganja, the patient stated he had smoked ganja from the time he was a lad ; " he had a pipe " in the morning, one in the evening, and, if he did not smoke in the middle of " the day, he would die." 68. Another lunatic, the onset of whose insanity was attributed to the conjoint action of drink and ganja, asserted, after his recovery, that he always spent one or two annas daily on ganja; he used to get half a tickel for 2 annas. Of late he had taken liquor only very exceptionally, but formerly, when in Calcutta about nine months ago, he drank brandy or gin every day. On the day of his admission into the asylum he had not had any spirit, but he had smoked ganja very freely. He mixed his ganja, having first washed it and squeezed out the excess water through a rag, with tobacco and smoked it thus. 69. Of an interesting class are those lunatics who are subject to relapses of insanity. Two criminals, one of whom had been sane for three years, and the other for one year, relapsed into insanity during the year of report. The cause of relapse in the first case was the loss of a companion, also a criminal who had recovered his sanity, who escaped from the asylum. In the second case no obvious cause for the relapse was apparent. The body weight of the first of the two men referred to was in June, before he relapsed, 165 lbs.; in July, during his relapse, 142 lbs., and in December, when he had recovered, 167 lbs. 70. Statement VII, showing the alleged causes of insanity, &c.14 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. want of attention to detail was apparent. In one of the history sheets received the description of symptoms characterising the insanity of the patient in question consisted of the monosyllable " Good " ; in another the signs of insanity were ex- pressed by the use of the word " Sudden." It must be admitted that the information supplied to and elicited at the asylum in respect of the alleged causes of insanity is on the whole meagre. Lunatics found wandering in Rangoon by the police are sometimes sent in with- out any more light being thrown on their antecedents than is conveyed by the word " Unknown "REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 15 asylum, on the day of his death, and he walked back to the asylum at the close of the day's work. At meal time he was seen by the Hospital Assistant to be lying on the ground. The Hospital Assistant finding the man had fever, sent him to hospital. He died before midnight. On making a post-mortem examination not a trace of splenic tissue could be found ; the situation usually occupied by the spleen was seen to be filled up with blood clot, while in the peritoneal cavity there was some uncoagulated blood. There were no marks of injury on deceased's body, and no evidence of rough handling was forthcoming. 78. Influenza.16 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. The following table shows the results of the periodical examinations:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 17 beri without more or less 18 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. of the germ alone is often insufficient to give rise to any of the symptoms of beriberi. Under hygienic conditions the disease may remain latent for long periods, or the tendency to it become altogether eradicated. Given, however, persons with debilitated constitutions, or lowered vitality, resulting from insani- tary surroundings, especially overcrowding and bad ventilation, the potentiality of the beriberi virus then makes itself manifest, and symptoms of the disease are produced. And it is under circumstances such as these that the development of beriberi takes place and epidemics of it are determined. 97. That beriberi, however, may occur and assume virulent characters with- out reference to insanitary agencies, there can be no question. Sufficient proof of this is afforded by the fact that the disease is subject to extreme fluctuations of prevalence, although the sanitary conditions, within the sphere of its operation, remain unchanged. 98. The sanitary state of the asylum was, in every respect, as satisfactory during the year of report as in preceding years. Excepting' for occasional over- crowding, during the day, of a slight and temporary nature, which has always existed in the sheds used by the lunatics, the capacity of the asylum buildings was more than sufficient for the maximum number of its inmates, while the venti- lation of all buildings gave complete satisfaction. 99. The general health of the lunatics was excellent, and the mortality among them, excluding that due to beriberi, was very small. 100. Clearly, therefore, the insanitary conditions to which outbreaks of beri beri are often attributed did not exist in the asylum. 101. The asylum premises, formerly demarcated by a bamboo hedge, were during the year surrounded by a brick wall 7 feet high, and much of the newly enclosed land, used as a place of burial for excreta, which had until then lain fallow, was brought under cultivation. Disturbances of the asylum soil to the ex- tent equivalent to the demands made by these works, therefore, took place. Al- though excavations of the soil are sometimes known to produce malarial diseases, it is not established that such excavations have at any time exercised the least influence in determining an outbreak of beriberi. 102. Looking at the etiological data furnished in the foregoing remarks, the conclusion arrived at is that the outbreak of beriberi which prevailed in the asylum during the year of report was the consequence of the prevalence in an acute form of a widely distributed epidemic of beriberi affecting the population of the district in which the asylum stands. 103. Treatment.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 19 In one or two cases at the General Hospital blood-letting undoubtedly saved life. It is extremely gratifying to witness the relief afforded in embarrass- ment of the respiration arising from 20 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1894. 116. On the 23rd December 1894 1st grade Assistant Surgeon Reilly, who had been appointed to the asylum by the Government of India, arrived and assumed charge of his duties. From this date the allowance given to the Over- seer of Rs. 50 per mensem was withdrawn, and it has since been notified to him that his services will be dispensed with. 117. The strength of the force of warders is not yet adequate, and a cer- tain amount of dissatisfaction prevails amongst the men. But the revision of the asylum establishment, rendered necessary by the extension of the asylum and by the arrival from India of Assistant Surgeon Reilly, is now receiving the atten- tion of the asylum Committee of Visitors and the recommendations they may make will shortly be placed before the local Government. When the Overseer leaves, it will be absolutely necessary to secure the services of a clerk, for the clerical work in the office, which is very heavy, should no longer be performed in the unsatisfactory manner in which it has hitherto been carried on. 118. Statement XI, showing receipts and expenditure on account of manu- factures, &c.APPENDICES.
APPENDICES. iii. STATEMENT No. I.iv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. I.APPENDICES. V. STATEMENT No. II.vi. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. III.APPENDICES. vii. STATEMENT No. VI.viii. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VII.APPENDICES. ix. STATEMENT No. VII.X. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VIII.APPENDICES. xi. Deaths during the year 1894. No. Names. Date of admission into the asylum. State of health. Date of last admission into the hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. Yrs. 1 Nga Htoo ... ... 13th May 1872 ... Good ... 26th March 1893 ... 73 27th January 1894 ... General debility and old age. Effusion of serous fluid into abdominal cavity and extremities; anæmic and atrophied condition of brain. 2 T. H. ... ... ... 2nd October 1891 ... Indifferent 7th December 1893 ... 34 9th February 1894 ... General paralysis of insane No post-mortem. 3 Nga Hpaung ... ... 6th June 1893 ... Fair ... 6th June 1893 ... 35 12th February 1894 ... Insanity (epileptic) ... Effusion of serous fluid into the ventricles of brain; blocking of the right bronchus with cooked rice. 4 Nga Shwe Hmon ... ... 8th November 1871 ... Good ... 24th October 1893 ... 65 3rd March 1894 ... Tubercle ... ... Partial obliteration of pericardial sac; lower portion of left lung contained vomicae of various sizes filled with caseous matter; general atrophy of organs. 5 Nga Oung Dun ... ... 27th December 1893 ... Bad ... 27th December 1893 ... 35 8th March 1894 ... Mania ... ... Brain anaemic; mucous membrane of stomach and intestines congested here and there. 6 Nga Shwe Kee ... ... 10th May 1892 ... Good ... 13th March 1894 ... 39 13th March 1894 ... Rupture of spleen ... Brain congested; heart empty; liver pale and anaemic, and spleen ruptured. 7 Alain ... ... ... 27th May 1892 ... Do. ... 14th March 1894 ... 36 19th March 1894 ... Tubercle ... ... Sago-grain like deposits in the meninges of the brain; effusion of serum into ventricles ; brain congested. 8 Nga Nyet ... ... 10th July 1889 ... Bad ... 10th March 1894 ... 26 23rd March 1894 ... Starvation ... ... Emaciation of internal organs. 9 Jaggeth Singh ... ... 17th April 1890 ... Good ... 3rd January 1893 ... 44 27th March 1894 ... Tubercle ... ... Both lungs infiltrated with tubercular deposits. 10 Nga The ... ... 26th May 1888 ... Do. ... 8th October 1893 ... 58 31st March 1894 ... Do. ... ... Large tubercular abscess in the right lobe of liver; caseated and enlarged condition of mesenteric glands; one mass of caseous matter was as large as an orange. 11 Mi Myin ... ... 9th March 1894 ... Bad ... 9th March 1894 ... 30 24th April 1894 ... Syphilitic disease of brain Syphilitic ulcers on the arms, back, and head; distension of sub- dural space with 13 ozs. of yellowish fluid; a blood clot overlying the brain in left temporal region. 12 Kaw Warrah ... ... 23rd April 1873 ... Good ... 14th March 1894 ... 46 10th May 1894 ... Insanity ... ... Old pleuritic adhesions on both sides ; congestion of mucous membrane of stomach and intestines ; the rectum showed several small patches of superficial erosion. 13 Mi Tha Tu ... ... 29th July 1893 ... Bad ... 20th June 1894 ... 41 1st July 1894 ... ... Dysentery (chronic) ... Large intestines ulcerated, showing several long-standing ulcers.
xii. APPENDICES. Deaths during the year 1894APPENDICES. xiii. STATEMENT No. IX.xiv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. X.APPENDICES. xv. STATEMENT No. XI.xvi. APPENDICES. Abstract of Cash Account. Name of asylum. ESTABLISHMENT. DIET. CLOTHING AND BED- DING. MEDICINES. CONTINGENCIES. GRAND TOTAL. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Rangoon Lunatic Asylum. Rs. 11,456-13-0. Rs. 43-14-4. Rs. 19,093-6-4. Rs. 73-2-6. Rs. 1,551-7-11.* Rs. 5-15-1. Rs. 650-14-8.APPENDICES. xvii Remarks of the Asylum Visitors on the Asylum Annual Report for 1894. As regards the recommendations made last year:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1894. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1895. [ Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1895. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1896. [ Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1895. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1896.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. RESOLUTION BY THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER. Para. Page. Subordinate charge of asylum held by a Warrant Medical Officer as Deputy Superin- tendent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Remarks on accommodation of asylum ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. Remarks on healthiness of year and admissions into hospitals ... ... ... 3 2 Financial results of the year's administration ... ... ... ... ... 4 ib. Remarks on officers who held charge of the asylum ... ... ... ... 5 3 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. Introductory remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Exemption from epidemic and low sick admission and death-rate during year ... ... 2 ib. Situation, buildings, accommodation, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 3 ib. Capacity of various buildings ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ib. Further contemplated additions ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ib. Classification and strength of asylum population ... ... ... ... 6 ib. Accommodation available for various classes of asylum population ... ... 7 ib. Asylum cells on the whole satisfactory ... ... ... ... ... 8 ib. Water-supply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 2 Table of analyses of the asylum potable water ... ... ... ... 10 ib. Conservancy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ib. Drainage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ib. Clothing and bedding ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 ib. Statement of cost of clothing and bedding supplied during the last three years ... 14 ib. Amount spent on clothing ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 3 Diet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 ib. Extras in addition to ordinary diet allowed to convalescent lunatics ... ... ... 17 ib. Cost of extra diet supplied to members of the convalescent gang ... ... ... 18 ib. Labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 ib. Improvement in manufacture of textile fabrics ... ... ... ... ... 20 ib. Remarks on extra-mural labour ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 ib. Floriculture and vegetables ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 ib. Asylum cattle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 ib. Results of the asylum milk business ... ... ... ... ... 24 4 General treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 ib. Medical treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 ib. Medicines administered ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 ib. Escapes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 ib. Escape of a criminal lunatic ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 ib. Statement of lunatics who escaped from the custody of the asylum authorities during the year 1895 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 5 Admissions, discharges, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 6 Number of civil insanes ... ... ... ... ... ... 32 ib. Supposed lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 ib. Criminal lunatics admitted during year ... ... ... ... ... 34 ib. Statement III, showing the religion, sex, &c. ... ... ... ... 35 7 Statements IV and V, showing the previous occupation, ages, &c. ... ... ... 36 ib. Statement VI, showing the types of insanity ; Statement VII, the alleged causes of insanity 37 ib. Statement VIII, showing the return of sick, &c. ... ... ... ... 38 ib. Number of admissions to hospitals and deaths ... ... ... ... 39 ib. Mortality in relation to strength ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 8 Death from suicide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41 ib. Death from homicide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42 ib. Beriberi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43 ib. Statement IX, showing the cash account, &c. ... ... ... ... 44 ib. Statement X, showing the sanctioned establishment, &c. ... ... ... 45 ib. Statement XI, showing receipts and expenditure on account of manufactures, &c. ... 46 ib. Concluding remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47 ib. APPENDICES. Page. Statement No. I.ii. CONTENTS. Page. Statement No. VI.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1895. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. *Letter No. 44, dated 28th Jan- uary 1876, to the Government of Bengal. RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. 3 as being one of the points to which increased attention should be shown in the management of asylums. Not only the inmates who are specially classed as " convalescents," but all who are not robust might well receive a more generous diet than the ordinary scale affords. The gross receipts on account of manufactures amounted to Rs. 7,514 (columns 3 and 4 of Statement XI). The amount realized in the previous year was only Rs. 5,117. The amount Rs. 7,514 includes Rs. 4,186, the value of goods manufactured for use in the Asylum itself. The net profit of the industrial oper- ations, including the profit of the dairy and vegetable garden, amounted to Rs. 7,295 or more than double the net profit of 1894. These statistics are highly satisfactory, but the report does not explain why on an average only 66 lunatics were employed on manufactures, one less than the number reported for the pre- vious year. The Chief Commissioner is aware that employment is found for a great number of the inmates as asylum servants, but seeing that the average daily population increased by about 31 per cent., it is not easy to understand why the number employed on manufactures was stationary. It is observed with satisfaction that weaving has been successfully added to the occupations of the inmates. A larger number can be employed at this very suitable industry as soon as the two new day sheds recently sanctioned have been erected. The Chief Commissioner desires that a further effort should be made to promote floriculture, which has not had a fair trial yet. 5. On the whole Dr. Baker and the other officers who held charge are to be congratulated on the success of the year's work, which shows a marked im- provement on that of previous years. The experiment of placing a Military Assistant Surgeon in subordinate charge has been justified by the results. The Chief Commissioner shares the opinion of the Inspector-General and of the visitors that it is desirable to avoid changes both in the subordinate and also in the principal charge of the institution. The Inspector-General may submit separately the question of fixing the emoluments of the Deputy Superintendent at such an amount as will ensure some permanency in the charge of that office. It has been definitely decided that the Asylum and the Rangoon Central Jail should ultimately be formed into a single Superintendent's charge. But this measure cannot be carried out immediately as the jail population is still very high and the Jail Superintendent's duties are too heavy to be added to. By order of the Chief Commissioner, D. H. R. TWOMEY, Officiating Secretary.
From Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel D. SINCLAIR, M.B., C.M., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Administration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) 4. What is said regarding the water-supply in paragraph 9 may be read in connection with paragraph 6(e) of this office letter No. 1635-110M. prefixed to the Asylum Report of 1893. 5. The appended statements are sufficiently explained in the body of the report. The abstract of cost shows that the total expenditure, excluding public works and printing charges, was greater by Rs. 1,515 than for the year preced- ing. This is mainly due to the higher cost of establishment; medicines and contingencies also cost more. The expenditure distributed over a larger popu- lation, however, makes the cost per head considerably lower.
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1895. Introductory Remarks.2 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. according to the recommendations of the Government of India ; the soiled portion is cut out and replaced by fresh earth as required. Contrary to the expectations of some, this flooring has answered the purpose of securing greater cleanliness than heretofore both in the rainy and dry seasons. (c) The shed accommodation during the day provided for the lunatics was said to have been insufficient, espe- cially during the wet weather. Plans and estimates have been sanctioned for the further extension of this by two new sheds. 9. Water-supply.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. 3 15. Of Rs. 571-13-3 spent on clothing, Rs. 456-9-0 was the value of the jail-made cloth supplied from the Insein Jail. 16. Diet.4 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. Rs. A. P. 1. Received and paid into the treasury, being value of milk sold to the public ... ... ... 732 10 0 2. Value of milk supplied to the asylum and adjusted by book transfer ... ... ... ... 1,064 12 3 3. Realized by sale of cattle ... ... ... 183 0 0 Total ... 1,980 6 3 Cost of feeding cows ... ... ... ... 267 6 0 Price paid for cattle purchased ... ... ... ...... Salary of milkman ... ... ... ... 180 0 0 Total ... 447 6 0 Net profit ... ... ... ... 1,533 0 3 24. The net results of the asylum milk business for the past three years are contrasted in the following statement:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. 5 30. Statement of lunatics who escaped from the custody of the asylum authorities during the year 1895. Serial No. Name. Class. Disease. Mental condition at time of escape. Date of admission to asylum. Date of escape. Date of recapture. Remarks. 1 Peter ... Civil ... Mania ... Insane; employed in gardening. 10th December 1894. 10th March 1895 At large ... Escaped from No. 2 garden soon after unlocking hour. The warder at fault was fined. 2 Nga Pwe ... Civil ... Mania ... Insane; quiet and harmless. 3rd January 1895 2nd May 1895... 21st May 1895... Escaped while employed in cleaning the civil enclosure. He returned after 19 days of his own accord, stating he could get nothing to eat outside. The warder at fault was fined and dismissed. 3 Nga Hmu ... Criminal Dementia ... Sane ... ... 15th August 1889. 17th May 1895... At large ... Escaped during the night from the new block of cells inside the criminal enclosure. By manipulating the padlock of the lower ventilator at the back of his cell, he succeeded in bending the brass tongue of the padlock from its proper position and noiselessly crept through. He was not missed till unlocking hour the following morning, when it was dis- covered that he had cleverly devised a " dummy " in his cell representing a man lying asleep covered with a blanket, under which was found his clothes and remaining portion of bedding ; so it was presumed he left the asylum stripped. The night watchman at fault was fined and dismissed. 4 Boodu ... Civil ... Mania ... Insane; quiet and harmless. 31st December 1894. 4th July 1895 ... 4th July 1895 ... Escaped immediately on being unlocked by placing a couple of bricks against the low boundary wall situated behind the block of cells in No. 2 garden. The warder at fault was removed. 5 Sanda ... Civil ... Dementia ... Insane; mischievous and troublesome. 26th March 1890 18th August 1895 22nd August 1895. Escaped from the criminal enclosure by scaling the wall. He returned to the asylum during the night, where he remained in hiding for 72 hours, occupying the empty space between the ceiling and roof of No. 11 cottage situated in No. 1 garden. 6 Nga Lo ... Civil ... Mania ... Insane; employed as cook. 20th March 1887 17th September 1895. 18th September 1895. Escaped from No. 8 cottage by rushing through the door immediately it was unlocked at night for the purpose of administering hypnotics to noisy lunatics. 7 Nga San Baw... Criminal Mania ... Insane; quiet and harmless. 17th January 1890. 22nd April 1895 22nd April 1895 Escaped from No. 1 garden, where he was employed, by step- ping over the low boundary wall opposite the railway line, along which he walked to Kemmendine, where he was re- captured by the police and brought back to the asylum. The warder at fault was fined. 2
6 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. 31. Statements I and II, showing the admissions, discharges, &c.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. 7 Criminal lunatics admitted into the asylum during the year 1895. Those tried and acquitted on the ground of insanity. Those insane on admis- sion and found to be incapable of making their defence. Those who became insane during im- prisonment. Total of all classes. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. Males. Females. Total. 15 ... 15 16 3 19 5 ... 5 36 3 39 35. Statement III, showing the religion and sex, &c.8 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. 40. The total mortality was 36; and in relation to the strength gives 11 per cent., the average mortality in Indian asylums. Five of these deaths, however, were due to beri-beri, the result of the epidemic outbreak of that disease during the last quarter of 1894 ; two other deaths were homicidal and suicidal. Excluding these seven deaths, the mortality would be reduced from 11 to 9 per cent. Seven deaths were due to tubercle, 6 to chronic diarrhREPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1895. 9 in charge from 6th May to 12th July and from 19th August to 6th September 1895 ; and Surgeon-Major Rundle from 7th September to 27th October 1895. The post of Deputy Superintendent, made in December 1894, has been held throughout the year by Assistant Surgeon L. J. Reilly. The advance made in promoting weaving and other industries in the asylum, and the improved finan- cial results obtained in manufactures, gardening, and dairy operations, with the considerable diminution in the expenditure on clothing, all show that Assistant Surgeon Reilly has carried out his duties in a trustworthy manner with zeal and industry. It is needless to point out the desirability of retaining the services of a thoroughly reliable officer, who, having become experienced in the work, would be content to remain for some time in the post, so as to avoid a possible re- petition of the experiences in 1894 with the Burmese Assistant Surgeon. G. T. THOMAS, SURG.-LT.-COL., I.M.S., Superintendent, Rangoon Lunatic Asylum. RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM : The 27th January 1896. 3
APPENDICES.
APPENDICES iii. STATEMENT No. I.iv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. I.APPENDICES. v. STATEMENT No. II.vi. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. III.APPENDICES. vii. STATEMENT No. VI.viii. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VII.APPENDICES. ix. STATEMENT No. VII.x. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VIII.APPENDICES. xi. Deaths during the year 1895. No. Name. Date of admis- sion into the asylum. State of health. Date of last admission in- to hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. Years. 1 Nga Kywa Hmwe. 7th October 1893. Fair ... 28th October 1894. 31 1st January 1895. Beri-beri ... Fluid in thoracic and abdominal cavities, also in pericardium, and some in lateral ventricles of brain ; heart dilated, substance soft and flabby ; brain soft and pale. 2 Potanah ... 2nd December 1894. Bad ... 20th December 1894.. 52 9th January 1895. Debility ... Much wasted; fluid in pericardium ; fatty heart and a theromatous condition of aorta; brain soft; excess of fluid in lateral ventricles. 3 Ko Kala ... 21st Decem- ber 1894. Bad ... 4th January 1895. 40 14th January 1895. Acute mania ... xii APPENDICES. Deaths during the year 1895APPENDICES. xiii 26 Mi Po ... 5th April 1895 Indifferent 29th June 1895 56 12th Septem- ber 1895. Chronic diar- rhxiv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. IX.APPENDICES. xv. STATEMENT No. X.xvi. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. XI.APPENDICES. xvii. Abstract of Cash Account. Name of asylum- ESTABLISHMENT. DIET. CLOTHING AND BED- DING. MEDICINES. CONTINGENCIES. GRAND TOTAL. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Rangoon Lunatic Asylum. Rs. 13,905-14-7. Rs. 40-11-8. Rs. 17,879-10-10. Rs. 52-5-11. Rs. 842-13-3.* Rs. 2-7-6. Rs. 1,062-9-9. xviii. APPENDICES. Remarks of the Asylum Visitors on the Asylum Annual Report for 1895. RESOLUTION No. 2.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1895. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1896. [Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1896. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1897. [Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1896. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1897.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. RESOLUTION BY THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER. Para. Page. Executive staff of the Asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1. Accommodation at the Asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. General remarks on the Asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ib. Steps taken to transfer Natives in India to Asylums in India ... ... ... 4 2 Receipts from various industries in Asylum ... ... ... ... ... 5 ib. Auditing of revenue accounts in future by Inspector of Local Funds ... ... 6 ib. Remarks by Committee of Visitors ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ib. The services of Dr. Thomas ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ib. REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1896. Introductory remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Situation, buildings, accommodation, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. Water-supply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Conservancy and drainage ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ib. Clothing and bedding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ib. Diet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ib. Labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 3 Extra-mural labour ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ib. Asylum cattle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ib. General treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ib. Medical treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 4 Escapes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ib. Statements Nos. I and II, showing the admission, discharges, &c. ... ... ... 13 ib. Daily average population of criminal lunatics in Indian Asylums contrasted with that of Rangoon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 ib. Deaths and discharges among criminals ... ... ... ... ... 15 ib. Population of the Asylum and its division into criminal and civil classes ... ... 16 5 Remarks on the inmates of the Asylum ... ... ... ... ... 17 ib. Supposed lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 ib. Particulars relating to criminal lunatics ... ... ... ... ... 19 6 Religion, sex, &c., of lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 ib. Previous occupation, ages, &c, of lunatics ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 ib. Types of insanity and alleged causes of insanity ... ... ... ... 22 ib. Return of sick ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 ib. Mortality in relation to strength ... ... ... ... ... 24 7 Cash account, &c., for the year ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 ib. Sanctioned establishment during year ... ... ... ... ... 26 ib. Receipts and expenditure on account of manufactures ... ... ... ... 27 ib. Concluding remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 ib. APPENDICES. Page. Statement No. I.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1896. Extract from the Proceedings of the Chief Commissioner, Burma, in the Judicial Department,2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR 1896. until some act of violence or mischief brings them to the notice of the authorities. The continued decrease in the number of escapes is satisfactory. Of the four who escaped during the year only one remained at large. 4. The large proportion of natives of India to the total number in confine- ment is noticeable, and steps are being taken for the transfer to asylums in India, of such lunatics as are more likely to recover there or to find friends who can be trusted to take care of them. 5. The year under report was one of marked progress in the economy of the asylum. Hand-looms afford a useful and remunerative form of employment, and simple manufactures continue to be a source of profit. The development of weav- ing in the asylum during the past three years has amply justified its introduction in 1894, and the work should be further extended as opportunity offers. Receipts on this account show an increase of Rs. 600 over the figures of the previous year. The entertainment of a gardener on Rs. 25 per mensem will, the Chief Com- missioner hopes, stimulate floriculture in the asylum. The cost per head rose from Rs. 108-9-11 in 1895 to Rs. 111-14-2 in the year under report. This increase, as explained by the Superintendent, is due to no change in the diets of patients. 6. The revenue accounts of the asylum are in future to be audited by the In- spector of Local Funds. The proposals regarding the pay of the Deputy Superin- tendent are under consideration. The appointment has been held by three different officers during the year and it is desirable that the prospects should be such as to ensure a certain amount of permanency in the post. 7. The remarks of the committee of visitors were not received in time to be embodied in the report and are printed in Appendix A. The Chief Commissioner agrees with the Committee of visitors that opportunities for suicide should be minimised, and when funds are available the suggestion to provide pumps and cover the mouths of wells will be adopted. 8. The management of the asylum has benefited by the zeal and efficiency of Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas, and the Chief Commissioner is glad to endorse the commendatory opinion of the committee of visitors in this respect. Sir Frederic Fryer observes with particular approval the attention which has been paid to the discharge of persons whose lunacy has either been cured or so miti- gated as to render them safe with their friends. By order of the Chief Commissioner, F. C. GATES, Secretary.
From Surgeon-Colonel D. SINCLAIR, M.B., C.M., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Adminis- tration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, Burma,( 2 ) 5. In Statements III, IV and V there is nothing very noteworthy. Hindus and MahomedansREPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1896. Introductory Remarks.2 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1896. 3. Water-supply.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1896. 3 7. Labour.4 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1896. Patients incapable of work of any kind are led out of their sheds twice daily and given walking exercise in the open air. 11. Medical treatment.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1896. 5 16. The following statement shows the entire population of the asylum and its division into criminal and civil classes for the past ten years :6 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1896. table are not included in any of the prescribed annual statements which accom- pany this report. 19. In a foot-note to Statement II certain particulars relating to the crimi- nal lunatics admitted during the year are invited, and these are furnished in the following table:REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1896. 7 24. The total mortality was 30 and in relation to strength gives 9 per cent., the average mortality here for the previous 10 years being 11 per cent. Ten deaths were due to tuberculosis, three to dysentery, two to chronic diarrhAPPENDICES.
ii. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. I.APPENDICES. iii. STATEMENT No. I.iv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. II.APPENDICES. v. STATEMENT No. III.vi. APPENDICES STATEMENT No. VI.APPENDICES. vii. STATEMENT No VII viii APPENDICES. STATEMENT NO. VIII.APPENDICES. ix. Deaths during the year 1896. No. Name. Date of admis- sion into the asylum. State of health. Date of last admission into hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. Years. 1 Nga Shwe Ma... 13th October 1888. Good ... 7th December 1895. 45 11th January 1896. Tubercle ... Body extremely emaciated; both lungs were congested and infiltrated with tubercular deposits, breaking down into cavities containing purulent mat- ter; intestinesx. APPENDICES. Deaths during the year 1896APPENDICES. xi. 22 Nga Shwe Ngay 27th August 1891. Bad ... 11th Septem- ber 1896. 50 7th October 1896. Tubercle ... Body emaciated; both lungs were firmly adherent to the chest wall; the left lung contained deposits of tubercles; the upper and middle lobe of right lung were filled with miliary tubercles in cavities; heartxii. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. IX.APPENDICES. xiii. STATEMENT No. X.xiv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. XI.APPENDICES. xv. Abstract of Cash Account. Name of asylum. ESTABLISHMENT. DIET. CLOTHING AND BED- DING. MEDICINES. CONTINGENCIES. GRAND TOTAL. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Rangoon Lunatic Asylum. Rs. 13,641-4-0. Rs. 41-0-11. Rs. 19,779-14-4. Rs. 59-8-7. Rs. 1,400-5-6.* Rs. 4-3-5. Rs. 203-15-5.xvi. APPENDICES. APPENDIX A. Remarks of the Asylum Visitors on the Asylum Annual Report for 1896. AT the monthly meeting held on the 10th February the visitors learnt that the Annual Report had been submitted without the customary remarks by them, which are now for- warded. The visitors have recommended that pumps be put up at each well in the Asylum, firstly, to prevent lunatics attempting to commit suicide by throwing themselves down the openings through which the water is now hauled up and, secondly, in order to release some of the insanes for other work. Now that floriculture has been started, the ready supply of water is becoming important. The visitors hope that at least one pump will be fitted each year. The visitors desire to record their appreciation of the zeal with which Surgeon- Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas has overhauled the classification of the inmates, which has resulted in a very material reduction of the population of the Asylum. A. M. B. IRWIN, President. Commissioner, Pegu Division. W. T. HALL, Members. President, Rangoon Municipality. HARRY L. TILLY, Deputy Commissioner, Rangoon. H. M. S. MATHEWS, Deputy Commissioner, Hanthawaddy. R. MOORE, Subdivisional Magistrate, Western Subdivision. R. DAVIS, SURGEON-MAJOR, I.M.S., Superintendent, Central Jail, Rangoon. C. BARRY, SURGEON-CAPTIAN, I.M.S., Secretary to the Inspector-General of Jails. G. B. C. P. O.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1896. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1897. [ Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1897. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1898. [Price,REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1897. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1898.
TABLE OF CONTENTS. RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM. Para. Page. Appointment of Superintendent of the Asylum ... ... ... ... 1 1 Capacity of the Asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. Proposed transfer of European and Eurasian lunatics to asylums in India ... ... 3 ib. Transfer of Indian lunatics to asylums of other provinces ... ... ... 4 2 Percentage of deaths to daily average strength ... ... ... ... 5 ib. Payment of monthly stipends to certain classes of lunatics ... ... ... 6 ib. Remarks on cases of insanity entered as " unknown " in medical history sheets ... 7 ib. Expenditure of the year ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ib. Dairy operations in the asylum ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ib. Remarks on the audit of the asylum accounts ... ... ... ... 10 3 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1897. Introductory remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Situation, buildings, and accommodation ... ... ... ... ... 2 ib. Water-supply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 2 Conservancy and drainage ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 ib. Clothing and bedding... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ib. Scale of diet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ib. Labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 3 Extra-mural labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ib. Asylum cattle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ib. General treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 4 Medical treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 ib. Escapes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ib. Admission, discharges, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 ib. Criminal population ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 5 Entire population divided into two classes ... ... ... ... ... 15 ib. Transfers to India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 ib. Supposed insanes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 ib. Particulars of different types of insanity ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 ib. European and Eurasian inmates ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 6 No special remarks on Statements III, IV, and V ... ... ... ... 20 ib. Recoveries during year ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 ib. Return of sick, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 ib. Expenditure during year ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 7 Sanctioned establishment ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 ib. Receipts and expenditure on account of manufactures, &c. ... ... ... 25 ib. Concluding remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 ib. APPENDICES. Page. Remarks of the Asylum Visitors on the Asylum Annual Report for 1897 ... ... iii. Statement No. I.RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1897. Extract from the Proceedings of the Government of Burma, No. 9K.-8, dated the 1st April 1898. READ2 RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR 1897. 4. Eight natives of India were transferred to asylums in other provinces and arrangements are now in progress for transferring other lunatics of Indian races. 5. The number of deaths was 36, which gives a percentage of 10.80 on the daily average strength. This percentage, though less than the average of the previous ten years, is higher than in the year 1896. It is clear that the compara- tively high mortality was due to the general bad health of the civil lunatics newly admitted to the asylum. The percentage of mortality among the criminal lunatics was only 6.37. Only three deaths were attributed to tuberculosis and one to phthisis, and there is apparently no ground for believing that the high mortality from phthisis in 1896 was due to any local defects in the asylum. The daily average sick (13.97) was much lower than in 1896 (17.33), but the total number of admis- sions to hospital (154) was higher than in that year (133), the increase being due to the cause already given in explanation of the heavy mortality among the civil lunatics. 6. During the year a proposal was sanctioned to pay all criminal lunatics on probation and sane patients of the same class a monthly stipend of Rs. 2 each, up to a maximum number of 15, and provision has been made to continue these payments in 1898. The system of stipends strengthens the hands of the Super- intendent in maintaining discipline. The Lieutenant-Governor observes with pleasure the efforts made by the Superintendent to provide amusements for the patients. He hopes that pwès will be held frequently in future. Further endeavour is necessary to ensure the success of the ornamental garden. His Honour does not understand the want of success in this direction, seeing that there is a good water-supply and that labour is plentiful. 7. The Lieutenant-Governor regrets to notice the large number of cases in which the cause of insanity is entered as unknown in the medical history sheets forwarded to the asylum. The omission to record information on this point in- creases the difficulty of the Committee of Visitors in dealing with the cases of the patients. The Superintendent should act in accordance with the instructions con- tained in Circular No. 98 of 1896 providing for further local enquiries by the Magistrates in such cases. 8. The expenditure of the year calls for no special remarks, except as re- gards the abnormally high cost of dieting. It is not understood why information on this point could not be included in the report. A further report should be submitted. The average cost per head on all accounts was Rs. 128 as com- pared with Rs. 112 in 1896. 9. Sir Frederic Fryer does not concur in the Inspector-General's proposal to transfer all dairy operations to Insein. From paragraphs 6 and 9 of the re- port it appears that in many cases milk is the only diet of the patients, and it is well that the Superintendent should be able to watch over and control the source of its supply. It is observed that there was a considerable expansion of the dairy business during the year of report, the supply to the public as well as to the asylum having greatly increased. The Superintendent is to be congratulated on the success of the dairy operations. Owing mainly to this cause the profits on account of " Manufactures" were better than in the previous year. The Lieutenant-Governor is glad to see that the asylum manufactures afforded employ-
RESOLUTION ON THE REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR 1897. 3 ment for about 120 inmates per day, or 36 per cent. of the mean population, a much higher proportion than in the previous year. 10. No mention has been made in the report of the audit of the asylum ac- counts by the Inspector of Local Fund Accounts. The Lieutenant-Governor regrets to record that the result was not satisfactory. Besides other minor irregu- larities, it was found that sums received by the Superintendent were frequently used to meet expenditure instead of being paid into the treasury. Now that the errors and omissions have been pointed out, and that steps have been taken to remedy them, it is hoped that the Superintendent will guard against their recur- rence by a closer supervision of the accounts in the future. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor, D. H. R. TWOMEY, Offg. Secy., to the Government of Burma.
From Surgeon-Colonel D. SINCLAIR, M.B., C.M., Inspector-General of Jails, with Civil Medical Adminis- tration, Burma, to the Secretary to the Government of Burma,( 2 ) under clothing and bedding and medicines. Compared with the asylums in India as per annexed tableERRATUM. IN paragraph 13, page 4, for the word " Civil" in the 5th and 6th lines read " Criminal."
REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1897. Introductory remarks.2 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1897. 3. Water-supply.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1897. 3 7. Labour.4 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1897. This shows a great advance on previous years. The increase in amount of milk used in the asylum is due to freer issues being made to the sick and debilitated. There is no food which is so easily assimilated as milk and nothing so suitable to the feeble digestion of the insane. Many of the sick are practically and entirely dieted on milk only. With the increased dairy the amount spent on sundries has risen. 10. General treatment.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1897. 5 14. Statement No. II shows the criminal population.6 REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1897. 19. European and Eurasian, &c.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM FOR THE YEAR 1897. 7 The following table gives the number of admissions to hospital and deaths during the past three years :APPENDICES.
APPENDICES. iii. Remarks of the Asylum Visitors on the Asylum Annual Report for 1897. No remarks. J. E. BRIDGES, President. Commissioner, Pegu Division. S. C. F. PEILE, LIEUT.-COLONEL, Members. Inspector-General of Police. H. L. EALES, President, Rangoon Municipality. H. L. TILLY, Offg. Deputy Commissioner, Rangoon. H. TODD-NAYLOR, Deputy Commissioner, Hanthawaddy. R. MOORE, Assistant Magistrate, Rangoon. G. T. THOMAS, SURGN.-LIEUT.-COL., Civil Surgeon, Rangoon. B. J. SINGH, SURGEON-CAPTAIN, Offg. Secy. to the Insp.-Genl. of Jails, with Civil Medl. Admn., Rangoon.
iv. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. I.APPENDICES. v. STATEMENT No. I.vi. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. II.APPENDICES. vii. STATEMENT No. III.viii. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VI.APPENDICES. ix. STATEMENT No. VII.x. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. VIII.APPENDICES. xi. Deaths during the year 1897. No. Name. Date of admission into the asylum. State of health. Date of last admission into hospital. Age at death. Date of death. Cause of death. Remarks. Years. 1 Oung Gine ... 21st December 1895. Good ... 19th Novem- ber 1896. 42 11th January 1897. Chronic diarrhxii. APPENDICES. Deaths during the year 1897APPENDICES. xiii. 18 Yenkama alias Kasin Bu. 9th January 1891. Bad ... 28th April 1897. 47 21st July 1897 Dysentery ... No post mortem made. 19 Maung So ... 2nd December 1886. Bad ... 24th July 1897 51 25th July 1897 Peritonitis ... Body well nourished. Liver somewhat congested; the peritoneum was found to be greatly injected, but not adherent. The abdominal cavity was full of extravasated blood and fæces with three or four large round worms. When the blood was removed a rupture, size of eight-anna piece, was found in the ileum. The intestine and mesentery in the neighbourhood of the rupture were much congested ; part of this portion was gangrenous. 20 C. F. Kellogg... 25th June 1897 Good ... 31st July 1897 33 1st August 1897. Effusion of fluid into base of brain. Both lungs were deeply congested ; the cavity of the heart engorged with dark blood. The spleen, liver, and kidneys were congested; there was a considerable quantity of serous fluid about the base of the brain. The ventricles greatly distended with fluid. The substance of the brain was soft; about 20 to 30 oz. of fluid found about the base of the brain and in the cavities of ventricles. 21 Ah Chin Shoke 20th January 1883. Bad ... 12th August 1897. 37 12th August 1897. Epilepsy ... Body well developed. Both lungs were deeply congested. There was a con- siderable quantity of dark coloured blood oozing out from the brain. The ventricles were dilated with fluid; the substance of the brain was hard. 22 Nga Po Lu ... 16th June 1895 Good ... 29th August 1897. 32 8th September 1897. No. 433, acute membronous colitis. There were several large ulcers; in the large intestine the ulcers have very definite edges and are of great size ; the whole diseased surface is raised ; ulcers extended whole way round the gut; most of them have an adherent slough which is membranous. 23 Ma Nge ... 30th October 1894. Indifferent 5th June 1897 32 12th Septem- ber 1897. Debility ... Body greatly emaciated. All the organs were shrunken; the substance of the brain was soft. The small intestines were congested in patches; the mucous membrane of the large intestine quite striped off; it has a denuded look with patches of discolouration. 24 Ma Gyi ... 24th February 1892. Fair ... 5th December 1896. 30 23rd Septem- ber 1897. Diarrhxiv. APPENDICES. Deaths during the year 1897APPENDICES. xv. STATEMENT NO. IX.xvi. APPENDICES. STATEMENT No. X.APPENDICES. xvii. STATEMENT No. XI.xviii. APPENDICES. Abstract of Cash Account. Name of asylum. ESTABLISHMENT. DIET. CLOTHING AND BED- DING. MEDICINES. CONTINGENCIES. GRAND TOTAL. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Total cost. Cost per head of average strength. Rangoon Lunatic Asylum. Rs. 13,997-1-9. Rs. 41-15-11. Rs. 23,979-3-6. Rs. 71-15-1. Rs. 1,358-15-6. * Rs. 4-1-3. Rs. 64-14-5.REPORT ON THE RANGOON LUNATIC ASYLUM For the year 1897. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] RANGOON : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1898. [Price, 