REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1883-84. Lahore: PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1885.
Proceedings of the Hou'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, in the Home, (Medical and Sanitary) Department No.19, dated 8th January 1885. READ( 2 ) to the effect that the supervisor should supply the lambardár of each village with a list of persons vaccinated, so that inspecting officers may be able to check the work done and ascertain the proportion inspected from time to time. His Honor is gratified to observe the growing attention which is being paid to inspection work. 7. The special staff of vaccinators in the Eastern Circle performed 52,036 operations in Native States. The number of cases exceeded 3,000 in each of the States of Mandi, Biláspur, Bághal, Keonthal, Bashahr, Suket, and Nálagarh. It is satisfactory to observe that opposition was nowhere met with in any of the 33 States in which vaccinators were employed, except in Bashahr and Dujána. In Bashahr the Rája rendered all the assistance which could reasonably be expected of him. Sir Charles Aitchison notices with satisfac- tion that the objections felt by the Nawáb of Dujána to vaccine operations in his territory have now been removed. The special staff of the Western Circle did good work in the Ráwalpindi, Jhelum, and Hazára Districts, and, except in parts of the Gujarkhan tahsíl bordering on Pindigheb and on the Jhelum District, little or no difficulty was experienced in carrying on the work. The number vaccinated by this staff was 13,228. 8. The Lieutenant-Governor regrets to learn that vaccination continues to remain in a very unsatisfactory state in the cantonments of the Province. In only two cantonments, out of thirteen situated within the Eastern Circle, is there a vaccinator employed, namely, in Umballa and Subáthu. In Umballa Surgeon-Major O'Connell, A.M.D., has shown great interest in the work. The neglect of vaccination operations in the Jullundur Cantonment has formed the subject of separate correspondence. The rules laid down by the Government of India on the general question of vaccination in cantonments are sufficient if acted up to. Heretofore they have not been sufficiently regarded ; but attention has been called to them during the past summer, and the Sanitary Commissioner has taken measures to ensure their observance in future. 9. Seven thousand eight hundred and twenty-seven persons were vaccinated in the several dispensaries of the Province. 10. In conclusion, the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor desires to acknowledge the services of the Sanitary Commissioner and of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioners, as well as of the native gentlemen mentioned in paragraph 19 of the Report. ORDER.SECTION VII.( 2 ) It will be seen from the above statement that excepting Gurgaon, Karnál and Rohtak in the Eastern, and Jhang, Muzaffargarh, Pesháwar and Hazára in the Western Circle, all other districts show an increase in the number of vaccinations performed during the year under review, as compared with the previous year. The increase was most marked in Kángra 13,598, Hoshiárpur 8,228, Amritsar 7,578, Siálkot 7,482, Gurdáspur 6,966, and Jhelum 6,578. In Pesháwar, Karnál and Muzaffargarh the decrease is very trifling, namely, 83, 123 and 217 respectively. In regard to Gurgaon, Rohtak and Hazára no special reasons are assigned for the decrease in the number of vaccinations by the Civil Surgeons of these districts in their annual reports; but it seems to me that the unpopularity of vaccination is the main cause of the fluctuations from year to year in the number of vaccination operations. In the Jhang district the Civil Surgeon attributes the diminution in the number principally to two causes( 3 ) district might not do in another. I therefore merely commend Dr. O'Neill's suggestion, and leave the practical point to the discretion of the Civil Surgeons to act upon it as far as they think feasible. Examination and super- vision of vaccination oper- ations. 6. The work of examining the vaccinations performed by the vaccinators is carried out by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioners, the Civil Surgeons and native supervisors; but it should also be noted that in many districts the native supervisor is unable to inspect all the vaccinations, so that part of the work of recording results has to be left to some of the vaccinators themselves, for, besides inspecting the work of the vaccinators, he has many other things to do, especially when vaccination is carried out with difficulty. In every case, however, the greater number of operations are inspected by the native supervisor, and this along with inspections by Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons gives a considerable amount of check over the returns. In January 1884 I issued a circular to all Civil Surgeons to note particularly in their annual reports the number of vaccination operations, with primary and re-vaccinations, personally examined, and the number found successful in each case. The following statement shows the number of vaccin- ations actually inspected by the Civil Surgeons, Assistant Surgeons and native supervisors, and the number of those found successful and, unsuccessful during the year 1883-84 :( 4 ) Districts visited by the Deputy Sanitary Commis- sioners. and the general results of their inspections. 7. During the year Dr. O'Neill visited the districts of Jullundur, Umballa, Rohtak, Delhi, Karnál, Hissar and Sirsa; and Surgeon G. W. P. Dennys, while officiating for him (from 16th August 1883 to 10th January 1884) visited the districts of Amritsar, Gurdáspur and Siálkot. The vaccin- ations seen by Dr. O'Neill were, he observes, &quot;of the usual type,&quot; and the conduct of the vaccinators, so far as he could ascertain, has been fairly good. In every district visited he made a point to see the Deputy Commissioner, if it were possible to do so, and in no case did he hear of any complaints of a serious nature of the general behaviour of the men of the Department. Dr. Doyle inspected the districts of Shahpur, Dera Ismail Khan, Dera Gházi Khan, Muzaffargarh, Montgomery, Mooltan and Lahore, besides Murree and Hazára, which are his head-quarters during the summer. He submits the following report of his inspection of each district:( 5 ) 6 punctures except for special reasons. The native supervisor, Imám Dín, deserves credit for having introduced arm-to-arm vaccination so successfully into the district. &quot;I visited the lower portion of the Muzaffargarh district. Vaccination had not at that time been begun in the upper part. Vaccination is difficult in the lower part, whereas it is easy in the upper half. 19 had 7 vesicles or scars. 497 ( 6 ) &quot;Having to arrange for sending vaccinators to Baháwalpur I returned to Mooltan. 136 bad 6 scare. 26 ( 7 ) No. State Number vaccina- ted No. State Number vaccina- ted 1 Mandi ... 10,201 18 Sángri ... 499 2 Biláspur ... 9,184 19 Bhagat ... 414 3 Bághal ... 5,218 20 Kotgarh ... 296 4 Keonthal ... 5,037 21 Solon ... 263 5 Bashahr ... 4,319 22 Kot Khái ... 233 6 Suket 3,621 23 Mailog ... 228 7 Nálagarh ... 3,384 24 Loháru ... 217 8 Kalsia ... 1,337 25 Bharauli ... 193 9 Patiála ... 962 26 Kunhiár ... 186 10 Bhajji ... 834 27 Dhámi ... 182 11 Balsan ... 818 28 Darkoti ... 100 12 Jubbal ... 712 29 Mángal ... 79 13 Taroch ... 703 30 Dagshai ... 62 14 Kumhársain ... 695 31 Bheja 61 15 Theog ... 658 32 Kuthár 53 16 Pataudi ... 634 33 Kasauli ... 23 17 Kotli 625 Total 52,036 The special staff during the year confined its operations, with a trifling exception, to the Native States, in which 52,036 operations were perform- ed. The number of persons vaccinated in each State is given in the margin. Opposition was no where met with, except in the States of Bashahr and Dujána. The Rája of Bashahr, as Dr. O'Neill reports, when small-pox appears in his State, urgently asks for vaccina- tors, and generally grants them travelling allowance for the jour- ney they make to his State ; but it is with difficulty he can be induced to bring any pressure to bear on his subjects to accept vaccination. The Nawáb of Dujána is of quite a different temperament. He hear- tily dislikes the vaccinators and all their works, and is at no pains to conceal his feelings. Last year there was great difficulty met with in vaccinating his State, and this year the opposition was renewed and maintained till the Commissioner of the Hissar Division wrote to the Nawáb, His letter must have put the advantages of vaccination in such a light as to have brought convic- tion to the mind of His Highness, &quot;for,&quot; observes Dr. O'Neill, &quot; all opposition was at once removed, and the work went on very well.&quot; The Commissioner, Hissar Division, however, informed the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner that he had heard of complaints regarding the conduct of the vaccinators from the people of the Dujána State; but the complaints were of an indefinite nature, and no specific charge could be brought against any vaccinator in particular. &quot; I doubt not,&quot; says Dr. O'Neill, &quot; the men were too ready to assert themselves, and it is possible they under-rated the value of suavity of manner, and thought any deficiency in this respect might be compensated for by firmness of will.&quot; It must be remem- bered, however, that that was the first time vaccination was performed in the State, and the natives were to a certain extent hostile. Detail of work performed by the special staff of the Western Circle. 11. The special staff of vaccinators attached to the Western Circle worked in the Hazára and Murree hills during the summer. In October they commenced work in the Gujar Khan tahsíl, and Dr. Doyle, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, remarks that &quot; excepting parts of the tahsíl that border on Pindigheb and on the Jhelum. district there was little difficulty in carrying on the work.&quot; 3,455 vaccinations were performed by the special staff in this tahsíl. From Gujar Khan some of the men proceeded to Hazára, while three of them went to work in Pind Dádan Khan. The following table gives the localities traversed and the operations performed by the vaccinators during the year :( 8 ) Establishment and cost of the special staffs. 12. The following table shows the vaccination establishment of the special staff entertained in each circle, and the annual expenditure on the Provincial Funds, including the salaries of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioners :( 9 ) VACCINATION IN NATIVE STATES. Native States of Patiála, Baháwalpur, Jínd, Nábha, Kapurlhala, Farídkot and Máler Kotla. 14. I have received no reports from the Punjab Government up to date of the vaccination work performed during the year in the marginally noted Native States, except that of Máler Kotla. These States, in accordance with Punjab Government No. 715, dated the 4th October 1882, have to make their own arrangements for carrying out vaccination. The number of vaccinations performed in the Máler Kotla State from 1st October 1883 to March 1884 was 4,805, of which 4,560 are shown as successful, 127 unsuccessful, and 180 as doubtful. Dr. Doyle reports that in Baháwalpur 6 vaccinators are entertained by the State. There is no native supervisor. In April 1884 I was informed by telegram from the Punjab Government of the outbreak of small-pox in this State, and was directed to make arrange- ments for stamping out the disease. I accordingly placed a native supervisor and 4 vaccinators of the Mooltan district staff, and 2 vaccinators of the special staff of the Western Circle, at the disposal of the State authorities to assist in checking the spread of the disease. The Rája of Bashahr has lately made an application, through the Deputy Commissioner of Simla, for the services of 23 vaccinators to carry on vaccination in his State. The necessary enquiries on this subject are being made by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Eastern Circle. The vaccination work performed in the minor Native States are conducted by the vaccinators of the special staff, and the total vaccinations performed in them have already been given in paragraph 10. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. Vaccination in Dispensa- ries. 15. The following statement shows the number of vaccinations performed in the several Dispensaries of the Punjab Pro- vince during the year, as also the agencies through which the work was done :( 10 ) tion is so great that vaccination is done altogether, Dr. O'Neill reports, ( 11 ) Names of officials and non-officials in each distinct of the Province whose services in the cause of vaccination are brought to the notice of Government. District Name Occupation Place of residence DELHI Rám Bakhsh ... Zaildár ... Sonepat. Doongar ... ( 12 ) Names of officials and non-officials( 13 ) Names of officials and non-officials( 14 ) DELHI. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 15 ) VIII.( 16 ) &quot; As regards the city, only 1,067 children have been vaccinated during the last 3 months ; a census of 9 wards out of 13, which has been taken in spite of some opposition, gives 7,848 children, showing that there are about 12,000 to be done. If the vaccinators do 3,000 altogether it will be a marvel: the wealthiest and most intelligent persons are opposed to vaccination, and as none of the members of the Committee, excepting one or two, have their own children done, it is not to be expected that they can or will help. &quot;If some solid reward was granted taking the form of remission of taxation, or money given to dig a well or tank, I am quite convinced that nothing would be more popular than vaccination in the district. Rewards should be substantial, mere parwánas will not suffice, and in a year of great scarcity like the present such rewards would seem doubled in value. &quot; For the city of Delhi there is but one remedy, and that is to make vaccination compulsory. It would be a religious ceremony in five years, especially if entrusted to Brahmans altogether, and lymph provided from and brought down from the hills every season by that caste.&quot; In transmitting the Civil Surgeon's report to this office, Mr. Smyth, the Deputy Commissioner, observes :( 17 ) re-vaccinations was 76 against 42 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 20.26 against 22.42 in the preceeding year ; decrease 2.16. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,755 as compared with Rs. 1,585, an increase of Rs. 170, and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-2, decrease Re. 0-0-7. One thousand one hundred, and sixty-three primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Mr. R. E. Wrafter), of which 1,133 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 97.42 per cent. From the first supply of two tubes of vaccine lymph forwarded by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Eastern Circle, Punjab, on the 23rd September 1883, four children were vaccinated with six punctures, i.e., three on each arm, and on the sixth day from the date of vaccination 16 well-developed and mature vesicles appeared. Another supply of six tubes of lymph was received subsequent- ly from the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, which also proved successful. In October 1882 vaccine operations were first started in the Fírozpur tahsíl, where the whole of the vaccinators were employed in a body by zails under the immediate supervision of the native supervisor of vaccination; and, after finishing this tahsíl, the operations were extended to Palwal, where they worked throughout the tahsíl with the exception of a few villages which could not be done owing to want of time, as the hot weather having set in the operations could not be carried on successfully. The work is now discontinued. In the Nuh tahsíl, where small-pox was reported to have occurred, two vaccinators were sent to vaccinate unprotected children, and one vaccinator was sent to the Rewári town to assist the Assistant Surgeon in vaccinating children there. This vaccinator has also done some work in a few villages of the Rewári tahsíl. In compliance with the instructions conveyed in this office Circular No. 22, dated 30th November 1883, all the medical subordinates were requested to popu- larize and extend the cause of vaccination and to vaccinate themselves as far as possible within the towns were they are stationed. The Hospital Assistants of Sohna, Nuh, Farukhnagar and Gurgaon, and Assistant Surgeon of Rewári and Compounders and Dressers of Gurgaon Sadr, Rewári and Nuh dispensaries, have done vaccination work. It is satisfactory to mention that the people of Fírozpur and Palwal tahsíls, particularly Meos, Játs, and other inferior classes, most willingly and cheerfully bring their children for vaccination( 18 ) KARNAL. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below:( 19 ) the simple reason, he states, &quot; that on my proceeding to inspect vaccination in any town or village the unsuccessful cases were not produced.&quot; In the Municipal towns he compared a good many of the tickets given to the parents of the children with their corresponding counterfoils and found the entries correct. The amount of assistance given and interest shown in vaccination work by the different Municipal Committees showed a marked contrast. In the Municipal towns of Kaithal and Pánipat great interest was apparently shown, and every assistance personally given to the Civil Surgeon in collecting and inspecting the children vaccinated. In Kaithal the Civil Surgeon would especially wish to mention the name of Kázi Ghulám Nabi, a member of the Municipal Committee, as having been of the greatest use to him, not only in the city but in the surrounding villages. The Municipality of Pundri took no interest and gave no assistance in inspecting the children. The Municipal Committee of Karnál, with the exception of Nawáb Shamshere Ali Khán, would give no assistance. This is well shown by the fact that out of 209 children vaccinated in the Karnál city the Civil Surgeon has only been able to personally inspect 60. Repeated efforts have been made to obtain the assistance of the members of the Karnál Municipal Committee in collecting the remainder of the children. They declined doing so, said they had other work, and finally stated that they were too fully engaged in the important work of the forthcoming Local Self-Government elections, &c., to assist the Civil Surgeon. Under the pressure brought to bear on them by the Deputy Commissioner they offered to collect a small number of children each day until the Civil Surgeon had seen them all. This would of course leave the door open to the probable fraud of reproduction of the same children day after day, and was consequently refused. In the larger Municipalities of Kaithal and Pánipat there was not the slightest difficulty in having at least three-fourths of the entire number of children vaccinated produced at one time for inspection. The natural explanation of the supposed difficulty is to be found in the apathy and indifference of the members of the Karnál Municipality to vaccination, with the single exception of Nawáb Shamshere Ali Khán. This Nawáb has further set a good example by having two of his own children vaccinated, such an example being much more valuable than an infinity of the usual expressions of interest, &c. HISSAR. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 20 ) The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 12,291, being an increase of 1,840 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 11,582 primary cases returned as successful against 10,098 in the previous year, and the percentage of success 94.23 as compared with 96.62, being a decrease of 2.39. No re-vaccinations were performed either in this or the previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 22.97 against 20.03 in the preceding year ; increase 2.94. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,608 as compared with Rs. 605, an increase of Rs. 3 ; and each successful case cost Re. 0-2-2, decrease Re. 0-0-4. One thousand five hundred and sixty-nine primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. J. A. Cooper), of which 1,531 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 97.58 per cent. Vaccination operations were carried on from arm-to-arm. The vaccinators were ordered to do the work from Fatahabad tahsíl, all working in one tahsíl in two bodies. The vaccination was first established by lymph in tubes at Hissar town by the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon and Native Supervisor on the 1st October 1883. The supply of lymph was of good quality which enabled the vaccinators to extend the operation from arm-to-arm to the neighbouring villages, and then to the Fatahabad, Barwála and Hánsi tahsíls. The Civil Surgeon inspected the children of the Hissar, Fatahabad, Barwála and Hánsi tahsíls and was satisfied as to the genuineness of the vaccination by personally examining the children. Dr. Cooper has ordered the Assistant Surgeons and Hospital Assistants of each dispensary to vaccinate all the children of the town in future. This will enable the vaccinators to carry out the district vaccinations more strenuously and uninterruptedly. Endemic small-pox is reported by the Civil Surgeon to have prevailed during the winter at Hissar, Hánsi, Fatahabad and Barwála in a mild form, but the good result of vaccination prevented an epidemic. ROHTAK. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 21 ) re-vaccinations was 27 against 10 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 25.40 against 27.16 in the preceding year ; decrease 1.76. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,495 as compared with Rs. 1,265, an increase of Rs. 230; and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-8, increase Re. 0-0-4. Ten thousand eight hundred and fourteen primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Mr. T. Baron), of which 10,658 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 98.56 per cent. *Mr. G. Davics, Lálas Diwán Singh, Jot Hám, Haruám Singh. Bahádur Ali Khán, and Turabáz Khàn. In this district vaccine operations began in the first week of October, and ended on the 27th March. The whole district was worked over. The plan adopted was to divide the staff into two parties, establishing lymph (from tubes received through the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner) at two opposite extremes of the district, the parties then worked on and finished up at Rohtak itself. They had two tahsíls each. This plan has been adopted two seasons running, and has worked well. The Civil Surgeon inspected the work of each party alter- nately. Lymph was established under his supervision, and the arm-to-arm method was followed. Mr. Baron is glad to be able to record that considerably less opposition was met with this season, and believes that before very long the people will bring their children to the dispensaries to be vaccinated. He writes in very commendable terms of the assistance rendered in the cause of vaccination by Rái Sálig Rám, Extra Assistant Commissioner of Jhajjar, and Rái Manohar Lál of Rohtak. The Tahsíldárs too, as also the members of the Municipal Committee of Rohtak, * gave all the help they could, and were indefatigable in persuading the people to accept vaccination. On the whole, the result may be said to be satisfactory. The Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Steel, in forwarding the report to this office, observes :( 22 ) 96.92 as compared with 9679, being an increase of 0.13. The number of re-vaccinations was 159 against 5 of previous year. The number successfully- vaccinated per mille of population was 36.36 against 32.99 in the preceding year; increase 3.37. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,603 as compared with Rs. 1,706, a decrease of Rs. 103, and each successful case cost Re. 0-2-9, decrease Re. 0-0-6. Four thousand four hundred and eighty-nine primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Mr. R. Crossley), of which 4,447 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 99.06 per cent. As early in October as possible, i.e., as soon as a supply of lymph was received, work was begun, and as soon as a sufficient supply of fresh lymph was collected from the arms of the most healthy children the operators were distri- buted for the work. The 6 vaccinators divided into two parties, and beginning at the head-quarters of the district went through the three tahsíls in rotation. By the end of October the 1st-class vaccinator was separated from the rest of the staff and began inspections. The Civil Surgeon began his inspections in November. The three tahsíls with over 600 villages were gone through during the year, 9,818 operations having been performed. The work has been, so far as Mr. Crossley has seen it, remarkably well done, fully 75 per cent. having 6 good marks, 23 per cent. 4 and 5 marks, and the rest 2 and 3 only. 0.54 per cent. only proved unsuccessful. The Civil Surgeon inspected 197 villages during the year in which 2,905 children were vaccinated. The 1st-class vaccinator recorded 2,762 as successful, 11 unsuccessful, and 132 unknown of the above. The municipal towns of Ellenabad and Sirsa were also inspected by him, and 450 were found registered as vaccinated. Of this number 432 were reported as successful and 18 as unknown. The arms of 381 children were examined and every one was found to be successfully vaccinated. The Civil Surgeon obtained monthly supplies of fresh lymph from the Association for supply of pure vaccine lymph established in London (the same plan adopted by him last year), and to it he attributes mainly the success which has attended operations in this district. A monthly supply of a dozen tubes at a time enabled him to keep up a healthy flow of good lymph in a much wider area, and thus saved much of the trouble that used to be experienced before, and reduced to a mini- mum the necessity for taking children from their own houses to any other village for vaccination. This was done only where a village with 3 or 4 children hap- pened to be within easy distance of a larger one where the operators were at work. In conclusion the Civil Surgeon observes &quot; that nearly every surviving child born in the district during the previous twelve months bad been vaccinated.&quot; UMBALLA. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 23 ) 1882-83 1883-84 Total vaccinations (including primary and re-vaccina- tions) ... 10,652 23,889 Successful cases ... 17,878 21,597 Percentage of successful cases ... 92.16 90.83 Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population 16.87 20.28 Average number vaccinated by each vaccinator ... 1,511.69 1,837.60 Cost of each successful case Re. 0-2-4 0-1-11 The work performed by the above establish- ment during the two years is shown in the margin. The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 23,889, being an increase of 4,237 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 21,597 primary cases returned as successful against 17,878 in the previous year, and the percentage of success 90.83 as compared with 92.16, being a decrease of 1.33. The number of re-vacci- nations was 113 against 255 of previous year. The number successfully vacci- nated per mille of population was 20.28 against 16.87 in the preceding year; increase 3.41. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 2,556 as compared with Rs. 2,670, a decrease of Rs. 114; and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-11, decrease Re. 0-0-5. Five hundred and fifty-seven primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. R. S. Bateson), of which 529 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 94.97 per cent. During the year vaccinators were distributed as follows :( 24 ) Four thousand two hundred and ninety-four primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. R. Rouse), of which 4,276 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 99.58 per cent. Vaccination operations were continued from April to June 1883, and the vesicles were very good in the hot months of May and June. The people, however, complained of vaccination being carried on during the hot months, and it was therefore stopped about the middle of June. At the end of September the whole of the vaccinators, including the native supervisor, were called to Ludhiána from the district to commence vaccine operations. The first supply of lymph sent by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner was received on the 26th September, and 2 children were vaccinated with it in the town of Ludhiána on the 27th by punctures. Six good vesicles were produced on the 3rd October, when the Civil Surgeon and native supervisor went to the spot and vaccinated 8 children from these vesicles, all of which proved successful on the 9th idem. Twenty-two children were then vaccinated from the vesicles of 6 healthy children, which gave good results on the 15th. Lymph was then filled in capillary tubes and glasses, and the vaccinators were distributed as follows :( 25 ) Civil Surgeon's system and arrangements have been very thorough, and he arranged in concert with myself that as far as possible children taken for supply of lymph should not be taken out of their own villages, which was a great cause of objection and unpopularity before. The Municipal Committee of Jagraon have applied to have the Act introduced, and I hope soon to submit like applications from all the towns of the district.&quot; SIMLA. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 26 ) 1882-83 1883-84 Total vaccinations (including primary and re-vaccina- tions) ... ... ... ... 22,962 26,840 Successful cases ... ... ... ... 21,543 24,997 Percentage of successful cases ... ... ... 93.88 93.34 Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population 27.29 31.70 Average number vaccinated by each vaccinator ... 1,913.50 2,236.66 Cost of each successful case ... ... Re. 0-1-10 0-1-7 The work performed by the above establish- ment during the two years is shown in the margin. The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 26,840, being an increase of 3,878 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 24,997 primary cases returned as successful against 21,543 in the previous year, and the percentage of success 93.34 as compared with 93.88, being a decrease of 0.54. The number of re-vaccin- ations was 62 against 17 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 31.70 against 27.29 in the preceding year; increase 4.41. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 2,453 as compared with Rs. 2,476, a decrease of Rs. 23, and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-7, decrease Re. 0-0-3. Three thousand six hundred and seventeen primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. F. F. Perry), of which 3,597 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 99.45 per cent. On Dr. Perry's arrival at Jullundur the work of vaccination had been commenced on the plan that had been adopted in the previous year. The vaccinating staff being divided into two parties, both parties commencing work in the same tahsíl, each taking half, or after completing the work then work- ing simultaneously into the next. On commencing operations in any tahsíl the supervisor of vaccination was required to furnish the Civil Surgeon with a list giving the dates on which the various towns and villages would be ready for inspection, and the Civil Surgeon, as far as he was able, made it a practice of personally inspecting the results at the towns and larger villages. Commencing with the Nakodar tahsíl the staff proceeded to Phillour, next into Nawashahr, and finished up with Jullundur. The number of villages vaccinated was 1,221. The following are the names of certain individuals from whom Dr. Perry received special help in carrying on vaccination operations : Sardár Ajít Singh of Aláwalpur, Zaildár Isar Singh of Daruli, Polo Rám of Jadilah, Bambu Khán of Ráhon, Sham Singh of Talun, Mihr Nizám-ud-dín of Jullundur, Sardár Bhagat Singh of Shahkot, and Sardár Jaimal Singh of Phillour. The creditable manner in which native supervisor Niáz Ali Shah performed his duties is also brought to notice. The popularity of the vaccination operations in this district is owing, to a considerable extent, to the tact and judgment he has shown. He has always been indefatigable in this work. HOSHIARPUR. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below:( 27 ) 1882-83 1883-84 Total vaccinations (including primary and re-vaccina- tions) ... ... ... ... 24,215 32,443 Successful cases ... ... ... 23,346 31,339 Percentage of successful cases ... ... ... 96.51 96.62 Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population 25.91 34.78 Average number vaccinated by each vaccinator ... 1,862.69 2,703.58 Cost of each successful case ... ... ... Re. 0-1-6 0-1-2 The work performed by the above establish- ment during the two years is shown in the margin. The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 32,443, being an increase of 8,228 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 31,339 primary cases returned as successful against 23,346 in the previous year, and the percentage of success 96.62 as compared with 96.51, being an increase of 0.11. The number of re-vaccinations was 7 against 27 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 34.78 against 25.91 in the preceding year ; increase 8.87. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 2,237 as compared with Rs. 2,224, an increase of Rs. 13, and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-2, decrease Re. 0-0-4. Three thousand eight hundred and eleven primary vaccinations were in- spected by the Civil Surgeon (Mr. C. L. Fox), of which 3,793 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 99.52 per cent. Each vaccinator was furnished with two books (for municipal towns only) which contained blank pages of counterfoil tickets, and at the end of the month the number of operations performed was shown in their monthly return, and as far as practicable checked by the 1st-class vaccinator. These tickets bore the name of the child to be vaccinated, the name of the father, the age of the child and date when the operation was completed; the date on the parent's ticket and counterfoil was entered with direction to appear on the specified date. The work of vaccination first began in Hoshiárpur tahsíl, and the children in the towns of Hoshiárpur, Bahádurpur, Khánpur and the suburbs were operated on, and from them the lymph was conveyed from village to village accord- ing to zails until the Hoshiárpur tahsíl was completed. The staff then was divided into 4 gangs of 3 each ; of these, 6 men were sent to the Garhshankar and 6 to the Dasúya tahsíls, taking up their work by zails and concluding in like manner. After they had finished these two tahsíls the entire body entered the Una tahsíl. In this tahsíl the population is sparse and the villages and houses far apart, and a great deal of time is required to complete the work. Vaccination lymph was obtained from the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner in two tubes, and on the 26th September 4 children were vaccinated by 21 insertions of lymph. Of this number 17 well-developed vesicles were the result. A second supply of 3 tubes was received on the 30th September, 36 insertions in 6 children were made on the 3rd October, and of this number 12 vesicles were produced, and only 5 well-developed ones was the result. From the above sources vaccination operations were commenced on the 2nd October 1883, and steadily carried out through each tahsíl, namely, Hoshiárpur, Garhshankar, Dasúya and Una; and on the 26th March 1884 the entire work of the district was completed. The Civil Surgeon, Mr. Fox, states that the greatest difficulty is experi- enced in the work of vaccination in the Una tahsíl. The population here, he says, is sparse, consisting of Rájputs ; the houses are situated far apart from each other, studded about the hills, and their constant refusal to bring their children to a certain spot or village on the plea that they are pardawálas, and must have their children vaccinated at their respective houses. This opposition causes a great deal of inconvenience, delay and hardship to the vaccinators, together with the loss of time and lymph, while in the other tahsíls the work is got through in a comparatively short time. &quot; This is quite true,&quot; says the Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Roe; who remarks further that &quot;it is a great hardship for women in these hills to have to take their children to another village.&quot; The hardship complained against is quite evident, particularly in the hills, as I myself noticed during my recent tour in this part of the country, and the only remedy that I can suggest is for the Civil and Medical authorities to
( 28 ) fix a particular day for the people of a particular locality to bring their children for vaccination to some specified spot, say a temple, or the priest's or headman's house. The parents would probably make no objection to meeting the vaccinators at the local temple or other shrine. KANGRA. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 29 ) During my cold-weather tour through a part of this district I inspected a number of children both at Kángra and Jawálamukhi, and reported to the Civil Surgeon that the work was not satisfactory ; the vesicles were badly developed, the scars very superficial, and in many cases I found only one or two marks. Dr. Dennys made careful enquiry into this matter so far as he was able, and the result appears that the work was done almost entirely, if not exclusively, by Hospital Assistants. They were supplied again with fresh lymph wherewith to start work again on a better footing. The Hospital Assistants have, however, been unable, through various causes, want of time, &c, to keep the lymph going, and the work has again come to a stand-still. The Civil Surgeon reports that he has good reason to believe that a large number of operations performed by Hospital Assistants have not been included in the monthly returns of the district, and he is unable to say why they did not send in any returns, and their not doing so must undoubtedly decrease to a great extent the total number of operations performed in the district during the year. Orders have been issued, however, to the effect that in future all Hospital Assistants are to report in the usual form the number of cases performed by them monthly. Dr. Dennys states in his report that the system at present in force of employing Hospital Assistants as vaccinators in their respective municipalities has not been a success. He has had numbers of complaints of various sorts regarding the work done by these men, who complain that they cannot find the time to go about from mohalla to mohalla vaccinating without greatly interfer- ing with their dispensary duties, and that no help can be obtained by them from tahsíl and district officials in the work of vaccination. And further on it is stated that the system of dispensary vaccination, which has been carried on largely in the district, has been an endless trouble to him, and has been a failure. For want of funds the present district staff cannot be strengthened by the entertainment of additional vaccinators, but I would suggest that where Hospital Assistants experience difficulties, such as that brought to notice by Dr. Dennys, they should not be employed in vaccination work. Much of the difficulty brought to notice by the Civil Surgeon will doubtless be obviated by the proposal recently adopted by the Committee to utilize the services of the Hospital Assistants for vaccination purposes within a convenient distance of their respective jurisdictions, and this arrangement will, to a certain extent, set the vaccination staff free to give more time and attention to points where small-pox may happen to be unusually troublesome. AMRITSAR. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 30 ) 1882.83 1883-84 Total vaccinations (including primary and re-vaccina- tions) ... ... ... ... 17,902 25,480 Successful cases ... ... ... 16,845 24,358 Percentage of successful cases ... ... 95.81 96.93 Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population 19.08 27.46 Average number vaccinated by each vaccinator ... 1,377.07 1,960.00 Cost of each successful case ... ... ... Re. 0-2-7 0-1-10 The work performed by the above establish- ment during the two years is shown in the margin. The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 25,480, being an increase of 7,578 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 24,358 primary cases returned as successful against 16,845 in the previous year, and the percentage of success 96.93 as compared with 95.81, being an increase of 1.12. The number of re- vaccinations was 350 against 323 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 27.46 against 19.08 in the preceding year; increase 8.38. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 2,901 as compared with Rs. 2,816, an increase of Rs. 85, and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-10, decrease Re. 0-0-9. One thousand and ninety-one primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon, of which 1,052 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 96.42 per cent. Amritsar city.( 31 ) District Vaccination.( 32 ) During the year the Four tahsíls of Gurdáspur, Batála, Shakargarh and Pathánkot were overhauled by the vaccination establishment. Although the work of vaccination cannot be said to be altogether popular, no opposition of a serious nature was raised, the attitude of the people, especially in the towns of Batála and Fatahgarh, having been more apathetic than antagonistic. The Civil Surgeon reports very unfavorably on the amount of help given to the vaccinators from members of Municipal Committees. In the town of Batála, with the exception of Rái Bhág Singh, the members took neither interest nor gave any assistance to the staff. In Fatahgarh great difficulty was experienced in vaccination. The Civil Surgeon, however, in his tour of inspection has impressed on the members the great necessity of the operation, and he hopes to receive more hearty assistance next vaccinating season. The Deputy Commissioner, Lieutenant-Colonel A. F. P. Harcourt, states( 33 ) The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 43,960, being an increase of 7,432 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 43,532 primary cases returned as successful against 36,049 in the previous year, and the percentage of success 99.11 as compared with 98.76, being an increase of 0.35. The number of re-vac- cinations was 38 against 28 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 43.02 against 35.60 in the preceding year ; increase 7.42. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 2,745 as compared with Rs. 2,627, an increase of Rs. 118, and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-1, equal to that of last year. Two thousand one hundred and thirty-six primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon, of which 2,119 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 99.20 per cent. Before commencing vaccine operations in October 1883 each of the vaccinators was furnished with a copy of the rules for the guidance of the vaccination staff in vernacular signed by the Civil Surgeon, and they were told that the names of those deserving of special notice would be reported to the Sanitary Commissioner, and that such reports would be determined not so much by the number of children vaccinated as by the results of the vaccination. The work was begun in one tahsíl, and the vaccinators divided into three sets, each of which was placed under one of the head vaccinators. The whole tahsíl was divided into as many circles as there were zails, and to each set of vaccinators a certain number of zails was allotted, the whole of the work being placed under the supervision of the native supervisor. The vaccin- ators worked from village to village, but in some places where small villages were close together the children were collected in one village at a site previous- ly fixed, and there they were vaccinated from vaccinifers brought to meet them. When one tahsíl was finished operations were commenced in the next tahsíl in the villages adjoining. Two tubes of lymph were received from the Deputy Sanitary Commis- sioner on the 27th September 1883, and on the 1st October 3 children were vaccinated with one tube in the village of Pul Bajá in the Bajwát iláka, tahsíl Siálkot, situated on the other side (from Siálkot city) of the river Chenab. In the same iláka two children were vaccinated with the other tube in the village of Sokhyái: in both cases the lymph took very good effect. On the 3rd October a fresh supply of lymph in three tubes was received, and on the 4th idem 6 more children were vaccinated in the village of Jhang, iláka Bajwát. The third supply of lymph was a failure. From the three vaccinifers at Pul Bajú about 50 children were vaccinated on the 7 th October, and from the two at Sokhyái 30 children were vaccinated on the 9th, and from the three at Jhang 95 children on the 11th idem. From these sources the whole of the Bajwát iláka, consisting of three zails, was vaccinated by the 23rd October. The Bajwát iláka was selected as it is traversed by numerous natural and artificial channels, and was consequently at that season of the year much colder than any of the others. From the Bajwát iláka a good supply of lymph was stored in glass slides and operations commenced on the Siálkot side of the Chenab from three centres of vaccination, namely, one at Chaprár in charge of 4 vaccinators, a second at Gondal in charge of 5 vaccinators, and a third at the Sadr town of Siálkot in charge of 6 vaccinators. In this way the whole of the Siálkot tahsíl was finished by the end of November 1883. The work was then commenced in the Daska, Pasrúr, Raya and Zafarwál tahsíls successively. A portion of the Jummoo territory and the Siálkot cantonment were also overhauled during the season. The number of towns and villages vaccinated was 2,270. In June 1883 the Deputy Commissioner, under instructions from Government, appointed a sub-committee of the Siálkot Municipal Committee to fix upon convenient localities in the city to bring the children together for vaccination purposes in the following season. The Committee selected ten places, and operations were commenced in the town on the 20th October. Assistant Surgeon Fatteh Singh, then in charge of the dispensary, reports as follows :( 34 ) &quot; In this way, although the staff for the town consisted of 6 vaccinators, the opera- tions were prolonged over a period of not less than 36 days, namely, from the 20th October to the 25th November 1883, during which period 1,030 children were vaccinated in all. None of the members of the Municipal Committee accompanied the vaccinators in their work. The Committee ordered one chaprási named Atar Bég to assist the vaccinators while at their work, whose presence, I believe, in the respectable mohallas was always found to be worse than useless. The ten localities as mentioned above were appointed only nominally, very few of them were made use of, and the vaccinators had to go to almost every street for vaccinating children. Had the members been active in giving assistance to the vaccinators, and no unnecessary delay occurred in consequence, the work of vaccina- tion would have been finished in the town in less than five days.&quot; Dr. Shand does not agree with Assistant Surgeon Fatteh Singh's experience of the fixed-site system for municipal towns, and says( 35 ) LAHORE. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 36 ) It was resolved at this meeting of the Municipal Committee that the Civil Surgeon should send up to the Secretary of the Municipal Committee the names of parents who disregarded the notices. The system suggested by me was accordingly put in force, but the Civil Surgeon reports with regret that there has been little if any improvement. &quot; Some of the people,&quot; he says, &quot; refuse to have anything to do with the notices, and many of those who take them pay no attention to them. Of course,&quot; he adds, &quot; no legal action can be taken inasmuch as the Act has not been extended to Lahore and vaccination is not compulsory.&quot; Dr. Gray thinks it right to mention, however, that some of the native members take an interest in vaccination and occasionally accompany the vaccinators, but they seem to have little influence with the people, and comes to the conclusion &quot; that the attempt to protect the majority of children in the city from small-pox by vaccination is, under the present system, a failure, and that the work is now carried on with so much friction, and with so much trouble to all concerned, that a change of system is not only advisable but absolutely necessary.&quot; Two alternatives suggest themselves to him( 37 ) causes (1) to the fact that the order directing children to be vaccinated in their own villages has been more strictly carried out; (2) to transfers and changes that have been made in the staff, in consequence of which there were two short during a part of the vaccinating season and two were beginners ; and (3) to the breaking out of measles in fearful form which carried away several children from almost every village in the district, and left a greater portion sick and unfit for vaccination. But the chief cause is, Dr. Gray believes, that the whole of the district had not been vaccinated for some years before 1882, and consequently the number of unvaccinated children was larger than it will again be, now that the district has its own staff of vacccinators who visit the whole or the greater part of it every year. Assistant Surgeon Múl Chand is reported to have taken great interest in the work. He states in his report that he has given brief lectures on vaccina- tion and sanitation in the villages, and that he has tried to persuade the old and influential gentlemen of the district &quot;to adopt vaccination as a religious rite like others in force, so that their descendants would never after raise any objection to it.&quot; In regard to the number of vaccinations actually inspected by the Civil Surgeon and others, Dr. Gray remarks that &quot;it is not so satisfactory as I should like it to be.&quot; But this is owing to the fact that it is a new form, and that the circular asking for the information was only lately received. In future, however, a more accurate record will be kept. He (the Civil Surgeon) speaks in high terms of the assistance rendered by Mr. Johnston, the Secretary of the Municipal Committee, in the cause of vaccination. I believe some plan was adopted by him for vaccinating females in Zanána schools. I have not been informed of this officially, and should like to hear further particulars of the plan pursued. The subject of introducing some better means for popularizing vaccination in the capital of the Punjab is at present under the consideration of Dr. Gray and myself, but I agree with Colonel Minchin &quot;that the time has come to make vaccination compulsory,&quot; and that until this is done the present difficulties will never be surmounted. The report of Dr. Gray is exceedingly interesting, and reflects great credit upon that officer. GUJRANWALA. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 38 ) The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 23,060, being an increase of 2,415 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 21,257 primary cases returned as successful against 19,562 in the previous year, and the percentage of success 92.40 as compared with 94.85, being a decrease of 2.45. The number of re- vaccinations was 66 against 22 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 34.47 against 31.71 in the preceding year ; increase 2.76. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,661 as compared with Rs. 1,763, a decrease of Rs. 102; and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-3, decrease Re. 0-0-2. Three thousand nine hundred and eighteen primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. R. J. Quinnell), of which 3,886 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 99.18 per cent. The first supply of lymph was received on the 4th October, when arrange- ments were immediately made, and operations started on the 6th idem in a village (Lohiánwála) near the Sadr. Three more supplies arrived at intervals of a few days later on. In each instance, to remove doubt, the Civil Surgeon, Dr. Quinnell, tested their quality himself by vaccinating two or three children in different centres in the neighbourhood; the result having proved to be satis- factory, the work was extended at once by arm-to-arm operations, and, in order that it should be carried on systematically, one tahsíl was done at a time, each being previously mapped out successively into zails and halkas. By this method, omission of villages was impossible, and the operations were confined to areas in turn, which not only allowed of more easy and efficient supervision, but reduced, in a great degree, the amount of trouble and discomfort the parents were sometimes put to in having to travel inconvenient distances with their children for operation or inspection. This plan, moreover, of working near and together, facilitated the submission of reports and returns from the vaccinators with more punctuality than had been the case when they worked in a straggling way in different tahsíls at the same time. The native supervisor, under instructions from the Civil Surgeon, re- mained always with the vaccinators during the time they were engaged in oper- ations, and it is believed that, while his constant presence instilled energy into the work, it had a salutary effect further in preventing carelessness of a kind likely to cause serious prejudice against vaccination, and that is, in not properly examining and excludiug children who, suffering from eruptions and other diseases, were unfitted at the time for vaccination, or for supplying afterwards lymph to other children. The manner in which Dr. Quinnell conducted his own inspections is shown thus in his able and interesting report:( 39 ) in the larger centres, amongst the children born intermediately between the period (October) when operations were first begun, and when they ended (March). If the extent of this interval is considered, it will be apparent that a large number of children have to remain unprotected until the following winter, who might regularly be vaccinated if the establishment could be supplemented. The Civil Surgeon thinks an increase in the staff would be very desirable for another reason. &quot;The staff now employed,&quot; he says, &quot;is barely able to cope with the re- quirements of the infant population, but with a fast-growing appreciation of vacci- nation its benefits might be extended to the adult members also. With an in- crease of, say, three or four vaccinators to the present staff, the entire population would not only be more thoroughly protected, but the prevalence of epidemics be infinitively reduced.&quot; FEROZEPORE. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below:( 40 ) As the villages of three outlying tahsíls of the district were vaccinated according to a uniform plan, one description of the method adopted will apply to all. At the Civil Surgeon's request the Deputy Commissioner issued orders for the division of each tahsíl into four parts; this being done, 2 vaccina- tors were told off to protect each part. From the chaukídárs' books they found out the children born during the year, and, having vaccinated them, they made an entry to that effect in these books; and also, on completion of work, lists showing the children vaccinated in each village were sent to the thánadár. Instead of these lists counterfoil books of tickets were used in the municipal towns. This plan has many advantages( 41 ) The Civil Surgeon inspected 5,669 children; out of this number 5,323 were found successful, 195 unsuccessful, and 151 doubtful. There is sometimes considerable difficulty, judging from the appearance of the scar some months after vaccination, to determine whether the result has been successful or not; in many cases which appeared doubtful, the scar being superficial and small, and presenting no honeycombing, the Civil Surgeon enquired carefully as to whether the vesicles had formed well at the time of ripening, and very often the answer was in the affirmative. The vaccinators assert most positively that where lymph has been taken from an arm, the resulting scar is liable to be small and superficial. The Civil Surgeon has not been able to verify this. In general the result is less satisfactory in the municipalities as can be seen from the greater ratio of unsuccessful and doubtful cases. In almost all cases six punctures were made, except in the case of very young children, where only two to four punctures were made. By far the greater number were marked with six vesicles, and in most cases all six had taken and showed a typical scar. The system of vaccination all over the district is by puncture, scratching being never tried. The Deputy Commissioner and the District Superintendent of Police rendered great assistance in the work of vaccination; without their hearty co- operation the carrying out of the Civil Surgeon's scheme would have been impossible. His Highness the Nawáb of Mamdot gave kind aid on the occasion of the Civil Surgeon's visit to the villages in his State. The great assistance given by the Assistant Surgeon, Malk Jawála Sahái, whose interest in vaccination is unflagging, is also brought to notice. RAWALPINDI. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 42 ) re-vaccinations was 917 against 346 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 23.03 against 18.11 in the preceding year; increase 4.92. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 2,250 as compared with Rs. 2,205, an increase of Rs. 45; and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-11, decrease Re. 0-0-5. Nine hundred and twenty-two primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon, of which 904 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 98.05 per cent. Operations were inspected by Dr. Massy in the following places:( 43 ) From the 1st May to the 20th October 1883 the members of the vaccine staff were employed in sanitary work, that is, visiting the different villages and advising the inhabitants in the first principles of hygiene. On the 21st October vaccine operations were commenced in the town of Jhelum, and the villages in its immediate neighbourhood, and the vaccine staff were instructed not to leave a tahsíl until all the unprotected were vaccinated. In this way work was carried on successively in the tahsíls of Jhelum, Chakwál, Talagang and Pind Dádan Khan. Lest a scarcity of lymph should ensue, one vaccinator was detained in the station, whose duty it was to vaccinate daily one or more children. Wishing to become acquainted with the manner in which vaccine work had hitherto been carried on, and with the feeling of the inhabitants regarding vaccination, the Civil Surgeon, Dr. McDonnell, made, from time to time, visits to many of the villages of the district. In all he saw 835 villages and inspected 8,881 children, in age varying from ten years to a few months ; of this number he found 2,163 without a vaccine scar, and fully as many more with merely a trace of scar. The tahsíls of Jhelum and Pind Dádan Khan are the worst vaccinated, while the distant tahsíl of Talagang is, in this respect, far ahead of other parts of the district. The great majority of those of two years and under are fairly well vaccinated, but those of four years and upwards are, in many instances, quite unprotected. The inhabitants, so far as the Civil Surgeon could discover, show no antipathy to vaccination( 44 ) as compared with 92.18, being an increase of 1.99. The number of re-vaccinations was 40 against 51 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 36.57 against 33.06 in the preceding year ; increase 3.51. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,746 as compared with Rs. 1,983, a decrease of Rs. 237; and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-1, decrease Re. 0-0-3. Five thousand four hundred and thirty-one primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. J. R. Deane), of which 5,133 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 94.51 per cent. The vaccination work was carried on by placing vaccinators singly in each zail of one tahsíl, until the whole tahsíl was completed. When each vaccinator's work was done, he was removed to a neighbour- ing zail in another tahsíl, and so on, until all the tahsíls were covered. The names of the tahsíls are Gujrat, Phálián and Khárián. The whole of the villages in the district, numbering 1,422, were vaccinated. Vaccination was completed in the first-half of the year, on 17th April 1883. It was resumed on 28th September 1883. Arm-to-arm work was re-intro- duced with the assent of the Deputy Commissioner, and three punctures on each arm were always made. One or two vaccinifers were generally taken to a neighbouring village from whom the lymph was spread. But occasionally it was found to be more convenient to bring unprotected children to the vaccinifers to receive lymph. Among the tubes with lymph received in October 1883 were two containing English calf-lymph from the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner. From these tubes the season's work has received much benefit. The vesicles produced are larger, and the indentations left are deeper. Dr. Deane, the Civil Surgeon, says that the system of using counterfoil tickets according to my circular No. 3 of 12th March 1883 has had no effect upon the minds of the people, who have failed entirely to act up to them. Vaccinifers for the propagation of lymph were only obtained through the personal exertions of the staff, aided by the municipal members. SHAHPUR. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 45 ) successful against 10,899 in the previous year ; and the percentage of success 88.54 as compared with 96.86, being a decrease of 8.32. The number of re-vaccinations was 115 against 12 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 24.40 against 25.85 in the preceding year; decrease 1.45. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,916 as compared with Rs. 1,886, an increase of Rs. 30 ; and each successful case cost Re. 0-2-11, increase Re. 0-0-2. Two hundred and forty-seven primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. G. F. Nicholson), of which 242 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 97.97 per cent. Vaccination was carried out in the three tahsíls of this district, viz., Shahpur, Bhera and Khusháb; and in each village in these tahsíls the vaccin- ators worked two by two. To every pair, a certain area in the tahsíl which is being vaccinated is given, and when the whole district is finished individual vaccinators were located in the large towns and vaccinated any children who had been passed over in the first visit on account of illness, &c., and also those who were born subsequently to it; the work was carefully examined by the 1st-class vaccinator, &c. It is the custom now to examine the work of each vaccinator by visiting one of the villages which he is doing, or has just done; of course he is not aware which village will be selected for inspection, and so must do all his work thoroughly. Each vaccinator, in sending in his weekly report of work done, also sends in a statement of where he expects to be each day of the ensuing week, so that he can be met at any of the places where he ought to be, and see that he really is there. In this way the Civil Surgeon twice found men absent from work. The objection to vaccination is gradually subsiding ; the greatest difficulty is experienced in the large towns amongst the Hindús; this might be easily overcome if the members of the Municipal Committees would only give some help in inducing them to have their children vaccinated; but the interest taken by municipal members is of the smallest; one bright exception to this is Pandit Diwán Chand of Shahpur city, who, by precept and example in having his own relations vaccin- ated, has helped the work of vaccination in no small measure. This he has done for many years past, and has given a great amount of time and energy to it. He has several certificates from former Civil Surgeons of this district and others; lately one from the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Western Circle, Punjab, testifying to the good work he has done for vaccination. MOOLTAN. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost there of, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 46 ) The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 22,921, being an increase of 4,749 over the number vaccinated in the previous year. There were 21,641 primary cases returned as successful against 17,513 in the previous year; and the percentage of success 96.13 as compared with 97.43, being a decrease of 1.30. The number of re-vaccin- ations was 408 against 90 of previous year. The number successfully vaccina- ted per mille of population was 39.64 against 31.78 in the preceding year ; increase 7.86. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 2,487 as compared with Rs. 1,789, an increase of Rs. 693; and each successful case cost Re. 0-1-10, increase Re. 0-0-3. One thousand two hundred and fifty-five primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. J. Bennett), of which 1,250 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 99.60 per cent. The arm-to-arm system of vaccination was invariably carried out, and to this, no doubt, is due the high standard of success obtained. The vaccination staff, which had numbered 8 in the previous year, was augmented by one native supervisor and 4 vaccinators in the month of September last, and the increase in the numbers vaccinated just alluded to is due to the increased number of the vaccinators at work during the last three months of the year under review. The full number of vaccinators sanctioned for this district in September 1883 was not entertained by the Civil Surgeon, as further experience showed that the accession of 5 vaccinators to the strength of the old establishment would be sufficient to meet all requirements. Years Male Female Under a year Above a year 1882 ... 53.77 46.23 36.40 63.60 1883 ... 54.33 45.67 56.49 37.99 The marginal statement shows the sex and age of the vaccinated. In a total of 22,921 cases, 12,453, or 54.33 per cent., were males, and 10,468, or 45.67 per cent., were females. These propor- tions are almost the same as those obtained in 1882, and they closely approximate to those shown for the whole of the Province in the statement in which the sex is noted, given in the Annual Reports on vaccine operations in the Punjab, from 1878 to 1881, a period of four years. Further it may be interesting to note that the proportion of females to males in the first five years of life for the Mooltan division, shown in the report on the census of the Province in 1881, closely approaches the ratios given in the marginal statement; the figures for the five years average 958 females per 1,000 males, being in the ratios 49 and 51 per cent., respectively. Of the successful primary vaccinations 12,933 were under, and 8,708 were above, a year, or 56.49 and 37.99 per cent., a differ- ence of 18.43. Of the vaccinations performed in tahsíls, those of Sarai Sidhu and Shujabad exhibit the highest ratios, being 25 above the average of the district. The low ratios shown by Mooltan and Lodhrán are due to the former having been undertaken at the end of the working season, where, owing to the heat, operations had to be brought to a close before the whole of the tahsíl had been systemati- cally covered; while about half of the latter tahsíl was left uncovered at the end of the year under report. The low ratio in the tahsíl of Mailsi shows that a consider- able number of children must have remained unvaccinated. The population over a wide range of this tahsíl, the uplands in the centre of the Doáb, being sparse and nomadic in its habits, moving with its flocks from pasturage to pasturage wherever water is to be found, and long distances over wild jungly tracts, in which there were but few roads, having had to be traversed by the vaccinators, the collection of children for vaccination was attended with much difficulty and loss of time, while, as has just been mentioned, not a few of them escaped the operation altogether. Some opposition also was occasionally met with in the more densely populated tracts nearer the banks of the Sutlej. At the suggestion of the Deputy Commissioner the sum of Rs. 50, paid from District funds, was distributed among 4 vaccinators who were deemed worthy of reward for efficiency displayed in the discharge of their duties.
( 47 ) JHANG. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 48 ) Vaccination appears to be fairly popular among the Muhammadans, but the Hindús are greatly opposed to it. A few of the more intelligent Muhammadans know the difference between inoculation and vaccination, and between a good and a bad cicatrix. In a very few of the villages the people admitted that it had conferred great benefits on them and immunity from small-pox. The occurrence of small-pox was twice reported, and immediate measures were taken to isolate the cases and vaccinate all the villages. At Dahraj, a village 12 miles from head-quarters, a case having been reported, the 1st-class vaccinator and a vaccinator immediately went there and vaccinated all the children in that village and the neighbouring wells. The Civil Surgeon himself also went out and saw the case. The other case occurred in the Bár of the Shorkot tahsíl, where an inoculator from Montgomery had been at work. Here also a vaccinator was immediately sent out, and vaccinated all unprotected children. In both instances the measures adopted were effectual in stamping out the disease. One hundred rupees were placed at the Civil Surgeon's disposal by the Deputy Commissioner for distribution among those who had done their work well, and among a few zaildárs and others who had given assistance in vaccination. During the season the Civil Surgeon inspected the registers and found them, on the whole, correct without any false entries ; occasionally the results were not entered, but this was rare. He considers the vaccinations performed in this district very good indeed. MONTGOMERY. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 49 ) Four hundred and thirty-three primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Mr. J. Rehill), of which 433 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 100 per cent. Vaccine operations commenced on the 4th October 1883, by 4 vaccinates against 6 in 1882, at the station of Montgomery. From two tubes 4 children were vaccinated( 50 ) One thousand seven hundred and thirty-eight primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. J. Connor), of which 1.647 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 94.76 per cent. Vaccination was begun on the 4th November 1883 in the Alípur tahsíl, and that part of the district was finished by the middle of January 1884. The total number vaccinated during the season amounted to 2,551, of which number 28 were unsuccessful; this is only equal to about one-half the number vaccinated in this tahsíl during the year 1882. This is a great falling-off as compared with the two previous years, and is in great part owing to the laxity of the lambardárs and zaildárs in assembling the children for the purpose of being vaccinated. Except in a few instances they all showed great want of zeal and energy in the matter, and as a consequence many of the people offered more opposition than usual, although, as a whole, they are not opposed to it, but it gives them some trouble to have their children vaccinated, therefore many from sheer laziness, and some from dislike to the operation, among the latter Hindús chiefly, did not fetch their children. In some parts of this tahsíl, notably Alípur town, the vaccination was so far unsatisfactory that the children had sometimes one successful vesicle, and often only two ; this arose from the objection of the parents to six punctures being made, and from the timidity of the apprentice vaccinators in not insisting upon the full number of punctures, and also from the want of skill in the operators, who tried to do too many from the arms of a single child ; they can hardly be blamed for this, as parents have an almost invincible objection to allowing lymph to be taken from the arms of their children. Perhaps also the very large mortality among the children during the first three months of 1883 may have been a factor in the falling-off. Work was begun at Muzaffargarh, with new lymph received from the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, on the 17th December 1883, and was finished by the middle of February. The total number vaccinated was 4,079, or nearly the same as during the year 1882; of this number 30 were unsuccessful. In this tahsíl there was no difficulty experienced in vaccinating the children, the tahsíl officials, zaildárs and lambardárs all showed great energy in the work, consequently the work was well done. The vesicles ranged from 4 to 6 on each child, they were large and well formed, and altogether very satisfactory, except in the case of one zail, that of Kalandarwála, where a new vaccinator, one who had previously been an apprentice vaccinator at Alípur, tried to do too many from too small a quantity of lymph; consequently, although 6 punctures were made, the results were often only one or two vesicles, and sometimes complete failures; this vaccinator has been threatened with dismissal in case of any laxity being found in his work for the future. Besides the abovementioned number there were 2,938 children vaccinated in the Muzaffargarh tahsíl during January and February 1883 ; these have not been shown in any annual return, on account of the change in the period of the returns ; 37 of these were unsuccessful. Work began in the Sinánwán tahsíl on the 13th February 1884, and was finished by the beginning of April; altogether 1,717 children were vaccin- ated in the tahsíl as against 1,503 in 1882 ; of this number 31 were unsuccess- ful ; here too the work was satisfactory, and the results were good, the vesicles- ranging from 4 to 6, generally the latter. The work was well aided by the tahsíl officials, zaildárs, lambardárs and chaukídárs, and there was little or no objection met with. The large diminution in the number vaccinated has already been accounted for ; the falling-off was confined exclusively to the Alípur tahsíl, and it was in this tahsíl that the officials did not exert themselves, and consequently the work was carried on under great difficulties. Many of the people, from lack of energy by zaildárs, &c., failed to have their children done, and many who disliked it were glad of this laxity, and availed themselves of it. The vaccination was carried on by zails, which has been found the surest and easiest way of getting all the children; the zails were worked consecutively from one to the next adjoining, and so through the district. The &quot;from arm-to-arm method&quot; was adopted, and this has always been a most difficult thing to do, the parents have an almost invincible objection to allowing lymph to be taken from the arms of their children ; money, except to the very poorest people, is no temptation; reason- ing oftener fails than succeeds, and any attempt to force the parents would infallibly lead to an assault upon the vaccinators; so very often the best lymph
( 51 ) cannot be had because the finest children belong to the well-to-do classes. Attempts have often failed to persuade parents to allow lymph to be taken from their children's arms, and, when successful with the fathers, the mothers and grandmothers are often abusive, the husband getting a fair share of it for having consented. The results being inspected, in 1,738 children 91 cases were found unsuc- cessful. The head vaccinator inspected 5,091 children, and he found 82 cases unsuccessful. The Alípur tahsíl, and about three-quarters of the Muzaffargarh tahsíl, have been inspected. The head vaccinator inspected the Sinánwán tahsíl and one-half of the Muzaffargarh tahsíl. The vaccinators had orders to take the birth registers of each mauza and mark off the children they had done, and to call for all born within 18 months ; this they did, but absent children were always accounted for as being away to some Saint's tomb on pilgrimages, marriages, or some such excuse, the fact being that they were either sent away or not brought because the zaildárs and lambardárs did not exert themselves in some parts of the district, notably Alípur. DERA ISMAIL KHAN. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 52 ) From each district the vaccinators are constantly forwarding complaints of the obstacles thrown in the way of their work, and aid has been sought from the Civil authorities to use their influence with villagers through their headmen. This has always been complied with, but it will be some years before the people sufficiently recognise the merits of vaccination to bring forward their children of their free-will. &quot;For a district of this size,&quot; says the Civil Surgeon, &quot;with villages scattered miles apart, the number of vaccinators employed is far too small to produce any- thing approaching complete protection. If the staff could be doubled for two or three years and the whole district thoroughly worked through once, a smaller- number of men would suffice to keep the work in hand.&quot; This subject is now under my consideration. DERA GHAZI KHAN. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below ;( 53 ) BANNU. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 54 ) 1882-83 1883-84 Total vaccinations (including primary and re-vaccina- tions) ... ... ... ... 5,721 5,638 Successful cases ... ... ... ... 4,793 4,601 Percentage of successful cases ... ... ... ... 86.36 86.14 Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population 8.23 8.05 Average number vaccinated by each vaccinator ... ... 817.28 704.75 Cost of each successful case ... ... ... ... Re. 0-5-10 0-5-1 The work performed by the above establish- ment during the two years is shown in the margin. The average number of operations returned by the vaccinators of this district during the year is 5,638 being a decrease of 83 from the number vaccinated in the previous year, There were 4,601 primary cases returned as successful against 4,793 in the previous year ; and the percentage of success 86.14 as compared with 86.36, being a decrease of 0 22. The number of re-vaccinations was 297 against 171 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 8.05 against 8.23 in the preceding year; decrease 0.18. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,805 as compared with Rs. 1,791, an increase of Rs. 14; and each successful case cost Re. 0-5-1, decrease Re. 0-0-9. Five hundred primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. T. E. L. Bates), of which 500 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 100 per cent. The quality of the vaccinations which the Civil Surgeon inspected &quot;has been, as a rule, very satisfactory, the vesicles being large, distinct and numerous.&quot; In this district there are seven vaccinators and a native supervisor. The latter with 3 vaccinators went to Naushahra where vaccination was known to be very backward and small-pox prevalent. Almost all the large villages in the tahsíl were visited by the vaccinators, but the amount of work done was not very large. The Civil Surgeon saw a large number of the cases that had been vaccinated when he visited Naushahra in November, and the results &quot;were excellent,&quot; the vesicles and marks being &quot;numerous and large.&quot; The difficulties attending vaccination in the Naushahra and Mardán tahsíls are very much greater than those met with in the neighbourhood of Pesháwar, where the work has been fairly satisfactory. In the city the people are fully aware of the benefits of vaccination, but many of them will not take the trouble to bring their children for the purpose. During the year a good number of people brought their children to the hospital, and vaccinators did a good deal of work by going round to their homes Towards the end of December the members of the Municipal Committee were requested to help by collecting children, on fixed days, in one place for the vaccinators. The city was divided into divisions, and each member was to collect children on a fixed day in his own division. In this way a good deal of work was done. The Civil Surgeon attended these meet- ings and saw the children vaccinated, and Assistant Surgeon Nabi Bakhsh also assisted in carrying out this plan. A good deal of vaccination work has been done in the villages. In one rather small village, inspected by the Civil Surgeon one morning, 38 successful cases were seen, all of them having almost perfect vaccine vesicles. In another village (Fatto) the people themselves asked for a vaccinator to vaccinate their children, and even brought some of them to the Civil Surgeon for that purpose. On the whole, the Civil Surgeon considers that vaccination is gaining a hold on the people slowly but steadily, and will become easier year by year. Nothing is done to force it, the vaccinator goes about unarmed with any official authority, and it is only in places where the people generally are very backward and have had very little communication with Europeans that they experience much difficulty. During the latter months of the year under review there was a severe epidemic of small-pox in the district, and particularly so in the city of Pesháwar. The Civil Surgeon believes that inoculation is largely practised by Mullas, who pretend to protect the people from small-pox by charms, &quot;which simply means,&quot; the Civil Surgeon states, &quot;that they inoculate them from small-pox crusts.&quot; There is evidently no law to prevent such practices, and, as the Mullas have great power over the people, they probably must derive a considerable profit from the sale of this charm. &quot;It is,&quot; says the Civil Surgeon, &quot;extremely
( 55 ) likely that the disease has been spread by their inoculations,&quot; but he adds : &quot;It is only fair to say, however, that in no particular case was it clearly shown that inoculation was being practised by any particular person; it is impossible to ascertain particulars and names in these cases, but no attempt is made to conceal the fact that inoculation is largely practised, and frequently are its marks seen on the arms of children. As long as inoculation prevails there is no difficulty in accounting for the spread of small-pox, and it is satisfactory to see that the people are becoming less inclined to submit to it, and gaining more faith in vaccination every year. It may be confidently expected that in a few years this practise will spontaneously cease as the protection afforded by vaccination becomes more and more apparent.&quot; This very interesting report was submitted by Surgeon M. O'Dwyer, late Civil Surgeon of Pesháwar, who notes with regret &quot;that the work done by the vaccination staff has not been satisfactory on the whole;&quot; he states that &quot;they do not work well together, and seem to go about their work in a half-hearted sort of way, as if they did not care whether they succeeded or not.&quot; Since the above was written I have transferred Mani-ud-dín, the native supervisor, to another district, and appointed Hakím Saif-ud-dín, a local man, to his post. I feel sure that Dr. Bates, the present Civil Surgeon, will keep the vaccinators up to their work. In the short report furnished by Dr. Bates, it is stated that &quot;certain Miáns (Mullas) who practised inoculation have brought their children to the native supervisor (Saif-ud-dín) for vaccination.&quot; HAZARA. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 56 ) Vaccination is carried on by a staff of vaccinators under the orders of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, and by 3 district vaccinators. In several places visited by the Civil Surgeon vaccination seemed to be appreciated, and the people desirous of having their children vaccinated; in other places, however, it was the reverse of this, and so much apathy, if not antipathy, shown, that vaccina- tion makes small way, and there are some parts of the district which it has not yet reached. The independent territory of the Nawáb of Amb which adjoins the district, as well as some portions of Kághan, have not yet been visited by vaccinators. The Nawáb, it is believed, is anxious that vaccination should be introduced into his country, and applied for the services of some vaccinators from the Civil Surgeon, but as there was no qualified man available, the request was not complied with. I have now directed Dr. Doyle, the Deputy Sanitary Com- missioner, Western Circle, to make enquiries on the subject, and, in communi- cation with the Nawáb, to arrange for the introduction of vaccination in his State. &quot;The Hazára district,&quot; says the Civil Surgeon, &quot;is under great disadvan- tages as regards vaccination by having two staffs of vaccinators, one under the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, and the other under the Civil Surgeon. The district is one peculiarly suited for a staff of local vaccinators, and none but those acquainted with the district and the people and their language can expect to spread vaccination among them.&quot; This matter is now under considera- tion, and will form the subject of a separate communication. The Civil Surgeon has not instituted any comparison with the work of previous years &quot;owing to there being no record of the work of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's staff.&quot; This remark is not understood, for the special staff is quite distinct from the district staff, and the vaccinations performed by it should not, of course, be includ- ed in the Civil Surgeon's returns. Dr. Farrell's military duties prevented his personally supervising the vaccination work of the district. In December, however, he made a short tour in lower Hazára and saw a good deal of the work which was being carried on ; that coming under his own observation, he says, &quot;was fairly done, though in some instances it was far from being satisfactory.&quot; KOHAT. The vaccination establishment entertained, and the annual cost thereof, during the years 1882-83 and 1883-84 are as below :( 57 ) successful against 2,927 in the previous year ; and the percentage of success 90.34 as compared with 81.41, being an increase of 8.93. The number of re-vaccina- tions was 55 against 23 of previous year. The number successfully vaccinated per mille of population was 22.15 against 16.15 in the preceding year; increase 6.00. The aggregate cost amounted to Rs. 1,620 as compared with Rs. 1,280, an increase of Rs. 340 ; and each successful case cost Re. 0-6-5, decrease Re. 0-0-6. Sixteen primary vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeon (Dr. J. Duncan), of which 16 were found to be successful, the ratio of success being 100 per cent. The report of the Civil Surgeon is exceedingly brief. It only states that from 1st January to the end of April 2 vaccinators were employed in the Kohát tahsíl, and 2 in the Khatak country ; and from 1st November to the end of the year, all were sent to Hangu tahsíl. 230 villages were visited. The following is a translation of a vernacular report on vaccination in this district during 1883, by the native supervisor of vaccination :( 58 ) persuasion and pressure, but it was with difficulty that 15 to 20 per cent. were vaccinated, and in the whole Khatak country no one allowed his child to be taken away elsewhere for the purpose of furnishing lymph. Vaccination was carried on by lymph from glasses. &quot;Now in December 1883 the villages of Tagh, Muhammad Khoja, Kahi and Balyámni in Hangu tahsíl were visited, and the children vaccinated with great difficulty. &quot;I further beg to state that the lambardárs of all the tahsíls in the Kohát district who did not assist the vaccination work have been reported on to the Tahsildárs of their respective tahsíls, but they have not as yet been reprimanded, and for this reason the work was retarded. When the officers pay attention to this, it is hoped that work will go on all right.&quot; In transmitting the vaccination report to this office, the Deputy Com- missioner, Mr. St. G. Tucker, makes the following observations :A.APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. STATEMENT SHOWING THE DETAILS OF THE VACCINATION OPERATIONS PER- FORMED BY THE SPECIAL AND CANTONMENT STAFFS ACCORDING TO LOCALI- TIES DURING THE YEAR 1883-84. 1 2 3 4 5 No. NAMES OF LOCALITIES Average number of vaccina- tors employed throughout the season Total number of persons vaccinated PRIMARY RE-VACCINA- TION PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL Total Successful Total Successful Primary Re-vaccination Under one year Over one and un- der six years Total of all ages (Special Staff, Eastern Circle.) 1 Mandi, Native State ... 10,201 10,151 3,216 5,374 9,965 50 4 2 Biláspur A.B.COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV, SHOWING THE NUMBER OF PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED AND THE NUMBER OF THOSE PERSONS WHO WERE SUCCESSFULLY VACCINATED IN THE PUNJAB IN EACH OF THE UNDERMENTIONED OFFICIAL YEARS. ESTABLISHMENTS PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Total number Number successfully vaccinated Years ending 31st March 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1876* see note For three months ending 31st March 1877 REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1885-86. Published for Authority [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1886.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lientenant-Governor of the Punjab in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department, No. 418 S., dated 13th September 1886. READ( 2 ) themselves to overcome the various obstacles in the way of vaccinating. Civil Surgeons should strictly and carefully supervise the vaccinators in their respec- tive districts, noting the work done by them, and directing especial attention at the same time to securing accuracy in the returns. The Lieutenant-Governor hopes this matter will receive the attention it deserves. 6. There appears to have been a large decrease in the numbers vaccinated in the districts of Hoshiarpur, Lahore, Shahpur and Bannu. In Lahore the decrease is attributed by the Civil Surgeon, Dr. Center, in his report to &quot;changes of the Assistant Surgeons (in charge of the Rural Vaccine Establishment) and to the illness and death of the former Native Supervisor.&quot; The prevalence of small-pox also apparently had to do with the decrease in Lahore, as well as in the Shahpur and Bannu Districts. 7. Of the total number of vaccinations (550,806) performed by the district staff, 62,201 were inspected by the Civil Surgeons. The system of check- ing returns by comparing the vaccinated children with the copy of the vaccina- tion registers left in the villages continues to work satisfactorily in the Jhang District. 8. In the districts of Jhelum, Kangra, Dera Ismail Khan, Peshawar and Umballa, the inspection by Civil Surgeons seems to have been seriously neglected. It is hopeless to expect any system of vaccination, however elaborately developed, to succeed, unless the subordinate agency is thoroughly supervised, and Civil Surgeons, who most carefully watch the work in their districts, bear the strongest testimony to this. The importance of Civil Surgeons personally inspecting the working of the vaccinators in their districts cannot be too strongly urged, and it is to be hoped similar complaints of neglect will not appear in future Reports. Good work in the way of inspection was done by Dr. Quinnell, at Gujranwala; Assistant Surgeon Chetan Shah, at Jhang; Mr. Baron, at Ferozepore; Mr. Crossley, at Hoshiarpur; Assistant Surgeon Bhagwan Das, at Ludhiana; and Assistant Surgeon Jaswant Rai, at Rohtak. 9. In the towns of Rohtak, Bahadurgarh, Mahim and Jhajjar, in the Rohtak District; Mahetpur, Shahkot and Nur Mahal, in the Jullundur District ; and in the principal towns of the Shahpur District, the Civil Surgeons report that the members of the Municipal Committees give little or no assistance to the vaccinators. This is discreditable to the members of these Municipalities, and Deputy Commissioners should bring the matter to their notice. 10. The experiment of vaccinating from the calf direct, tried by Dr. Center in Lahore, is interesting, and appears to have been successful. In this way one of the chief difficulties in the way of arm-to-arm vaccination (the objection parents have to lymph being taken from their children) may be got rid of, and a fresh and good supply of lymph secured. The experiment is deserving of the attention of all Civil Surgeons, who have not already made it in their own districts. 11. It is satisfactory to find that vaccination is making progress in the Native States of Patiala, Kapurthala, Nabha, Jind and Faridkot. The figures given by the Sanitary Commissioner show that much work, especially in the first named State, was done during the year under report. - 12. In paragraph 7 of the Review on the Vaccination Report for the year 1884-85, the Lieutenant-Governor observed that no reason had been assigned for the falling-off in vaccination in the Dera Ismail Khan District ; and in paragraph 16 of the same review it was noted that in the hope of encouraging vaccination in that district local vaccinators were to be entertained in place of the regular staff of vaccinators. It has been explained by the Sanitary Commissioner that the falling-off in vaccination noticed by His Honor was due to the reduction of two vaccinators as a first step towards the introduction of the new scheme. Subsequent experience has shown that the scheme is not likely to be so successful as was anticipated by the local authorities. It is not impossible that the system of vaccination by the Regular District Staff may have to be re-intro- duced.
( 3 ) In paragraph 29 of the Vaccination Report for the year 1885-86, now under review, it is said that the special staff of the Eastern Circle shows a decrease of 23,844 vaccinations, as compared with the results of the previous year. The Officiating Sanitary Commissioner has since explained that a large number of vaccinations were performed in the Sirmur and Bashahr States in 1884-85, because no vaccination had been done in those States for some time, and conse- quently there were a large number of un-vaccinated children. The State of Sirmur was not visited in 1885-86, as the staff was unable to cover the whole of the Hill States. Twenty-eight localities were, however, visited, as against 19 in 1884-85; but the ground covered was apparently less populous in children requir- ing vaccination. ORDER.MEMO OF ERRATA. In para. 7, line 2, for 2,211, read 2,212, and for 1,970, read 1,978. At page 6, line 1, for 3,477, read 3,497. In para. 17, line 9, for 2,405, read 2,408. In para. 28, line 3, for 24,131, read 22,131. In para. 28, heading to column 2 of the statement for vaccinations, read vaccinators. In column 2 of the statement under para. 28, average number of vaccinators for Western Circle, for 7, read 8. In para. 29, line 2, for 24,844, read 23,844. In statement No. I, in column 3, population of the district of Rohtak, for 653.609, read 553,609. In the Lahore district, in the same column, for 624,106, read 924,106. In Appendix to statement No. I, column 5, primary successful operations over one year and under six years in Kalsia, for 1,249, read 1189; in Chachraee in the same column for 742, read 745; and in the column of total for all ages, for 1,501, read 1,541 ; in Balsan, in column over one year and under six years, for 288, read 268.
SECTION VII.2 Cost of the Depart- ment. 4. The total cost of the Vaccine Department during the year under report amounted to Rs. 84,038, that for the preceding year being Rs. 82,652. The cost per successful case was 0-2-4 against 0-2-5 in the previous year. General results. 5. Taking the work performed by all the establishments together, the total vaccinations in the Punjab during the year under report were 612,466 against 583,498 in the previous year. There is thus an increase of 28,968 vaccinations, which shows that the Department worked satisfactorily during the year. The general results for the several estab- lishments separately are given below for the years 1885-86 and 1884-85. STAFF. Total operations. Primary. Re-vaccination. Successful Primary. Successful Re-vaccina- tions. Percentage of successful Primary. Percentage of successful Re-vaccination. District ... ... 1885-86 550,806 536,610 14,196 508,323 6,758 94.72 47.60 1884-85 500,438 493,728 6,710 467,278 3,477 94.64 51.82 Special ... ... 1885-86 52,778 49,839 2,939 47,534 1,315 95.37 44.74 1884-85 74,909 66,601 8,308 63,916 2,623 95.96 31.57 Cantonment* ... 1885-86 4,214 3,579 635 3,261 376 91.11 59.21 1884-85 3,650 3,050 600 2,794 361 91.61 60.17 Dispensary ... ... 1885-86 4,668 4,339 329 3,985 222 91.84 67.48 1884-85 4,501 4,332 169 3,963 81 91.48 47.93 Total ... ... 1885-86 612,466 594,367 18,099 563,103 8,671 94.74 48.00 1884-85 583,498 567,711 15,787 537,951 6,542 94.76 41.43 * In this statement the operations performed in 1884-85 by the two Cantonment Vaccinators of Siálkot and Ráwalpindi are deducted from the district figures and added to those of Cantonments. Of the grand total of 612,466 vaccinations performed by all establishments 332,835 were of male and 279,631 of female. The total successful primary vacci- nations were 563,103. Of these 427,734 were children under one, and 131,978 between one and six years; the number over six years was only 3,391. The percentage of successful primary operations was 94.74 against 94.76 in the pre- vious year, and of re-vaccinations 48.00 against 41.43. DISTRICT STAFF. General results3 Ferozepore, Ráwalpindi, Jhelum, Gujrat, and, Gurdáspur, the number varied between 2,589 to 2,870. In Simla the number was only 774 and in Pesháwar 922. In the following 16 districts the number was below the average, viz. :4 No. DISTRICT. TOTAL OPERATIONS. Increase. Decrease. 1884-85. 1885-86. 1 Delhi ... ... ... 10,193 13,031 2,838 2 Gurgáon ... ... ... 18,042 20,714 2,672 ... 3 Karnál ... ... ... 10,664 13,656 2,992 ... 4 Hissár ... ... ... 10,881 15,117 4,236 ... 5 Rohtak ... ... ... 10,061 11,054 993 ... 6 Umballa ... ... ... 10,094 18,250 8,156 ... 7 Ludhiána ... ... ... 14,593 15,946 1,353 ... 8 Simla ... ... ... 1,116 774 ... 342 9 Jullundur ... ... ... 23,230 25,634 2,404 ... 10 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... 26,896 22,536 ... 4,360 11 Kángra ... ... ... 10,935 19,023 8,08S ... 12 Amritsar ... ... ... 30,008 30,712 704 ... 13 Gurdáspur ... ... ... 24,298 31,579 7,281 ... 14 Siálkot ... ... ... 32,278 46,818 14,540 ... 15 Lahore ... ... ... 30,446 26,243 ... 4,203 16 Gujránwála ... ... ... 24,906 27,004 2,098 ... 17 Ferozepore ... ... ... 23,721 24,045 324 ... 18 Ráwalpindi ... ... ... 28,469 27,776 ... 693 19 Jhelum ... ... ... 21,216 21,610 394 ... 20 Gujrát ... ... ... 26,985 26,447 ... 538 21 Shahpur ... ... ... 16,549 13,850 ... 2,699 22 Mooltan ... ... ... 16,710 16,220 ... 490 23 Jhang ... ... ... 14,997 16,226 1,229 ... 24 Montgomery ... ... ... 9,100 12,701 3,601 ... 25 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... 8,549 9,295 746 ... 26 Dera Ismail Khan ... 7,061 6,215 ... 846 27 Dera Gházi Khan ... 11,366 11,640 274 ... 28 Bannu ... ... ... 11,016 9,055 ... 1,961 29 Peshawár ... ... ... 5,746 6,455 709 ... 30 Hazára ... ... ... 6,398 6,356 ... 42 31 Kohát ... ... ... 3,914 4,824 910 ... Total ... 500,438 550,806 50,368 ... Districts in which the increase was most mark- ed. 11. The largest increase, it will be seen, took place in Siálkot which, owing to a very considerable falling off of vaccination in it last year, was the subject of unfavorable comments by His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor. The increase in the number of operations is shown to be no less than 14,540. The operations of this year, viz., 46,818, are larger in number than those rendered in any one year since the new scheme of district vaccination came into force in 1881. Next to Siálkot come the districts of Kangra, Umballa and Gurdáspúr with an increase of 8,088, 8,156 and 7,281 respectively. On reference to the com- parative statement of work given in the last report, it will be seen that these are, with one exception, the very districts which showed the largest amount of decrease in the previous year: so that the loss is fully made up by the operations of the present year. The great unhealthiness of the preceding year in many of the districts and the unusual healthiness of the year under report, afford the true expla- nation of the lesser and greater number of vaccinations performed respectively. Much encouragement has been given in the Gurdáspúr district to persons who helped the vaccinators in their work. &quot;On my recommendation,&quot; says the officiating Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon Radha Kishen, &quot;the District Board of Gurdáspur granted pagris and certificates to the persons who rendered cordial assistance in the cause of vaccination. This in a great measure encour- aged the people to give assistance, who, otherwise probably would not have taken any interest. The district authorities reprimanded those persons who were reported to have either shown opposition to the practice or would not help when they were in a position to do so.'' These measures may to some extent account for the increase noticed in the returns for this district, though the character of the season in respect to salubrity or otherwise is the principal cause affecting the rise or fall in the number of persons vaccinated in each season.
5 Increase in certain other districts. 12. The increase of 4,236 in Hissár, 3,601 in Montgomery, 2,838 in Delhi, 2,672 in Gurgáon, 2,992 in Karnál, 2,404 in Jullundur, 2,098 in Gujránwála, is also very satisfactory. Districts in which there was a decrease. 13. In the districts of Hoshiárpur, Lahore, Shahpur and Bannu, on the other hand, there has been, in round numbers, a decrease of between two to four thousand. The decrease in the Lahore district is stated by Dr. Center in his report to be due to &quot;changes of the Assistant Surgeons (in charge of the rural Vaccine Establishment) with the illness and death of the former Native Supervisor. The prevalence of small-pox also had a great deal to do with decrease in the number vaccinated during the year, as a great many of the young children who got small-pox could not be brought up for being vaccinated after the attack.&quot; In the districts of Bannu and Shahpur, also, the falling off in the number of vaccinations is due to the prevalence of small-pox. Inspection of vacci- nation in the several districts by Civil Sur- geons. 14. The following statement shows the number of vaccinations inspected by Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons, and by Native Supervisors, also, the number of vaccinations found successful or unsuccessful as well as their percentages :6 Dr. Roe, late of Siálkot, and his Assistant Surgeon, 3,477, Mr. J. Connor of Muzaffargarh 2,547, Assistant Surgeon Juswunt Roy of Rohtak 3,712. The system of checking returns by comparing the vaccinated children with the copy of the vaccination registers left in the villages, continues to work satisfactorily in the Jhang district. &quot;In not a single instance during the year,&quot; says the Civil Surgeon, &quot;was any false entry detected in the returns either by the Supervisor or by the Civil Surgeon.&quot; Districts in which there was little or no inspection of vaccina- tions. 16. The district of Jhelum shows not a single case of vaccination inspect- ed by the Civil Surgeon, Kángra only 8, Dera Ismail Khan 7, Pesháwar 44, Umballa 161. In districts in which Civil Surgeons hold joint medical charge of the civil and military populations, as well as in those in. which the duties at the head stations take up almost all the time of the Medical Officer, much inspection work cannot be expected. But the statement clearly shows, that in several instances the Civil Surgeons have not paid much attention to this important part of their duties. The success of vaccination depends greatly upon the genuineness of the opera- tions performed by the Vaccinators, and unless the quality of work done is tested by the Civil Surgeons by personal inspection, no great reliance can be placed on the figures shown in the statement. The necessity of in- spection. 17. The necessity for a close examination of the vaccination work on the part of Civil Surgeons is amply proved by the results of inspection embodied in the following extract from Dr. Roe's report:7 tion is not only becoming more popular year by year, but is carried on system- atically in every part of the Province. Considerable efforts are being made to overcome the prejudices of the people in places in which the opposition against the prophylactic is still active. Municipalties in which little or no assistance was given to the vaccin- ators. 21. In the towns of Rohtak, Bahadurgarh,Mahim and Jhajjar in the Rohtak district, and Mahetpur, Shahkot and Nur Mahal in the Jullun- dur district, and in the Municipal towns of the Shahpur dis- trict, however, the Civil Surgeons report that the Members of the Municipal Committees give little or no assistance to the vaccinators. This does not speak well in favor of the gentlemen composing these municipalities. It is hoped that endeavours will be made during the current year to secure their sympathy and active co-operation in the work of vaccination. Arm to arm method. 22. As far as practicable the &quot;arm-to-arm&quot; method has been adopted throughout the Province owing to many advantages it posses- ses over other methods of vaccination. There are, however, serious obstacles in the way of fully carrying out this system among the higher classes of the population, especially in Municipal towns, notably in the districts of Ludhiána, Muzaffargarh, Gurdáspur and Lahore. The people, it appears, would not allow lymph to-be taken from the arms of the vaccinifer. This pre- judice caused much inconvenience in very many cases, as for instance, in the city of Lahore, and impeded the work. &quot;The people were willing to have their children vaccinated,&quot; says Dr. Center in his report, &quot;but there is a strong pre- judice against allowing lymph to be taken. There is an ignorant prejudice on the part of the mothers that it is dangerous to the child. It is impossible to overcome the prejudice at present and it limits operations and compels the vacci- nators to utilize one vaccinifer for as many as possible. Rewards of two and finally of four annas were offered for each vaccinifer but without the slightest effect. There must be some reason for this powerful prejudice. I believe it is due to two causes, one is that, while the prejudice lasts, the vaccinators are compelled to vaccinate as large a number as possible from each vaccinifer they can get, and thus may set up irritation of the vesicles ; the other is the filthy way the children are kept in consequence of which dirt may get into an open sore and set up irritation or erysipelas.&quot; During the year under review, a very sharp outbreak of small-pox occurred in the city, the weekly mortality from the disease rose from 26 in November to 91 in December 1885. ''The panic,&quot; says Dr. Center, &quot;was so great that the people became extremely anxious to get their children vacci- nated, but after they were done the mothers refused to allow lymph to be taken. The demand was so strong that I directed the vaccinators to ope- rate first on those who agreed to allow lymph to be taken. It was found that they generally agreed to do so, but ran away when it was required.&quot; 23. To meet this difficulty Dr. Center made the following arrange- ments :8 in order to show the vaccinators that it can be done by any single vaccinator at once in any village without special appliances. Calves of three or four months are selected. One is laid on the ground on its side, and its legs tied or held. The udder or belly is roughly shaved. The female calf is the best, as the udder is more delicate and easier to puncture. About 20 to 30 punctures are made in the usual way deep enough to draw a show of blood. The lymph from a baby's arm is inserted in the usual way. The vesicles are ripe and can be used on the 5th and 6th days. The amount of lymph in each vesicle is small, but it was found that the slightest stain on the lancet was enough to ensure successful results. By puncturing and waiting for some minutes enough lymph oozes out to be filled into a tube. By squeezing the vesicle with a forceps the flow is promoted, The vesicles produced in children were found to be very well developed. There were no severer symptoms in any of the cases than in ordinary vaccina- tion. It was known that Mohammedans were not likely to make any objection, but we were astonished to find that many Hindus, especially the best educated and of the highest castes, accepted it. The people had to come openly and of their own accord and squatted down near the calf till the children were done. There was not the slightest attempt to conceal the source of the lymph, and the people were told that they could take it or not as they chose. It was only towards the end of the epidemic that we succeeded with the calves. If we had done so earlier, there would have been a ready supply of lymph. These results prove, (1) that without any special skill or appliances calf vaccination may be started by a vaccinator in any village at any time; (2) that in this way an amount of lymph may be obtained in two or three weeks enough to cope with the require- ments of an epidemic if the people will accept it; (3) that there is no special severity in the vaccinations done in this way from the calf. It is to be remembered that this is retro-vaccination, which has only the effect of re-vivifying the lymph. It is not the same as inoculation of the calf with small-pox, the lymph resulting from which may produce severer effect. It would seem to be indicated that there would be little objection on the part of the Mohammedans to its use, and also apparently on the part of the better class of Hindus. I am informed that in the Presidency towns it is generally preferred by Hindus to 'arm-to-arm' vaccinations.&quot; Dr. Doyle's arrange- ments for procuring lymph. 24. In regard to supply of lymph, Dr. Doyle followed the usual plan, which he explains thus :9 Inspection work per- formed by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioners. 26. The Deputy Sanitary Commissioners, Eastern and Western Circles, Drs. J. O'Neill and B. Doyle, did much inspection work. Dr. O'Neill inspected the vaccination of the following Municipal towns, and the adjacent villages :10 the larger Native Hill States are closed to them at this season of the year, while the smaller States of Dojana, Pataudi, Loharu and Kalsia afford only a comparatively limited field for their labors. The following statement shows the total operations performed by the Special Staff of the Eastern Circle in the several localities :11 CANTONMENT VACCINATION. Cantonment vaccina- nation. Sabathu. Jullundur. Mooltan. Ferozepore. D. G. Khan. Jhelum. Abbottabad. D. I. Khan. Kohat. 31. Vaccination operations in the Cantonments of this Province were conducted in the same manner as stated in para. 13 of last year's report. In 9 cantonments, as shown in the margin, the operations were carried on by the District Staff. The total operations performed were 2,603, of which number 2,285 were primary and 318 re-vaccinations. The percentage of successful cases were, primary 94.83, re-vaccinations 85.53. There are now five cantonment vaccinators employed, as already stated. These five men operated on 4,214 persons, and the percentage of successful cases was 91.11 for primary and 59.21 for secondary vaccinations. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. Dispensary vaccina- tion. 32. The total dispensary vaccination during the year under review amounted to 4,668 against 4,501 in the previous year, showing a slight increase of 167. The operations were performed by Assistant Surgeons, Hospital Assistants, Compounders, Hakims and Dressers in the Dispensaries or Hospitals situated in the following eleven districts:12 NATIVE STATE. Males. Females. Total. Successful. Patiála ... ... ... 16,310 14,764 31,074 30,530 Kapurthala ... ... 4,306 3,695 8,001 7,269 Nabha ... ... ... 1,016 1,047 2,063 1,759 Jind ... ... ... 3,294 3,103 6,397 5,921 In Kapurthala and Jínd, the outturn of work, as compared with the previous year is almost the same. But in the State of Patiála, there has been an increase of no less than 7,918 vaccinations; during the year under review. Fortunately for this State as well as for the Native. State of Kapurthala, the medical charge has been held by Drs. J. Fair weather and J. Bennett, respectively; the work of vaccination therefore in these States has been well attended to. Patiála State. The large increase of vaccinations noticed in the returns of the Patiala State is, according to Dr. Bennett, &quot;mainly due to the great sickness and mortality from fevers which, prevailing throughout the greater part of the State in the autumn and early part of the cold season of 1884, greatly impeded, the season's work for that year, while during the past year the autumnal sickness was much more limited in extent and severity.&quot; Kapurthala State. In the Kapurthala State, there has been a slight falling off of 807 in the number of vaccinations, but it is attributable to the growing- popularity of the system of vaccination, and consequently the lesser number of children available for the operation from year to year. The Commissioner of the Jullunder Division notices this fact with great pleasure in forwarding Dr. Fair weather's report to this office :13 Services rendered by Pundit Bál Kishen, De- puty Superintendent of Vaccination. In concluding this section of the report I should make mention of the valuable services rendered by Pundit Bál Kishen, late Deputy Superintendent of Vaccination, in the Zenanas of the native aristocracy and gentry, which he was allowed access by reason of his professional attainments as a Hakim. List of persons to bo rewarded with recom- mendatory purwánas. A list of those native gentleman and others who rendered assistance in the cause of vaccination during the year under review has been prepared in this office, and the usual recommendatory purwanas will be forwarded to each one of them in due course. 15th May 1886. H. W. BELLEW, DY. SURG.-GENL., Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab.
STATEMENTS.
A.DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1885-86. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. Total. Successful. Under 1 year. Over 1 and under 6 years. Total of all ages Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccina- tion. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 12,904 7,472 5,023 12,495 127 111 96.83 87.40 19.59 13,080 20.32 188 0.29 20,714 14,645 5,214 19,859 ... ... 95.87 ... 30.94 12,605 19.64 588 0.92 13,643 10,506 2,375 12,881 13 5 94.41 38.46 20.69 10,800 17.35 1,310 2.10 15,107 9,553 5,238 14,791 10 3 97.91 30.00 22.39 10,811 16.36 300 0.45 11,052 9,061 1,433 10,494 2 ... 94.95 ... 16.05 10,261 18.53 381 0.68 18,235 11,211 5,423 16,634 15 2 91.22 13.33 15.59 15,107 14.15 1,161 1.09 15,918 13,098 2,652 15,750 28 3 98.94 10.71 25.45 17,005 27.48 195 0.31 498 123 309 437 276 113 87.75 40.94 12.81 912 21.24 7 0.16 25,039 22,196 1,463 23,685 595 366 94.59 61.51 30.46 21,178 26.81 87 0.11 22,514 18,540 3,235 21,918 22 9 97.35 40.91 24.33 24,998 27.73 89 0.10 18,231 5,688 12,183 17,871 792 757 98.02 95.58 25.48 23,299 31.88 88 0.12 29,342 25,182 3,601 28,783 1,370 1,097 98.09 80.07 33.45 22,066 24.70 584 0.65 31,310 19,440 7,326 26,766 269 89 85.49 33.08 32.60 23,236 28.21 225 0.27 46,732 34,400 11,349 45,749 86 4 97.80 4.65 45.60 37,411 36.96 90 0.09 33,235 18,515 12,234 32,482 2,047 965 97.73 47.14 Information not available. 314,474 219,630 79,058 300,595 5,652 3,524 95.59 62.63 30.44 268,265 26.82 5,497 0.55 26,033 22,190 2,284 24,474 210 40 94.01 19.05 39.28 22,0l7 23.82 388 0.42 25,117 19,456 2,649 22,105 1,887 456 88.01 24.16 36.57 20,607 33.40 31 0.05 24,045 17,126 6,507 23,633 ... ... 98.29 ... 31.62 19,844 26.55 288 0.38 27,565 24,200 2,234 26,434 211 157 95.89 74.40 33.07 20,754 25.29 71 0.09 19,368 16,947 1,656 18,603 2,242 1,535 96.05 68.46 34.17 12,072 20.48 38 0.06 26,304 21,669 3,793 25,462 143 61 96.80 42.66 37.04 22,709 32.97 14 0.02 13,700 8,476 2,317 10,793 150 48 78.78 32.00 25.72 11,088 26.19 57 0.13 16,077 12,239 3,417 15,656 143 80 97.38 55.94 28.51 14,805 26.82 152 0.27 10,838 7,395 2,189 9,584 5,388 1,715 88.43 31.83 28.58 9,112 23.05 31 0.08 12,679 10,626 1,860 12,486 22 7 98.48 31.81 29.29 10,918 25.60 374 0.88 9,294 6,432 2,481 8,972 1 1 96.53 100.00 26.50 11,233 33.17 176 0.52 6,056 2,321 3,268 5,589 159 89 92.29 55.97 12.86 6,548 14.83 859 1.94 11,640 6,493 4,351 10,844 ... ... 93.16 ... 29.84 10,537 28.99 152 0.41 9,055 3,299 5,442 8,741 ... ... 96.53 ... 26.28 8,241 24.78 445 1.34 6,422 2,201 2,891 6,008 33 8 93.55 24.24 11.75 5,003 8.44 1,114 1.88 6,354 5,645 531 6,181 2 2 97.28 100.00 15.19 7,125 17.50 32 0.08 4,824 3,520 963 4,645 ... ... 96.29 ... 25.59 3,901 21.49 211 1.16 16,604 13,543 1,503 15,052 892 350 90.65 39.24 Information not available. ... ... 271,975 203,778 50,336 255,262 11,483 4,549 93.85 39.61 29.39 221,825 25.09 4,433 0.50 586,449 423,408 129,394 555,857 17,135 8,073 94.78 47.11 29.93 489,983 26.04 9,931 0.53 Special Staff in the Cantonments and other localities shown in the entertained their own vaccinators, are not included in this statement.
APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to Localities during the year 1885-86. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Number. Districts NAME OF LOCALITIES. Average number of vaccinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Total of all ages. Special Staff, Eastern CircleSTATEMENT NO. II.
A.DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1885-86. EXPENDITURE. PAID FROM Number of all successful vaccinations and Re- vaccinations. Average cost of each successful case. Pay of Establish- ment. Travelling allow- ance. Contingencies. Total cost. Imperial Funds. Provincial Funds. Local (District) Funds. Municipal Funds. Native States. Cantonment Funds. Total. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. A. P. 2,093 20 41 2,154 ... ... 952 1,202 ... ... 2,154 12,606 0 2 9 1,392 ... 177 1,569 ... ... 1,106 463 ... ... 1,569 19,859 0 1 4 1,389 5 64 1,458 ... ... 1,249 209 ... ... 1,458 12,886 0 1 10 2,004 ... 86 2,090 ... ... 988 1,102 ... ... 2,090 14,794 0 2 3 1,365 ... 199 1,564 ... ... 1,564 ... ... ... 1,564 10,494 0 2 5 2,365 6 240 2,611 ... ... 1,621 810 ... 180 2,611 17,688 0 2 2 1,544 338 78 1,960 ... 338 785 837 ... ... 1,960 15,753 0 2 0 180 ... ... 180 ... ... 60 120 ... ... 180 550 0 5 3 2,112 9 154 2,275 ... ... 1,370 905 ... ... 2,275 24,051 0 1 6 1,921 ... 60 1,981 ... ... 991 990 ... ... 1,981 21,927 0 1 5 963 34 120 1,117 ... ... 1,117 ... ... ... 1,117 18,628 0 0 11 2,391 224 218 2,833 ... 224 1,735 874 ... ... 2,833 29,880 0 1 6 1,874 ... 86 1,960 ... ... 1,320 640 ... ... 1,960 26,855 0 1 2 2,366 110 143 2,619 ... 110 2,084 242 ... 183 2,619 46,156 0 0 11 13,727 4,428 576 18,731 ... 18,731 ... ... ... ... 18,731 33,447 0 8 11 37,686 5,174 2,242 45,102 ... 19,403 16,942 8,394 ... 363 45,102 305,574 0 2 4 2,164 23 89 2,276 ... ... 1,048 1,048 ... 180 2,276 25,216 0 1 5 1,308 ... 77 1,385 ... ... 693 692 ... ... 1,385 22,561 0 1 0 1,668 ... 51 1,719 ... ... 1,229 490 ... ... 1,719 23,633 0 1 2 1,998 5 55 2,058 ... ... 764 1,109 ... 185 2,058 27,135 0 1 2 1,548 ... 58 1,606 ... ... 855 751 ... ... 1,606 20,138 0 1 3 1,637 3 64 1,704 ... ... 1,696 8 ... ... 1,704 25,523 0 1 1 1,394 ... 15 1,409 ... ... 942 467 ... ... 1,409 10,841 0 2 1 2,326 16 141 2,483 ... ... 2,483 ... ... ... 2,483 15,736 0 2 5 1,336 9 67 1,412 ... ... 1,195 217 ... ... 1,412 11,299 0 2 0 1,160 22 26 1,208 ... ... 906 302 ... ... 1,208 12,493 0 1 0 1,037 12 111 1,160 ... 12 1,148 ... ... ... 1,160 8,973 0 2 1 1,188 ... 75 1,263 ... ... 675 588 ... ... 1,263 5,678 0 3 7 1,428 ... 67 1,495 ... ... 662 833 ... ... 1,495 10,844 0 2 2 1,164 ... 68 1,232 ... ... 892 340 ... ... 1,232 8,741 0 2 3 1,598 ... 61 1,659 ... ... 1,086 393 ... 180 1,659 6,952 0 3 10 1,112 ... 35 1,147 ... ... 608 539 ... ... 1,147 6,183 0 3 0 959 ... ... 959 ... ... 462 497 ... ... 959 4,645 0 3 4 9,975 2,378 408 12,761 ... 12,761 ... ... ... ... 12,761 15,402 0 13 2 35,000 2,468 1,468 38,936 ... 12,773 17,344 8,274 ... 545 38,936 261,993 0 2 5 72,686 7,642 3,710 84,038 ... 32,176 34,286 16,668 ... 908 84,038 567,567 0 2 4 from cantonment funds. Class Vaccinator instead of one 3rd Class Vaccinator.
B.Comparative Statement No. IV, showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years. ESTABLISHMENTS. PERSONS PRIMARY VACCINATED. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1876* see note. For three months ending 31st March 1877REPORT VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1886 Price, Re. 0-7-0 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: THE &quot;CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS. Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1887.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department,( 2 ) The increase in the work done by the District Staff is satisfactory, 570,586 operations having been performed against 550,806 in the year be- fore, and of these 550,788 were cases of primary vaccination, of which 523,845 are reported to have been successful. The largest number of operations, 36,748, was performed by the Siálkot Staff; but the Hoshiárpur District shows the highest increase over the work of the year before. It is noticeable that, although Siálkot shows the largest number, vaccinations decreased in this district by 10,000 cases. This decrease is, however, satisfactorily explained by the fact that the work of 1885-86 was abnormal owing to the Zafarwál Tahsíl and part of the Raya Tahsíl having been neglected the year before. 6. The inspections by both Civil Surgeons and Native Supervisors may on the whole be considered satisfactory. In both cases the number of inspections is in excess of last year's work. It is also satisfactory to observe that in these inspections the percentage of successful operations reported by each is almost the same. The following are the number of inspections during the last two years :( 3 ) Rohtak. Núrmahal. Pesháwar. Gujrát. Amritsar. Mooltan. Bhiwáni. 10. The failure of the Municipal Committees of the towns noted in the margin to give assistance in the spread of vacci- nation is not creditable to them. District Officers should use all their influence to induce the Com- mittees to evince an active interest in this work. 11. The decrease in the number of vacci- nations performed by the Special Staff is unsatis- factory. It may, however, be accounted for in the way pointed out by the Sanitary Commissioner, and was therefore to some extent unavoidable. 12. The spread of vaccination in Native States is observed with satis- faction and credit is due to Dr. Bennett, the Medical Officer to His Highness the Mahárája of Patiála, for the energy and success with which he has carried on operations in that State. 13. The Vaccination Act (XIII of 1880) having been brought into force at Amritsar, a set of rules framed by the Municipal Committee under Section 19 for the regulation of vaccine operations in the city have been con- firmed by the Lieutenant-Governor and published in the Punjab Gazette for the information of all concerned prior to their enforcement. 14. With reference to paragraph 7 of the Review on the Vaccination Report for the year 1885-86, it has been found necessary to abolish the system of local vaccinators in the Dera Ismail Khan District, and to re-introduce the scheme of vaccination by the District Staff. Arrangements are being made accordingly. OREDER.SECTION VII.2 The decrease of Rs. 106 in the Cantonment Staff is due to the cost of the Vaccination Establishment in the Siálkot and Meean Meer cantonments being less in 1886-87 than in 1885-86. The following statement gives a detail of the total expenditure of the three different staffs under the heads of establishment, travelling allowance and contingencies for 1885-86 and 1886-87 :3 Of the 626,917 persons vaccinated (340 vaccinated by the Lahore Dispen- sary Establishment, and 56 by the Sabathu Cantonment Staff, having been excluded, the necessary information not having been given by these two establish- ments) 341,591 were males and 285,326 females. For every 100 males there were, therefore, about 84 females vaccinated. The total number of persons successfully vaccinated during the year was 583,929 ; of these 573,093 were cases of primary vaccination, and 10,836 were successful re-vaccinations. During the year 1885-86 there were 563,103 successful primary vaccinations and 8,671 persons were successfully re-vaccinated. The percentage of successful primary vaccinations for the present year was 95.11, very nearly the same as 94.74, the successful percentage of last year. 47.91 per cent. of last year's re-vaccination cases were successful, whereas, this year the percentage was only 43.75. DISTRICT STAFF. District Staff. General results. 5. There were 570,586 vaccinations performed by the District Staff during the year, being, as above noted, 19,780 more than the number performed during 1885-86. Of these, 550,788 were cases of primary vaccination, and, it is reported that 523,845 of these operations were successful. The total number of successful primary vaccinations last year was 508,323, being a percentage of 94.73. This year 95.11 per cent. of the primary operations are reported to have been successful. In this percent- age 20,079 cases, the results of which could not be ascertained, are reckoned as unsuccessful, were these to be altogether excluded from the calculation, out of 530,709 primary vaccinations, 523,845 were successful, being at the rate of 98.71 per cent. Re-vaccinations. 6. The District Staff re-vaccinated 19,798 persons during the year, and, in the case of 8,413 of these the result was successful, the percentage of successful vaccinations being 42.49. Last year the number of re-vaccinations was 14,196, and 6,758 of these, or 47.60 per cent. were done successfully. It is gratifying to find that the number of re-vacci- nations is steadily increasing. During the present year there were 5,602 more persons re-vaccinated than there were during last vaccinating season, and 13,088 more than during the year 1884-85. Last year the largest number of re-vaccinations was done in the Jhang district. The Civil Surgeon evidently keeps up his interest on this subject, and consequently the number done this year in his district is again large, but a larger number was done in Gujránwála. In the Gujránwála district the number of re-vaccinations done was 6,344 and in Jhang 4,120 were re-vaccinated. Considerable attention has also been paid to this subject in the Lahore, Amritsar and Jullundur districts during the present season, in which, respectively, 2,592, 1,443, and 1,422 re-vaccinations were performed. Ratio per 1,000 of persons successfully vaccinated. 7. During the five years 1881-82 to 1885-86 the total average number of persons successfully vaccinated by this establishment, was 477,160, they, on an average, having vaccinated 25.32 per 1,000 of the population annually. This year there were 30.52 per 1,000 of the population successfully vaccinated, and there were 55,098 more successful vaccine operations performed than the average of the previous five years. The year was certainly a healthy one and therefore more vaccinations were done than if the season had been unhealthy, but taking into account that the staff vaccinated so many more than they did last year, which was also healthy, I consider that the increase in the number of successful vaccina- tions tends to prove that, on the whole, vaccination is gradually becoming more popular in the Province. It must, however, be noted that there were ten more vaccinators in the District Staff than there were last year. The districts in which more vaccinations were done in 1886-87 than in 1885-86. 8. The following statement gives the districts in which the vaccine operations performed in 1886-87 are more numerous than those done in 1885-86 :4 DISTRICTS. Total number of vac- cinations performed. Increase in 1886-87. 1886-87. 1885 -86. Hoshiárpur ... ... ... ... 31,773 22,536 9,237 Lahore ... ... ... ... 31,689 26,243 5,446 Delhi ... ... ... ... 16,536 13,031 3,505 Hissár ... ... ... ... 18,503 15,117 3,386 Ludhiána ... ... ... ... 19,302 15,946 3,356 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 14,282 11,054 3,228 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... 26,948 24,045 2,903 Mooltan ... ... ... ... 19,120 16,220 2,900 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 27,905 25,634 2,271 Ráwalpindí ... ... ... ... 29,840 27,776 2,064 Dera Gházi Khan ... ... ... 13,328 11,640 1,688 Pesháwar ... ... ... ... 8,037 6,455 1,582 Gurdáspur ... ... ... ... 32,797 31,579 1,218 Karnál ... ... ... ... 14,625 13,656 969 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... 10,113 9,295 818 Dera Ismail Khan ... ... ... 7,031 6,215 816 Bannu ... ... ... ... 9,701 9,055 646 Hazára ... ... ... ... 6,907 6,356 551 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 14,151 13,850 301 Umballa ... ... ... ... 18,470 18,250 220 Kángra ... ... ... ... 19,187 19,023 164 The statement shows that the largest increase took place in the district of Hoshiárpur, where 9,237 more vaccinations were done than in the year 1885-86. There were 4,360 fewer vaccinations done in this district in 1885-86, by the District Staff, than in the year preceding, but, even taking that into consideration, the result of this year's work is very satisfactory. The average number of successful vaccinations done in the Hoshiárpur district, during the five years 1881-82 to 1885-86 was 25,063, and during the present year, there were 31,104 persons successfully vaccinated. The number successfully vacci- nated was thus 6,041 greater than the average of the previous five years. There was also a substantial increase in the number of vaccinations done in the Lahore district, there having been 5,446 more persons vaccinated than in the previous year, and 2,782 more successful vaccinations were done than the average of the preceding five years. It is also satisfactory to have to report that there was a considerably larger number of persons vaccinated in the districts of Delhi, Hissár, Ludhiána, Rohtak, Ferozepore, Mooltan, Jullundur and Ráwal- pindi than in the previous year. There was an increase of 816 vaccinations in the Dera Ismail Khan dis- trict over the number done last year. This is due to two vaccinators having been re-appointed in the place of the two local men appointed in 1884, on the recom- mendation of the Deputy Commissioner of the district. These local men were paid by results, the fee being an anna for each successful case done by them. As in two years they successfully vaccinated only twenty children, the experiment was evidently a failure, and, with the sanction of His Honor the Lieutenant- Governor, ordinary vaccinators were appointed in their place in November last.
5 The districts in which the number of vaccinations done was smaller in 1886-87 than in 1885-86. 9. The districts in which the number of vaccinations done was smaller than that of the previous year are given below :6 than in 1885-86. Taking the three tahsíls together the recorded fever death- rate in 1885 was 37.4 and, in 1886, 37.1 per 1,000 ; and the number vaccinated during 1885-86 in these tahsíls was 13,546, and during 1886-87 it was 7,900. I do not therefore think it is proved that the greater prevalence of fever in 1886 was the cause of the diminished number of vaccinations done in these tahsíls during 1886-87, if the fever mortality is to be taken as a measure of the amount of fever that prevailed during the two seasons. Regarding the Civil Surgeon's second alleged reason for the decrease, viz., &quot; the prejudice of the people to accept vaccination,&quot; provided the vaccinators showed the same judgment and tact during the present season that they showed in 1885-86, I do not see why the people should have been more prejudiced than they were in the previous year. In the Jhelum district there were 2,868 fewer persons vaccinated than in the previous season. The Civil Surgeon says that the cause of the decrease was the greater prevalence of the practice of inoculation. There was a decrease of 2,515 vaccinations in the Gujrát district, as compared with the number done last year. The Civil Surgeon says : &quot; The following causes explain the lessened num- ber of vaccinations done; (1) the introduction of vaccination direct from the heifer throughout the district, entirely replacing the arm to arm method, neces- sitating the loss of valuable time in making vaccinators familiar with the new method; (2) the passive resistance of the vaccinators to the new method, and the reduced number of operators, in consequence of the suspension, and ultimate dismissal, of two vaccinators for disobedience of orders, and (3) many children were left unvaccinated through early setting in of the hot weather; there being no small-pox in those parts to warrant vaccination being continued.&quot; The third reason alleged by the Civil Surgeon does not seem to me to have much force, as the weather was not too hot in the end of March to permit of success- ful vaccination. In Jhang there was a decrease of 2,066 vaccinations ; regarding this point the Civil Surgeon says : &quot; That it was due to the increased prevalence of small-pox, and to there being three persons engaged in practising inoculation in the district.&quot; During the year 1886-87 there were 276 deaths reported from small-pox in the Jhang district, and in 1885-86 there were only 16 deaths reported from that cause. The number vaccinated at the different ages. 11. Of the 523,845 successful primary vaccinations, done by the District Staff, 410,425 were cases of infants under one year of age, and 111,135 were done on children between one and six years of age. As noticed in last year's report the number of children between one and six years of age, who were successfully vaccinated in the Kángra dis- trict, was very large when compared with the number of infants vaccinated. In that district there were 11,405 children between one and six years of age suc- cessfully vaccinated, and only 6,822 infants under one year of age. It is also worthy of remark that in the North-West Frontier, with the exception of Kohát, the number of infants under one year of age successfully vaccinated, as compared with the number successfully vaccinated between one and six years of age, is very much smaller than the average for the Province. In Pesháwar there were 2,528 successfully vaccinated under 12 months, and between 1 and 6 years as many as 4,409; in Bannu the numbers were 4,559 and 4,621 ; in Dera Ismail Khan, 2,059 and 3,998 ; and in Dera Gházi Khan, 6,829 and 5,762 respectively. The districts in which the ratio of persons suc- cessfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population was high. Ratio per 1,000 of population of persons successfully vaccinated. Per 1,000 of population. Ferozepore district 35.47 Siálkot 7 Gházi Khan, for this year, the ratio per 1,000 of persons successfully vaccina- ted was 34.69, being the fourth on the list for the Province. The Civil Sur- geon and his vaccination staff deserve credit for having obtained such favour- able results. The districts in which the ratio was low. Per 1,000 of population. Simla ... ... 7.17 Pesháwar ... ... 12.54 Dera Ismail Khan ... 14.02 Umballa ... ... 15.47 Hazára ... ... 16.39 13. The districts giving the smallest ratios per 1,000 of population success- fully vaccinated are given in the mar- gin. The lowest ratio is observed in Simla, viz., 7.17 per 1,000. This ratio is misleading as there is only one vaccinator attached to the Simla district, and he vaccinates in the station of Simla only, so that the ratio should be calculated on the population of the station of Simla, and not on the population of the district. The vaccinator did 435 vaccinations during the year, whereas last year there were 774 operations performed. The Civil Surgeon reported the vaccinator for careless work in the month of July, and the man was transferred to the Gujrát district and was afterwards dismissed the service. The next smallest ratio is seen in the Pesháwar district, viz., 12.54 per 1,000 of population. The vaccination staff have special difficulties to contend with in this district, and besides the station is an important one, with a largo jail attached to it, so that the Civil Surgeon has little time at his disposal for in- spection duty. It has been proposed to divide the district into two parts for vacci- nation purposes, one division to be under the supervision of the Civil Surgeon of Pesháwar, and the other under the Civil Surgeon of Hoti Mardán. In the event of this proposal being carried out, more strict supervision will be exercised over the vaccinators while on duty in the rural circles, and I trust the results will be more satisfactory. The ratios are also low in the districts of Dera Ismail Khan and Hazára. These are Frontier districts, the latter being situated in the hills, where the population is sparse, so that the vaccinators have more difficulties to contend with than those in the rest of the Province have. The districts in which the average number of operations done by each vaccinator was largo. District. Average num- ber of opera- tions done by each vaccina- tor. Kángra ... ... ... ... 3,837.40 Hazára ... ... ... ... 3,453.50 Gujránwála ... ... ... 2,999.33 Ferozepore ... ... ... 2,994.22 Ráwalpindi ... ... ... 2,984.00 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... 2,647.75 Siálkot ... ... ... ... 2,624.86 14. The districts in which the average number of operations done by each vaccinator was large are given in the mar- gin. The reason why the average num- ber done by each man in the Kángra and Hazára districts is so high is, because, these districts being hilly, the temperature throughout the year is comparatively low, and the vaccinators are able to carry on operations during the whole year, whereas in the plains vaccination is usually re- stricted to the six cold weather months, from October to March inclusive. Of the districts situated in the plains, Gujránwála, Ferozepore and Ráwalpindi show the best results; in each of these districts each vaccinator did, on an average, nearly 3,000 operations. The districts in which the average number of vaccinations done by each vaccinator was low. District. Average number of operations done by each vaccinator. Simla ... 435.00 Kohát ... 1,068.25 Pesháiwar ... 893.00 Delhi ... 1,378.00 D. I. Khan ... 1,004.43 Umballa ... 1,420.77 15. The districts in which the average number of vaccinations done by each vaccinator is low are noted in the margin. The most of these have been referred to in the Section which gives the districts in which the ratios per 1,000 of persons successfully vaccinated are low. Inspections by Sanitary Commissioner, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner and Deputy Superinten- dent of Vaccination. 16. During the months of November, December, January and February, I inspected part of the vaccination work of most of the Muni- cipal towns, with the surrounding villages, of the districts of Karnál, Delhi, Gurgáon, Rohtak and Hissár. The work was on the whole satisfactorily done, the great majority of the children whom I inspected having from four to six well formed marks. In the
8 smaller towns and villages, in which the vaccination work of the season had been done, I found that, on an average, three-fifths of the children under one year of age had been protected by vaccination, but in the larger towns the proportion was usually not so large. During April 1886 Doctor Doyle inspected the vaccination work of the towns of Delhi, Umballa, Jullundur, Amritsar and Pathánkot. As he was trans- ferred to Military duty on the 1st of November, the Department was deprived of his services during the greater portion of the cold weather. He returned to the Sanitary Department in the end of February, and during March inspected the work done in the Municipal towns of Gujránwála, Gujrát, Siálkot and Rawalpindi. Pundit Balkishen acted as Deputy Superintendent of Vaccination, during Doctor Doyle's absence, for the months of November, December, January and February. During that time he inspected the vaccination work of the Municipal towns of Delhi, Sonepat, Ballabgarh, Rohtak, Sirsa, Hissár, Bhiwáni, Rewári, Jagádhri, Umballa, Ludhiána, Jagraon, Jullundur. Nakodar, Nurmahal, Hoshiár- pur, Peshawar, Haripur, Ráwalpindi, Kohát, Jhelum, Shahpur, Khusháb, Bhera, Míani, Gujrát, Jalálpur, Kunjah, Siálkot, Gujránwála and Mooltan. Inspections by Civil Surgeons, and their assist- ants and the native su- pervisors in each district. 17. The number of vaccination operations inspected by the Civil Surgeons and their assistants, as well as the number inspected by- native supervisors, in each district, is given in the following statement. The number of vaccinations found successful in each district and the percentages of successful cases, actually verified by inspection, are also entered. Number. DISTRICT. Number of Vacci- nations inspected. Number of Vacci- nations found successful. Number of Vacci- nations found unsuccessful. Percentage of suc- cessful cases actu- ally verified by inspections. By Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. By Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. By Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. By Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. 1 Hissár ... ... ... 2,549 17,302 2,499 17,037 50 265 98.04 98.47 2 Rohtak ... ... ... 3,908 11,197 3,898 10,944 10 253 99.74 97.74 3 Gurgáon ... ... ... 2,975 14,481 2,957 14,137 18 344 99.39 97.62 4 Delhi ... ... ... 3,926 4,446 3,800 4,342 126 104 96.79 97.66 5 Karnál ... ... ... 1,131 5,100 1,131 5,055 ... 45 100.00 99.12 6 Umballa ... ... ... 1,839 12,259 1,818 11,998 21 261 98.86 97.87 7 Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Kángra ... ... ... 1,151 19,197* 1,124 18,858 27 339 97.65 98.23 9 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... 3,658 17,943 3,579 17,745 79 198 97.84 98.90 10 Jullundur ... ... ... 2,649 15,387 2,565 15,079 84 308 96.83 98.00 11 Ludhiána ... ... ... 5,593 18,952 5,414 18,799 179 153 96.80 99.19 12 Ferozepore ... ... ... 4,392 22,759 3,952 22,594 440 165 89.98 99.28 13 Mooltan ... ... ... 1,463 18,475 1,447 18,332 16 143 98.91 99.23 14 Jhang ... ... ... 3,632 8,151 3,605 8,088 27 63 99.26 99.23 15 Montgomery ... ... ... 1,016 12,3249 The above statement shows that 76,107 vaccinations were inspected by Civil Surgeons and their assistants, and 378,889 by native supervisors. Civil Surgeons and their assistants found that 74,341, or 97.68 per cent. of the cases inspected by them, were successful, and the percentage of successful operations inspected by native supervisors was reported by them to be 97.99, they having found 371,278 successful cases. It is satisfactory to find that, on an average, the percentage of cases found to be successful by supervisors approximates so closely to the percentage of successful cases given by Civil Surgeons, as it shows that the figures given by native supervisors are probably ap- proximately correct. It is gratifying to learn that Civil Surgeons found so many of the operations inspected by them to be successful, thus proving that, as a rule, vaccinators have done their work in a satisfactory manner. Last year Civil Surgeons and their assistants inspected 62,201 cases, of which 97.62 per cent. were found to be successful. Native supervisors inspected 348,329 cases, and found 98.64 per cent. successful. During the year under review the largest number of inspections by Civil Surgeons and their assistants was made in the Lahore district, where as many as 12,253 operations were scrutinized. Gujránwála comes next with 7,552 inspec- tions, and the amount of inspection work done by the Civil Surgeons of Ludhiána, Ferozepore, Delhi, Rohtak, Amritsar, Hoshiárpur and Jhang was also very satisfactory. The Civil Surgeons of the Frontier districts were able to inspect comparatively few cases, they having their Military duties to attend to. The number of operations inspected by the Civil Surgeon of Gujrát is not satisfactory. He states that he was not able to inspect many cases on account of his inability to leave the Sadr Station for any length of time. It was unfortunate that he was not able to do more inspection work as 14,144 Muhammadans were vaccinated with calf lymph in his district, and it would have been well if this new method of vaccination had been more directly under his own supervision. Civil Surgeons should strive to do as much vaccination inspection duty as they possibly can. If vaccination work is not properly done, it not only does no good, but it tends to do much harm, because, when the next epidemic of small-pox comes round, some of the badly vaccinated cases are almost certain to fall victims to the disease, and thus the confidence of the people in the operation is apt to be shaken. Our vaccinators are not a highly paid class, and, unless Civil Surgeons visit different parts of their districts, and personally inspect the work done, it cannot be possibly known for certain whether the men do their work satisfactorily or not. The number of cases inspected by the Civil Surgeon of Muzaffargarh is not entered in the statement. He informs me that he unfortunately mislaid his note book, and that therefore he could not give the exact figures. He states that he inspected about 1,500 cases, the greater number of which he found to be satisfactorily done. The difference in the per- centages of the cases in- spected by the Civil Sur- geon and the native super- visor of the Ferozepore district noticed 18. As above noted the percentages of successful cases given by native supervisors approximate very closely to those given by Civil Surgeons. The results observed in the district of Ferozepore are however exceptional, the Civil Surgeon having found 89.98 per cent. of the cases inspected by him to be successful, and the native supervisor states that 99.28 per cent. of his inspections were successful. The Civil Surgeon inspected 4,392 cases out of 26,948 done in the district; about one-sixth of the total number vaccinated, and, as his cases are not stated to have been picked, he has been asked to find out why the percentage obtained by the supervisor was so different from the percentage observed by himself. The Civil Surgeon of Gurgáon's explanation as to the reason why the num- ber of cases inspected by the native supervisor ex- ceeds the total number vaccinated. 19. The number of cases said to have been inspected by the native supervisor of the Gurgáon district exceeds the total number vaccinated by the district staff by 216, and the number found by him to be successful, exceeds the number of successful cases done, by 386. The Civil Surgeon, on being asked to find out the cause of this excess, states that there were 595 vaccinations done in April 1886, the
10 details of which were not received by this office, and which are, therefore, not included in the annual returns. Calf lymph vaccination in Lahore and Gujrát districts. 20. In last year's Vaccination Report it was pointed out that Civil Surgeons often experienced great difficulty in keeping up arm to arm vaccination, in consequence of parents being often very unwilling to allow their children to be used as vaccinifers. In Lahore, more especially, the Civil Surgeon found it very difficult to keep up the supply of lymph. There was an epidemic of small-pox in the city, parents were anxious to have their children vaccinated, but lymph was not forthcoming. In order to obviate this difficulty, Doctor Center resolved to vaccinate calves with human lymph, and to use the lymph got from them for vaccinating children. The experiment was made, and, after one or two failures, calves were successfully vaccinated, and, with lymph taken from them, 112 Muhammadan and Hindú children were vaccinated. Doctor Mulroney, the Civil Surgeon of Gujrát, experienced the same difficulty about getting lymph for arm to arm vaccination, and he also had recourse to calf lymph, with which he vaccinated 2,177 children, and 98.48 per cent. of these were successfully vaccinated. The measures taken to introduce calf lymph vacci- nation in the other districts of the province. 21. As these experiments had been so successful, and as the difficulty of getting lymph was experienced in most of the districts of the Province, a circular was sent to all Civil Surgeons informing them that Doctors Center and Mulroney had, during the past season, successfully vaccinated with animal lymph, both Muhammadan and Hindú children, with the consent of their parents. Extracts were given from Doctor Center's and Doctor Mulroney's reports in which the methods followed by them were distinctly laid down, and Civil Surgeons were recommended to try calf lymph vaccination next season, provided parents and guardians agreed to accept it. As, however, certain classes of the community might object to calf lymph, Civil Surgeons were directed to consult the Deputy Commissioners of their districts, before they had recourse to the new method, and they were also asked to consult the Committees of Municipal towns, before commencing animal lymph vacci- nation in the different Municipalities. As the Hindús of most districts objected to the innovation, Civil Surgeons were recommended by most of the Deputy Commissioners to abstain from using animal lymph for the present. In a few districts tentative experi- ments were made, but in the districts of Lahore and Gujrát only was calf lymph vaccination employed to any extent. The plan adopted by the Civil Surgeon of Lahore. 22. The Civil Surgeon of Lahore has a great many duties to perform, so that he can supervise vaccination, even in the city, in a general way only. He accordingly put vaccination directly under the charge of Assistant Surgeon Brij Lal Ghose, Rai Bahádur, and, owing, in part, to the tact and zeal displayed by him, the method of animal vaccination was successfully carried on in Lahore, in which, during the season, 1,259 children were vaccinated by lymph taken from the calf or young buffalo. Doctor Center in his report says :11 The experiment was successful, and children were successfully vaccinated with lymph taken from the young buffalo. Regarding this point the Civil Sur- geon writes : &quot;I therefore got a buffalo vaccinated. The vesicles developed and came to maturity and scabbed in the same way as in the calf, and there was no clinical difference in their development or in that of the vesicles raised from the lymph in children. As a first experiment 40 children were vaccinated on one arm from the calf and on the other from the buffalo, and there was no differ- ence between the development of the vesicles. Children also vaccinated from the buffalo alone showed no difference from those done with calf or human lymph This was naturally to have been expected from the zoological affinity of the cow and buffalo.&quot; Doctor Center did not try to persuade people to accept animal lymph, but having explained to them its advantages, he left them to decide for themselves. He even put a price on this method of vaccination, stating at the same time that it would be done gratuitously to those who pleaded poverty. On this subject he says : &quot;Instead of taking the course of offering animal vaccination gratuitously and making attempts to persuade people to come for it I adopted the opposite policy. Excessive zeal in the former line leads to an intuitive sus- picion, in the ignorant, that there is some ulterior object. The. price of each vaccination was fixed at one rupee, for those who could afford to pay, and the money was paid by the well-to-do people, at the ordinary vaccination place, before the common people. It was given out that any one who pleaded poverty could have it done gratuitously. In this way Rs. 70-8-0 were received which nearly covered the cost, chiefly from Europeans, of course, but Rs. 10 were received from Hindús and Rs. 9-8-0 from Muhammadans. Of Hindús 322 were vaccinated, of Muhammadans 677, of Europeans 115, and of sweepers 145. This is a very good result for work still in an experimental stage. The success has been in great measure due to the skill and tact of Dr. Brij Lal Ghose, who is well known in the city.&quot; The plan adopted by the Civil Surgeon of Gujrát. 23. In the rural circles of Gujrát, Doctor Mulroney was very successful with his animal lymph operations. He states in his report that 14,1.44 Muhammadan children were vaccinated with calf lymph, but not a single Hindú child, it being considered advisable not to do Hindú children with animal lymph. Either the Hindús of the city of Gujrát are more prejudiced than those living in Lahore, or the same tact was not dis- played by the vaccination staff; in any case Doctor Mulroney was not successful in his attempts to introduce animal lymph vaccination into Gujrát city. He vaccinated 40 Muhammadan children in the city with calf lymph, but the opposi- tion shown by the Hindús became so serious, that he had to give up calf lymph and resort to ordinary arm to arm vaccination. He found it difficult to continue vaccination in any form, only a few Hindú children were done by the ordinary arm to arm method, and the majority of the children in the city of Gujrát remained unprotected at the end of the vaccinating season. The manner in which he carried on operations in the rural circles of the district, and the reason why Hindús came to object to Muhammadan children being vaccinated with animal lymph, in some of the Municipal towns, are given in the following extract from his report : &quot;So as not to cause any delay in work, and to vaccinate both Hindús and Muhammadans at one time in the same locality, the vaccinator on coming to a village would start lymph in a calf from a calf previously vaccinated, and at the same time vaccinate a Hindú child with lymph either from a child's arm direct, or from glasses; the former to supply lymph for the Muhammadans the latter for the Hindús. In this way vaccination progressed satisfactorily without a hitch throughout the district, and in all the large towns and villages, except Jalálpur, Gujrát and Kunjah. In these three places the Hindú element tried their utmost to prevent the Muhammadans from using the direct calf method, because they knew that, if the Muhammadans did adopt the arm to arm method, they, the Hindús, would have to allow lymph to be taken from their children to vaccinate other Hindú children. This they strongly objected to, and would not, on any acccount, allow lymph to be taken from their children. In previ- ous years the lymph for the Hindús was taken from the children of Muhamma- dans and low castes, but since one of the conditions attached to the direct calf method, is that no lymph will be taken from the children, as the supply is kept up by passing it from calf to calf, and the Muhammadans having a strong aversion to the lymph being taken from their children, they, the Muhammadans
12 asked for, and obtained, the direct calf method. Though the Muhammadans showing a preference for the direct calf method, the Hindus were deprived of their source of lymph supply, and, to prevent this, they tried to persuade the Muhammadans to reject the calf lymph.&quot; The Civil Surgeon of Delhi was unable to attempt to introduce calf lymph vac- cination at present. 24. The Civil Surgeon of Delhi reports that he did not try calf lymph in that city, because the Deputy Commissioner was opposed to its introduction, owing to the tension that existed between Muhammadans and Hindús for a great part of the cold weather. He hopes, however, to make a beginning next cold season. The advantages of calf lymph vaccination. 25. The success obtained in Lahore is very encouraging, and were it to be successfully introduced into Amritsar and Delhi also, the pre- judices of the people in the country districts would be gra- dually overcome. As soon as these prejudices are overcome, I feel confident that animal lymph vaccination will be more popular in this Province than vaccination by lymph taken from the child for the two following reasons :13 Honorary Magistracies. It is useless for the District Officer to talk. The opponents of vaccination say &quot;I go&quot; and go not. They declare vaccination a most excellent thing, and repeat its merits with the utmost glibness, and then go off and do what they can, by passive resistance, to prevent its spread.&quot; Mr. Purser's long district experience gives great value to his opinion, and I quite agree with what he says in the above quoted extract from his report. The people of this Province, as a rule, are desirous of having their children vaccinated, and they, for the most part, would willingly bring them forward for vaccination were it to be made compulsory. In the event of Government not seeing its way to have resort to compulsory vaccination in the larger Municipalities just yet, Mr. Purser suggests that all persons appointed hereafter to any post under Government should be compelled to get themselves vaccinated the first cold weather after appointment, if not already vaccinated or distinctly marked with small-pox, and that all officials should be compelled to get their children vaccinated, when in a good state of health, under pain of dismissal. This proposal seems a good one, because, were officials to come to see that no harm, but only good, resulted to themselves and their children from vaccination, they would become more zealous in its cause than some of them are at present. Prevalence of inoculation in certain districts of the Province. 28. The practice of inoculation continues to be resorted to in different parts of the Province, especially in the Frontier districts. The Civil {Surgeons of Pesháwar, Kohát, Bannu, Dera Ismail Khan, Shahpur, Jhang, Montgomery, Jhelum and Kángra, state in their reports that it is a principal cause of the propagation of small-pox in their districts. The people of every part of these different districts can now, without any difficulty, have their children vaccinated, and as vaccination is becoming more popular, I trust Government will soon be able to see their way to prohibit, by law, the practice of inoculation. It has been proposed to request professional inoculators to come to the Sadr Station of their respective districts in order to learn how to vaccinate, with the view to their being employed, in the future, as vaccinators. The pro- posal seems to be worthy of consideration, and I have written to the Civil Sur- geons of the districts, in which inoculation is practised, asking them to find out whether the inoculators would be willing to become vaccinators. The Municipal Commit- tees who are reported to have given little or no as- sistance in the cause of vaccination in the past season. 29. It was noted in last year's report that the Municipal Committees of several towns in the Province had given little or no assist- ance to the vaccinators. The Committees of the towns of Rohtak and of Nur Mahal in the Jullundur district, are again reported to have given very little aid. Besides these two, the Committees of the Municipalities of Peshawar, Gujrát, Amritsar, Mooltan, and Bhiwáni in the Hissár district, are stated to have given no real assistance during the past vaccinating season. SPECIAL STAFF. General result of the Special Staff. 30. The following statement gives the general result of the work done by the Special Staff during the year :14 The total number of operations performed during the year was 46,311, of which 43,532 were primary and 2,779 were cases of re-vaccination. Of the 43,532 cases of primary vaccination 41,697 were successful, being 95.78 per cent., and of the successful cases, 26,799 were infants under one year of age, and 12,796 were children of one year and under 6 years of age. Of the 2,779 cases of re-vacci- nation 1,203, or 43.29 per cent., were successful. Last year the number of vacci- nations done by the Special Staff was 52,778, or 6,467 more than the number done in the present year. The diminution in the number of vaccinations done is, in my opinion, due to the supervision being less perfect than it used to be. Last year there were two Deputy Sanitary Commissioners, one for the Eastern and the other for the Western circle, and, during the hot weather months, each personally super- vised the work done by his own staff. There was besides, the Deputy Superin- tendent of Vaccination, who assisted the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Eastern Circle, during the hot weather months, and, during the winter months, supervised the work of the Special Staff in the plains. During the year under review, there was ' no Deputy Superintendent of Vaccination and only one Deputy Sanitary Com- missioner. Doctor Doyle remained with the Special Staff of the Eastern Circle till August, when he went to inspect the work of the Western Circle in the Murree hills. As he had thus to go from one circle to the other, it was simply impossible for him to superintend thoroughly the work of both, and the consequence was that less work was done. During the greater part of the cold weather Doctor Doyle was absent on Military duty, and, during his absence, Pandit Bál Kishen was appointed to the Vaccination Department. He was principally employed in attending to the vaccination of the larger Municipalities, and, consequently the work of the Special Staff, in the Native States, was superintended by the two native supervisors only. During the hot weather months the vaccinators of the Eastern Circle worked principally in Chumba, Suket, Mandi, Nalagarh, Baláspur and the small States in the neighbourhood of Simla. During the winter months the most of the men were working in the Umballa district, and vaccinators were detached to vaccinate the children of the Pataudi, Dujána and Loháru States. The men of the Western Circle worked in Hazára and the Murree tahsíl of the Ráwalpindi district, during the summer months, and during the winter months they were employed in the lower portions of the Hazára district, and in the Jhang, Montgomery and Pesháwar districts. Arrangements for the supply of lymph. 31. Lymph was, as usual, sent to Civil Surgeons in the end of September by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner to enable them to com- mence vaccine operations. The supply from the hills was sent in two instalments, and Civil Sugeons as a rule report favourably on the quality of what they received. In addition each Civil Surgeon received two tubes of lymph which Doctor Doyle got out from England. In some cases the lymph of both tubes failed, but the majority of Civil Surgeons, who make reference to it, were successful in getting well developed vesicles from the English lymph, CANTONMENT VACCINATION. The vaccinations per- formed in the Canton- ments of the Punjab. Jullundur, Ferozopore, Mooltan, Bukloh, Jhelum, Campbellpore, Abbotta- bad, Kohát, Dera Is- mail Khan and Dera Gházi Khan, 32. No change has taken place during the year in the manner in which Can- tonment vaccination is carried on; in some cantonments the work is done by the District Staff, and in others by special vacci- nators. In the ten cantonments noted in the margin the District Staff vaccinated 3,334 persons, 2,829 being cases of primary vac- cination, and 505 being re-vaccinations. Of the 2,829 primary vaccinations 2,675 were successful, and 298, of the 505 cases of re-vaccination, succeeded. In the cantonments of Umballa, Meean Meer, Siálkot, Ráwalpindi and Pesha- war, the work was done by separate cantonment vaccinators, and at Sabathu a few persons were vaccinated at the Cantonment Hospital. In these six cantonments there were 6,073 vaccination operations performed, of which 4,516 were primary vaccinations, 4,214 of which were done successfully, or 93.31 per cent. There were 1,557 cases of re-vaccination, 1,011 of which, or 64.93 per cent., were success- fully done.
15 DISPENSARY VACCINATION. The vaccination oper- ations performed in the dispensaries. 33. The dispensary vaccination was carried on in the same way as last year, the operations having been performed by Civil Surgeons, Assist- ant Surgeons, Hospital Assistants, Compounders and Hakíms. Vaccinations were done at the dispensaries of the Gurgáon, Delhi, Kángra, Hoshiárpur, Ludhiána, Jhang, Lahore, Gujrát, Pesháwar, Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan districts. Altogether there were 4,343 persons vaccinated by the dispensary staff. Of these there were 3,708 cases of primary vaccination, and 3,337 of them were successfully operated on, giving a percentage of 89.99 suc- cessful cases. Of the persons successfully vaccinated 2,141 were under one year of age, and 1,149 were between one and six years old. There were 635 cases of re-vaccination, 209 of which were successful or 32.91 per cent. Last year there were 4,668 vaccinations done at dispensaries, of which 4,339 were primary and 329 were cases of re-vaccination. The percentage of successful cases of primary vaccination was 91.84 and as many as 67.48 per cent. of the re-vaccinations were successful. 1,508 of this year's vaccinations were done in the Jhang district, 585 in Pesháwar and 50C in Dera Ismail Khan. Of the 635 cases of re-vaccina- tion 557 were done in the Jhang district. NATIVE STATES. Vaccination in the large Native States. 34. The statistics of the vaccination work done in the Native States of Patiála, Nábha, Kapurthala, Farídkot and Baháwalpur are given in the following statement. No return has been received up to date from the Jhínd State :16 year. Doctor Warburton attributes the increase to the very healthy season, and to the more than usual care taken in making up the lists of unprotected children of each village. The result of the year is very satisfactory, 36.93 per 1,000 of the population having been vaccinated, the ratio for the Province being 30.52. There was also a very large increase in the number of vaccinations done in Nábha as compared with last year's number. This year there were 7,412 operations done, and last year there were only 2,063, the increase being 5,349 ; of the 7,412 vaccinations done during the year, 5,719 or 77.2 per cent. were successful. Vaccination returns have been received this year from the Native States of Baháwalpur and Farídkot. In the Baháwalpur State 8,252 children were vacci- nated during the year, in 7,211 cases with a successful result. In the Farídkot State there were 2,894 vaccinations performed, and 2,821 of these cases proved to be successful. Vaccination work in the larger Native States satis- factory. 35. Vaccination work is thus, on the whole, being very vigorously and successfully carried on in the larger Native States. In conse- quence of the careful way in which the work is being systematically done, vaccination seems to be quite as much appreciated by the people as it is in the rest of the Province, and in Patiála and Kapurthala the ratio per 1,000 of the population successfully vaccinated is higher than the highest ratio obtained in any of the Provincial districts. 36. Lists of the names of officials and non-officials, who have been recommended by District and Medical Officers, for commendatory purwánás, for special interest in the cause of vaccination during the year, for each division of the Province, are under preparation, and will be sent, when completed, to Commissioners for approval. A. STEPHEN, SURGEON.-MAJOR, Officiating Sanitary Commissioner.
A.i A.ii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1886-87. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. Total. Successful. Under 1 year. 1 year and under 6 years. Total of all ages. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vacci- nation. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 18,501 10,715 7,515 18,230 2 1 98.54 50.00 27.60 10,705 16.20 313 0.47 14,282 10,691 2,869 13,560 ... ... 94.04 ... 24.49 11,811 21.34 378 0.68 14,264 11,064 1,886 13,750 1 1 96.40 100.00 21.42 17,564 27.37 591 0.92 16,382 10,466 5,486 15,952 154 107 97.38 69.48 24.96 13,705 21.30 188 0.29 14,617 12,456 1,440 13,896 8 3 95.07 37.50 22.32 12,849 20.64 1,267 2.03 18,114 13,135 3,223 16,358 356 151 90.31 42.42 15.47 16,975 15.91 1,113 1.04 274 138 103 241 161 67 87.96 41.61 7.17 831 19.36 10 0.22 18,571 6,822 11,405 18,227 616 613 98.15 99.51 25.78 11,122 15.22 115 0.16 31,622 26,771 4,215 30,994 151 110 98.01 72.85 34.51 25,063 27.80 60 0.07 26,483 23,160 1,646 24,826 1,422 718 93.74 50.49 32.35 23,506 29.77 128 0.16 19,243 15,955 2,901 13,888 59 1 93.16 1.69 30.52 18,466 29.84 193 0.31 26,948 19,442 7,067 26,509 ... ... 98.37 ... 35.47 22,796 30.50 353 0.47 18,755 14,516 3,595 18,111 365 221 96.57 60.55 33.21 16,560 30.00 132 0.24 10,040 7,415 1,787 9,202 4,120 1,533 91.65 37.21 27.16 10,840 27.42 12 0.03 10,788 9,468 1,223 10,691 12 6 99.10 50.00 25.08 10,124 23.74 411 0.96 29,097 24,645 2,845 27,490 2,592 451 94.48 17.40 30.24 25,159 27.23 629 0.68 28,549 24,959 3,048 28,007 1,443 1,315 98.10 91.13 32.83 23,119 25.88 726 0.81. 32,231 20,071 6,695 26,766 566 138 83.76 24.38 32.66 23,403 28.41 306 0.37 36,698 29,097 6,553 35,650 50 11 97.14 22.00 35.23 37,758 37.31 193 0.19 23,847 19,916 3,403 23,319 85 41 97.79 43.24 33.90 25,188 36.55 73 0.11 20,650 16,647 2,201 18,945 6,344 2,378 91.74 37.48 34.57 21,295 34.52 86 0.14 14,029 10,401 2,315 12,716 122 55 90.64 45.08 30.30 12,048 28.58 138 0.33 18,234 15,968 1,479 17,447 508 23 95.68 46.06 30.00 15,517 26.33 131 0.22 29,582 24,553 3,775 28,478 258 80 96.27 31.01 34.80 22,178 27.03 59 0.07 6,863 6,020 598 6,659 44 11 97.03 25.00 16.31 5,911 14.52 43 0.10 8,008 2,528 4,409 7,416 29 14 92.61 48.28 12.51 5,206 8.78 1,066 1.80 4,273 2,833 570 3,974 ... ... 93.00 ... 21.89 4,034 22.22 184 1.01 9,692 4,559 4,621 9,180 9 5 94.72 55.56 27.62 8,341 25.08 257 0.77 6,751 2,059 3,998 6,057 280 133 89.72 47.50 14.02 6,374 14.43 438 0.99 13,287 6,829 5,762 12,591 41 15 94.76 36.59 34.69 10,598 29.17 74 0.20 10,113 7,126 2,502 9,715 ... ... 96.06 ... 28.69 8,112 23.96 28 0.08 43,532 26,799 12,796 41,697 2,779 1,203 95.78 43.29 ... ... ... ... ... 594,320 437,224 123,931 565,542 22,577 9,616 95.20 42.59 30.52 477,160 25.32 9,693 0.51 by the Special Staff in the localities shown in the Appendix their own vaccinators are not included in this statement.
iii APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to Localities during the Year 1886-87. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Number. Districts. NAMES OF LOCALITIES. Average number of vaccinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No I. 1 Umballa Jagádhri Tahsíl ... 5,161 5,123 3,616 1,333 4,955 38 13 ... ... 2 Pipli do. ... 1,869 1,869 1,557 214 1,771 ... ... ... ... 3 Naraingarh do. ... 5,642 5,629 3,894 1,507 5,410 13 3 ... ... 4 Buriya Town ... 62 62 55 5 60 ... ... ... ... 5 Thanesar do. ... 200 200 182 11 193 ... ... ... ... 6 Simla Barauli and Simla ... 70 70 41 27 68 ... ... ... ... 7 Kot Khai and Kot- garh. ... 347 347 142 198 340 ... ... ... ... 8 Kálka ... ... 140 140 79 51 132 ... ... ... ... 9 Kasauli ... ... 93 86 70 12 84 7 7 ... ... 10 Dagshai ... ... 53 50 31 17 48 3 ... ... ... 11 Baláspur State ... 7,260 6,433 2,501 2,848 6,348 827 482 ... ... 12 Nalagarh do. ... 2,105 2,105 1,174 872 2,062 ... ... ... ... 13 Mailog do. ... 408 408 207 186 396 ... ... ... ... 14 Koti do. ... 192 192 49 99 192 ... ... ... ... 15 Kuthar do. ... 152 141 53 80 141 11 5 ... ... 16 Mangal do. ... 63 63 25 23 63 ... ... ... ... 17 Dhami do. ... 93 93 54 36 90 ... ... ... ... 18 Bhagat do. ... 436 245 116 114 233 191 87 ... ... 19 Sirmour do. ... 520 501 223 230 486 19 4 ... ... 20 Mandi do. ... 2,850 2,678 981 1,423 2,615 172 42 ... ... 21 Suket do. ... 2,740 2,563 1,011 1,316 2,500 177 69 ... ... 22 Chamba do. ... 1,228 945 96 320 934 283 145 ... ... 23 Pataudi do. ... 682 682 430 244 674 ... ... ... ... 24 Dujána do. ... 705 705 471 222 693 ... ... ... ... 25 Loháru do. ... 630 630 452 178 630 ... ... ... ... 26 Hoshiárpur Una Tahsíl ... 143 143 119 20 143 ... ... ... ... 27 Jhang Jhang do. ... 994 673 592 71 663 321 89 ... ... 28 Chiniot do- ... 1,521 843 645 96 741 678 236 ... ... 29 Montgo- mery Pákpattan do. ... 663 663 612 46 658 ... ... ... ... 30 Gugaira do. ... 539 538 465 51 516 1 ... ... 31 Dípálpur do. ... 807 801 751 34 785 6 4 ... ... 32 Ráwalpindi Murree do. ... 1,367 1,355 948 120 1,068 2 ... ... ... 33 Hazára ... Abbottabad do. ... 2,345 2,345 1,635 288 1,931 ... ... ... ... 34 Mansahra do. ... 1,754 1,737 1,525 173 1,708 17 10 ... ... 35 Haripur do. ... 1,935 1,922 1,707 128 1,862 13 7 ... ... 36 Nawashahr Town ... 74 74 63 8 71 ... ... ... ... 37 Pesháwar Pesháwar ... ... 43 43 32 11 43 ... ... ... ... 38 Mardán ... ... 189 189 79 90 174 ... ... ... ... 39 Daudzai ... ... 10 10 8 2 10 ... ... ... ... 40 Sawabi ... ... 226 226 108 92 206 ... ... ... ... Total ... 22 46,311 43,532 26,799 12,796 41,697 2,779 1,203 95.78 43.29 The vaccinations performed in Cantonments and Foreign Territories by the District Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Kángra ... Nadaun State ... ... 43 40 16 23 39 3 3 ... ... 2 Jullundur ... Jallundur Cant. ... ... 539 539 158 325 483 ... ... ... ... 3 Ferozepore ... Ferozepore do. ... ... 582 582 236 321 557 ... ... ... ... 4 Mooltan ... Mooltan do. ... ... 525 288 116 164 280 237 l7l ... ... 5 Gurdáspur ... Bukloh Cant. ... ... 309 160 38 116 154 149 48 ... ... 6 Jummoo State ... ... 275 *275 Detail is not given. ... ... ... ... 7 Siálkot ... Jummoo State ... ... 285 285 107 178 285 ... ... ... ... 8 Jhelum ... Jhelum Cant. ... ... 170 122 101 20 121 48 30 ... ... 9 Ráwalpindi. Campbellpore do. ... ... 37 37 16 21 37 ... ... ... ... 10 Hazára ... Abbottabad do. ... ... 157 144 109 35 144 13 6 ... ... 11 Kohát ... Kohát do. ... ... 692 692 63 21 634 ... ... ... ... 12 Khattack Country ... ... 450 450 322 85 409 ... ... ... ... 13 D. I. Khan ... D. I Khan Cant. ... ... 300 242 14 228 242 58 43 ... ... 14 D. G. Khan ... D. G Khan do. ... ... 23 23 13 10 23 ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 4,387 3,879 1,309 1,547 3,408 508 301 94.56 58.22 The vaccinations in Cantonments which entertain their own Vaccinators are not included in Statement No I 1 Umballa ... Umballa Cant . ... 1 1,571 1,518 935 393 1,419 53 40 ... ... 2 Lahore ... Meean Meer Cant. ... 1 835 676 221 404 625 159 131 ... ... 3 Siálkot ... Siálkot iv A.B.vi Comparative Statement No. IV, showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years. ESTABLISHMENTS PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1876* see note. For three months end- ing 31st March 1877. 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 Government ... ... ... ... ... ... 134,820 126,402 168,970 159,704 180,368 169,537 103,632 97,868 138,325 131,228 193,137 183,050 278,953 264,957 340,228 323,392 371,934 355,180 295,920 280,916 280,831 267,069 157,170 149,210 371,821 356,589 380,118 359,893 301,835 288,141 41,349 40,506 29,507 27,912 62,557 56,503 66,601 63,916 40,839 47,534 43,532 41,697 Municipal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,427 9,102 10,921 9,091 13,956 11,928 25,533 20,822 29,147 24,852 20,695 17,046 21,710 18,271 16,095 13,782 32,643 27,777 26,323 23,417 12,727 11,044 584,172REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1886. Published by Authority. Price, Re. 0-7-0 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: THE REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1887-88. Published by Authority. Price, Re 0-4-0. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: 1888.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department, No. 386, dated 16th August 1888. READ( 2 ) ORDER.No. 32/1103. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR W. A. C. ROE, Officiating Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, To C. L. TUPPER, ESQUIRE, Officiating Secretary to Government, Punjab. Dated LAHORE, the 13th June 1888. SIR, Submits Vaccination Returns with brief remarks. IN accordance with the instructions conveyed in Resolution of the Government of India No. 282 The districts in which the increase and decrease was most marked. 10. The districts in which the increase and decrease in the number of operations performed during the year as compared with 1886-87 were most marked, are noted below :Aii A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1887-88. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. AVERAGS ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SAMLL-POX DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. Total. Successful Primary. Re-vaccina- tion. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 17,791 11,111 6,232 17,343 1,255 986 97.48 78.57 27.74 13,072 19.79 347 0.53 12,618 9,938 2,246 12,184 4 ... 96.56 ... 22.01 12,576 22.72 372 0.67 17,992 15,056 2,320 17,376 2,186 1,927 96.58 88.15 30.07 15,727 24.50 607 0.95 15,432 11,359 3,646 15,005 664 546 97.23 82.23 24.17 14,812 23.02 165 0.26 15,731 11,761 2,980 14,741 89 31 93.71 34.83 23.73 12,422 19.95 1,263 2.03 18,311 12,248 4,224 16,472 1,290 357 89.96 27.67 15.77 16,309 15.28 1,048 0.98 228 127 80 207 6 ... 90.79 ... 482 816 19.00 10 0.23 21,917 9,735 11,659 21,394 230 163 97.61 70.87 29.50 14,328 19.60 122 0.17 28,627 24,350 3,883 28,277 2,794 2,114 98.78 75.66 33.72 26,753 29.68 76 0.08 25,673 21,360 1,731 23,106 2,556 573 90.00 22.42 29.99 23,649 29.95 186 0.24 16,211 13,362 2,469 15,836 2,346 1,067 97.69 45.48 27.31 17,544 28.35 223 0.36 25,423 17,501 7,254 24,755 2,710 1,005 97.37 37.09 34.47 24,663 33.00 453 0.61 18,001 13,911 3,448 17,359 1,092 657 96.43 60.17 32.64 17,859 32.36 99 0.18 9,104 6,925 1,372 8,297 6,651 2,609 91.14 39.23 27.59 10,963 27.73 63 0.16 11,491 10,283 700 10,983 4 1 95.58 25.00 25.75 10,398 24.38 438 1.03 27,347 23,945 1,931 25,876 1,435 211 94.62 14.70 28.23 25,460 27.55 672 0.73 32,253 26,347 5,482 31,829 5,006 3,827 98.69 76.45 39.92 25,906 29.00 801 0.90 30,640 19,896 6,330 26,226 690 148 85.59 21.45 32.02 24,614 29.88 358 0.43 40,136 32,761 5,938 38,699 1,057 167 96.42 15.80 38.40 38,512 38.05 300 0.30 25,387 21,243 3,280 24,523 662 204 96.60 30.82 35.88 24,530 35.60 161 0.23 20,645 17,759 1,662 19,432 4,707 433 94.12 9.20 32.20 21,573 34.97 194 0.31 14,091 10,650 2,207 12,857 122 55 91.24 45.08 30.63 11,764 27.91 227 0.54 13,298 12,443 630 13,073 189 183 98.31 96.83 22.49 16,216 27.51 272 0.46 23,214 19,893 2,416 22,309 598 295 96.10 49.33 27.55 23,200 28.28 159 0.19 6,976 5,451 967 6,533 181 44 93.65 24.31 16.16 6,401 15.72 45 0.11 9,163 5,045 3,194 8,840 121 85 96.47 70.25 15.06 5,644 9.52 1,211 2.04 4,049 2,510 602 3,759 40 3 92.84 7.50 20.72 3,867 21.30 179 0.99 7,688 4,749 2,490 7,239 122 108 94.16 88.52 22.09 8,973 26.98 353 1.06 7,503 2,962 3,726 6,688 739 450 89.14 60.89 16.16 6,710 15.19 566 1.28 18,394 7,903 9,377 17,280 130 41 93.94 31.54 47.67 10,061 27.69 38 0.10 11,106 7,884 2,709 10,723 1 1 96. 55 100.00 31.67 8,622 25.46 39 0.12 68,372 30,793 22,812 66,369 12,037 5,925 97.07 49.22 ... ... ... ... ... 614,812 441,261 129,997 585,590 51,714 24,216 95.25 46.83 32.36 493,946 26.21 11,048 0.59 Special Staff in the localities Shown in the Appendix to this return. The operations performed in those his statement
iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to Localities during the Year 1887-88. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Number. Districts. NAMES OF LOCALITIES. Average number of Vaccinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TIONS. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. under six years. Total of all ages. The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No I. 1 Rohtak Jhajjar Tahsíl . ... 601 593 386 187 573 8 3 ... ... 2 Umballa Rupar do. ... 5,039 4,944 3,789 866 4,832 95 41 ... ... 3 Kharar do. ... 22 22 18 ... 18 ... ... ... ... 4 Kalsia State ... 4,880 4,765 2,379 2,147 4,639 115 46 ... ... 5 Loháru. do. ... 538 538 290 229 519 ... ... ... ... 6 Mandi do. ... 9,900 8,433 2,231 4,941 8,204 1,467 483 ... ... 7 Sirmor do. . ... 23,763 22,386 4,767 7,277 21 ,912 1,377 626 ... ... 8 Bhagat do. . . ... 650 308 104 104 285 342 64 ... ... 9 Sangri do. . . ... 466 445 89 193 433 21 7 ... ... 10 Bahgal do. . ... 1,573 1,573 318 914 1,573 ... ... ... ... 11 Patiála (near Simla) ... 61 60 22 37 60 1 ... ... ... 12 Kumharsain State . ... 392 379 46 291 374 13 5 ... ... 13 Mailog do. . ... 5,658 393 287 59 393 5,265 3,447 ... ... 14 Kumahar do. ... 39 36 11 21 36 3 3 ... ... 15 Bashahr do. . . ... 5,969 5,031 1,258 3,064 4,824 938 263 ... ... 16 Jubbal do. ... 1,397 1,301 407 730 1,258 96 30 ... ... 17 Balsán do. . ... 503 423 99 217 408 80 40 ... ... 18 Madhan do. . ... 111 59 6 17 53 52 23 ... ... 19 Ghund do. ... 148 130 20 107 127 18 9 ... ... 20 Behja do. ... 375 48 28 6 34 327 75 ... ... 21 Theog do. ... 221 162 35 112 149 59 18 ... ... 22 Rotes do. . . ... 20 20 11 9 20 ... ... ... ... 23 Simla . . ... 105 71 35 8 70 34 17 ... ... 24 Kasauli ... . ... 14 14 7 6 14 ... ... ... ... 25 Dagshai . . ... 66 64 48 14 64 2 1 ... ... 26 Solan . . ... 48 34 19 4 34 14 12 ... ... 27 Kálka ... . ... 157 133 94 34 131 24 11 ... ... 28 Jhaug Jhaug Tahsíl . ... 1,210 631 539 53 592 579 255 ... ... 29 Ckmiot do. ... 2,258 1,369 1,194 129 1,323 889 344 ... ... 30 Jhelum ... Ohakwál do. . ... 5,205 5,134 4,778 200 4,980 71 18 ... ... 31 Ráwalpind Murree do. . ... 1,036 1,016 789 138 938 20 10 ... ... 32 Hazára Abbott-abad do. . ... 2,051 1,995 1,515 183 1,787 56 51 ... ... 33 Mansahra do. ... 3,008 2,988 2,492 397 2,908 20 8 ... ... 34 Haripur do. ... 2,596 2,547 2,399 78 2,480 49 15 ... ... 35 Baffa Town .. ... 327 325 283 38 322 2 ... ... ... 36 Nawashahr do. ... 2 2 ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... Total . 21 80,409 68,372 30,793 22,812 66,369 12,037 5,925 97.07 49.22 The vaccinations performed in Cantonments and Foreign Territories by District Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Ferozepore Ferozepore Cant. . ... 1,595 1,500 455 909 1,364 95 57 ... ... 2 Mooltan . Mooltan do. . ... 1,045 387 155 217 372 658 407 ... ... 3 Gurdáspur Bukloh do. ... 232 173 55 117 172 59 6 ... ... 4 Siálkot . Jummoo State ... 143 143 95 48 143 ... ... ... ... 5 Jhelum .. Jhelum Cant. . ... 194 138 25 108 133 56 56 ... ... 6 Hazára . Abbott-abad do. . ... 77 69 3 1 54 8 2 ... ... 7 Kohat Kohát do. ... 694 694 37 19 637 ... ... ... ... 8 Khattack country ... 573 533 370 97 476 40 3 ... ... 9 D. G. Khan D. G. Khan Cant. . ... 161 136 7 124 131 25 6 ... ... 10 Rájanpur do . ... 18 12 ... 12 12 6 1 ... ... 11 Beyond Frontier ... 2,064 2,064 975 985 1,960 ... ... ... ... Total . ... 6,796 5,849 2,177 2,637 5,454 947 538 93.25 56.81 The vaccinations in Cantonments which entertain their own Vaccinators are not included in Statement No. 1. 1 Umballa .. Umballa Cant. 1 1,619 1,523 1,035 345 1,401 96 53 ... ... 2 Lahore . Mian Mir do. . 1 919 711 172 497 669 208 180 ... ... 3 Jullundur Jullundur do. 1 423 226 158 50 208 197 134 ... ... 4 Siálkot . Siálkot do. 1 826 659 107 455 565 167 130 ... ... 5 Ráwalpindi Ráwalpindi do. 1 2,058 1,151 579 561 1,140 907 487 ... ... 6 Pesháwar Pesháwar do. . 1 1,802 1,110 370 93 1,086 692 495 ... ... 7 Simla * Subáthu do. ... 117 97 46 50 96 20 20 ... ... Total 6 7,764 5,477 2,467 2,051 5,162 2,287 1,499 94.25 65.54 * Vaccinations done at the Cantonment Hospital.
v A.iv. B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV. showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years. ESTABLISHMENTS. PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- vaccinated. Total number. Number success- vaccinated. Total number. Number success- vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1876* (see note.) For three months end- ing 31st March 1877. 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 Government ... ... ... ... ... 134,820 126,402 168,970 159,704 180,368 169,537 103,632 97,868 138,325 131,228 193,137 183,050 278,953 264,957 340,228 323,392 371,934 355,180 295,929 280,916 280,831 267,069 157,170 149,210 371,821 356,589 380,118 359,893 301,835 288,141 41,349 40,506 29,507 27,912 62,557 56,503 66,601 63,916 49,839 47,534 43,532 41,697 68,372 66,369 Municipal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,427 9,102 10,921 9,091 13,956 11,928 25,533 20,822 29,147 24,852 20,695 17,046 21,710 18,271 16,095 13,782 32,643 27,777 26,323 23,417 12,727 11,014 584,172REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1888-89. Published by Authority. Price, Re. 0-4-0. Lahore: THE &quot; CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE &quot; PRESS. Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1889.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant.Governor of the Punjab in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Depart- ment,( 2 ) In the Lahore District out of 30,804 operations, 18,524 were from animal lymph, and in the Gurdáspur District the proportion was 18,789 out of 32,651 cases. Grujrát, Hazára and Siálkot also show good results. Sixteen districts used animal lymph ; in 1887-88 only fourteen districts used it. The evidence thus afforded of the rapid extension of the use of animal lymph is one of the most satisfactory points in this year's Report. No efforts should be spared to improve and still further extend the system. It will probably be practicable to establish central depôts at different stations, if not at the head-quarters of each district, from which animal lymph may be distributed to all parts of the Province. For effecting this object the services of the Special Vaccination Staff, under the guidance of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, should be employed as largely as possible. 7. Native States continue to devote attention to vaccination. Returns from Farídkot have not been received, but Patiála, Nábha, Kapurthala and Jínd show better results than last year. In Baháwalpur, however, there is a consider- able falling off. ORDER.No. 50/1160. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR A. STEPHEN, M.A., M.B., Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, To C. L. TUPPER, ESQUIRE, C.S., Secretary to Government, Punjab. Dated LAHORE, 13th June 1889. SIR, I HAVE the honor to submit the Annual Vaccination Statements for the year 1888-89, with the following brief remarks. Surgeon-Major O'Neill present throughout the year. 2. Surgeon-Major O'Neill, the Deputy Sanitary Com- missioner, was in charge of the Special Vaccination Staff throughout the year. Strength of Vaccination Staff. 3. The average strength of the Vaccination Establishment for the year was 35 Native Supervisors, 39 first class, 78 second class and 173 third class Vaccinators. The establishment in 1887-88 consisted of 35 Native Supervisors, 40 first class, 78 second class, and 172 third class Vaccinators, so that the total strength for the year under review remains the same as it was in the previous year. The number of first class Vaccinators has, however, been reduced by one, and the number of third class Vaccinators increased by one during the year. The appointment of the first class Vaccinator for Pesháwar Cantonment was abolished from the 1st of August 1888. One third class Vaccinator was entertained to do the work of the Kulu Sub-division of the Kángra District on the 23rd of November 1888, and four additional third class Vaccinators were appointed for the general work of that district on the 1st of March 1889, so that, on an average, the Vaccination Estab- lishment of the Kángra District for the year was increased by one third class Vaccinator. Expenditure for the year greater than in 1887-88. 4. The total expenditure for the year amounted to Rs. 76,483, or Rs. 8,577 more than that of last year, which was Rs. 67,906. This increase is principally due to Doctor O'Neill having been in charge throughout the year, whereas he was absent on furlough during the first half of 1887-88. There has also been a considerable increase in the contingent expenses in the districts of Grurgáon, Hoshiárpur and Lahore. Average cost of each successful vaccination less than in 1887-88. 5. Notwithstanding the increased expenditure, the average cost of each successful vaccination has been reduced from one anna nine pies in 1887-88 to one anna seven pies in the present year. Total number of vaccina- tions performed. 6. The number of persons vaccinated during the year was 942,295, of whom 509,779 were males and 432,516 females. During 1887-88 there were 680,742 vaccinations performed, or 261,553 fewer than in 1888-89. Of the total number vaccinated, 668,458 were cases of primary vaccination and 273,837 cases of re-vaccination. Of the primary vaccinations, 635,875 were done successfully, or 95.13 per cent. The percentage of successful re-vaccinations was 52.07, 142,600 of the operations having been successful.
2 District Staff. 7. There were 825,707 vaccinations done by the District Staff against 586,117 in 1887-88, an increase of 239,590 operations. Of those vaccinated during the present year, 570,407 were cases of primary vaccination and 255,300 were re-vaccinations; 540,745 of the primary vaccinations and 133,322 of the re-vaccinations were successful, the per- centages being 94.80 and 52.22, respectively. Large increase in number of vaccinations done in Kángra District. 8. The majority of the increased number of vaccinations were done in Kángra, where 240,784 persons are said to have been vaccinated, about one-third of the population of the district. As the vaccination work of this district was in a rather unsatisfactory state, the Deputy Commissioner appointed Pandit Bálkishen, late Superintendent of Vaccination, to supervise the work on the 7th of August 1888, with the result above noted. The Civil Surgeon reports that Bálkishen seems to have persuaded almost every person he met to submit to the operation. Other districts in which there was a considerable increase in the number of vaccinations done. 9. There was also a considerable increase in the number of operations done in the districts noted below :3 Animal Lymph vaocina- tion. 14. During the year 10,398 persons were vaccinated with calf lymph and 93,774 with buffalo calf lymph. There were thus 104,172 operations done with animal lymph, very nearly one-ninth of the total number vaccinated. The districts in which animal lymph vaccination was used, and the number of persons vaccinated with the animal lymph in each district, are given in the following table :4 Vaccination work done in Native States. 16. The vaccine operations, with results, performed in the Native States, from which reports have been obtained, are given in the following table :A.ii A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1888-89. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Percentage vac- cinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SON SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINA- TED DURING PER- VIOUS 5 YEARS AVERAGE AN- NUAL MUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DUR- ING PERVIOUS 5 YEARS. Total. Successful. Under one year. | One year and under six years. Total of all ages. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccina- tion. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 16,644 12,140 3,997 16,137 1,278 432 96.93 33.80 25.08 14,719 22.28 426 0.64 11,755 9,145 2,170 11,315 54 8 96.26 14.81 20.45 12,005 21.68 125 0.23 14,136 10,218 3,423 13,641 335 215 96.50 64.18 21.59 16,710 26.03 519 0.81 15,367 10,478S 4,354 14,832 2,403 2,062 96.52 85.81 26.25 14,674 22.80 203 0.32 15,896 12,073 2,691 14,764 40 13 92.88 32.50 23.73 12,815 20.58 1,208 1.94 19,841 13,681 4,539 18,220 1,185 400 91.83 33.76 17.45 16,073 15.06 982 0.92 266 82 154 249 67 26 93.61 38.81 6.40 706 16.44 9 0.21 58,719 17,578 37,943 55,521 182,065 91,629 94.55 50.33 201.34 17,658 24.16 133 0.18 29,680 25,815 2,960 28.831 6,354 4,147 97.14 65.27 36.59 28,160 31.24 186 0.21 24,798 20,695 1,611 22,312 3,375 683 89.97 21.51 29.12 24,074 30.49 272 0.34 17,503 14,120 2,950 17,090 2,736 1,111 97.64 40.61 29.41 17,325 28.00 401 0.65 20,863 14,930 5,072 20,082 4,358 1,968 96.26 45.16 29.51 24,921 33.35 650 0.87 20,906 17,812 2,533 20,345 948 449 97.32 47.36 37.67 17,954 82.53 190 0.34 10,030 8,474 1,181 9,655 6,076 2,514 96.26 41.38 30.78 10,808 27.34 122 0.31 12,278 10,051 562 10,613 2,514 1,108 86.44 44.07 27.48 10,753 25.21 423 0.99 28,068 23,828 2,325 26,153 2,736 519 93.18 18.97 28.86 26,342 28.51 655 0.71 32,705 25,363 6,805 32,168 21,581 19,502 98.36 90.37 57.84 29,627 33.17 861 0.96 29,762 20,821 6,419 27,240 2,889 1,083 91.53 37.49 34.39 25,502 30.96 407 0.49 42,580 33,620 7,396 41,016 3,907 1,134 96.33 29.02 41.64 39,075 38.61 437 0.43 25,920 22,189 2,746 24,935 496 205 96.20 41.33 36.48 24,919 36.16 193 0.28 22,620 19,354 1,795 21,203 6,207 817 93.74 13.16 35.70 21,633 35.07 201 0.33 12,547 9,595 ],941 11,536 42 25 91.94 59.52 27.43 12,166 28.86 262 0.62 11,821 10,825 754 11,579 2,690 2,608 97.95 96.95 24.07 17,177 29.14 342 0.58 18,772 16,120 2,054 18,174 369 265 96.81 71.82 22.47 24,748 30.16 340 0.41 4,966 2,799 811 3,720 39 11 74.91 28.21 9.17 6,069 14.91 84 0.21 9,856 4,143 5,233 9,659 24 23 98.00 95.83 16.34 6,453 10.89 1,282 2.10 2,895 1,715 568 2,693 188 97 93.02 51.60 15.37 4,033 22.22 250 1.38 6,675 4,167 2,104 6,271 43 19 93.95 44.19 18.92 9,178 27.60 420 1.26 5,948 2,410 2,722 5,132 409 208 86.28 50.86 12.09 6,8S2 15.58 793 1.80 15,460 9,922 4,900 14,822 82 33 95.87 40.24 40.88 12,138 33.41 200 0.55 11,130 8,116 2,653 lO,837 10 8 97.37 80.00 32.03 9,149 27.02 159 0.47 89,499 32,229 27,243 87,269 15,936 8,096 97.51 50.80 ... 57,661 ... ... ... 659,906 444,508 154,609 628,014 271,236 141,418 95.17 52.14 40.84 572,104 30.36 12,734 0.68 localities shown in the Appendix to this return. The operations performed in those cantonments which enter-
iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to localities, during the year 1888-89. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. Districts. NAMES OF LOCALITIES. Average number of Vaccinators employed throughout the season. Total number of Persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Hissár ... Bhiwáni Tahsíl ... ... 9,474 7,956 3,849 3,466 7,750 1,518 736 ... ... 2 Umballa Kharar do. ... ... 188 188 162 22 184 ... ... ... ... 3 Jagádhri do. ... ... 4,494 4,460 3,507 731 4,243 34 16 ... ... 4 Simla Kotkhai & Kotgarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tahsíl ... ... 325 305 145 137 297 20 3 ... ... 5 Bahroli do. ... ... 2,191 2,045 264 716 1,994 146 117 ... ... 6 Kasauli ... ... 53 50 37 12 49 3 1 ... ... 7 Dagshai ... ... 52 52 37 14 52 ... ... ... ... 8 Solon ... ... 53 20 15 5 20 33 14 ... ... 9 Suket State ... ... 13,375 10,312 1,182 3,009 10,166 3,063 1,839 ... ... 10 Biláspur do. ... ... 28,070 25,565 3,853 8,325 25,230 2,505 1,071 ... ... 11 Kuthár do ... ... 171 158 54 92 153 13 6 ... ... 12 Dhámi do. ... ... 2,100 1,970 197 543 1,924 130 118 ... ... 13 Mángal do. ... ... 238 188 29 50 179 50 15 ... ... 14 Bhagát do. ... ... 1,238 554 118 26 544 684 219 ... ... 15 Mailog do . ... ... 879 359 158 35 325 520 186 ... ... 16 Bhágal do. ... ... 4,871 3,533 433 1,319 3,430 1,338 684 ... ... 17 Bhajji do. ... ... 4,918 4,751 305 1,146 4,690 167 61 ... ... 18 Keonthal do. ... ... 97 97 34 59 96 ... ... ... ... 19 Khaneti do. ... ... 6 6 ... 6 6 ... ... ... ... 20 Loháru do. ... ... 17 17 12 5 17 ... ... ... ... 21 Dajána do. ... ... 199 199 164 25 189 ... ... ... ... 22 Patoudi do. ... ... 185 185 107 70 177 ... ... ... ... 23 Kángra Kángra Tahsíl ... ... 13 13 4 4 8 ... ... ... ... 24 Hamírpur do. ... ... 620 271 129 136 265 349 177 ... ... 25 Pálampur do. ... ... 6,682 3,593 822 2,638 3,460 3,089 1,589 ... ... 26 Lumbagráon State ... ... 1,880 1,231 195 979 1,174 649 404 ... ... 27 Ferozepore Fázilka Tahsíl ... ... 541 538 453 55 508 3 1 ... ... 28 Jhang ... Chiníot do. ... ... 129 95 67 28 95 34 24 ... ... 29 Lahore Lahore do. ... ... 1,058 731 650 51 705 327 118 ... ... 30 Kasúr do. ... ... 51 51 44 7 51 ... ... ... ... 31 Jhelum Chakwál do. ... ... 5,416 4,993 4,536 258 4,794 423 200 ... ... 32 Ráwalpindi Murree do. ... ... 1,180 1,180 875 73 1,119 ... ... ... ... 33 Gujar Khan do. ... ... 3,092 3,084 2,869 93 2,962 8 ... ... ... 34 Hazúra Haripur do. ... ... 2,129 1,705 1,623 53 1,677 424 297 ... ... 35 Mansehra do. ... ... 5,459 5,294 2,386 2,529 5,179 165 59 ... ... 36 Abbottabad do. ... ... 3,091 2,855 2,222 387 2,703 236 139 ... ... 37 Buffa Town ... ... 220 217 191 24 215 3 2 ... ... 38 Dhudiál do. ... ... 30 30 25 5 30 ... ... ... ... 39 Pesháwar Nowshera do. ... ... 11 9 5 ... 5 2 ... ... ... 40 Sawábi do. ... ... 341 341 267 43 312 ... ... ... ... 41 Mardan Tahsíl ... ... 298 298 204 67 292 ... ... ... ... Total .. 21 105,435 89,499 32,229 27,243 87,269 15,936 8,096 97.51 50.80 The vaccinations performed in Cantonments and Foreign Territories by District Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Ferozepore Ferozepore Cant. ... ... 484 334 190 133 323 150 41 ... ... 2 Mooltan ... Mooltan do. ... ... 306 177 148 27 175 129 105 ... ... 3 Siálkot ... Jummoo State ... ... 343 343 165 178 343 ... ... ... ... 4 Jhelum ... Jhelum Cant. ... ... 47 44 28 16 44 3 3 ... ... 5 Hazára ... Abbottabad do. ... ... 249 236 145 24 228 13 1 ... ... 6 Kohát Kohát do. ... ... 430 414 45 21 373 16 2 ... ... 7 Khattack Country... ... 369 340 196 97 295 29 9 ... ... 8 D. I. Khan D. I. Khan Cant. ... ... 163 16 5 11 16 147 114 ... ... 9 D. G. Khan D. G. Khan Cant. ... ... 97 89 2 82 84 8 2 ... ... Total ... ... 2,488 1,993 924 589 1,881 495 277 94.38 55.96 The vaccinations in Cantonments which entertain their own Vaccinators are not included in Statement No. I. 1 Umballa ... Umballa Cant. ... 1 1,579 1,525 949 403 1,352 54 36 ... ... 2 Jullundur... Jullundur do. ... 1 283 229 166 38 204 54 23 ... ... 3 Lahore ... Meean Meer do. ... 1 843 680 237 390 627 163 138 ... ... 4 Siálkot ... Siálkot do. ... 1 481 270 139 117 256 211 143 ... ... 5 Ráwalpindi Ráwalpindi do. ... 1 1,531 1,051 738 293 1,031 480 133 ... ... 6 Pesháwar .. Pesháwar do ... ... 529 529 77 70 503 ... ... ... ... 7 Simla ... Subáthu do. ... * 365 183 48 19 175 182 112 ... ... Total ... 5 5,611 4,467 2,354 1,330 4,148 1,144 585 92.86 51.14 * Vaccination done at the Cantonment Hospital.
v A.vi B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV. showing the number of Persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those Persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official Years. ESTABLISHMENT. PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number Success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number Success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number suecess- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number succcss- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1876* (see note.) For three months end- ing 31st March 1887. 1878-79 1879-80 1880-81 1881-82 1882-83 1883-84 1884-85 1885-86 1886-87 1887-88 1888-89 Government ... ... ... ... 134,820 126,402 108,970 159,704 180,368 169,537 103,632 97,868 138,325 131,228 193,137 183,050 278,953 204,957 310,228 323,392 371,934 355,180 205,929 280,916 280,831 267,069 157,170 149,210 371,821 356,589 380,118 359,893 301,835 288,141 41,349 40,506 29,507 27,913 62,557 60,503 66,601 63,916 49,839 47,534 43,532 41,697 68,372 66,369 89,499 87,269 Municipal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,427 9,102 10,921 9,091 13,956 11,928 25,533 20,822 29,147 24,852 20,695 17,046 21,710 18,271 16,095 13,782 32,643 27,777 26,323 23,417 12,727 11,014 584,1724REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1889-90. Published by Authority. Price, Re. 0-4-0. Lahore : 1890.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Depart- ment, No. 399, dated 11th of July 1890. Read( 2 ) increased very largely since the year 1886; for in that period only 570,586 persons were vaccinated against 853,676 in the past year, while altogether in the former period 627,313 operations were performed by the different staffs compared with 934,110 in the year 1889. On the whole, therefore, if the figures are reliable, considerable progress has been made during the past three years, and, as no complaints have been received by the Lieutenant-Governor regarding the conduct of the subordinate officers of the Department, it seems that the prejudices of the people against vaccination are being rapidly overcome. 5. The work of the Special staff as compared with that done, in the year 1888-89 shows a decrease of no less than 34,297 operations. This falling- off is attributed by the Sanitary Commissioner partly to the action of the Rája of Náhan in refusing to allow Vaccinators to work in his State, but principally to the conduct of certain Vaccinators who declined, on alleged religious grounds, to use animal lymph. The Lieutenant-Governor is glad to notice that these men eventually set aside their scruples and agreed to use buffalo calf lymph. The Rája of Náhan objected to the Special staff of Vaccinators carrying on vaccine operations in his territory on the ground that on a previous occasion (August 1887) the Vaccinators had misconducted themselves by refusing to pay the hire claimed for certain coolies and mules engaged for the conveyance of baggage. It appeared on enquiry that the hire had been withheld because the coolies and muleteers failed to carry out their engagement efficiently. The sum actually due was eventually paid, and the Rája withdrew his objection, but the protracted inactivity of the Vaccinators who had already proceeded to Náhan caused a considerable loss of valuable time. It was further represented by the Rája that an adequate machinery for vaccination already exists in the Sirmúr State, but His Highness did not press this matter as an insuperable objection to the acceptance of co-operation from the Provincial establishments. As soon as the Lieutenant. Governor is assured that any Native State has made efficient arrangements for vaccination, he will be ready to leave the control of the operations to the authorities of the State, but meanwhile, considering the proximity of so many of the Hill States to the various cantonments situated in the Simla hills, it is very desirable that the British authorities should supervise and carry out the work of vaccination. 6. Of the total number, of vaccination operations performed during the year 645,871 were &quot;primary&quot; and 288,239 were &quot; re-vaccinations.&quot; In the case of the primary vaccinations 618,268, or 95.73 per cent., were successful, and it is stated that about 80 per cent. of the infant population of the Province were vaccinated during the season. If the statistics given in the Report are trustworthy, this result may be regarded as most satisfactory, but, considering the difficulty of supervising and testing the work of the subordinate officers of the Department, there are some grounds for thinking that their returns are not always accurate. In the case of the re-vaccinations, which were 14,402 more than in 1888, 146,014, or 50.66 per cent., were successful. In this connexion the Lieutenant-Governor is glad to observe that his remarks in the Review of the Sanitary Report for the year 1888, to the effect that the subject of re-vaccination might receive attention in view of the high mortality from small-pox, have not been overlooked; and His Honor trusts that the importance of re-vaccination will continue to engage the attention of the Sanitary Commissioner and those working under his control. 7. The total cost of the vaccination establishment for the year 1889-90 was Rs. 75,671, or Rs. 812 less than in 1883-89. This decrease is largely due to a less highly paid officer being at the head of the Special staff for a portion of the year. In the District staff there was an increased expenditure. of Rs. 1,367. This and the fluctuation in expenditure generally as compared with the expenditure of last year is due to ordinary causes, such as the entertainment of additional Vaccinators and increased cost of travelling allowances and contingencies. On the whole however, notwithstanding increased activity in the Department generally, the total expenditure was less than in the previous year.
( 3 ) * 1888-89 ... 240,784 1889-90 ... 183,691 Total ... 424,475 8. The districts in which vaccination apparently received the most attention and in which the largest number of operations were performed were Kángra, Amirtsar, Gujránwála and Gurdáspur, in all of which over 40,000 vaccinations were performed, Kángra again heading the list with 183,691. In those districts and also in Hoshiárpur, Mooltan, Gurgaon and Jhang special attention was given to the subject of re-vaccination. Good work was also done in the Lahore and Jullundur Districts, and altogether there Was an increase in the number of persons vaccinated in 22 out of the 31 districts of the Province. The district of Kángra shows the large decrease of 57,093 operations as compared with last year's figures, but the total number of operations stated to have been performed in that district within the last two years* is still very remarkable. The district contained 730,845 souls at the census of 1881, and in the last two years the number of primary vaccinations returned has been( 4 ) unanimous resolution, requested that the Vaccination Act might be extended to that Municipality, and this measure has been carried out since the conclusion of the year. It may be hoped that the neighbouring municipal towns will in time come to appreciate the example set by Umballa, and show more interest in the matter. The ratio of successful vaccinations per thousand of the population of the Province as a whole during the year 1889-90 was 40.13, which may be considered satisfactory, and in paragraph 16 of his Report the Sanitary Com- missioner adduces figures which clearly show that the gradual extension of vaccination in the Punjab has resulted in a corresponding decrease of mortality from small-pox. 10. In paragraphs 17 to 22 of his Report Dr. Stephen gives a brief sketch of the progress made in the use of animal lymph in the Punjab since the year 1885-86, when it was first tried by Dr. Center, Civil Surgeon of Lahore, and Dr. Mulroney, Civil Surgeon of Gujrát. In that year 2,289 children were vaccinated from animal lymph. In the year under review (1889-90) 246,105 persons were so vaccinated. This clearly demonstrates that the use of animal lymph is growing in favour with the people of the Punjab, and, considering the obvious advantages of the system and the difficulties experienced in maintaining a proper supply of human lymph, the success which has followed the introduction of animal lymph is in His Honor's opinion most gratifying, and he believes that the results attained will no less commend themselves to the Government of India with special reference to its letter No. 3( 5 ) 14. The following table comparing the results of the operations of the Vaccination Department in the Punjab for the year 1889-90 with those of the year 1886-87 (the last for which a full report was written) is interesting :No. 32/1282. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR A. STEPHEN, M.A., M.B., Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, To H. C. FANSHAWE, ESQUIRE, C.S., Offg. Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, Dated LAHORE, the 2nd June 1890. SIR, I have the honor to forward the Vaccination Statements for the year 1889-90, with the following remarks. Officers in charge of the Special Vaccination Staff. 2. Surgeon-Major J. O'Neill was in charge of the Special Vaccination Staff till the 7th of November 1889. On that date he gave over charge to Surgeon Dyson, who remained in charge of the Special Staff till the end of the season. Changes in the District Vaccination Establishment. 3. There were on an average nine more Vaccinators employed than in the previous year. The number of Vaccinators of the 1st class was increased by three and that of the 3rd class by seven ; the number in the 2nd class was diminished by one. In Karnál the number of Vaccinators, eight, remains the same as in 1888-89 ; but, instead of there being three Vaccinators in the 2nd class and five in the 3rd, there are now three in the 1st class, two in the 2nd and three in the 3rd. The staff in the Kángra District was increased by four 3rd Class Vaccinators. In the Mooltan, as well as in the Jhang District, there was on an average one more 3rd Class Vaccinator at work than in the previous year, and in the Grujránwála District the number of 3rd Class Vaccinators was increased by three. The cost of the different establishments. 4. The following statement gives the expenditure incurred by the District, Special and Cantonment Establishments during 1888-89 and 1889-90 :2 The cost of the District Establishment was Rs. 1,367 greater than it was last year, but this increase is more than neutralized by the diminished expendi- ture of Rs. 2,133 incurred by the Special Staff. The cost of Cantonment vaccination was Rs. 46 less than it was last year. Altogether the cost of the Vaccination Establishment was Rs. 812 less than it was in 1888-89. The increase in the cost of the District Vaccination Staff is partly due to the increase in the number of Vaccinators, and partly to the increased expenditure under travelling allowance and contingencies. In 1889-90 the travelling allowances granted to the District Staff amounted to Rs. 1,317, and in 1888-89 Rs. 851 were spent under this head. The contingent expenses of the two years were Rs. 4,011 and Rs. 3,659, respectively. The decrease in the expenditure incurred by the Special Staff is princi- pally due to the fact that Dr. O'Neill was in charge throughout the year 1888-89, and Dr. Dyson had charge during nearly five months of 1889-90, and Dr. O'Neill's pay was considerably greater than the officiating pay granted to Dr. Dyson. There was also a slight decrease in the travelling and contingent expenses. In 1888-89 the travelling expenses of the Special Staff were Rs. 4,005 and the contingencies Rs. 632 ; in 1889-90 the respective charges under these heads were Rs. 3,626 and Rs. 513. Cost of each successful case same as last year. 5. The total cost of the Vaccination Establishment for the year was Rs. 75,671 and the number of successful vaccinations done was 761,065, so that the average cost of each successful case was one anna and seven pies, the same as the 'average cost of each success- ful case last year. The numbers of opera- tions performed during the year by the different estab- lishments. 6. The number of operations performed by the different establishments during the year and the number and percentage of success- ful cases are given in the following statement. The re- spective numbers for 1888-89 are added for the sake of' comparison:3 Primary vaccination. 7. Of the 934,110 persons vaccinated 515,877 were males and 418,233 females, so that for every 100 males there were 81 females vaccinated. There were 645,871 primary vaccinations done during the year, of which 618,268, or 95.73 per cent., were successful. Of the persons successfully vaccinated for the first time 483,638 were infants under one year of age. Excluding cantonments, there were 759,049 births registered in the Province during 1889, and during the year the number of recorded deaths among children under one year of age was 156,607. There were thus, approxi- mately, 602,442 children under one year of age alive on the 31st December 1889, and, excluding cantonments, there were 481,111 children under one year of age vaccinated during the season 1889-90, so that about 80 per cent. of the infant population of the Province were successfully vaccinated during the year. Last year there were 668,458 cases of Primary Vaccination, and of these 635,875, or 95.13 per cent., were successful. Re-vaccination. 8. In the review of the Sanitary Report for 1888, it is noted that His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor is disposed to think that the subject of re-vaccination has not hitherto received so much attention as it deserves. In connection with this remark, a circular was issued to all Civil Surgeons on the 11th of November 1889, requesting them to use every endeavour to persuade the people to allow their children to be re- vaccinated on their attaining a suitable age. I have now to report that 288,239 persons were re-vaccinated during the year, and of the operations done 146,014, or 50.66 per cent., were successful. This is a substantial increase on last year's numbers; in 1888-89 there were 273,837 cases of re-vaccination, and of these 142,600, or 52.07 per cent., were successful. DISTRICT STAFF. The vaccination perform- ed by the District Staff. 9. There were altogether 853,676 vaccinations performed by the District Staff during the year, 27,969 more than the large number vaccinated last year. In last year's Report it was noted that the amount of work done in the Kángra District was abnormally large, Pandit Bálkishen having succeeded in vaccinating 240,784 persons, or nearly one-third of the population of the district. The number vaccinated in that district during the year under review was again very large, though the cases fell short of those of last year by 57,093. Excluding the district of Kángra, in which these abnormally large numbers of vaccinations were done in both years, there were 669,985 vaccinations done by the District Staff during the year, or 85,062 more than the number vaccinated last year. The number of re-vacci- nations performed by the District Staff of Vaccina- tors. 10. The District Staff performed 276,657 re-vaccinations during the year as compared with 255,300 in 1888-89. In both years a very large number of re-vaccinations were done in the dis- trict of Kángra under the supervision of Pandit Bálkishen. If that district be excluded, there were 122,336 persons re-vaccinated by the District Staff during the year, or 49,101 more than last year when 73,235 operations of that nature were done. Of the total number re- vaccinated in the Province by the District Staff, 140,937 were done successfully, or 50.94 per cent. Last year there were 133,322 persons, or 52.22 per cent., successfully re-vaccinated. After Kángra the work of re-vaccination received most attention in the district of Gujránwála, where 28,939 operations were done. Much attention was given to re-vaccination in Amritsar and Gurdáspur, in which districts, respectively, 23,412 and 12,269 persons were re-vaccinated. This subject was also well attended to in the districts of Jhang, Mooltan, Hoshiárpur and Gurgáon; the numbers re-vaccinated in these districts were respectively 8,307, 8,026, 7,268 and 5,919. The
4 work of re-vaccination was much neglected in the district of Muzaffargarh, in which only 2 operations were done. The number of operations of this kind done in Pesháwar, Bannu and Hazára was very small, but in these frontier districts the Vaccinators possibly met with special difficulties. Very little attention seems to have been paid to re-vaccination in the districts of Karnál and Shahpur, in which the numbers of operations done were, respectively, 58 and 158. The districts in which an increase in the number of vaccinations were recorded as comparedwith 1888-89. 11. The districts in which a larger number of vaccine operations were done in 1889-90 than in 1888-89 are given in the following statement:5 There was also a large increase in the number of vaccinations done in the districts of Gurdáspur and Gurgáon, the excess over last year having been re- spectively 13,329 and 10,554. In these districts there were also many more re-vaccinations done than in 1888-89; the increase in Gurdáspur was 9,380 and in Gurgáon 5,584. There was also a satisfactory increase over last year in the numbers vaccinated in the districts of Amritsar, Mooltan, Hissár, Jhang and Rohtak. Statement; showing dis- tricts in which there was a decrease. 12. The following statement gives the names of the districts in which the number of vaccinations done was smaller than in 1888-89:6 suspended during the hot weather months. The climate of Hazára is also tem- perate, hence the number of vaccinations done by each Vaccinator in that district is comparatively large. The average number of operations done by each man in the Gujránwála, Amritsar and Gurdáspur Districts is very high. The average amount done by the Vaccination Staff of the Hoshiárpur and Gurgáon Districts was also very satisfactory. NAME OF DISTRICT. Average number of vaccinations done by each Vaccinator. Simla ... ... ... ... ... ... 640.00 Dera Ismail Khan ... ... ... ... 788.43 Kohát ... ... ... ... ... ... 893.25 Pesháwar ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,055.56 Bannu ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,310.80 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,470.50 In the margin are given the districts in which the average number of operations done by each Vac- cinator was small. The amount of vaccination work done by the Vaccinator in Simla is small because there are comparatively few child- ren in the station. The in- habitants of the frontier districts of Pesháwar, Kohát, Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan are more ignorant and prejudiced' than those of the rest of the Punjab; hence the smaller number of vaccinations performed. The amount of work done by the Vaccinators of the Dera Ismail Khan District contrasts very badly with that done in the neighbour- ing districts of Dera Gházi Khan and Bannu. As in former years, the average amount of work done by each Vaccinator in the Delhi District was small. The districts in which the ratios per 1,000 of po- pulation of persons success- fully vaccinated were high. 14. The 16th column of Statement I. gives the ratios per 1,000 of popu- lation of persons successfully vaccinated in each district, and in the undernoted list are given the districts in which the ratios are highest:7 The districts in which the ratios per 1,000 of population of persons successfully vaccinated were low. NAME OF DISTRICT. Ratio per 1,000 of population of persons successfully vacci- nated. Dera Ismail Khan ... ... ... ... 10.68 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 12.50 Pesháwar ... ... ... ... ... 15.73 Kohát ... ... ... ... ... 18.09 Umballa ... ... ... ... ... 18.48 Hazára ... ... ... ... ... 18.53 Bannu ... ... ... ... ... 18.72 15. In the margin are given the districts in which the ratios per 1,000 of population of persons suc- cessfully vaccinated are low. With the exception of Simla and Umballa, the districts are those of the North-West Frontier. The ratio in Simla is small because the Vaccinator works only in the station, and the ratio is calculated on the population of the district. The amount of work done in the district of Umballa is very small, and this unsatisfactory state of matters is partly due to the indifference shown by the members of several of the Municipal Committees. The Civil Surgeon in his Annual Report writes :8 The difficulty of procur- ing fresh lymph one of the principal reasons why the number of vaccinations done has been compara- tively small. 17. One of the principal reasons why the number of vaccinations done in the Province has been comparatively small has been the difficulty of obtaining fresh lymph. Parents are very unwilling to allow lymph to be taken from their children, and hence workhas at times been brought almost to a stand- still. This difficulty has been particularly felt among the higher classes. They refuse to allow their own children to be used as vaccini- fers, and object to take lymph from the arms of low caste children. This diffi- culty is being obviated by the introduction of vaccination with animal lymph, and the favorable results obtained this year lead me to hope that in a very few years arm to arm vaccination will be almost entirely replaced by vacci- nation with animal lymph, and I trust that in consequence of this change the number of vaccinations done will soon be considerably greater than it is at present. The history of animal lymph vaccination in this Province. 18. Animal lymph was first employed in this Province for vaccinat- ing children of the general population in the season of 1885-86 by Doctor Center, the Civil Surgeon of Lahore, and Doctor Mulroney, the Civil Surgeon of Gujrát. These two Civil Surgeons, finding considerable difficulty in obtaining human lymph, vaccinated heifers, and employed the lymph taken from them for vaccination purposes. During that season Doctor Mulroney vaccinated 2,177 Muhammadan children and Doctor Center 112 children, of whom 25 were Hindús, with calf lymph. In the following year 14,144 persons were vaccinated with calf lymph in the Gujrát District, and 1,259 were vaccinated in Lahore with calf and buffalo lymph. In the year 1887-88 the method of animal lymph vaccination was again used in the Gujrát and Lahore Districts, and a con- siderable number of vaccinations with animal lymph was performed in the Amritsar District. It having been found that in many instances Hindús objected to lymph taken from the calf of the cow, young buffalos were vaccinated and lymph was taken from them for vaccinating purposes. Alto- gether 24,287 persons were vaccinated with animal lymph in 1887-88. Of these, 14,613 were vaccinated with calf lymph and 9,674 with buffalo calf lymph. In the following year, in addition to the three districts abovementioned, animal lymph was extensively used in Gurdáspur, and to a less extent in Hazára, Siálkot, Jhelum, Delhi and several other districts. Altogether 104,172 persons were vaccinated with animal lymph in 1883-89; in 93,774 of these operations buffalo lymph, and in 10,398 calf lymph, was employed. In the review of the Vaccination Report for 1888-89, His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor remarks that no effort should be spared to improve and still further extend the system of animal lymph vaccination. A copy of the Govern- ment of India's letter No. 39 Statement showing the Vaccine Operations performed with Animal Lymph in the Punjab during the year 1889-90. No. DISTRICTS. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS. Buffalo lymph. Calf lymph. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. 1 Hissár ... ... ... ... 552 93 645 632 13 2 Rohtak ... ... ... ... 6,716 ... 6,716 6,673 43 3 Gurgáon ... ... ... ... 14,421 ... 14,421 14,298 123 4 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... 5,064 440 5,504 4,972 212 5 Karnál ... ... ... ... 1,749 ... 1,749 1,703 46 6 Umballa ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 615 615 515 82 8 Kángra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... ... 6,505 ... 6,505 6,010 230 10 Jullundur ... ... ... ... 1,024 1 1,025 729 147 11 Ludhiána ... ... ... ... 6,251 ... 6,251 5,511 413 12 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Mooltan ... ... ... ... 284 ... 284 211 43 14 Jhang ... ... ... ... 911 ... 911 824 81 15 Montgomery ... ... ... ... 6,880 7 6,887 6,859 11 16 Lahore ... ... ... ... 27,141 513 27,654 24,137 1,561 17 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 59,926 ... 59,926 56,432 2,125 18 Gurdáspur ... ... ... ... 41,750 ... 41,750 32,568 2,348 19 Siálkot ... ... ... ... 16,858 ... 16,858 16,659 199 20 Gujrát ... ... ... ... ... 11,945 ... 11,945 11,756 189 21 Gujránwála ... ... ... ... 10,666 ... 10,666 10,467 199 22 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 1,908 ... 1,908 1,674 60 23 Jhelum ... ... ... ... 2,514 ... 2,514 2,505 9 24 Ráwalpindi ... ... ... ... 1,866 ... 1,866 1,756 51 25 Hazára ... ... ... ... 4,825 1,238 6,063 5,728 70 26 Pesháwar ... ... ... ... 1,739 576 2,315 2,298 7 27 Kohát ... ... ... ... ... ... 150 150 141 8 28 Bannu ... ... ... ... ... 17 17 15 2 29 Dera Ismail Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 Dera Gházi Khan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... 2,631 337 2,968 2,968 ... 32 Special Staff ... ... ... ... 6,888 1,104 7,992 7,248 344 Total ... 241,014 5,091 246,105 225,289 8,616
10 In the Amritsar, Gurdáspur and Lahore Districts the majority of the operations were done with animal lymph. That system was also extensively used in the Siálkot, Gurgáon, Gujrát and Grujránwála Districts, and a considerable number of persons were vaccinated with animal lymph in the districts of Rohtak, Delhi, Hoshiárpur, Ludhiána, Montgomery and Hazára. The reasons assigned by the Civil Surgeons of certain districts for not using animal lymph for vaccination purposes. 20. The Civil Surgeon of Umballa reports that, owing to the difficulty of procuring calves or buffalo calves, animal vaccination was found impracticable in that district. Had as much tact and perseverance been shown by the Umballa Vaccination Staff as were shown by the staff in the neighbouring districts of Ludhiána and Hoshiárpur, a different result might have been obtained. The Civil Surgeon of Kángra says that no attempt was made to introduce animal vaccination into that district, as the system in force has worked satisfactorily for the last two years, and he ' considers that it would be difficult to say what the result of introducing any innovations among the people of the Kángra Valley might be. The people in Kángra are for the most part bigoted Hindús, and therefore the method of buffalo lymph vaccination should be introduced very cautiously, but, on the other hand, there are strong reasons why animal lymph should be used instead of human lymph in the Kángra District. The Civil Surgeon of Ferozepore states that animal lymph vaccination was not introduced into that district because the population consists chiefly of Hindu Sikhs, who are averse to this mode of vaccination. He seems to forget that in the year 1888-89, in the district of Amritsar, which is the strong- hold of Sikhism, 50,388 out of a total of 54,286 vaccinations were performed with animal lymph. The inhabitants of the frontier districts are for the most part ignorant and prejudiced; in these districts the good effect of vaccina- tion is only just beginning to be appreciated, and animal lymph will have to be introduced very cautiously. There were 150 persons vaccinated with animal lymph in Kohát District during the past season, and the Deputy Commissioner and Civil Surgeon are of opinion that the number of operations will be greatly increased next year. More than 26 per cent of the total vaccinations were performed with animal lymph. 21. In the Province, as a whole, there were 246,105 animal lymph vaccinations performed during the year, more than 26 per cent. of the total number vaccinated. Of these vaccinations, 241,014 were done with buffalo and 5,091 with calf lymph. The people not opposed to the use of animal lymph. 22. In almost every district into which animal lymph has been introduced to any considerable extent, Civil Surgeons report that the people generally prefer it to human lymph, as it obviates the necessity of making use of children as vaccinifers. Some Civil Surgeons report that they cannot distinguish between the results of human and animal lymph vaccinations ; others state that, when animal lymph is used, the fever is rather more pronounced and the inflammatory areola is larger. From what I have seen I am inclined to believe that the areola is slightly larger than it is when human lymph is used. Statement showing the number of vaccinations in- spected by Civil and Assist- ant Surgeons and Native Supervisors. 23. The following statement gives the number of vaccinations inspected by Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons during the year, as well as the numbers inspected by Native Supervisors. It also contains the number of vaccinations found to be successful in each district and the percentages of successful cases:11 No. DISTRICTS. Number of vaccinations inspected. Number of vaccinations found successful. Number of vaccinations found unsuccessful. Percentage of successful cases actually verified by inspections. By Civil Sergeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. By Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. By Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. By Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons. By Native Supervisors of Vaccination. 1 Hissár ... ... ... ... ... 3,247 21,139 3,209 20,861 38 278 98.83 98.68 2 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... 3,470 13,835 3,462 13,634 8 201 99.77 98.55 3 Gurgáon ... ... ... ... ... 7,500 15,862 6,900 14,635 125 321 92.00 92.26 4 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... 4,936 8,649 4,731 7,640 205 1,000 95.85 88.33 5 Karnál ... ... ... ... ... 291 6,779 285 6,579 6 200 97.94 97.05 6 Umballa ... ... ... ... ... 106 11,663 106 11,408 255 100.00 97.81 7 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 80 ... 80 ... ... ... 100.00 8 Kángra ... ... ... ... ... 707 35,972 640 33,368 67 2,604 90.52 92.76 9 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... ... ... 972 12,066 932 11,714 40 352 95.88 10 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 1,098 12,834 1,071 12,078 24 756 97.81 94.11 11 Ludhiána ... ... ... ... ... 4,747 19,077 4,343 18,190 404 887 91.49 95.35 12 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... ... 22,201 ... 21,570 ... 631 ... 97.16 13 Mooltan ... ... ... ... ... ... 28,246 ... 25,797 ... 1,485 ... 91.33 14 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... 2,134 5,063 1,905 5,058 229 5 89.27 99.90 15 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... 341 16,266 336 15,991 5 275 98.53 98.31 16 Lahore ... ... ... ... ... 16,424 25,211 16,151 24,689 270 522 98.36 97.93 17 Amritsar ... ... ... ... ... 2,844 41,308 2,490 39,992 354 1,316 87.55 96.81 18 Gurdáspur ... ... ... ... ... 8,575 19,979 7,658 18,400 917 1,579 89.31 92.10 19 Siálkot ... ... ... ... ... 1,712 13,867 1,487 12,734 225 1,133 86.86 91.83 20 Gujrát ... ... ... ... ... 762 16,111 697 15,830 65 281 91.47 98.26 21 Gujránwála ... ... ... ... ... 16,025 33,709 15,655 31,890 370 1,819 97.69 94.60 22 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... 736 10,181 718 9,955 18 226 97.55 97.78 23 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 98 16,469 96 16,324 2 145 97.96 99.12 24 Ráwalpindi ... ... ... ... ... 401 9,872 390 9,685 11 187 97.26 98.11 25 Hazára ... ... ... ... ... 1,978 7,312 1,969 7,205 9 107 99.54 98.51 26 Pesháwar ... ... ... ... ... 581 10,231 574 10,109 7 122 98.80 98.81 27 Kohát ... ... ... ... ... 178 2,625 170 2,536 8 89 95.51 96.61 28 Bannu ... ... ... ... ... 97 4,329 92 4,112 5 117 94.85 94.99 29 Dera Ismail Khan ... ... ... ... 2 1,390 2 1,234 ... 91 100.00 88.78 30 Dera Gházi Khan ... ... ... ... 312 15,898 306 15,714 6 181 98.08 98.84 31 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... 1,652 8,339 1,638 8,260 14 79 99.15 99.05 Total ... 82,006 466,483 78,099 447,192 3,432 17,259 95.24 95.86 From the statement it will be seen that 82,006 vaccinations were inspected by Civil and Assistant Surgeons. Last year Civil and Assistant Surgeons inspected 87,921 cases, so that 5,915 fewer inspections were made in 1889-90 than in 1888-89. In consequence of the importance of their Jail duties, Civil Surgeons are not allowed to be more than 72 hours absent from head-quarters without formally giving up the Superintendentship of their Jails for the time being. It is of the greatest importance that the vaccination work of certain definite portions of each district be carefully inspected by the Civil Surgeon annually, otherwise the work cannot be properly supervised, and it is impossible to find out whether the returns sent in by Vaccinators are accurate or not. As it is very difficult to check the vaccination work of large towns, Civil Surgeons should, in my opinion, be afforded the opportunity of visiting the rural portion of their districts during the winter months, and should be allowed to make several tours, for from five to seven days at a time, during the vaccinat- ing season. Native Supervisors are said to have inspected 466,483 vaccine operations, or 117,938 more than last year. In the Mooltan District the Native Supervisor
12 is stated to have inspected every person vaccinated during the year, includ- ing those vaccinated by the Dispensary Staff. In the districts of Pesháwar, Montgomery, Jhelum, Hissár, Rohták, Ludhiána and Dera Gházi Khan the percentages of total numbers vaccinated, said to have been inspected by Native Supervisors, are also very high. In future I trust Civil Surgeons will inspect the work of their Native Supervisors, by making tours in the rural portions of their districts, more effectually than they have been able to do this year. The percentage of successful cases actually verified by Civil and Assistant Sur- geons by inspections is nearly the same as that verified by Native Supervisors; 95.24 per cent. of the operations inspected by Civil and Assistant Surgeons were successful, and Native Supervisors report that 95.86 per cent. of the cases inspected by them were successful. The number of cases in- spected by Sanitary Com- missioner during his cold weather tour. 24. While on tour I inspected 4,510 cases of primary vaccination: 4,333 of the cases were successful, 141 were unsuccessful, and in 36 cases, in consequence of ulceration, it was impossible to say whether vaccination had been successful or not. Put- ting the doubtful cases under the head of unsuccessful, 96.08 per cent. of the primary vaccinations inspected by me were successful. Inoculation. 25. Inoculation continues to be practised in out of the way parts of the frontier districts, but is evidently losing ground year by year. The Civil Surgeon of Hazára writes :13 carry out animal lymph vaccination wherever practicable, eight of the Hindu Vaccinators of the Special Staff declined to employ animal lymph. It was pointed out to them that the making use of buffalo lymph was not contrary to their religious tenets, and that as a matter of fact many Hindu Vaccinators of the District Staff were using buffalo lymph. They were also informed that, if they did not carry on vaccination work with buffalo calf lymph in suitable cases, their conduct would be brought to the notice of Government. They afterwards agreed to use buffalo calf lymph, but much valuable time was lost. Sixty-one thousand and seventeen of the operations done by the Special Staff were cases of primary vaccination; of these, 59,092, or 96.85 per cent., were successful. They performed 10,121 re-vaccinations, of which 4,245, or 41.94 per cent., were successful. The Special Staff performed 7,992 vaccina- tions with animal lymph ; of these, 6,888 were done with buffalo and 1,104 with calf lymph. During the hot weather months the Special Staff belonging to the Eastern Circle were employed on vaccination duty in the States of Mundi, Chamba, Nálagarh, Basáhir, Jabal, Keonthal and the other small States in the neighbour- hood of Simla. In the cold weather they were employed in the Native States of Kalsia, Loháru, Pataudi and Dujána, in the Sonepat Tahsíl of the Delhi District, in the Fázilka Tahsíl of the Ferozepore District, in the Zafarwál Tahsíl of the Siálkot District and in Pesháwar. The men of the Western Circle did vaccination work in the Murree Tahsíl of the Ráwalpindi District and in the Hazára and Pesháwar Districts. Doctor O'Neill inspected the vaccination work of Murree and its neigh- bourhood, Chamba, Palampur, Mundi and Sukhet. Doctor Dyson inspected the vaccination work done in the districts of Gurgáon, Rohtak, Hissár, Ferozepore and Hazára, and in the towns of Kasúr, Gujrát and Jalálpur. In his report he states that he has personally examined a large number of children who have been vaccinated with animal lymph, and has found the scabs and scars to be larger than those produced by human lymph. He states that though he has made many enquiries he has not found that animal lymph vaccination is attended with greater physical disturbance than vaccination with human lymph is. Establishment of suitable depôts for animal lymph. 28. The Punjab Government was requested in the Government of India's letter No. 314 Ferozepore.. Abbottabad. Mooltan. Kohát. Jhelum. D. I. Khan. Campbellpore. D. G. Khan. Râjanpur. In the nine cantonments noted in the margin, 1,778 vaccinations were performed during the year by members of the District Staff. Of these vaccinations, 1,191 were primary and 587 were re-vaccinations; 1,120 of the primary vaccinations, or 94.04 per cent., were successful, and of the cases of re-vaccination 214, or 36.46 per cent., were successful. In the Cantonments of Umballa, Jullundur, Meean Meer, Siálkot and Ráwalpindi vaccination work was carried on by Special Cantonment Vaccinators, and in the cantonment of Pesháwar the work was done by a member of the Pesháwar District Staff, whose services were lent for a time to the Cantonment. In these six cantonments 5,429 vaccinations were performed during the season, of which 4,674 were primary vaccinations and 755 were cases of re-vaccination. Of the 4,674 primary vaccinations 4,380, or 93.71 per cent., were successful; 69.80 per cent. of the re-vaccinations were successful, 527 out of the 755 cases re-vaccinated having proved successful. DISPENSARY VACCINATION, Dispensary vaccination. 30. Vaccination operations were done by members of the Dispensary Staff in the 13 districts entered in Statement No. III. There were 3,867 vaccinations performed during the year; 3,161 persons were vaccinated for the first time, and there were 706 cases of re-vaccination, Of the primary vaccinations 2,912, or 92.12 per cent., were successful, and 43.20 per cent. of the cases of re-vaccination were successful. Last year 5,542 vaccinations were done by the Dispensary Staff, so that during the present year there was a decrease of 1,675 operations. Last year 4,085 of the operations were primary and 1,457 were cases of re-vaccination, the percentages of successful cases having been, respectively, 90.89 and 40.97, NATIVE STATES. Native States. 31. The number of vaccinations performed in the large Native States during the year, with results, is given in the following statement:15 per cent. of the primary vaccinations and 44.94 per cent. of the re-vaccinations were successful. Last year 48,477 persons were vaccinated, and the percentages of successful primary vaccinations and re-vaccinations were, respectively, 92.28 and 49.32. There is a substantial increase in the amount of work done in Baháwalpur. There were 18,274 operations performed against 11,621 in 1888-89. There were 17,448 primary vaccinations and 826 cases of re-vaccination performed, and the percentages of successful cases were, respectively, 93.69 and 90.80. Last year the percentages of cases found successful were, respectively, 91.36 and 94.12 : in both years the percentages of successful re-vaccination were very high. In Kapurthala there were 9,012 persons vaccinated, the cases of re-vacci- nation having been 54. The percentage of successful cases of primary vaccina- tion was 96.89, and 37.04 per cent. of the re-vaccinations were successful. Last year as many as 2,629 persons were re-vaccinated in this State out of a total of 11,587 cases done. In Nábha 5,801 vaccinations were done during the year 1889, of which 5,771 were primary. Of the primary vaccinations 4,815, or 83.43 per cent., were successful. The number of operations done in Jínd during the year 1889 was 5,395, all being primary vaccinations, and of these, 4,907, or 90.95 per cent., were successful. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, A. STEPHEN, SURGEON-MAJOR, Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab.
A.ii A.iii DEPARTMENT.in the Punjab Province during the Year 1889-90. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. AVERAGE AN- NUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DUR- ING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 21,754 15,909 5,191 21,100 1,414 353 96.99 24.96 31.90 15,716 23.37 378 0.56 15,403 12,296 2,734 15,030 617 415 97.58 67.26 27.90 11,457 20.70 111 0.20 19,106 15,533 2,664 18,197 5,919 4,939 95.24 83.44 36.05 16,880 26.30 418 0.65 16,125 10,685 4,735 15,420 1,521 1,301 95.63 85.54 25.98 14,212 22.08 165 0.26 14,740 12,188 2,053 14,241 58 32 96.61 55.17 22.12 13,198 20.45 770 1.19 20,715 14,887 3,994 18,881 859 204 91.15 23.75 18.48 15,467 14.98 937 0.91 524 186 222 496 116 41 94.66 35.34 12.50 424 9.87 9 0.21 29,370 18,243 8,915 27,158 154,321 76,588 92.47 49.63 141.95 43,385 59.36 168 0.23 29,650 25,413 3,231 28,684 7,268 4,955 96.74 68.18 37.32 28,487 31.60 293 0.33 25,941 21,796 1,356 23,152 2,382 772 89.25 32.41 30.30 23,667 29.98 395 0.50 17,750 14,567 2,787 17,368 2,531 1,070 97.85 42.28 29.79 16,831 27.20 483 0.78 24,932 17,689 6,314 24,003 1,308 444 96.27 33.94 32.71 24,233 32.43 797 1.07 20,191 16,471 3,303 19,774 8,026 6,013 97.93 74.92 46.72 17,737 32.13 292 0.53 12,519 10,487 1,737 12,224 8,307 4,819 97.64 58.01 43.11 11,561 29.25 127 0.32 14,964 14,204 555 14,759 1,530 1,086 98.63 70.98 37.15 10,951 25.67 444 1.04 31,479 28,110 1,787 29,897 3,080 540 94.97 17.53 32.94 26,778 28.98 781 0.85 37,648 30,010 7,319 37,329 23,412 20,237 99.15 86.44 64.44 35,055 39.24 929 1.04 33,711 24,118 7,370 31,488 12,269 5,750 93.41 46.87 45.21 25,727 31.23 480 0.58 34,738 28,567 5,520 34,087 4,272 1,505 98.13 35.23 35.16 38,796 38.33 502 0.50 23,870 20,309 2,651 22,960 2,495 1,543 96.19 61.84 35.56 24,907 36.14 251 0.36 21,716 18,017 2,202 20,314 28,939 3,700 93.54 12.79 38.93 21,785 35.31 210 0.34 14,863 11,796 1,752 13,548 158 112 91.15 70.89 32.41 12,421 29.47 272 0.65 15,289 14,382 691 15,073 2,460 2,349 98.58 95.45 29.56 17,089 29.00 373 0.63 20,419 17,398 2,621 20,019 2,262 1,479 98.04 65.38 26.20 24,657 30.05 436 0.53 8,219 5,978 1,370 7,467 174 78 90.85 44.83 18.53 5,831 14.32 165 0.41 9,465 4,323 4,594 9,289 35 32 98.14 91.43 15.73 7,435 12.54 980 1.65 3,174 1,966 551 2,954 399 330 93.07 82.71 18.09 3,787 20.86 245 1.35 6,470 3,897 2,296 6,193 84 33 95.72 39.29 18.72 8,448 25.40 442 1.33 5,281 2,416 2,185 4,601 238 117 87.12 49.16 10.68 6,160 13.95 867 1.96 16,693 10,149 5,963 16,112 201 98 96.52 48.76 44.61 13,152 36.20 223 0.61 10,300 7,274 2,778 10,066 2 2 97.73 100.00 29.73 9,713 28.69 233 0.69 61,017 29,838 19,671 59,092 10,121 4,245 96.85 41.94 .. 65,189 638,036 479,105 121,112 610,976 286,778 145,182 95.76 50.63 40.13 611,134 32.43 13,176 0.70 NOTE.iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to Localities, during the Year 1889-90. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. DISTRICTS. Names of Localities. Average number of Vac- cinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No.1. 1 Delhi ... Sonepat Tahsíl ... ... 7,570 6,128 4,748 1,144 5,988 1,442 719 ... ... 2 Simla Kalka ... ... ... 227 216 176 33 210 11 4 ... ... 3 Kasauli ... ... ... 59 55 42 12 55 4 1 ... ... 4 Dagshai ... ... ... 46 46 33 11 46 ... ... ... ... 5 Solon ... ... ... 26 19 12 7 19 7 4 ... ... 6 Kalsia State ... ... 3,521 3,511 2,200 1,229 3,430 10 5 ... ... 7 Loháru do. .. ... 199 199 93 79 172 ... ... ... ... 8 Pataudi do. .. ... 267 267 150 110 260 ... ... ... ... 9 Dnjána do. ... .. 788 788 660 113 773 ... ... ... ... 10 Mandi do. ... ... 5,444 4,435 1,464 2,536 4,190 1,009 448 ... ... 11 Chamba do. .. ... 20,161 14,974 1,789 5,756 14,873 5,187 1,696 ... ... 12 Nálagarh do. ... ... 3,767 3,678 2,272 947 3,621 89 39 ... ... 13 Sirmour do. ... ... 9 9 5 1 6 ... ... ... ... 14 Jubal do. ... ... 1,985 1,725 375 997 1,671 260 140 ... ... 15 Keonthal do. ... ... 3,277 2,551 545 1,379 2,487 726 575 ... ... 16 Tharoach do. ... ... 323 295 121 141 281 28 23 ... ... 17 Balson do. ... ... 552 464 72 169 464 88 60 ... ... 18 Koti do. ... ... 209 209 45 129 206 ... ... ... ... 19 Madhan do. ... ... 271 227 29 68 227 44 32 ... ... 20 Bahja do. ... ... 33 31 24 5 31 2 ... ... ... 21 Rámpur Bussáhir . . ... 3,389 3,220 1,241 1,677 2,953 169 82 ... ... 22 Bhagat do. ... ... 231 132 73 41 129 99 33 ... ... 23 Ferozepore Fázilka Tahsíl ... ... 2,348 2,344 1,928 388 2,316 4 3 ... ... 24 Lahore ... Lahore do. ... ... 59 59 54 3 58 ... ... ... ... 25 Siálkot ... Zafarwál do. ... ... 7,172 6,619 6,026 200 6,226 553 188 ... ... 26 Jhelum ... Chakwál do. ... ... 22 21 15 2 17 1 ... ... ... 27 Ráwalpindi Murree do. ... ... 1,311 1,042 852 145 998 269 146 ... ... 28 Gharyál Cantonment ... 26 22 9 12 21 4 ... ... ... 29 Hazára Mánsahra Tahsíl . . ... 1,815 1,811 645 915 1,763 4 2 ... ... 30 Abbattabad do. ... ... 2,242 2,135 1,802 166 1,973 107 42 ... ... 31 Harripnr do. ... ... 857 854 768 75 843 3 3 ... ... 32 Nawashahr Town .. ... 144 144 75 1 76 ... ... ... ... 33 Amb State ... ... ... 16 16 4 9 13 ... ... ... ... 34 Pesháwar Daudzai Tahsíl ... ... 1,713 1,713 705 920 1,652 ... ... ... ... 35 Mardán do. ... ... 391 390 285 92 383 1 ... ... ... 36 Sawábi do. ... ... 668 668 501 159 661 ... ... ... ... Total ... 21 71,138 61,017 29,838 19,671 59,092 10,121 4,245 96.85 41.94 The vaccinations performed in Cantonmets and Foregin Territories by District Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Ferozepore Ferozepore Cantt. ... ... 751 484 242 236 478 267 51 ... ... 2 Mooltan ... Mooltan do ... ... 137 137 112 23 135 ... ... ... ... 3 Jhelum ... Jhelum do. ... ... 21 11 9 2 11 10 10 ... ... 4 Ráwalpindi Campbellpore Cantt. ... 11 11 10 1 11 ... ... ... ... 5 Hazára Abbottabad Cantt... ... 242 102 41 9 63 140 62 ... ... 6 Kohát Kohát do. ... ... 279 271 15 7 258 8 8 ... ... 7 Khattach Country.. . . 480 384 289 84 375 96 92 ... ... 8 D. I. Khan D. I. Khan Cantt. .. ... 164 26 10 16 26 138 81 ... ... 9 D. G. Khan D. G. Khan do. ... ... 144 123 39 76 115 21 1 ... ... 10 Rájanpur do. ... ... 29 26 5 18 23 3 1 ... ... Total ... ... 2,258 1,575 772 472 1,495 683 306 94 92 44.80 The vaccinations in Cantonments which. entertain their own Vaccinators are not included in Statement No. I. 1 Umballa ... Umballa Cantonment 1 1,212 1,190 846 274 1,120 22 12 ... ... 2 Jullundnr... Jullundur do ... 1 483 291 194 51 245 195 104 ... ... 3 Lahore ... Meean Meer do. ... 1 1,119 810 216 543 759 309 281 ... ... 4 Siálkot ... Siálkot do. ... 1 546 480 155 320 475 68 62 ... ... 5 Ráwalpindi Ráwalpindi do. ... 1 1,086 922 497 225 825 164 68 ... ... 6 Pesháwar... Pesháwar do. ... * 981 981 136 169 959 ... ... ... ... Total ... 5 5,429 4,674 2,044 1,582 4,380 755 527 93.71 69.80 * An allowance was granted to a Vaccinator of the District Staff from Cantonment Funds.
v A.vi B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV. showing the number of Persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those Persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned Official Years. ESTABLISHMENT. PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- Total number Number success- fully vaccmated. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1876* (see note). For three months end- ing 31st March 1877.REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1890-91. Published On Authority. Price Re. 0-8-0. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: THE &quot;CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS, Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1891.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department, No. 371, dated 22nd July 1891. READ( 2 ) a statement in the Sanitary Report for the year 1890-91 to the effect that a death-rate of 1.99 per 1,000 from small pox in the Karnál District, the highest registered in any district during the year, was perhaps attributable to the in- different manner in which vaccination has been carried on. His Honor is glad to know that the offenders were punished and measures taken to carry on vaccination properly ; also that on small-pox breaking out in any place special Vaccinators are at once deputed to the spot. 5. In the larger Native States in the Punjab which have their own establishments vaccination was prosecuted with fair vigour. Inthe States of Patiála and Baháwalpur there was an increase in the number of vaccinations. *Buffalo ... ... 575,636 Calf ... ... ... 4,789 Donkey ... ... 1,034 Sheep and goat ... ... 7 Lymph in lanolin ... 198 Total ... 581,664 6. Vaccination was carried out with animal lymph in every district in the Province. There were 581,664 operations against 246,105 in 1889 90, or an increase of 335,559 This is very satisfactory. The great bulk of the vaccinations* were from buffalo lymph ; then followed lymph from the calf, donkey, sheep or goat, and 198 operations were performed with lymph preserved in lanolin. Dr. Stephen attaches to his Vaccination Report a report of the result of the experiments made under the orders of the Government of India of vaccination with animal lymph preserved in lanolin. This and also the question of the establishment in the Punjab of depôts for the supply of animal lymph will be dealt with separately with reference to the correspondence ending with the letter from the Government of India in the Home Department, No. 343 Sanitary, dated the 6th of November 1890. 7.During the year 1890-91 rules for the regulation of vaccine opera- tions in the Cantonment of Kasauli were promulgated and the provisions of Act XIII of 1880 (The Vaccination Act) were applied to the Municipality of Umballa, and later on to that of Rohtak. ORDER.A. STAFE. STRENGTH OF ESTABLISHMENT INCREASE. TOTAL NUMBER OF OPRATIONS. Increase. Decrease PRIMARY VACCI- NATIONS. Increase Decrease. 1889-90. 1899-91. Supervi- sors. Vaccina- tors. Supervi- sors. Vaccina- tors. Supervi- sors. Vaccina- tors. 1889-90 1890-91. 1889-90 1890-91. District ... ... ... 33 273 33 274 ... 1 853,676 767,767 ... 85,909 577,019 538,150 ... 38,869 Dispensary ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,867 3,210 ... 657 3,161 2,604 ... 557 Cantonment ... ... ... ... 5 ... 5 ... ... 5,429 6,047 618 ... 4,674 4,114 ... 560 Special ... ... ... 2 21 2 21 ... ... 71,138 73,118 1,980 ... 61,017 50,266 ... 10,751 Total ... 35 289 35 300 ... 1 934,110 850,142 2,598 86,566 645,871 595,134 ... 50,737 Net decrease as compared with the figures for 1889-90 = 83,968 Net decrease on the figures of 1889-90 = 50,737
( 2 ) A.No. 36/1300. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR A. STEPHEN, M.A., M.B., Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, To H. C. FANSHAWE, ESQUIRE, C.S., Officiating Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab. Dated LAHORE, the 1st June 1891. SIR, I have the honor to submit the vaccination statements for the year 1890-91 with the following brief remarks. Surgeon Dyson in charge of the special staff. 2. Surgeon Dyson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, was in charge of the special vaccination staff throughout the year. Strength of the vaccina- tion staff. 3. The strength of the vaccination establishment is almost exactly the same as it was last year. In both years there were 35 native supervisors, 42 first class and 77 second class vaccinators. There were on an average 181 third class vaccinators employedduring the year, the average number for the previous year having been 180.The increase is due to an extra vaccinator having been employed in theMooltan district. Expenditure considerably less than in 1889-90. 4. The expenditure incurred by the establishment as a whole was Rs. 4,628 less than in the previous year. The district and special establishments cost, respectively, Rs. 1,198 andRs. 3,457 less than they did last year, but the cantonment staff expenditurewas Rs. 27 greater than in 1889-90. Causes of decreased ex- penditure. 5. The travelling expenses and contingencies of the district staff were respectively Rs. 414 and Rs. 197 less than in the previous year. The pay of the district establishment was Rs. 560 less than in 1889-90, due to the special Superintendent of Vaccination of the Kángra district, on a salary of Rs. 100 a month, having been replaced by a second class Supervisor on Rs. 30 a month. The reduction in the expenditure of the special staff was partly due to Surgeon Dyson having succeeded Surgeon Major O'Neill as Deputy Sanitary Commissioner on smaller allowances than those drawn by Doctor O'Neill. The travelling allowance paid to the special staff was Rs. 1,037 less than the amount paid under that head in 1889-90. Cost of each successful vaccination operation. 6. The average cost of each successful vaccination was one anna seven pies, the same as the average cost of each successful case in 1888-89 and 1889-90. Number of vaccinations performed during the year. 7. There were 850,142 persons vaccinated during the year, of whom 479,646 were males and 370,496 females. In 1889-90 there were 934,110 vaccinations done, or 83,968 more than during the year under review. Of the total number of vaccinations done 595,134 were cases of primary vaccinations, and of these, 565,094, or 94.95 per cent., were successful. Of the 255,008 cases of re-vaccination done 143,068 were successful, a percentage of 56.10. Vaccinations done by district staff. 8. The district staff performed 767,767 operations, as against 853,676 in 1889-90. Of these, 538,150 were primary vaccinations, and 229,617 were cases of re-vaccination : 94.83 per cent. of the primary operations and 56.04 of the cases of re-vaccination were successful. The decrease in 1890-91 is due entirely to the comparatively small amount of work done in Kángra. In 1889-90 vaccination in Kángra was under a special Superintendent, and 183,691 vaccinations were performed ; and in 1890-91 only 20,413 persons were vaccinated in that district. Excluding Kángra, there were 77,369 more vaccinations done by the district staff in 1890-91 than in 1889-90.
2 Primary vaccinations done. 9. Excluding Kángra, there were 28,150 fewer primary vaccinations done by the district staff than in 1889-90. This decrease was due to the excessive mortality that occurred among infants during the autumn months. The principal decrease occurred in the districts of Siálkot, Gujrát, Gujránwála, and Gurdáspur, where the infantile mortality was particularly high. Re-vaccinations done. 10. Considerable attention was given to re-vaccination by the district staff. Excluding Kángra, they performed 105,519 more re-vaccinations than in the previous year. The greatest increase in the number of re-vaccinations took place in the districts of Hissár, Rohtak, Karnál, Ferozepore, Mooltan, Montgomery, Amritsar, Gurdáspur, Bazára, Peshawar, Dera Gházi Khan, and Muzaffargarh. There is, however, reason to believe that in several districts vaccinators have re-vaccinated a con- siderable number of children who had been re-vaccinated one or two years previously. I propose calling the attention of Civil Surgeons to this subject in the beginning of next vaccinating season. Work done by special staff. 11. The special staff performed, on the whole, 1,980 more operations than in 1889-90. They did 10,751 fewer primary operations and 12,731 more re-vaccinations than in the previous year. Work done by canton- ment staff. 12. There were 618 more operations done by the cantonment staff than in the previous year. They did 1,178 more re-vaccinations and 560 fewer primary vaccinations than in 1889-90. Work done by dispensary staff 13. There were 657 fewer dispensary vaccinations done than in the previous year. Under primary vaccination the decrease was 557, and this staff did 100 fewer cases of re-vaccina- tion than in 1889-90. Progress of animal lymph vaccination. 14. The following statement gives the number of operations performed in the different districts with animal lymph during the year :3 There were 581,664 animal lymph vaccinations done, as against 246,105 in the previous year. This large increase shows that the method of animal lymph vaccination is becoming more popular in the Province, and I believe that in a few years it will entirely take the place of the arm-to-arm method. In every district, with the exception of Bannu, a considerable number of animal lymph vaccinations were done. The districts in which animal lymph was principally used were Rohtak, Gurgáon, Karnál, Simla, Mooltan, Jhang, Lahore, Amritsar, Gurdáspur, Siálkot, Gujránwála, Ráwalpindi, Hazára, Kohát, and Muzaffargarh. Animal lymph was also extensively used by the special staff, and the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner states that the Rájás of Sirmúr, Chamba, and Mandi gave much assistance to the vaccinators who carried out animal lymph vaccination in their respective States. Percentages of cases found successful after in- spection. 15. I inspected 3,597 primary vaccinations during the year, and found that 3,344, or 93 per cent., were successful. The Deputy Sani- tary Commissioner inspected 3,970 vaccinations, of which 3,726, or 94 per cent., were successful. The Native Super- visors of the special staff inspected 22,430 cases of primary vaccination and 8,565 re-vaccinations. They stated that 22,134 of the primary vaccinations and 5,985 re-vaccinations were successful, the respective percentages of successful operations having been 99 and 70. Civil Surgeons inspected 49,514 cases of primary vaccination and 19,485 re-vaccination, and the percentages found successful were respectively 95.54 and 68.62. Assistant Surgeons inspected 11,394 primary vaccinations, and found 96.41 per cent. of them successful. Of 2,070 re-vaccinations inspected by Assistant Surgeons, 68.21 per cent. were successful. Native Super- visors of districts inspected 353,098 primary vaccinations and 127,036 cases of re-vaccination, and the percentages found successful by them were respectively 97.91 and 62.89. The work inspected by me was for the most part good, but that of two vaccinators in the Gurgáon district was very bad. One of the men was dismissed, after warning, and the other was fined, and the children who had been unsuccessfully vaccinated were vaccinated a second time. Result of experiments made with animal lymph mixed with lanolin. 16. The report by Surgeon-Major King, acting Sanitary Commissioner of Madras, on experiments with animal lymph mixed with lanolin, was forwarded to me by the Punjab Govern- ment in November 1890, with the request that similar experiments should be made in this Province. Experiments similar to those described by Dr. King were made by Dr. Dyson, the Deputy Sanitary Com- missioner, and by Dr. Hendley, the Civil Surgeon of Pesháwar, and the reports and tables which they were good enough to submit are given as appendices to this report. The experiments done by them show that vaccine lymph mixed with lanolin gives fairly good results after it has been kept for a considerable length of time. A set of experiments made by Dr. Dyson also shows that animal lymph stored in tubes for 28 days is as efficacious in the Punjab as lymph mixed with lanolin in the proportion of 1 to 6 stored for 33 days. Vaccination work done in large Native States. 17. The following statement gives the number of vaccinations, with results, performed during the year in the large Native States from which returns have been received :4 Statement showing the Vaccinations-performed in the large Native States during the year 1890-91. NATIVE STATES. Total number vac- cinated. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vac- cinations. Patiála ... ... ... ... 52,490 44,768 41,088 7,722 5,598 91.78 72.49 Baháwalpur ... ... ... 20,721 19,951 18,962 770 676 95.04 87.79 Kapurthala ... ... ... 8,363 8,338 8,142 25 7 97.65 28.00 Nábha* ... ... ... ... 4,516 4,498 3,970 18 9 88.26 50.00 Jínd* ... ... ... ... 4,527 4,527 4,026 ... ... 88.93 .. Farídkot ... ... ... 2,358 2,351 2,149 7 7 91.41 100.00 Mandi ... ... ... ... 1,019 600 566 419 174 94.33 41.53 * For the calendar year 1890. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. STEPHEN, SURGEON-MAJOR, Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab.
A.ii A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1890-91. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons sucessfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year ana under six years. Total of all ages. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000 20,599 13,670 6,482 20,152 8,277 2,054 97.83 24.82 33.02 17,875 26.58 346 0.51 12,691 9,373 2,922 12,295 10,030 6,969 96.88 69.48 34.80 12,601 22.76 113 0.20 20,571 14,770 2,482 17,252 3,183 2,066 83.87 64.91 30.10 17,981 28.01 409 0.64 13,946 10,880 2,154 13,034 2,512 2,027 93.46 80.69 23.40 15,566 24.19 156 0.24 16,293 12,712 2,465 15,177 9,296 3,462 93.15 37.24 28.88 14,121 21.88 546 0.85 23,096 13,171 7,517 20,688 3,871 979 89.57 25.29 20.98 17,536 16.98 532 0.52 694 123 164 653 1,358 551 94.09 40.57 28.04 375 8.73 5 0.12 18,651 13,272 4,642 17,914 1,762 815 96.05 46.25 25.63 61,984 84.81 94 0.13 29,688 24,699 4,160 28,859 8,419 5,985 97.21 71.09 38.66 30,008 33.29 318 0.35 27,085 22,156 1,827 23,983 2,196 608 88.55 27.69 31.15 24,039 30.45 376 0.48 18,980 14,520 3,957 18,490 1,791 737 97.42 41.15 31.07 17,637 28.50 411 0.66 23,310 16,869 5,707 22,596 5,687 2,704 96.94 47.55 33.85 24,480 32.76 718 0.96 13,723 10,178 3,264 13,442 28,543 19,729 97.95 69.12 60.10 19,733 35.75 263 0.48 11,745 9,739 1,727 11,466 4,652 1,748 97.62 37.58 33.43 12,430 31.44 128 0.32 13,257 11,931 838 12,769 10,241 8,052 96.32 78.63 48.81 12,348 28.95 491 1.15 28,331 24,232 2,446 26,678 5,057 1,580 94.17 31.24 30.58 27,130 29.36 808 8.87 35,182 28,879 5,861 34,740 31,114 25,156 98.74 80.85 67.05 40,819 45.70 670 0.75 28,217 20,206 6,132 26,338 18,058 9,503 93.34 52.62 43.51 29,139 35.38 426 0.52 28,324 23,832 3,876 27,708 8,340 2,878 97.83 34,51 30.22 39,604 39.13 647 0.64 16,566 13,609 2,227 15,836 2,018 1,225 95.59 60.70 24.76 24,651 35.77 319 0.46 16,383 14,268 1,006 15,317 21,884 4,252 93.49 19.43 31.72 21,957 35.59 230 0.37 14,016 10,236 2,092 12,328 2,667 2,115 87.96 79.30 34.27 12,349 29.30 276 0.65 15,567 14,274 1,141 15,415 4,285 4,109 99.02 95.89 33.13 16,537 28.06 367 0.62 20,149 16,967 2,835 19,802 4,398 3,240 98.28 73.67 28.08 23,538 28.69 438 0.53 6,388 5,127 742 5,908 5,410 3,198 92.49 59.11 22.37 6,141 15.09 171 0.42 9,792 4,140 4,686 9,466 5,617 5,216 96.67 92.86 24.77 8,275 13.96 1,003 1.69 3,13S 2,017 640 3,049 608 263 97.16 43.26 18.24 3,691 20.33 241 1.33 10,034 4,619 4,899 9,518 593 285 94.86 48.06 29.48 7,558 22.73 422 1.27 13,193 4,278 7,848 12,126 1,680 754 91.91 44.88 29.16 5,813 13.16 715 1.62 17,660 10,049 6,772 16,821 8,805 1,027 95.25 11.66 49.12 14,367 39.54 232 0.64 10,881 6,878 3,550 10,513 7,265 5,385 96.62 74.12 46.95 10,065 29.72 237 0.70 50,266 27,963 13,803 48,379 22,852 12,589 96.25 55.09 ... 64,549 ... ... ... 588,416 429,637 120,864 558,712 252,469 141,261 94 95 55 95 37.15 654.897 34.76 12,108 0 64 NOTE iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to Localities, during the Year 1890-91. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. DISTRICTS. Names of Localities. Average number of vac- cinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TIONS. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. The Vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Delhi ... Sonepat Tahsíl ... ... 200 160 98 52 158 40 22 ... ... Ballabgarh do. ... ... 3,913 3,895 3,480 227 3,711 18 3 ... ... Farídabad Town ... ... 146 138 125 7 132 8 3 ... ... 2 Karnál ... Kaithal Tahsíl ... ... 4,533 3,795 2,734 881 3,644 738 596 ... ... 3 Umballa ... Kharar do. ... ... 3,933 3,848 2,911 792 3,712 85 33 ... ... 4 Simla ... Simla do. ... ... 452 56 14 14 48 396 139 ... ... Kotgarh do. ... ... 205 205 131 59 190 ... ... ... ... Kálka do. ... ... 162 106 83 9 93 56 39 ... ... Kasauli Cantonment ... ... 68 64 38 18 58 4 2 ... ... Dagshái do. ... ... 58 55 39 11 51 3 2 ... ... Solon do. ... ... 40 17 14 3 17 23 9 ... ... 5 ... Bhagat State ... ... 674 193 144 42 186 481 140 ... ... 6 ... Bahja do. ... ... 121 52 28 20 50 69 38 ... ... 7 ... Mailog do. ... ... 1,480 1,031 502 299 1,002 449 235 ... ... 8 ... Baláspur do. ... ... 10,074 6,622 2,447 2,151 6,376 3,452 1,893 ... ... 9 ... Sirmour do. ... ... 9,212 4,681 2,427 2,009 4,490 4,531 1,801 ... ... 10 ... Bahgal do. ... ... 1,712 805 371 287 789 907 546 ... ... 11 ... Rámpur Bushahr do. ... ... 341 243 70 140 224 98 54 ... ... 12 ... Suket do. ... ... 1,581 1,447 375 1,024 1,411 134 29 ... ... 13 ... Mandi do. ... ... 8,865 5,320 1,746 2,057 5,100 3,545 1,903 ... ... 14 ... Chamba do. ... ... 11,929 5,936 1,024 1,946 5,858 5,993 3,989 ... ... 15 Amritsar ... Amritsar City ... ... 201 201 124 11 136 ... ... ... ... 16 Gurdáspur ... Batála Town ... ... 10 10 9 ... 9 ... ... ... ... 17 Siálkot ... Zaffarwál Tahsíl ... ... 64 60 44 11 55 4 2 ... ... 18 Ráwalpindi Kahnta do. ... ... 2,015 1,409 1,252 85 1,338 606 385 ... ... Murree do. ... ... 1,603 1,484 1,288 66 1,421 119 13 ... ... Topa Cantonment ... ... 41 41 ... ... 41 ... ... ... ... 19 Hazára ... Abbottabad Tahsíl ... ... 3,698 3,695 2,930 655 3,590 3 ... ... ... Mánsera do. ... ... 1,508 1,500 1,350 104 1,458 8 1 ... ... Haripur do. ... ... 1,777 1,111 931 99 1,030 666 334 ... ... Nawashahr Town ... ... 6 6 6 ... 6 ... ... ... ... Buffa Town ... ... 320 319 256 16 272 1 ... ... ... Kálabágh Cantt. ... ... 28 ... ... ... ... 28 28 ... ... Bara Gully ... ... 25 7 5 2 7 18 17 ... ... Khaira Gully ... ... 50 50 ... ... 40 ... ... ... ... 20 Pesháwar, Dáúdzai Tahsíl ... ... 27 27 13 14 27 ... ... ... ... Sawábi do. ... ... 349 349 281 48 330 ... ... ... ... Mardán do. ... ... 1,697 1,328 673 644 1,319 369 333 ... ... Total ... 21 73,118 50,266 27,963 13,803 48,379 22,852 12,589 96.25 55.09 The Vaccinations performed in Cantonments and Foreign Territories by District Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Ferozepore Ferozepore Cantt. ... ... 745 482 201 238 439 263 60 ... ... 2 Mooltan ... Mooltan do. ... ... 101 54 40 12 52 47 ... ... ... 3 Gurdáspur. Chamba State ... ... 98 98 72 26 98 ... ... ... ... 4 Siálkot ... Jammoo Territory ... ... 154 154 79 75 154 ... ... ... ... 5 Jhelum ... Jhelum Cantonment, ... ... 470 42 27 15 42 428 322 ... ... 6 Ráwalpindi Campbellpore do. ... ... 15 15 12 3 15 ... ... ... ... 7 Hazára ... Abbottabad do. ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Kohát ... Kohát do. ... ... 374 319 1 5 313 55 55 ... ... Khattak Country ... ... 640 628 350 226 595 12 4 ... ... 9 D. I. Khan ... D. I. Khan Cantt. ... ... 242 116 12 104 116 126 65 ... ... 10 D. G. Khan ... D. G. Khan do. ... ... 229 166 27 127 154 63 2 ... ... Total ... ... 3,070 2,076 831 831 1,978 994 508 95.28 51.11 The Vaccinations in Cantonments which entertain their own Vaccinators are not included in Statement No. I. 1 Umballa ... Umballa Cantonment 1 1,048 987 487 400 887 61 43 ... ... 2 Jullundur ... Jullundur do. ... 1 312 294 218 38 256 18 8 ... ... 3 Lahore ... Meean Meer do. ... 1 1,226 928 334 542 876 298 247 ... ... 4 Siálkot ... Siálkot do. ... 1 462 314 104 210 314 148 138 ... ... 5 Ráwalpindi Ráwalpindi do. ... 1 1,534 1,314 781 514 1,295 220 160 ... ... 6 Pesháwar ... Pesháwar do. ... * 1,465 277 136 68 251 1,188 1,068 ... ... Total ... ... 6,047 4,114 2,060 1,772 3,879 1,933 1,664 94.29 86.08 * An allowance was granted to a vaccinator of the District Staff from Cantonment Funds.
v A.vi B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years. ESTABLISHMENT. PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1876* (see note). For three months end- ing 31st March 1877.APPENDIX I. Copy of a letter No. 221, dated 4th May 1891, from SURGEON H. J. DYSON, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, Camp Abbottabad, to SRGEON-MAJOR A. STEPHEN, Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab. I HAVE the honor to forward my report on the experiments with lanolin lymph. Experiment with lanolin lymph.2 Statement showing the number of cases and insertions of lanolin lymph. Place where used. NUMBER OF NUMBER OF SUCCESSFUL NUMBER OF CASES PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL By whom used. Cases. Insertions. Cases. Insertions. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Cases. Insertions. One to six lanolin lymph. Amritsar ... 63 228 50 120 9 4 84.75 56.60 Special Staff. Do. ... 10 38 8 18 1 1 88.89 52.94 District Staff. Batála ... 10 40 9 30 ... 1 100 83.34 Special Staff. Muzaffargarh ... 7 ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... Civil Surgeon. Much better results were attained with this lymph, both as regards the number of successful cases and insertions. The number of successful insertions is still, however, too low to compare favorably with fresh animal lymph. The vaccinators, however, had gained more experience in the method of operation. Statement showing the number and insertions of lanolin lymph. Place where used. NUMBER OF NUMBER OF SUCCESS- FUL NUMBER OF CASES PERCENTAGE OF SUC- CESSFUL By whom used. Cases. Insertions. Cases. Insertions. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Cases. Insertions. One to four lanolin lymph. Amritsar ... 6 36 6 24 ... ... 100 66.67 Do. ... 41 162 34 106 1 6 97.14 76.81 Special Staff. Do. ... 22 88 ... ... 22 ... ... ... District Staff. This lymph also gave fair results. In the last case the work was carried on by the District Staff without supervision. The results with this lymph, however, cannot be considered to be satisfactory. Statement showing the number of cases and insertions of lymph in tubes. Interval of days. Place where used. NUMBER OF NUMBER OF SUC- CESSFUL NUMBER OF CASES PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL By whom used. Cases. Insertions Cases. Insertions Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Cases. Insertions. 25 to 28 Pesháwar, 20 tubes of buffalo lymph. 10 60 9 46 1 ... 90 76.67 Civil Sur- geons. 17 to 24 Gujrát, 13 tubes of human lymph. 22 132 21 103 ... 1 100 81.75 18 to 21 Siálkot, 17 tubes of h u m a n lymph. 19 114 11 31 8 ... 57.89 27.19 21 to 24 Karnál, 14 tubes of buffa1o lymph. 11 66 8 22 3 ... 72.73 33.34
3 In Dr. King's report No. 3433 S., dated 20th August 1890, para. 3, it is stated that the efficacy of animal lymph when stored cannot be trusted to implicitly beyond 24 hours. Bearing this remark in mind, it was considered advisable to test the length of time for which lymph stored in tubes remained active in the Punjab, where the climate is so materially different from that of Madras. To make the test severe, no precautions were taken in storing the tubes sent out in this experiment beyond placing them in the hollow canes in which they are usually distributed, the ends of the canes being plugged with cotton wool. -A tin box was used to keep the canes in, and this box was left shut on the office table in the day-time. A comparison between the results obtained with one to six lanolin lymph and these tubes will show that they are almost identical. The period of length of preservation being, however, shorter in the cases of the tubes by five days. Character of vesicles produced by lanolin lymph.4 Even now in the city of Gujrát, the use of cow lymph, some years ago, is acutely remembered, and numbers of Hindús still refuse to allow vaccination at all in their families in that city. The time therefore hardly appears ripe in the Punjab for the introduction of lanolin lymph. The prejudice in Madras against animal lymph does not appear to be so strong as in the Punjab. Second, the expense. The general use of lanolin lymph necessarily involves the formation of depôts, and this means a considerable amount of expense. At present in the Punjab it is customary in the larger towns to pay small sums of money to the owners of the calves. In the villages however it is by no means so common to pay anything at all, nor should it be necessary to do so. The expense of the vaccination is borne by the districts. In the case of formation of depôts, imperial funds would be necessary. It is also by no means easy to name large towns in the Punjab where the people would be willing to supply the steady supply of buffalo calves necessary. Animal lymph is still a new idea to the general people, and owners of calves are frightened lest any harm should accrue to the calves through vaccination.......... As regards the preservation of lymph in tubes, owing no doubt to the difference of temperature in the Punjab as compared with Madras, stored lymph in tubes remains active for a much longer period than that laid down in Dr. King's report. There are few, if any, stations to which fresh lymph cannot be sent in tubes under ten days and, judging by the results given, be used with a fair amount of certainty. Lymph stored in tubes is considerably cheaper also than lanolin lymph. Therefore though there is little doubt that lanolin lymph, with a more extended experience, would give excellent results, yet in the Punjab it can hardly be used generally, owing to the strong prejudice against animal lymph. There is one great and decided advantage that lanolin lymph possesses, and that is that it does away with the crying evil of human vaccinifers ; but unfortunately the higher caste Hindús cling to human lymph, even though derived from Mussalmán vaccinifers. Table showing the results of lymph made of lanolin one to ten used by the Amritsar District Staff. Date of collection. Number of days preserved. Number of cases. Number of insertions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful. Failures. Unknown. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 30th January 1891. 10 1 4 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 11 1 4 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 12 1 4 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 13 1 4 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 14 1 4 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 15 2 4 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 18 5 4 1 ... ... ... 4 ... ... 19 4 4 ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... 21 3 4 ... 1 ... ... 1 1 ... 22 2 4 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 23 4 4 ... ... ... ... 4 ... ... 25 1 4 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... This work was done by the District Staff, who had had no previous experience of this method of using lymph.
5 Table showing the results of lymph made of lanolin one to six used by the Special Staff, Punjab, at Amritsar. Date of collection. Number of days preserved. Number of cases. Number of insertions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful. Failures. Unknown. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 14th January 1891. 16 4 4 ... ... 1 3 ... ... With scarificator and special silver rubber. 17 5 4 2 ... ... 2 ... 1 18 3 2 ... 3 ... ... ... ... One arm lanolin ; one buffalo lymph (fresh). 19 2 2 1 1 ... ... ... ... Ditto. 20 2 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... Ditto. 21 5 2 2 3 ... ... ... ... Ditto. 22 4 4 ... ... 1 2 1 ... Both arms scarificator. 23 6 4 3 ... ... 2 1 ... Ditto. 24 4 4 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... Ditto. 25 4 4 1 ... 2 1 ... ... Ditto. 26 4 4 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 Ditto. 27 4 4 ... ... 2 1 1 ... Ditto. 28 4 4 ... 1 ... 2 1 ... Ditto. 29 4 4 1 1 1 ... 1 ... Ditto. 30 3 4 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Ditto. 32 5 4 1 2 ... ... 2 ... Ditto. At this time two small flat bladed silver instruments were made to rub in the lymph, and these helped to give better results. The results had been so bad with the 16 Table showing the results of lymph made of lanolin one to ten used by the Civil Surgeon, Hissár. Date of collection. Number of days preserved. Number of cases. Number of insertions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful. Failures. Unknown. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 29th January 1891. 12 3 4 ... ... 1 1 1 ... 13 7 4 1 2 3 1 ... ... 15 2 4 1 1 ... ... ... ... 16 2 4 1 1 ... ... ... ... 23 16 4 ... 5 3 8 ... ... This work was done with a lancet only and not a scarificator. Table showing the results of lymph made of lanolin one to six used by the Amritsar District Staff. Date of collection. Number of days preserved. Number of cases. Number of insertions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful. Failures. Unknown. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 14th January 1891. 24 2 4 1 1 ... ... ... ... 26 1 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... 28 1 4 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 29 2 4 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 30 1 4 1 ... ... ... ... ... 32 2 4 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 33 1 4 ... 1 ... ... ... ... This work was done by the District Staff, who were not under constant supervision. Table showing the results of lymph made of lanolin one to six used by the Special Staff, Punjab, at Batála. Date of collection. Number of days pre- served. Number of cases. Number of inser- tions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful Failures. Unknown. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 14th Jan- uary,1891 20 1 4 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 21 9 4 1 1 1 5 ... 1 This work was all done under direct supervision Table showing the results of lymph made of lanolin one to four used by the Special Staff, Punjab, at Amritsar. Date of collection. Number of days pre- served. Number of cases Number of inser- tions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful. Failures. Unknown. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 2nd Janu- ary 1891 2 6 0 ... 1 2 1 ... 2 ... ... The rest of this lymph was sent to Civil Surgeon, Jhelum, and no information of the results has been received.
7 Table showing the results of lymph made of lanolin one to four used by the Special Staff, Punjab, at Amritsar. Date of collection. Number of days preserved. Number of cases. Number of insertions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful. Failures. Unknown. REMARKS. 1 2 3 4 21st January 1891. 31 6 *4 *1 ... 2 2 ... 1 * One child of two insertions only. 32 5 4 ... 2 1 2 ... ... 33 4 4 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 34 4 4 1 1 1 ... ... 1 35 3 4 ... ... 2 ... ... 1 36 5 4 ... ... ... 4 ... 1 37 3 4 ... ... ... 3 ... ... 38 4 4 ... ... 2 2 ... ... 39 3 4 ... ... ... 3 ... ... 40 4 4 2 ... ... ... 1 1 Used by the Special Staff under supervision. Table showing the results of lanolin lymph received from Dr. King, Madras. Date of collection. Number of days preserved. Number of cases. Number of insertions. Number of cases in which vesicles of the number noted in each column were successful. Failures. Unknown. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL REMARK.. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Cases. Insertions. Not known. ... 3 6 ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 2 6 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... 3 6 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 6 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 1 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 5 4 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 10 4 2 3 2 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 77 78 50.0 No information was received as to the age of this lymph. Table showing the cases turned unsuccessful with lanolin lymph. Date of collection. Number of days preserved. By whom used. REMARKS. 1 to 10 24th January 1891 19 to 25 Civil Surgeon, Rohtak ... ... All failures. 26th do. 9 to 27 Do. Delhi ... ... Do. 5th February 1891 11 to 15 Special Staff at Amritsar ... ... Do. 1 to 6 19th January 1891 ... ... Civil Surgeon, Muzaffargarh ... ... All failures 1 to 4 25th January 1891 39 to 45 Amritsar District Staff ... ... All failures (without supervision).
8 APPENDIX II. Copy of a letter No. 208, dated Pesháwar, 2nd May 1891, from Surgeon H. HENDLEY, Civil Surgeon, Pesháwar, to the Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab. I HAVE the honor to inform you that, in compliance with your request, I have carried out experiments with lanolin vaccine paste, both with that received from Madras and some prepared by myself. 2. The results are given in tabular form in the annexed statement, and though uniformly good results have not been obtained, still I consider that on the whole sufficient experience in performing the operation and in preparing the paste from vesicle pulp has been gained to give good hopes for a great advance next season. 3. It should be noticed that the freshest lymph used was 17 days old, i. e., two days over that now recommended by Dr. King. No deterioration was noticed in the paste at any time, it remained always perfectly sweet, and retained its granular appearance all through. 4. Scarificator No. 1 was supplied from Madras. It was found a suffi- ciently convenientinstrument; and No. 2 described by Dr. King seems to be a great advance on it. The angularity of the prongs perhaps renders the introduction of septic material, owing to a difficulty in cleaning, greater than was the case with the old bleeding lancet. 5. An indent will be sent to Madras shortly for a supply of the apparatus used there, as considerable delay was experienced in preparing a satisfactory batch of paste for want of them. 6. The partial and total failures have in my opinion been principally due to want of experience in handling a new instrument and carrying out the procedure. In the first few cases only were the cross scarifications employed. The great advantage of single marks is in the lessened amount of oozing that has to be dealt with. Much oozing is a misfortune, as it must be removed by blotting paper to assure success, and if this process is persisted in too long, there is a tendency for the scratches to become glazed over and so more or less impermeable. 7. In preparing the pulp the first trials were very unsatisfactory for reasons that afterwards became apparent. The vesicles require being very finely divided up in a mortar before any lanolin is added, and then when ready the difference in consistence of the two renders it necessary to exercise a consider- able amount of patience in the mixing.
9 Lanolin vaccine results, Pesháwar. FOUR INSERTIONS MADE IN EACH CASE UNLESS OTHERWISE STATED. Date of prepara- tion. Where prepared. Condition of paste. Age of paste. Total cases of primary vaccina- tion. Failures. One vesicle. Two vesicles. Three vesicles. Four vesicles. REMARKS. 23rd December 1890 ... Madras. Granular; looking sweet ... 25 days ... 4 1 1 1 ... 1 REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1891-92. Published by Authority. PriceREPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1891-92. Published by Authority. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: THE &quot; CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE &quot; PRESS, Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1892.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department,No.2 numbers for last year having been 595,134 and 255,008. Of the primary vaccina- tions done during the year, 588,625, or 94.85 per cent. were successful and 54.21 per cent. of the re-vaccinations were successful. Work of district staff. 7. There were 729,660 vaccine operations performed by the district staff during the year as against 767,767 during 1890-91, a decrease of 38,107. The primary operations amounted to 567,597 and the cases of re-vaccination to 162,063. Of the primary vaccinations 95.03 per cent. and of the cases of re-vaccination 54.48 per cent. were success- ful. Primary vaccinations done by district staff. 8. There were 29,447 more primary operations performed by the district staff than in the previous year. Of the total number of primary vaccinations 419,141 were successfully performed on children under one year of age as against 401,674 in 1890-91, an increase of 17,467. Seeing that there were 37,164 fewer births recorded in the province in 1891 than in the previous year, the results of the operations among infants for the year under review must be considered as satisfactory. Re-vaccinations done by district staff. 9. There were 67,554 fewer cases of re-vaccination done by the district staff than during the previous year. During the vaccinat- ing season of 1890-91 several Civil Surgeons reported that vaccinators in their districts were in the habit of vaccinating children who had been vaccinated only one or two years previously. A circular was accordingly issued to the effect that no person should be re-vac- cinated till a period of seven years had elapsed since the previous successful vaccination, and the result has been that many fewer persons have been re- vaccinated. Special staff. 10. There were 72,009 vaccine operations performed by the special staff during the year, of which 43,979 were primary and 28,030 were re-vaccinations. Of the cases of primary vaccination 92.64 per cent. were found to be successful, and the percentage of successful re-vaccinations was 52.46. The special staff did 6,287 fewer primary vaccina- tions and 5,178 more re-vaccinations than during the previous year. Cantonment staff. 11. The cantonment staff did 5,298 primary vaccinations and 1,084 re-vaccinations during the year as against 4,114 primary and 1,933 re-vaccinations in 1890-91. The percentage of primary vaccinations found to be successful was 94.66, and 80.44 per cent. of the re-vaccinations are said to have been successful. Dispensary staff. 12. There were 4,649 persons vaccinated at dispensaries, an increase of 1,439 on the figures of last year. Of those vaccinated, 3,730 were primary vaccinations and 919 were cases of re-vaccination, the percentages found to be successful having been respectively 93.32 and 29.49. Progress of animal lymph vaccination. 13. The popularity of the method of vaccination by animal lymph in this province continues to increase. There were 702,004 operations performed by this method during the year as against 581,664 in 1890-91 and 246,105 in 1889-90. In 16 of the 31 districts of the province practically the whole of the work of the district staff was done with animal lymph, and in 8 of the remaining 15 districts the great majority of the operations were done with the same kind of lymph. In Jullundur and Ferozepore animal lymph is not so popular as it is in the neighbouring districts, though many more vaccinations were done by this method in both these districts in 1891-92 than in the previous year. Bannu was the only district in which vaccination with animal lymph remained decidedly unpopular. In that district only 1,145 out of 10,699 vaccinations were performed by this method. There were 48,804 vaccinations done with animal lymph by the special staff as against 42,814 in 1890-91. The vaccinators of this staff are gradually overcoming the prejudices against animal lymph of the Hindu inhabitants of the Hill States. Result of inspection. 14. The following statement gives the result of my inspection of primary vaccination :3 Statement showing the result of the inspection of 14,222 lately vaccinated children. NAME OF DISTRICT. NUMBER OF CHILDREN SHOWING Total. Percentage efficiently vaccinated. 6 marks. 5 marks. 4 marks. 3 marks. 2 distinct marks. No mark or fewer than 2 distinct marks. Muzaffaragrh ... 153 32 23 19 4 17 248 93 Dera Gházi Khan ... 146 66 48 46 17 16 339 95 Ludhiána ... ... 311 52 28 9 5 6 411 99 Gujránwála ... 129 23 16 10 ... 2 180 99 Lahore ... ... 3,145 416 216 97 23 51 3,948 99 Amritsar ... ... 2,688 697 567 453 219 405 5,029 92 Gurdáspur ... ... 3,095 416 206 145 79 126 4,067 97 Total ... 9,667 1,702 1,104 779 347 623 14,222 96 Percentage of total number inspected ... 68 12 8 5 3 4 100 ... From the statement it will be seen that out of 14,222 cases inspected there were only 623 in which I found either no mark or less than two distinct marks, the percentage found efficiently vaccinated having been 96. The work which I inspected in the Lahore district was particularly good. In Amritsar I found a good many failures and a considerable number of cases in which there were only two or three well marked cicatrices. The comparatively poor results obtained in this district were, I believe, due to the fact that lymph had been taken generation after generation from the buffalo calf. It appears that, unless the greatest care is taken, lymph is apt to degenerate if it is taken for a large number of generations in succession from the buffalo calf, and the activity of the lymph is easily maintained if every fifth or sixth generation is taken through the human subject. A circular will be sent to Civil Surgeons in the beginning of next vaccinating season, directing them to renovate their lymph by taking every fifth generation through the human subject. In addition to the cases of primary vaccination given in the above state- ment, I inspected 7,839 vaccinated children of six years of age and under in the Kángra district; of these I found 284, or 4 per cent., who had either no cicatrix or less than two distinct cicatrices. The Deputy Sanitary Commissioner inspected 7,752 primary and 916 re-vaccinations. He found that 577 of the primary and 475 of the re-vaccinations were unsuccessful, the percentages of successful cases being respectively 92.56 and 48.14. Most of the persons inspected by him were vaccinated by the special staff. He is of opinion that the indifferent results observed by him were due (a)to the lymph not having been renovated by taking it occasionally through the human subject; (b) to the use of stored lymph; and (c) to inspections having been more searching and to vaccinators having on that account entered results more accurately. I am of opinion that the bad results were principally due to the use of stored lymph. As soon as the matter was reported to me I directed the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner to use only fresh lymph, and as soon as fresh lymph only was used the results obtained by the special staff were much more satisfactory than they had been previously. The native supervisors of the special staff inspected 26,336 primary and 9,594 re-vaccinations. They found that of these 25,848 primary and 6,778 re-vaccinations were successful, the percentages of successful cases having been respectively 98.15 and 70.65. Civil Surgeons inspect- ed 47,447 primary vaccinations and 8,610 cases of re-vaccination, of which 46,248 primary and 5,320 re-vaccinations were found to be successful, the percentages of successful vaccinations having been respectively 97.47 and 61.79. Assistant
4 Surgeons inspected 9,106 primary and 377 re-vaccinations, and found the percentages of the successful cases to be 98.82 and 66.31 respectively. The numbers of primary and re-vaccinations inspected by native supervisors were respectively 383,318 and 75,171; of the primary vaccinations 375,512 and 45,192 of the re-vaccinations were found to be successful, the percentages of success- ful cases having been respectively 97.96 and 60.12. Animal lymph depôt. 15. Under orders received from Government a small depôt for the preparation, storage and distribution of animal lymph was established at Amritsar in the beginning of January 1892, in charge of a first class vaccinator and under the supervision of the Civil Surgeon. The depôt was removed to Murree on the 1st of April, and, in future, it will remain at Murree during the six summer months from the 1 st of April to the 30th of September, and at Amritsar during the six winter months from the 1st of October to the 31st of March. Vaccination work in Native States. 16. The following statement gives the number of vaccinations, with results, performed in the large Native States from which returns have been received :A.ii A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1891-92. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DUR- ING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 22,416 14,484 7,329 21,813 4,355 1,088 97.31 24.98 29.52 19,358 24.95 409 0.53 14,423 10,147 3,717 13,864 1,230 750 96.12 60.98 24.75 14,355 24.31 134 0.23 21,227 16,302 3,920 20,222 49 39 95.27 79.59 30.29 17,873 26.72 517 0.77 10,204 7,369 2,418 9,787 1,625 1,323 95.91 81.41 17.49 16,057 25.28 176 0.28 14,503 11,327 2,451 13,778 1,276 602 95.00 47.18 21.03 15,272 22.34 712 1.04 21,727 15,688 4,465 20,153 2,437 795 92.76 32.62 21.33 18,542 18.88 689 0.70 194 115 58 181 477 306 93.30 64.15 13.82 506 14.36 17 0.48 27,238 19,558 6,579 26,137 6,764 3,499 95.96 51.73 39.02 62,004 81.64 68 0.09 27,788 21,646 5,241 26,887 28,956 22,361 96.76 77.22 48.68 32,591 32.22 319 0.32 25,864 19,138 1,916 21,054 3,293 655 81.40 19.89 24.36 24,147 27.09 320 0.36 17,648 13,012 4,075 17,231 2,327 875 97.64 37.60 27.91 18,332 28.26 462 0.71 24,547 17,030 6,955 23,985 3,476 2,187 97.71 62.92 30.38 24,813 28.80 710 0.82 22,386 18,357 3,513 21,870 9,533 6,103 9769 64.02 45.06 23,220 37.40 241 0.39 9,271 7,583 1,450 9,033 6,027 2,514 97.43 41.71 26.43 12,813 29.33 126 0.29 13,942 12,574 773 13,348 3,226 1,934 95.74 59.95 30.60 14,014 28.06 455 0.92 28,723 24,315 3,024 27,339 3,171 773 95.18 24.38 26.63 27,879 26.41 598 0.57 35,064 27,971 5,555 33,526 5,151 3,628 95.61 70.43 37.49 46,822 47.25 563 0.57 27,317 18,825 7,085 25,910 17,838 12,813 94.85 71.83 41.16 30,936 32.88 402 0.43 32,538 27,040 4,910 31,950 9,371 3,989 98.19 42.57 32.71 36,571 33.29 756 0.69 18,156 15,449 1,986 17,435 6,951 4,653 96.03 66.94 29.03 22,958 30.18 304 0.40 20,376 16,715 1,006 17,767 18,929 5,774 87.20 30.50 34.11 21,358 30.95 176 0.26 14,084 10,199 2,408 12,607 3,033 2,091 89.51 68.94 29.78 13,069 26.48 152 0.31 16.985 15,854 999 16,853 634 608 99.22 95.90 28.82 16,414 27.10 271 0.45 23,333 20,330 2,741 23,071 2,835 2,020 98.88 71.25 29.68 22,828 27.01 438 0.52 7,598 5,478 919 6,565 3,646 1,637 86.40 44.90 17.23 6,726 14.13 158 0.33 11,876 5,393 5,619 11,561 3,086 2,845 97.35 92.19 21.46 10,008 14.91 936 1.39 5,333 2,063 2,604 5,148 101 54 96.53 53.47 27.31 3,425 17.98 216 113 10,435 4,327 5,567 9,894 252 143 94.82 56.75 27.13 7,770 21.00 307 0.83 14,283 4,974 8,373 13,347 1,594 856 93.45 53.70 29.44 7,253 15.03 620 1.29 18,551 9,940 7,792 17,732 9,942 983 95.59 9.89 46.80 15,768 39.43 235 0.59 9,567 5,938 3,400 9,338 478 395 97.61 82.64 25.54 11,450 30.05 236 0.62 43,979 26,428 11,346 40,743 28,030 14,705 92.64 52.46 ... 66,973 ... ... ... 611,576 445,569 130,194 580,129 190,093 102,998 94.86 54.18 33.24 682,105 33.19 11,723 0.57 NOTE.iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the special and Cantonment Staffs, according to localities, during the year 1891-92. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. DISTRICTS. Names of localitíes. Average number of vac- cinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Total. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. The vaccinations performed by the special staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Delhi ... Ballabgarh tahsíl ... ... 315 255 213 31 244 60 18 ... ... 2 Do. ... Sonepat do. ... ... 3,746 3,684 2,125 367 2,494 62 30 ... ... 3 Karnál ... Kaithal do. ... ... 5,406 4,681 3,048 1,465 4,572 725 585 ... ... 4 Do. ... Pánipat do. ... ... 5,031 4,890 3,934 696 4,648 141 103 ... ... 5 Umballa ... Jagádhri do. ... ... 3,412 3,407 3,005 237 3,244 5 ... ... ... 6 Do. ... Buria town ... ... 100 100 89 4 93 ... ... ... ... 7 Simla Kálka ... 66 41 19 2 21 25 8 ... ... 8 ... Rámpur Bushahr State ... 15,342 7,350 2,322 2,943 6980 7,992 4,167 ... ... 9 ... Baláspur State ... ... 139 85 15 22 81 54 26 ... 10 ... Bhaji do. ... ... 3,330 466 38 119 434 2,864 1,410 ... ... 11 ... Koti do. ... ... 387 348 71 267 345 39 14 ... ... 12 ... Kamarsain do. ... ... 406 205 20 139 197 201 142 ... ... 13 ... Theog do. ... ... 314 139 ... 115 115 175 152 ... ... 14 ... Faroach do. ... ... 9 9 ... 6 8 ... ... ... ... 15 ... Jubal do. ... ... 615 79 65 14 79 536 486 ... ... 16 ... Sirmor do. ... ... 2,366 1,756 648 844 1,685 610 236 ... ... 17 ... Maudi do. ... ... 933 893 420 426 851 40 19 ... ... 18 ... Suket do. ... ... 6,165 667 354 200 580 5,498 1,909 ... ... 19 ... Chamba do. ... ... 7,459 1,234 583 336 1,221 6,225 3,673 ... ... 20 ... Kalsia do. ... ... 2,758 2,748 1,809 860 2,670 10 4 ... ... 21 Siálkot ... Zaffarwál tahsíl ... ... 1,682 1,571 1,327 48 1,376 111 62 ... ... 22 Ráwalpindi, Murree do. ... ... 1,650 1,595 1,407 95 1,503 55 43 ... ... 23 Do. .. Ghariál cantonment ... 16 16 15 ... 15 ... ... ... ... 24 Do. ... Topa do. ... ... 12 12 11 1 12 ... ... ... ... 25 Hazára ... Haripur tahsíl ... ... 2,730 2,538 1,909 499 2,422 192 118 ... ... 26 Do. ... Abbottabad do. ... ... 3,283 2,025 1,136 584 1,846 1,258 751 ... ... 27 Do. ... Mansera do. ... ... 2,596 1,821 973 676 1,758 775 519 ... ... 28 Do. ... Buffa town ... ... 375 375 261 104 373 ... ... ... ... 29 Do. ... Lora thána ... ... 533 225 173 29 204 308 181 ... ... 30 Pesháwar... Swábi tahsíl ... ... 417 412 246 131 379 5 2 ... ... 31 Do. ... Mardan do ... ... 416 352 192 86 293 64 47 ... ... Total... 21 72,009 43,979 26,428 11,346 40,743 28,030 14,705 92.64 52.46 The vaccinations performed in cantonments and foreign territories by District Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Ferozepore, Ferozepore cantt. ... ... 153 153 86 64 150 ... ... ... ... 2 Mooltan ... Mooltan do. ... ... 257 112 86 14 100 145 104 ... ... 3 Gurdáspur, Chamba State ... ... 166 144 64 80 144 22 92 ... ... 4 Siálkot ... Jammu territory ... ... 319 319 133 186 319 ... ... ... ... 5 Jhelum ... Jhelum cantonment, ... 145 41 27 9 36 104 88 ... ... 6 Ráwalpindi, Campbellpore do. ... ... 26 26 26 ... 26 ... ... ... ... 7 Hazára ... Abbottabad do. ... ... 241 202 48 22 93 39 20 ... ... 8 Pesháwar... Nowshera do. ... ... 316 27 22 3 26 289 289 ... ... 9 Kohát ... Kohát do. ... ... 379 349 28 16 337 30 30 ... ... 10 Do. ... Khattak country ... ... 3,237 3,206 944 2,029 3,084 31 10 ... ... 11 D. I. Khan, D. I. Khan cantt. ... ... 244 184 9 157 166 60 40 ... ... 12 D. G. Khan, D. G. Khan do ... ... 246 215 42 164 206 31 13 ... ... Total ... ... 5,729 4,978 1,515 2,744 4,687 751 606 94.15 80.69 The vaccinations in cantonments which entertain their own Vaccinators are not included in Statement No. 1. 1 Umballa ... Umballa cantonment, 1 1,438 1,394 630 463 1,248 44 27 ... ... 2 Jnllundur... Jullundnr do. ... 1 302 258 166 40 206 44 23 ... ... 3 Lahore ... Mean Meer do. ... 1 500 483 161 310 471 17 15 ... ... 4 Siálkot ... Siálkot do. ... 1 848 540 298 231 529 308 268 ... ... 5 Rawalpindi Ráwalpindi do. ... 1 1,786 1,599 1,233 363 1,596 187 76 ... ... 6 Pesháwar... Pesháwar do. ... * 1,234 767 150 130 718 467 452 ... ... 7 Simla ... Kasanli do. 1 94 86 53 28 81 8 4 ... ... 8 Do. ... Sabathu do. 98 97 66 29 95 1 1 ... ... 9 Do. ... Dagsbai do 68 60 52 7 59 8 6 ... ... 10 Do. ... Solon do. 14 14 11 1 12 ... ... ... ... Total ... 6 6,382 5,298 2,820 1,602 5,015 1,084 872 94.66 80.44 * An allowance was granted to a vaccinator of the District Staff from Cantonment Funds
V A.vi B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years. ESTABLISHMENT PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated.__ Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number succcss- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. _ Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. ft umber success- fully vaccinated.__ Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YAER ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867. 1868. 1869. 187 0. S 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1876* (see note). For three mouths and- ing 31st March 1877. REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1892-93. Published By Authority. Price 10 annas. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: THE &quot;CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS, Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1893.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1892-93. Published By Authority. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : THE &quot;CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS, Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1893.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department, No. 703 S., dated Simla, 25th August 1893. READ( 2 ) another and from one year to another and for a gradual increase in the proportion of re-vaccinations, but it is difficult to believe that under any properly regulated system results like those exhibited in the following table could be possible :TABLE OF CONTENTS. Para. Subject. Page. REVIEW OF THE REPORT OF GOVERNMENT ... ... ... ... 2 Administration of the Department ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 Strength of the Vaccination Establishment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 The cost of the Department ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 5 The cause of increase in the District and Cantonment Staffs ... ... ... ib. 6 The cost of the Special Staff and reason for increased expenditure ... ... ib. 7 Cost of each successful operation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 8 The general results obtained during the year ... ... ... ... ... ib. 9 Proportion of male to female operations ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 DISTRICT STAFF. 10 The work performed by the District Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 11 Percentage of successful operations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 12 Average number of vaccinations performed by each Vaccinator ... ... ib. 13 Increase in the number of operations performed by each Vaccinator in the Delhi district ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 14 The percentage of success by the District Staff ... ... ... ... ... ib. 15 Ratio of persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population ... ... ... ib. 16 Districts in which there was a decrease in the number of vaccinations performed ib. 17 Districts in which there was an increase of operations ... ... ... ... 5 18 Causes of decrease in primary vaccinations ... ... ... ... ... ib. SPECIAL STAFF. 19 The work of the Special Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 20 Introduction of animal lymph in the Hill States by the Special Staff of Vaccinators ib. 21 Sanads granted to certain Chiefs of the Hill States for their interest in animal lymph vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. CANTONMENT VACCINATION. 22 Cantonment vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 23 Percentage of primary successful operations ... ... ... ... ... ib. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. 24 Dispensary vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 25 Vaccination with animal lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib.
2 Para. Subject. Page. 26 Vaccination inspections by the Sanitary Commissioner ... ... ... ... 7 27 Inspections by Surg.-Capt. Dyson and Native Supervisors of the Special Staff ... 8 28 Vaccinatio ns inspected by a specially appointed Native Superintendent ... ib. 29 Vaccination inspections made by Inspecting Officers ... ... ... ... 9 30 Inspections by Civil Surgeons ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 31 Inspections by Native Supervisors ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 32 Percentage of successful Primary and Secondary vaccinations inspected by Civil Surgeons contrasted with those reported by Native Supervisors and Vaccinators ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 33 Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's report on the failure of the animal lymph supply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 NATIVE STATES. 34 Vaccination in Native States ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 35 Falling off in the number of operations ib. 36 Causes of decrease in Patiála and Baháwalpur ... ... ... ... ... ib. 37 Cause of decrease in Kapurtliala ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 38 Primary and Secondary vaccinations and percentages of successful cases ... ib. 39 Animal lymph vaccination in Native States ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 40 Places in which compulsory vaccination was introduced or was under consider- ation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 41 Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's Annual Vaccination Report and his Report on the Vaccine Lymph Dep6t ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. ANNUAL FORMS. I Showing particulars of vaccination in the Punjab during the year 1892-93 ... ii Appendix to Statement No. 1 showing the details of vaccination operations per- formed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs according to localities during- the year 1892-93 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... iv II Showing the cost of the Vaccine Department in the Pun-jab, during the year 1892-93 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... V III Showing Dispensary vaccinations in the Punjab during the year 1892-93 vi IV Comparative statement showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years ... ... ... ... ... vii APPENDICES. A.No. 31/3370. FROM SURGEON-LIEUT.-COLONEL W. A. C. ROE, F.R.C.S., Offg. Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, To C. L. TUPPER, ESQUIRE, C.S., Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab. Dated LAHORE, the 30th June 1893. SIR, I have the honor to submit the Report on Vaccination in the Punjab for the year 1892-93, with the prescribed statements. Administration of the Department. 2. Doctor Dyson was in charge of the Special Staff throughout the year. On the 1st of May 1893, Dr. Stephen proceeded on two months' privilege leave and made over charge of his appointment to me on that date. As I have only recently assumed charge of the office of Sanitary Commissioner, my report will merely consist of a general summary of the work performed by the Vaccinators, supplemented by facts gathered from the Vaccination Reports of Civil Surgeons. Average number employed. 1891-92. 1892-93. Native Supervisors ... ... 35 35 Vaccinators. 1st class ... ... 43 43 Do., 2nd class ... ... 77 77 Do., 3rd class ... ... 181 183 Strength of the Vaccination Establishment. 3. The statement in the margin compares the Establishments employed during the years 1891-92 and 1892-93. The number of Native Supervisors is the same in 1892-93, as it was in 1891-92, but there have been some slight changes made amongst this class of officials, in regard to their grade and pay. In Karnál the salary of the Native Supervisor was increased from Rs. 30 to Rs. 40 per mensem, and that of the Native Supervisor of Mu- zaffargarh was also increased by Rs. 5. In the Kángra district, on the repre- sentation of the District authorities, the 2nd grade Native Supervisor on Rs. 30 was displaced and Pandit Bálkishan, late Deputy Superintendent of Vaccination, now on pension, was entertained temporarily on a salary of Rs. 100 per month, with effect from the 17th February 1893. The strength of the 1st and 2nd class Vaccinators is the same as last year, but amongst the 3rd class Vaccinators there was, on an average, an increase of two Vaccinators. There was a decrease of one 3rd class Vaccinator in Pesháwar district and an increase of one each in the districts of Hoshiárpur, Ráwalpindi and Dera Ismail Khan. The additional 3rd class Vaccinator in the Dera Ismail Khan district was specially entertained to carry on vaccination in the Shiráni country beyond the frontier and its neighbourhood with an extra, allowance of Rs. 5 a month ; an experienced 3rd class Vaccinator of the District Staff was deputed for the work and his place was filled up by a candidate.
2 The cost of the Depart- ment. 4. The increase and decrease under the chief heads of expenditure are shown in the following table :3 Establishment. Year. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS. NUMBER SUCCESSFULLY VACCINATED. PERCENTAGE SUC- CESSFUL VAC- CINATED. Primary. Re-vaccination. Total. Primary. Re-vaccination. Total. Primary. Re-vaccination. District ... ... 1891-92 567,597 162,063 729,660 539,386 88,293 627,679 95.03 54.48 1892-93 515,639 225,148 740,787 492,868 130,307 623.175 95.58 57.88 Spacial ... ... ... 1891-92 43,979 28,030 72,009 40,743 14,705 55,448 92.64 52.46 1892-93 49,336 25,960 75,298 46.404 13,819 60,223 94.06 53.23 Cantonment ... ... 1891-92 5,298 1,064 6,382 5,015 872 5,887 94.66 80.44 1892-93 5,064 3,295 8,359 4,862 2,134 6,996 96.01 64.76 Diapensary ... ... 1891-92 3,730 919 4,649 3,481 271 3,752 93.32 29.49 1892-93 1,484 555 2,039 1,343 184 1,527 90.50 33.15 Total ... 1891-92 620,604 192,096 812,700 588,625 104,141 692,766 94.85 54.21 1892-93 571,523 254,958 826,481 545,477 146,444 691,921 95.44 57.44 There were 826,481 operations performed by all the Establishments during the year under review, as against 812,700 during the previous year.. There were 49,081 fewer primary vaccinations done during the year; the number of re-vaccinations on the other hand increased by 62,862. On the whole, however, there was an increase of 13,781 cases. Of the 571,523 primary vacci- nations, 545,477 were reported to have been successful or a percentage of 95.44. In 1891-92 the number of primary operations was 620,604, of which 588,625 or 94.85 per cent., were stated to be successful. .146,444 out of a total of 254,958 cases of re-vaccination were recorded as successful in 1892-93 against 104,141 out of 192,096 in 1891-92, the percentages of success reported in both the years being 57.44 and 54.21 respectively. Proportion of male to female operations. 9. Of the total operations (826,481), 475,134 were performed upon males and 351,347 upon females, or 135 males to 100 females; the proportion last year was 129 males to 100 females. DISTRICT STAFF. The work performed by the District Staff. 10. The Vaccinators of this Staff performed 515,639 primary and 225,148 secondary vaccinations, or a total of 740,787 operations. Last year the number of primary vaccinations performed by this Staff was 567,597, and re-vaccinations 1 62,063, or a total of 729,660. The District Staff thus did 51,958 fewer primary vaccinations and 63,085 more re-vaccinations. On the whole it will be observed that there was an increase of 11,127 operations as compared with the number last year. Percentage of successful operations. 11. Of the total primary vaccinations 387,749 operations were success- fully performed on children under one year of age, as against 419,141 in 1891-92 and 401,674 in 1890-91. Avarage number of vac- cinatious performed by- each Vaccinator. 12. The average number of vaccinations performed by each Vaccinator in the 31 districts taken together was 2,684, in the pre- vious year it was 2,663. The highest average viz4 Increase in the number of operations performed by- each Vaccinator in the Delhi district. 13. In his review of. the note on vaccination for last year His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor: noticed the very small number of operations performed by each Vaccinator in the Delhi dis- trict. During the year under review the number per- formed by each Vaccinator in this district was 1,865 or almost double that of the previous year. This is satisfactory in so far as their work is compared with that of 1891-92, but it is still considerably below the average of the Province. The percentages of success by the Dis- trict Staff. Primary vaccinations. Re-vacci- nations. 1892-93 ... 95.58 57.88 1891-92 ... 95.03 54.48 14. The percentages of successful primary vaccination and re-vaccina- tions in 1892-93 by the District Staff, as compared with 1891-92, is given in the margin. With the exception of the districts of Simla, Shahpur and Gujránwála, in which the percentages of successful primary vaccinations amounted to 82.09, 86.60 and 86.84 per cent. respectively, of the total primary vaccinations, the percentages in the remaining 28 districts varied from about 90 to 99.35. The percentages of successful re-vaccinations in several districts, notably in Delhi, in which it was 92.12, were exceedingly high. In Dera Gházi Khan on the contrary, the per- centage was very low, viz., 13.79. In the districts of Lahore, Hissár, Jullundur and Ludhiána it was much below the average, being about one-half of the provincial rate. It is difficult to reconcile these extremes, and no satisfac- tory explanation is offered; they seem to depend upon what each individual Vaccinator considers successful as there are no means apparently by which these statements can be verified. ; Ratio of persons success- fully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. 15. The provincial ratio of persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population was 33.25 during the year and 34.24 during the previous five years. The highest and lowest rates were recorded in the districts noted below :5 Hoshiárpur showed the largest decrease, i.e., from 56,744 in 1891-92 to 38,189 during the year under review. It occurred wholly in re-vaccinations. In Gujránwála also, which, next to Hoshiárpur, showed a great falling-off in the number of total operations, the decrease took place mostly in re-vac- cinations. Districts in which there was an increase of opera- tions. 17. The following statement shows the districts in which there was an increase in the number of vaccina- tions in 1892-93 over the number recorded in 1891-92 :6 SPECIAL STAFF. The work of the Special Staff. 19. The Special Staff did a total of 75,296 operations, 49,336 Primary and 25,960 Secondary, or 3,287 more than last year. The percentage of success in cases of Primary vaccinations was 94.06 as compared with 92.64 in the previous year, and in cases of re-vac- cination 53.23 against 52.46. The Deputy Sanitary Commissioner states that the increase in the vaccination work of the Special Staff would have been much larger had it not been for the widespread epidemic of cholera which occurred in 1892, necessitating the employment of a considerable number of the Vaccinators of this Staff in the district of Hazára, and in the adjoining villages of Murree tahsíl for distributing cholera medicines. Introduction of animal lymph, in the Hill States by the Special Staff of Vaccinators. 20. The most striking point in connection with the work of the Special Staff was the introduction and very extensive use of animal lymph in most of the important Hill States during the year, and particularly in the Biláspur State in which 23,673 vaccinations were performed, all with buffalo lymph. Doctor Dyson, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner stayed a considerable period in this State and succeeded in vaccinating the Rája with animal lymph The Rája's example was followed by the officials and the high caste inhabitants of the State. Of the 23,673 operations no less than 13,134 were performed among the Brahmins and Rájpúts who had been much averse to the use of animal lymph in previous years. Doctor Dyson also visited the Ránas of Kunihár, Kuthár, Dhámi, Bhajji, Keonthal, Nálagarh, Baghal and Rámpur Bashahr. He was able to persuade the Ránas of Kuthár and Kuuihár to have their sons vaccinated with animal lymph and to sanction its use in their States. During the year buffalo lymph was also for the first time used in the States of Nálagarh, Dhámi and Keonthal. Sanads granted to certain Chiefs of the Hill States for their interest in animal lymph vaccination. 21. At the recommendation of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner Sanads were granted to the Ránas of Kuthár, Kunihár, Bhajji and Dhami and to the Wazír of the Krithár State, in recognition of the assistance rendered by them. A complimentary letter was also given to the Rána of Koti by the Deputy Commissioner, Simla, for the great interest the Rána took in the cause of animal lymph vaccination. 73,361 out of a total of 75,296 cases were performed with animal lymph, in the previous year only 48,804 vaccinations were done by the Special Staff with animal lymph. Cantonment Vaccination. Cantonment vaccination. 22. In the cantonments of Mooltan, Jhelum, Abbottabad, Nowshera, Kohát, Dera Ismail Khan and Dera Gházi Khan in which the vaccination work was carried out by the members of the District Staff there were 1,019 cases of Primary and 915 of Secondary vaccin- ation recorded, the percentages of success reported being 91.66 and 72.46 respectively. The cantonments of Umballa, Jullundur, Mian Mir, Siálkot and Ráwalpindi entertain their own vaccinators. In the Peshawar cantonment an allowance of Rs. 5 per mensem is paid from Cantonment Funds to a member of the District Staff. In Kasáuli, Sabathu, Dagshai and Solon the work is carried on by one Vaccinator who is paid from Cantonment Funds. In all these cantonments the total number of vaccinations performed amounted to 8,359, showing an increase of 1,977 over the numbers done last year. The increase occurred altogether amongst re-vaccinations. Secondary vaccination was much more extensively performed in the cantonments of Ráwalpindi, Mián Mír and Jullundur, in which the number of re-vaccinations was 1,121, 771 and 207 as compared with 187, 17 and 44 respectively in the previous year. Percentage of primary successful operations. 23. In the ten cantonments taken together the percentage of primary successful operations was 96.01 and of re-vaccinations 64.76, the percentages recorded in the previous year
7 being 94.66 and 80.44 respectively. In Pesháwar cantonment the percentage of success in re-vaccinations was very high, 507 cases having been, reported successful out of a total of 550. In Ráwalpindi 720 are reported to have been successful out of a total of 1,121 re-vaccinations and in Mián Mír 450 out of 771. In the Review of the Vaccination Report for last year His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor asked for an explanation of the cause of the very large number of successful cases of re-vaccination in the cantonments as compared with the number reported in the Province generally This high percentage of successful re-vaccinations was noticed last year princi- pally in the cantonments of Pesháwar, Siálkot, Mián Mír and Umballa. The reasons given by the Inspecting Officers were8 Name of District NUMBER OF CHILDREN SHOWING Percentage efficiently vac- cinated. 6 marks. 5 marks. 4 marks. 3 marks 2 good marks. 2 bad marks. 1 mark. 0 mark. Total. Simla ... ... 112 24 24 16 5 4 9 7 201 90 Gurdáspur ... ... 27 35 16 6 4 ... ... ... 88 100 Hazára ... ... 569 115 121 51 21 1 16 15 909 96 Umballa 964 194 178 99 45 16 37 58 1,591 93 Ferozepore ... ... 388 66 49 36 12 1 6 3 561 98 Ludhiána ... ... 1,636 512 376 242 124 17 131 135 3,173 91 Jullundur ... ... 3,108 649 427 216 67 9 75 79 4,630 96 Hoshiárpur ... ... 2,201 299 151 105 13 14 20 24 2,827 98 Total ... 9,005 1,894 1,342 771 291 62 294 321 13,980 95 Percentage of total number inspected. 64 13 10 6 2 1 2 2 100 ... Dr. Stephen inspected 13,980 Primary Vaccinations showing a per- centage of 95 efficiently vaccinated. Last year the number inspected by him was 14,222 and 96 per cent. were efficiently vaccinated. In Ludhiána, Umballa and Simla the work was not so satisfactory as in the districts of Hoshiárpur, Jullun- dur, Hazára, Gurdáspur and Ferozepore. Inspections by Dr. Dyson and Native Supervisons of the Special Staff. 27. Dr. Dyson, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, inspected only 1,910 cases, of which he found 96.17 per cent. successful. Last year the total number of operations inspected by him was 8,668. This decrease is due to the fact that during the greater part of the cold weather Doctor Dyson was engaged in examining into the health of the inhabitants of the villages situated along the Western Jumna Canal. The two Native Supervisors of the Special Staff inspected a total of 29,532 Primary vaccinations and 12,400 re-vaccinations, the percentage of Primary cases found successful being 94.22 and of successful re-vaccinations 64.79. Vaccination inspecting by a specially appointed Native Superintendent. 28. The District Boards of Gujrát, Gujránwála, Shahpur and Jhelum having agreed to bear an equal share of the salary of an Assistant Surgeon for inspecting vaccination work in the above districts, under the orders of Govern- ment Assistant Surgeon Mehta Devi Dyal was entrusted with this duty experimentally. This appointment was made with a view to obtain the services of an intelligent officer who would be able to devote some time to inspecting the work of Vaccinators. The following table shows the result of the cases inspected by him: 9 Primary and Re-vaccination of four Districts. Name of District. Number of children inspected. NUMBER OF CHILDREN INSPECTED WHO HAD 6 Cicatrices. 5 Cicatrices. 4 Cicatrices. 3 Cicatrices. 2 distinct Cicatrices 2 indistinct Cicatrices or 1 Cica trix. No Cicatrix. Primary Vaccination. Gujrát ... ... ... ... ... 1,453 903 201 123 91 56 30 49 Gujránwála ... ... ... ... 1,607 1,069 217 127 95 48 36 15 Shahpur ... ... ... ... 2,248 1,400 230 154 261 118 51 34 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 3,229 2,534 304 158 112 58 31 32 Total ... 8,537 5,906 952 562 559 280 148 130 Re-vaccination. Gujrát ... ... ... ... ... 57 10 ... 2 4 10 7 24 Gujránwála ... ... ... ... 253 79 16 26 20 19 24 69 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... 102 12 6 6 10 6 10 52 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 1,017 109 64 69 98 124 103 450 Total ... 1,429 210 86 103 132 159 144 595 GRAND TOTAL ... 9,966 6,116 1,038 665 691 439 292 725 Mehta Devi Dyál inspected only 8,587 primary vaccinations and 1,429 re- vaccinations, altogether 9,966 cases, during the period he was employed, i.e., from 14th October 1892 to 31st March 1893, the percentage of primary cases found efficiently vaccinated amounting to 97 and of re-vaccinations to 48. In the statement given below the percentages of successful primary and secondary vaccinations inspected by Mehta Devi Dyál are contrasted with those reported by Native Supervisors and Vaccinators of the four districts in which the Native Superintendent was employed :10 No DISTRICTS Total number of per- sons vaccinated Total number inspected. Percentage of inspections of total number vaccinated Percentage of cases found successful of total number inspected. Percentage of success re- ported by Vaccinators. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. By Civil Surgeons By Native Supervi- sors or other inspect- ing officers By Civil Surgeons By Native Supervi- sors or other inspect- ing officers. By Civil Surgeons By Native Supervi- sors or other inspect- ing officers. Primary. Re-vacci- ation. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary. Re-vacci- nations Primary. Re-vacci- nations. Primary Re-vacci- nations. Primary Re-vacci- nations. Primary Re-vacci- nation 1 Hissár ... ... 16,686 5,222 2,119 157 14,715 2,667 12.70 3.01 88.19 51.07 96.00 24.00 97.00 25.00 97.91 27.25 2 Rohtak ... ... 13,561 221 2,240 27 12,509 161 16.52 12.22 92.24 72 85 98.88 92.59 98.79 94.40 96.39 77.83 3 Gurgáon ... ... 16,057 1,331 3,500 225 15,848 750 21.80 16.90 98.70 56.35 80.00 60.00 91.00 83.00 96.09 76.86 4 Delhi ... ... 12,918 9,469 713 413 10,119 5,521 5.52 4.36 78.33 58 31 93.17 89.59 99.47 92.42 98.07 92.12 5 Karnál ... ... 17,655 7,653 2,559 1,007 6,902 2,724 14.49 13.16 39.09 35.59 95.15 48.65 97.89 56.86 96.69 59.69 6 Umballa ... ... 20,903 3,392 14,005 1,305 67.00 38.47 97.84 77.01 92.91 31.52 7 Simla ... ... 335 397 327 397 97.61 100 00 85.05 25.30 82.09 44.33 8 Kángra ... ... 21,219 11,007 1 265 106 11,797 5,983 5.96 0.96 55.60 54 36 81.66 81.13 98.25 74.67 96.44 51.87 9 Hoshiárpur ... ... 27,866 10,323 1,293 283 16,335 2,634 4.64 2.74 58.62 25 52 98.60 69.61 08.59 88.80 95.83 65.35 10 Jullundur ... ... 25,017 2,829 1,726 21 12,787 291 6.90 0.74 51.11 10 29 98.03 42.86 97.20 40.89 90.42 25.63 11 Ludhiána ... ... 14,939 11,928 2,548 1,720 10,847 7,539 17.06 14.42 72.61 63 20 92.81 22.09 92.96 15.33 89.97 25.13 12 Ferozepore ... ... 20,604 11,487 624 20 18,690 11,474 3.03 0.17 90.71 99.89 99.19 100.00 98.96 78.12 98.79 73.58 13 Mooltan ... ... 14,544 30,308 14,544 30,308 100.00 100 00 99.09 52.40 99.10 52.40 14 Jhang ... ... 9,452 3,892 2,778 329 4,962 1,009 29.39 8.45 52.50 25 93 96.79 27.96 99.92 40.29 98.26 32.48 15 Montgomery ... ... 10,752 4,807 9,774 2,283 90.90 47 49 99.31 66.18 99.06 48.47 16 Lahore ... ... 29,028 1,640 1,88711 Inspections by Civil Sur- geons. 30. It will be seen from the statement that in the districts of Umballa, Simla, Mooltan and Montgomery not a single operation was inspected by the Civil Surgeons. In Amritsar only 49 primary and 22 re-vaccinations, in Gujrát 180 primary, and in Bannu 88 primary cases and 66 re-vaccinations were inspected by the Civil Surgeons. Inspections by Native Supervisors. 31. The percentages of inspections by Native Supervisors of total cases vaccinated differ widely. In Mooltan every one of the 14,544 primary and 30,308 secondary vaccinations are reported to have been inspected by the Native Supervisors, in Hazára the Super- visor appears to have seen not only all the vaccinations performed by the dis- trict Vaccinators, but a number of those done by the Special Staff. In Grurgáon the percentage of primary operations inspected by the Native Supervisors is stated to be about 99 per cent. In Dera Ismail Khan, on the other hand, the percentage of inspections of total number of primary vaccinations was 11.06 and of re-vaccinations 14.85. In Jullundur 10.29 per cent. of re-vaccinations are said to have been seen by the Native Supervisor, while in Ferozepore the percentage was 99.89. Percentage of successful primary and secondary vaccinations inspected by Civil Surgeons contrasted with those reported by Native Supervisors and Vaccinators 32. In the following nine districts the percentages of inspections, by Civil Surgeons, of total number of primary operations were tolerably large, varying from 9.35 to 31.37. The percent- ages of primary cases found successful by Civil Surgeons in these districts are contrasted with the percentages reported by the Native Supervisors and Vaccinators : 12 The percentages of successful primary vaccinations reported by Civil Surgeons, Native Supervisors or other inspecting officers and Vaccinators are al- most equal, except in the district of Gurgáon in which the success noted by the Civil Surgeon was 80.00 and by Native Supervisors and other inspecting officers and Vaccinators 91.00 and 96.09 respectively. In cases of successful re-vaccinations, the differences in the percentages are very great. In Ludhiána and Jhang the Civil Surgeons found 22.09 and 27.96 per cent. respectively of inspections successful, against 92.59 and 93.20 respectively by Civil Surgeons of Rohtak and Muzaffargarh. In Ludhiána Native Supervisors or other inspecting officers found only 15.33 per cent. suc- cessful, in Rohtak the percentage was as high as 94.40. In Ludhiána the success reported by the Vaccinators was 25.13, in Jhelum it was reported to have been 89.54. Comment on these figures seems unnecessary. As observed by His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor in his review on the note of vaccination for last year, I am disposed to think that these variations are due to differences of opinion as to what is to be considered an efficient re-vaccination. Deputy Sanitary Com- missioner's report on the failure of animal lymph supply. 33. Dr. Dyson, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, in his letter No. 821, dated 25th November 1892, makes the following remarks on the subject of the failure of the animal lymph supply. &quot;I have the honor to report for your information that the animal lymph issued by the Lymph Depôt at Murree is in my opinion of an unsatisfactory character. &quot;I have formed this opinion from personal observations in the Karnál district where the vesicles are not typical vaccine vesicles. On arrival at Murree I found that only four or five Medical Officers had returned the counterfoils showing the results of the lymph despatched during the hot weather, I immediately had Reminder Postcards printed and called for the results. &quot;I despatched the first supply of animal lymph on the 21st and 22nd and the third supply was despatched on the 27th of September 1892 to enable all Civil Surgeons to com- mence vaccine operations by the 1st of October 1892. I personally examined the calves and found that the vesicles were fully developed. I also vaccinated children direct with satisfac- tory results. Almost without exception these supplies failed completely in the plains. &quot;Not having had experience of animal lymph when transmitted by post to plain stations, I, to prevent the failure of vaccine operations in the Punjab, arranged with the Native Superintendents of the Special Staff, Punjab, to have ready a supply of fresh human lymph in case of its being required. It is fortunate that these precautionary measures were taken, since on the receipt of the unfavourable results I was in a position to supply the Civil Surgeons with a supply of fresh and reliable human lymph. With the same lymph which had failed in the plains I vaccinated successfully children in the hills and from these children I then vaccinated calves for fresh supplies hoping by these means to revive the lymph, though in no case, I am informed, had the lymph in the previous supplies passed through more than four animals successively, though five is the maximum consider- ed safe. &quot;During my tour in the cold weather in the Punjab I endeavoured to introduce the practice of carrying animal lymph from one village to the next in tubes hoping to thus pre- vent any inconvenience to the owners of buffalo calves. The results were, however, some- what unsatisfactory and this experience made me suspicious of animal lymph when carried in tubes and induced me to take precautionary measures to have human lymph available in case necessity should arise during the annual distribution. &quot;Further, I would beg to point out that this is the first time that English lymph has not been received to renovate the stock. Under the circumstances I would solicit sanction during the annual distribution to issue half animal and half human lymph sending out with each supply instructions to the officers concerned to vaccinate separate calves with human and animal lymph, using the former only in case of failure of the latter. &quot;Fearing that the source of the lymph supply of the Punjab may be faulty I have wired to the N. W. P. and Bengal for fresh supplies of lymph to re-utilize the stock. &quot;To enable me to contrast the respective working values of animal and human lymph I would beg most respectfully to suggest that half the indents received in future be supplied by the Animal Lymph Depôt and half by me with human lymph received direct from my Vaccinators. The results to be compared at the end of the cold weather, com- mencing from 1st December 1892. Dr. Mulroney, Civil Surgeon of Amritsar, has also been asked to test the lymph on children in Amritsar when sending out supplies.&quot;
13 NATIVE STATES. Vaccination in Native States. 34. The following statement shows the number of vaccine operations performed in the large Native States during the year 1892-93:14 reported to have been successful, showing an unusually high percentage of 98.23 of successful cases. In Kapurthala, Nábha, Jínd and Farídkot the total vaccinations were almost all primary operations and the percentages of success- ful cases were 95.50, 91.70, 92.30, and 92.16, respectively. Animal lymph vaccina- tion in Native States. 39. In Patiála 91 per cent. of the operations were performed with animal lymph which shows that the system has become very popular in that State. No mention is made of the number of vaccinations performed with animal lymph in any of the other States or whether any efforts were made to introduce the method in them. Places in which compul- sory vaccination was intro- duced, or was under con- sideration. 40. Vaccination was compulsory at the end of the year 1891-92 in the municipalities of Rohtak, Umballa, Simla, Kasauli and Amritsar, and during the year under review the Act was introduced in Dera Gházi Khan and a portion of the municipality of Delhi. Draft rules have been submitted to Government to make vaccination compulsory in the municipal towns of Lahore and Jullundur; and in the Municipal Committees of Murree, Dharmsála, Jhang and Bannu draft rules are under consideration. Deputy Sanitary Com- missioner's Annunl Vaccina- tion Report and the Report on Lymph Depôt. 41. The Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's Vaccination Report for 1892-93, and his report on the Vaccine Lymph Depôt at Murree and Amritsar are given as Appendices A and B to this report. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, W. A. C. ROE, F. R. C. S., SURG.-LIEUT.-COL , Offg. Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab.
A.A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1892-93. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED, DURING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DUR- ING PREVIOUS 5 YEARS. Successful Total. Under one year. One year and under 6 years Total of all ages Total Successful Primary Re-vaccination. Number Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000 16,686 11,367 4,976 16,343 5,222 1,423 97.94 27.25 22.90 20,292 26.16 408 0.53 13,561 9,774 3,297 13,071 221 172 96.39 77.83 22.43 14,566 24.67 238 0.40 16,057 12,859 2,570 15,429 1,331 1.023 96.09 76.86 24.60 19,175 28.67 545 0.81 12,918 7,688 4,981 12.669 9,469 8,723 98.07 92.12 33.68 15,067 23.72 196 0.31 17,655 13,238 3,833 17,071 7,653 4,568 96.69 59.69 31.65 15,368 22.48 716 1.05 20,903 15,979 3.441 19,420 3,392 1,069 92.91 31.52 20.86 19,430 19.78 713 0.73 335 138 136 275 397 176 82.09 44.33 12.80 594 16.85 17 0.48 21,219 15,049 5,415 20,464 11,007 5,709 96.44 51.87 34.46 64,160 84.48 61 0.08 27,866 22,383 4,321 26,704 10,323 6,746 95.83 65.35 33.06 36,220 35.80 313 0.31 25,017 21,126 1,492 22,621 2,829 725 90.42 25.63 26.19 23,380 26.23 266 0.30 14,939 10,983 2,318 13,440 11,928 2,997 89.97 25.13 25.34 18,175 28.02 482 0.74 20,604 14,965 5,390 20,355 11,487 8,452 98.79 73.58 33.44 24,746 28.72 666 0.77 14,544 11,653 2,750 14,413 30,308 15,882 99.10 52.40 48.80 25,148 40.51 233 0.38 9,452 7,818 1,464 9,288 3,892 1,264 98.26 32.48 24.16 12,976 29.71 71 0.16 10,752 9,921 730 10,651 4,807 2,330 99.06 48.47 25.99 14,931 29.89 422 0.84 29,028 24,547 2,568 27,115 1,640 450 93.41 27.44 26.11 27,913 26.44 536 0.51 31,480 26,120 4,694 30,814 14,794 11,041 97.88 74.63 42.24 48,388 48.83 496 0.50 25,103 19,147 5,243 24,390 32,988 23,986 97.16 72.71 51.42 33,300 35.40 347 0.37 34,431 28,354 5,448 33,802 9,351 3,511 98.17 37.55 33.96 36,627 33.34 646 0.59 20,053 17,249 1,892 19,141 2,704 1,687 95.45 62.39 27.38 22,704 29.84 215 0.28 18,465 15,304 731 16,035 8,600 2,714 86.84 31.56 27.17 21,802 31.60 64 0.09 10,192 7,294 1,532 8,826 692 454 86.60 65.61 18.80 13,455 27.26 67 0.14 16,286 14,127 2,053 16,180 12,093 10,828 99.35 89.54 44.58 16,370 27.02 130 0.21 18,130 15,131 2,683 17,851 7,258 5,320 98.46 73.30 27.41 22,135 26.19 342 0.40 5,773 4,122 999 5,271 751 339 91.30 45.14 11.78 7,032 14.77 169 0.35 12,794 7,268 4,608 12,217 1,606 1,208 95.49 75.22 20.00 11,403 16.99 690 1.03 3,661 1,639 1,588 3,589 357 291 98.03 81.51 20.37 3,670 19.26 166 0.87 7,058 3,709 2,865 6,574 877 610 93.14 69.56 19.42 7,941 21.46 319 0.86 16,654 4,082 11,636 15,718 3,905 2,388 94.38 61.15 37.53 8,856 18.36 428 0.89 15,890 9,751 5,380 15,131 10,046 1,385 95.22 13.79 41.30 16,990 42.49 219 0.55 8,133 4,964 3,036 8,000 3,220 2,836 98.36 88.07 28.44 11,454 30.06 217 0.57 49,336 26,688 12,649 46,404 25,960 13,819 94.06 53.23 ... 69,482 ... ... ... 564,975 414,437 116,719 539,272 251,108 144,126 95.45 57.40 33.25 703,750 34.24 10,398 0.51 NOTE.iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to localities, during the year 1892-93. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. DISTRICTS Names of localities. Average number of vac- cinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Hissár ... Hánsi Tahsíl ... ... 3,272 3,265 2,619 407 3,031 7 3 ... ... 2 Rohtak ... Sámpla V A.vi B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years: PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. ESTABLISHMENT. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated, Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- ully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1807. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1876* (see note). For three months end- ing 31st March 1877viii APPENDIX A. Annual Vaccination Report for 1892-93, by Surgeon-Captain H. J. Dyson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab. During the year 1892-93 the Vaccinators of the Special Staff performed 75,296 vaccine operations against 72,009 in the year 1891-92, giving an increase of 3,287. Animal lymph was employed in 73,361 cases against 48,804 in the previous year being an increase of 24,557. Human lymph was used in 1,935 against 23,205 in the previous year, showing a decrease of 21,270. Animal lymph has made steady progress since its introduction, and this is a source of gratification when it is remembered how many children are spared the pain and incon- venience of being used as vaccinifers. I have impressed it strongly on the Vaccinators of the Special Staff that animal (buffalo) lymph must be used wherever practicable. The increase in the total vaccinations performed in 1892-93 as compared with 1891-92 is 3,287. This total would have been considerably higher had it not been for the widespread epidemic of cholera which occurred in 1892, necessitating the employment of a considerable number of the Special Staff Vaccinators in Hazára and Murree in the distribution of cholera medicines. In some of the Hill States the Rájás were averse to the introduction of vaccination owing to the prevailing fear of cholera. In the summer of 1892 Vaccinators were sent to the following States : Biláspur, Kunihar, Kuthár, Mailog, Dhámi, Kumharsain, Bághal, Keonthal, Bíja, Baghát, Nálagarh and Sirmúr. I personally visited and held interviews with the Rájás and Ránas of Biláspur, Kunihar, Kuthár, Dhámi, Bhajji, Keonthal, Nálagarh, Bághal and Rámpur (Bushahar) (to inspect the previous year's work). I was able to persuade the Ránas of Kuthár and Kuni- har to allow their sons to be vaccinated with animal lymph, and to sanction the intro- duction of animal lymph for the first time for use among the people. Buffalo lymph was also this season for the first time used for vaccination purposes in the States of Nálagarh, Dhámi and Keonthal. Animal lymph has now been used in every Hill State of any importance during my term of office in this appointment. In Biláspur State 23,673 people were vaccinated, all with buffalo lymph; the details areix Changes in the Special Staff.X Appendix B. THE VACCINE LYMPH DEPOT. A depát for the distribution of animal (Bovine) lymph was established in the Punjab, it was also arranged that during the six hot weather months this depôt should remain at Murree, and in the six cold weather months at Amritsar. A 1st class Vaccinator was deputed by me to take charge of the establishment, and he was granted a special allowance of Rs. 5 per mensem. Previous to the establishment of the depôt the annual vaccine operations were carried out partly with fresh lymph received from England and partly with fresh human lymph collected by the Vaccinators of the Special Staff. The depôt commenced working in January 1892 at Amritsar, Ishar Das, 1st class Vaccinator of the Special Staff, being placed in charge. In April the depôt was re-opened at Murree, the same Vaccinator being in charge till June 17th, 1892, when he was relieved by 1st class Vaccinator Muhammad Sharif of the Special Staff. Strict orders were issued to him to renovate the stock of buffalo lymph by inoculating every fourth calf with fresh human lymph. It had also been decided that no lymph was to be obtained from England for use at the time of the annual distribution of lymphxi In two cases one vesicle was produced, but the general number of vesicles produced -was higher than in previous supplies. Between one and 5 vesicles ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Between 5 and 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Between 10 and 20 ... ... ... ... ... 3 Lahore reported 18 insertions, 18 vesicles, and Ludhiána 24 insertions, 19 vesicles. Fifth supply human lymph to fourteen Civil Surgeons :REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1893-94. Published by Authority. Price-Re. 0-10-0. Lahore : THE &quot;CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS. Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1894.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1893-94. Published by Authority. THE &quot; CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE &quot; PRESS, Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1894.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department, No. 505 S., dated 31st July 1894. READ 2 commencement of the official year for which the report is prepared. The Act was introduced during 1893-94 into the Municipalities of Murree, Jullundur, Jhang-cum-Maghiána, Edwardes-abad and Dharmsála, and also into the Canton- ments of Jullundur, Dalhousie and Dharmsála. Rules under the Act were promulgated for the Municipalities of Lahore and Jhang-cum-Maghiána, while at the close of the year rules for the Municipalities of Dera Gházi Khan and Murree were under consideration. Since the year actually closed the Act has been extended to the Municipality of Beri and rules under the Act have been framed for the Jullundur Municipality. Paragraph 21. 5. A diagram showing the death-rates from small-pox and the proportion of successful vaccinations, district by district, is appended to the Report in accordance with the orders of the Government of India. Some portions of the diagram seem to indicate in a striking manner the effect of vaccination in reducing mortality from small-pox, but others again do not. It would perhaps be easier to see one's way through the diagram at a glance if the districts were arranged in it from left to right in the order of the height of the black lines. Paragraph 22 and Appendix A. 6.The work of the special staff under the orders of Surgeon-Captain James appears to have been very satisfactory. The statement made in Appendix A, that after the Rája of Mandi had his children vaccinated the people of that State were &quot;most anxious to have their children done,&quot; needs correction. Some of the people of that State may have been ready or even anxious to see their children vaccinated, but the feeling of the people of the tract known as Seoráj was very much the other way ; indeed, one of the causes, and the immediate cause of what may be called the rebellion in Seoráj last year, was the indiscreet effort made to get the people to submit to vaccination. 7.In conclusion, Sir Dennis Fitzpatrick desires to thank Surgeon- Lieutenant-Colonel Roe and Surgeon-Captain James for the excellent work done during the year under review and for their respective reports. ORDER.TABLE OF CONTENTS. Para. Subject. Page. REVIEW OF THE REPORT OF GOVERNMENT. 2 Administration of the Department ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 Strength of the Vaccination Establishment ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 The cost of the Department ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 5 Cost of each successful operation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 6 The general results obtained during the year ... ... ... ... ... ib. 7 Work of District Vaccination Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 8 Primary vaccinations done by the District Staff ... ... ... ... ... ib. 9 Re-vaccinations done by District Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 10 Work done by Special Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Work done by the Cantonment Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 12 Work done by the Dispensary Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 13 Vaccination with animal lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 14 Vaccination inspections by Dr. Stephen ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 15 Inspections by Deputy Sanitary Commissioner and Native Supervisors Special Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 16 Appointment of Inspector of Vaccination for Gujrát, Gujvánwála and Shahpur districts, and his work ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 17 Inspections by Civil Surgeons, Native Supervisors and others ... ... ... 4 18 The places in which compulsory Vaccination Act was introduced... ... ... 5 19 Lambardárs' lists of persons vaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 20 Animal Lymph Depôt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 21 Small-pox diagram ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 22 Vaccination in Native States... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 23 Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's Annual Vaccination Report ... ... ... ib. ANNUAL FORMS. I Showing particulars of vaccination in the Punjab during the year 1893-94 ... ii Appendix to Statement No. I, showing the details of vaccination operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs according to localities during the year 1893-94 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... iv II Showing the cost of the Vaccine Department in the Punjab Province during the year 1893-94 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... V III Showing Dispensary vaccinations in the Punjab Province during the year 1893-94 vi IV Comparative Statement showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years ... ... ... ... ... vii V Showing total number of primary and re-vaccinations performed and number inspected by Civil Surgeons and Native Supervisors or other Inspecting Officers the percentages of those inspected, together with the percentages of cases found successful by them as contrasted with the percentages reported by the vaccinators in each district of the Punjab during the year 1893-94 ... ... viii APPENDICES. A.NO. 30/3118 FROM SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL W. A. C. ROE, F.R.C.S., Officiating Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, To H. C. FANSHAWE, ESQUIRE, Officiating Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab. Dated LAHORE, the 30th June 1894. SIR, I have the honor to submit the Annual Vaccination Statements for the year 1893-94 with the following brief remarks :2 The cost of the Depart- ment. 4. In the Special Staff the decrease of Rs. 3,583, under &quot; Establishment,&quot; is chiefly due to Surgeon-Captain James having succeeded Surgeon-Captain Dyson on smaller allowances than those drawn by Dr. Dyson. The expenditure under &quot;Travelling Allowance&quot; for the special Staff amounted to Rs. 3,199 against Rs. 3,888 and under &quot;Contingencies&quot; to Rs. 593 against Rs. 806 in the previous year. The increased cost of the District Establishment is due to the employment of Pandit Bálkishen on a higher salary in the Kángra district during the year, and also to the entertainment of an In- spector of Vaccination for the districts of Gujrát, Gujránwála and Shahpur, as sanctioned in Punjab Government letter No. 485, dated 14th October 1893. The expenditure under &quot; Contingencies&quot; for the district Staff during the year exceeded that of 1892-93 by Rs. 574. The travelling expenses of the District and Special Staffs were respectively Rs. 342 and Rs. 689 less than in the preceding year. On the whole there was a decrease of Rs. 2,547 in the total expenditure. Cost of each successful operation. 5. The total cost of the Department amounted to Rs. 74,151, and the number of successful vaccine operations performed during the year, being 781,392,* the average cost of each operation was one anna and six pies as against one anna and nine pies in the previous year. The general results ob- tained during the year. 6. The total number of persons vaccinated by all Establishments during 1893-94 was 10,56,805 (581,597 males and 475,208 females) against 826,481 (475,134 males and 351,347 females) in the preceding year, showing an increase of 230,324 operations over the number done in 1892-93. Of the total number of operations performed during the year 585,162 were primary vaccinations and 471,643 re-vaccinations; the corresponding numbers for the past year being respectively 571,523 and 254,958. Of the primary operations performed during the year 551,821 or 94.30 per cent., and of re-vaccinations 230,580 or 48.89 per cent. were successful. Work of District Vaccina- tion Staff. 7. The District Staff performed 954,113 operations during the year against 740,787 in 1892-93, an increase of 213,326. Of the number 954,113 vaccinated during the year, 520,189 were primary and 433,924 of secondary vaccinations. Of the primary vaccina- tions 490,052 or 94.21 per cent., and of the secondary vaccinations 204,947 or 47.23 per cent. were successful. Primary vaccination done by the District Staff. 8. During 1893-94, 4,550 primary operations were performed by the District Staff more than in the previous year and of the total number of primary vaccinations, 369,643 were performed successfully on children under one year of age against 387,749, or a decrease of 18,106. Re-vacoinations done by District Staff. 9 Excluding Kángra, in which district there was the extraordinary number of 275,844 re-vaccinations performed, the operations done by the District Staff during the year are less by 56,061 than last year; this decrease is due to the orders issued from this Department that no person should be re-vaccinated until seven years had elapsed since the pre- vious successful vaccination. With regard to the high number of re-vaccina- tions done in the Kángra district, it should be noted that this is apparently due to the influence, Pandit Bal Kishen, the Native Superintendent, exercises over the people of that district, and an enquiry made by this office in November last, goes to show that the figures given are reliable. Work done by Special Staff. 10. The Special Staff performed 94,409 vaccine operations during the year, of which 58,963 were primary and 35,446 re-vaccina- tions. Of the primary operations 56,100 or 95.14 per cent. and of the re-vaccinations 24,121 or 68.05 per cent. were successful. On the whole the Special Staff performed 19,113 more operations than in the previous year. Work done by the Canton- ment Staff. 11. The number of operations done by the Cantonment Staff were fewer by 1,208 than in the previous year; the total number of operations performed during the year being 7,151, of which 4,938 were primary and 2,213 re-vaccinations. Note.3 Work done by the Dis- pensary Staff. 12. The Dispensary Staff also performed fewer operations, doing only 1,132 altogether, and of these 1,072 were primary and 60 re-vaccinations. Vaccination with animal lymph. 13. The use of animal lymph has become almost universal in the Province. In every district the statistics show a more extended employment of this method of vaccination. Of the total number of vaccinations (10,56,805) during the year, 8,43,238 or 80 per cent. were performed with animal lymph. With reference to the correspondence ending with Punjab Government letter No. 104, dated 3rd March 1894, the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner was directed to carry out a series of experiments on the kid as a vaccinifer, as it is supposed that if vaccination with lymph obtained from kids can be as successfully performed as with the lymph taken from calves, many religious and other prejudices would be overcome; but the results obtained up to the present have not been very promising. Vaccination inspections by Dr. Stephen. 14. Dr. Stephen during his tour of inspection in February last inspect- ed 2,104 vaccine operations and the results of his inspection are given in the table below:4 Statement showing results of inspection by the Native Inspector of children vaccinated in the Districts of Gujranwala, Gujrat and Shahpur during the year 1893-94. Districts. Week ending Number of children inspected. PRIMARY. Number of children inspected. RE-VACCINATION. Number of children inspected who had Number of children inspected who had 6cicatrices. 5 cicatrices. 4 cicatrices. 3 cicatrices. 2 distinct cicatrices. 2 indistinct cicatrices or one cicatrix. No cicatrix. 6 cicatrices. 5 cicatrices. 4 cicatrices. 3 cicatrices. 2 distinct cicatrices. 2 indistinct cicatrices or one cicatrix. No cicatrix. Gujránwála ... 9th November 1893 753 539 90 61 36 15 1 11 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Gujrát ... ... 16th do. 784 690 46 23 10 7 ... 8 7 3 ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 Do. ...... 23rd do. ... 816 678 61 30 16 13 ... 18 68 3 2 3 4 1 3 52 Do. ...... 30th do. 669 572 41 20 18 11 ... 7 27 5 5 6 3 ... ... 8 Shahpur ...... 7th December 1803 759 602 49 32 48 10 ... 18 60 6 2 5 10 4 1 32 Do....... 14th do. 821 695 36 21 43 11 1 14 274 22 6 18 27 33 4 164 Do....... 21st do. ... 479 370 21 11 57 9 ... 11 207 27 2 6 10 14 3 145 Gujránwála 28th do. 446 306 52 28 35 11 2 12 35 ... ... ... 3 6 ... 26 Do. 3rd January 1804... 912 699 95 71 30 13 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. 10th do. ... 677 462 83 46 42 16 4 24 10 ... ... ... 2 ... 1 7 Do. 17th do. ... 782 517 76 62 47 27 1 52 68 1 ... 1 1 5 11 49 Do. 21th do. ... 374 328 19 18 2 4 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gujrát ...... 31st do. 863 784 43 21 6 5 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. ...... 6th February 1894 1,535 1,396 75 26 24 4 ... 10 5 3 1 ... 1 ... ... ... Do. ...... 13 th do. ... 1,214 1,095 62 24 18 6 ... 9 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 Do. ...... 20th do. 867 664 65 60 35 16 ... 27 43 ... ... 3 4 8 2 26 Shahpur ...... 27th do. 691 536 37 26 55 18 ... 19 39 6 2 3 7 1 ... 20 Do....... 6th March 1894 ... 638 484 52 19 50 24 ... 9 302 12 5 10 30 33 ... 212 Do....... 13ch do. 737 569 49 23 70 20 ... 6 71 6 3 2 8 13 ... 42 Gujránwála 23rd do. 801 424 94 93 52 45 10 86 38 2 ... ... 2 3 3 28 Do. 31st do. 1,404 1,039 104 70 73 33 10 75 513 109 23 22 24 27 1 307 Do. 7th April 1801 ... 615 423 71 36 45 21 ... 19 44 ... 1 1 4 3 ... 35 Do. 11th do. 237 149 37 18 22 4 ... 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. 21st do. 427 319 28 52 17 6 ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Shahpur 22nrl to 27th April 1801. 595 419 47 51 37 23 ... 18 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 18,896 14,750 1,430 942 888 372 34 471 1,810 206 52 81 140 152 30 1,159 Inspections by Civil Sur- geons. Native Supervisors and others. 17. The statement ordered in Government of India letter No. 6-197 Sanitary, dated 29th August 1892, is given as Statement No. V attached to this note. As remarked in para. 31 of the Annual Vaccination Report for the year 1892-93 the percentages of inspections by Native Supervisors, &c., of total cases vaccinated differ greatly. The percentage of inspections of primary vaccinations are as high as 97.45 in Mooltan and 94.76 in Rohtak, while they are as low as 14.18 in Dera Ismail Khan and 30.93 in Kángra. Again the percentages of inspections of re-vaccinations by Native Supervisors, &c., are 99.21 in Muzaf argarh, 97.85 in Dera Gházi Khan, and 97.53 in Mooltan, while they are 0.74 in Bannu, 7.32 in Jullundur, 9.72 in Ráwalpindi, and 15.56 in Dera Ismail Khan. The following table shows the districts in which the percentages of inspections by Civil Surgeons of total number of primary operations were highest5 Similarly the table below shows the districts in which the inspections by Civil Surgeons of re-vaccinations were highest6 shows the districts in which these lists were compared in the Civil Surgeons' Offices :During the years 1881-82 to 1893-94, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Diagram showing the Death rates from Small-Pox during the year 1893-94 and the proportion of successful Vaccinations during the years 1881-82 to 1893-94, per 10,000 of Population in each District of the Punjab. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
A.ii A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1893-94. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccina- ted per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PERSONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS FIVE YEARS. AVER AGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DUR- ING PREVIOUS FIVE YEARS. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year and under 6 years. Total of all ages. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 17,282 11,913 4,996 16,909 4,091 913 97.84 22.32 22.07 20,179 26.01 397 0.51 13,848 10,963 2,524 13,487 283 226 97.39 79.86 23.22 14,778 25.03 155 0.26 20,658 17,558 2,434 19,992 805 506 96.78 62.86 30.65 18,605 27.82 472 0.71 17,778 14,073 3,288 17,361 631 478 97.65 75.75 28.08 16,236 25.56 88 0.14 22,741 17,509 4,604 22,113 6,495 3,710 97.24 57.12 37.77 16,742 24.49 693 1.01 20,852 15,031 4,363 19,394 6,081 1,965 93.01 32.31 21.74 20,162 20.53 721 0.73 341 151 112 274 618 276 80.35 44.66 15.60 642 18.21 16 0.45 20,818 14,685 5,173 19,858 275,844 123,697 95.39 44.84 189.02 65,087 85.70 55 0.07 20,313 14,217 2,913 17,130 13,970 7,849 84.33 56.18 24.69 36,S32 36.41 264 0.26 23,900 18,488 1,599 20,088 1,448 320 84.05 22.10 22.90 23,313 26.15 266 0.30 15,665 8,266 2,576 10,842 8,74S 1,727 69.21 19.74 19.38 18,082 27.88 411 0.63 18,979 12,746 6,041 18,7S7 3,520 2,476 98.99 70.34 24.68 25,355 29.43 594 0.69 16,166 13,605 2,390 15,995 13,599 7,504 98.94 55.18 37.85 27,604 44.46 151 0.24 8,526 6,728 1,686 8,414 3,363 1,167 98.69 34.70 21.93 12,905 29.54 13 0.03 12,895 9,794 2,733 12,527 5,213 3,552 97.15 68.14 32.19 15,330 30.69 445 0.89 26,652 21,132 3,831 24,963 4,414 1,805 93.66 40.89 25.36 28,209 26.72 565 0.54 30,899 24,774 5,455 30,229 16,197 10,896 97.83 67.27 41.50 49,628 50.08 406 0.41 22,024 14,954 6,444 21,398 23,000 13,676 97.16 59.46 37.28 37,700 40.07 292 0.31 26,116 20,529 4,972 25,501 14,674 6,368 97.65 43.40 29.01 36,316 33.05 515 0.47 18,915 14,783 3,291 18,074 1,153 694 95.55 60.19 24.67 21,924 28.82 184 0.24 17,601 13,770 1,456 15,226 4,876 1,565 86.51 32.10 24.33 21,579 31.27 53 0.08 11,068 7,564 2,387 9,951 3,067 1,496 89.91 48.78 23.19 12,723 25.79 71 0.14 13,750 12,054 1,468 13,522 3,510 2,834 98.34 80.74 27.00 19,120 31.56 96 0.15 17,136 13,832 2,799 16,642 3,304 2,149 97.12 65.04 22.23 22,248 26.32 266 0.31 7,126 4,807 1,089 6,117 776 359 85.84 46.26 13.60 6,839 14.36 167 0.35 14,626 6,152 7,475 14,104 2,689 2,395 96.43 89.07 24.58 12,303 18.33 615 0.92 3,771 1,817 1,598 3,686 242 201 97.75 83.06 20.40 3,694 19.39 136 0.71 9,349 4,217 4,621 8,838 404 333 94.53 82.43 24.79 7,908 21.37 441 1.19 20,038 5,112 14,085 19,197 3,876 2,392 95.80 61.71 44.75 11,049 22.90 217 0.45 21,407 12,230 8,331 20,611 6,526 984 96.28 15.08 54.01 16,829 42.09 46 0.12 8,949 6,139 2,683 8,822 507 434 98.58 85.60 24.29 11,476 30.12 133 0.35 58,963 35,724 13,485 56,100 35,446 24,121 95.14 68.05 ... 67,068 ... ... ... 579,152 405,367 132,902 546,152 469,370 229,068 94.30 48.80 37.72 718,470 34.96 8,938 0.43 NOTE.iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. 1. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to localities, during the year 1893-94. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 NO. DISTRICTS. Names of localities. Average number of vac- cinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Hissár ... Hánsi Tahsíl ... ... 844 844 613 145 758 ... ... ... ... 2 Sirsa v A.vi B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years. PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. ESTABLISHMENT. Total Number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1876* (see note.) For three months end- ing 31st March 1877.viii Statement No. V.-Showing total number of primary and re-vaccinations performed and number inspected by Civil Surgeons and Native Supervisors or other inspecting officers the percentages of those inspected, together with the percentages of cases found successful by them as contrasted with the percentages reported by the vaccinators, in each district of the Punjab during the year 1893-94. NO. DISTRICTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF PERSONS VACCINATED. TOTAL NUMBER INSPECTED. PERCENTAGE OF INSPECTIONS OF TOTAL NUMBER VACCINATED. PERCENTAGE OF CASES FOUND SUCCESSFUL OF TOTAL NUMBER INSPECTED. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS REPORTED BY VACCINATORS. Primary. Re-vaccinations. By Civil Surgeons. By Native Supervisors or other inspecting officers. By Civil Surgeons. By Native Super- visors or other inspecting officers. By Civil Surgeons. By Native Super- visors or other inspecting officers. Primary. Re-vaccinations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary Re-vacc- nations. Primary. Re-vaccin- abions. Primary. Re-vaccin- abions. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. 1 Hissár... ... ... ... ... 17,282 4,091 1,200 70 14,762 3,187 6.94 1.71 85.42 77.90 97.00 20.00 96.00 20.00 97.84 22.32 2 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... 13,848 283 2,555 45 13,122 239 18.45 15.90 94.76 84.45 98.63 91.11 98.97 91.21 97.39 79.86 3 Gurgáon ... ... ... ... ... 20,658 805 9,500 400 14,954 502 45.99 49.69 72.39 62.36 80.00 7000 90.00 72.00 96.78 62.86 4 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... 17,778 631 445 64 12,575 273 2.50 10.14 70.73 43.26 98.42 82.81 98.96 99.01 97.65 75.75 5 Karnál ... ... ... ... ... 22,741 6,495 3,853 229 9,357 1,983 16.94 3.53 41.15 30.53 96.06 72.16 97.76 84 .71 97.24 57.12 6 Uniballa ... ... ... ... ... 20,852 6,081 757 53 13,767 2,848 3.63 0.87 66.02 46.83 97.48 81.13 98.24 42.45 93.01 32.31 7 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 341 618 ... ... *440 *917 ... ... *129.03 *148.38 ... ... 82.28 44.66 80.35 44.66 8 Kángra ... ... ... ... ... 20,818 275,844 734 2,025 6,440 53,922 3.53 0.73 30.93 19.55 94.28 86.56 96.28 89.35 95.39 44.84 9 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... ... ... 20,313 13,970 1,789 301 13,750 2,674 8.81 2.15 67.69 19.14 99.60 74.75 98.53 82.83 84.33 56.18 10 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 23,900 1,448 1,032 21 10,729 106 4.32 1.45 44.89 7.32 98.00 100.00 96.79 45.28 84.05 22.10 11 Ludhiána ... ... ... ... ... 15,665 8,748 3,566 1,216 14,125 6,902 22.76 13.90 90.17 78.90 99.55 23.85 96.80 32.08 69.21 19.74 12 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... 18,979 3,520 562 29 16,930 2.380 2.96 0.82 89.20 67.61 99.11 65.51 98.96 70.16 98.99 70.34 13 Mooltan ... ... ... ... ... 16,166 13,599 413 336 15,753 13,263 2.55 2.47 97.45 97.53 99.50 95.50 98.90 54.20 98.94 55.18 14 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... 8,526 3,363 954 68 4,919 845 11.19 2.02 57.69 25.13 98.95 17.94 99.96 39.53 98.69 34.70 15 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... 12,895 5,213 888 210 10,715 3,582 6.88 4.03 83.09 68.71 94.82 50.00 98.46 68.95 97.15 68.14 16 Lahore ... ... ... ... ... 26,652 4,414 14,627 1,313 20,439 3,056 54.88 29.75 76.69 69.23 91.70 36.30 94.30 41.50 93.66 40.89 17 Amritsar ... ... ... ... 30,899 16,197 5,961 2,286 24,701 8,081 19.29 14.11 79.94 49.89 99.38 86.13 99.52 80.80 97.83 67.27 Gurdáspur ... ... ... ... ... 22,024 23,000 2,721 4,993 9,749 9,441 12.35 21.71 44.27 41.05 99.00 70.00 99.00 69.00 97.16 59.46 la Siálkot ... ... ... ... ... 26,116 14,674 2,192 894 13,791 5,800 8.39 6.09 52.81 39.53 99.64 43.85 98.72 50.92 97.65 43.40 20 Gujrát ... ... ... ... ... 18,915 1,153 634 ... 17,063 508 3.35 ... 90.21 44.06 99.84 ... 98.53 54.33 95.55 60.19 21 Gujránwála ... ... ... ... ... 17,601 4,876 1,473 ... §17,988 §2,044 8.37 ... §102.20 §41.92 99.46 ... 96.33 38.96 86.51 32.10 22 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... 11,068 3,067 1,243 74 4,123 956 11.23 2.41 37.25 31.17 99.02 74.32 98.35 35.66 89.91 48.78 23 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 13,750 3,510 1,065 2 11,586 2.339 7.75 0.06 84.26 66.64 99.10 50.00 96.50 72.50 98.34 80.74 24 Ráwalpindi ... ... ... ... 17,136 3,304 1,211 370 10,468 321 7.07 11.20 61.09 9.72 99.42 67.84 98.99 37.07 97.12 65.04 25 Hazára ... ... ... ... ... 7,126 776 179 3 5,552 294 2.51 0.39 77.91 37.89 78.77 66.66 97.80 65.30 85.84 46.26 26 Pesháwar ... ... ... ... ... 14,626 2,689 1,410 321 9,814 2,126 9.64 11.94 67.10 79.06 98.10 96.82 97.64 90.04 96.43 89.07 Mardan subdivision ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 89.00 81.00 27 Kohát ... ... ... ... ... 3,771 242 100 132 3,037 96 2.65 54.55 80.54 39.67 100.00 91.68 98.15 86.35 97.75 83.06 28 Bannn ... ... ... ... 9,349 404 102 32 4,141 3 1.09 7.92 44.29 0.74 99.10 56.25 97.22 66.67 94.53 82.43 29 Dera Ismail Khan ... ... ... ... ... 20,038 3,876 620 28 2,841 603 3.09 0.72 14.18 15.56 91.61 71.42 96.36 58.70 95.80 61.71 30 Dera Gházi Khan ... ... ... ... ... 21,407 6,526 605 140 17,030 6,386 2.83 2.15 79.55 97.85 100.00 10.71 96.13 15.17 96.28 15.08 31 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... 8,949 507 3,775 350 8,314 503 42.18 69.03 92.90 99.21 81.08 89.42 99.02 95.82 98.58 85.60 Special Staff ... ... ... ... 58,963 35,446 ix APPENDIX A. Annual Vaccination Report of the Special Staff for 1893-94 by Surgeon-Captain C. H. JAMES, Officiating Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab. The past year has been a very successful one. The Vaccinators of the Special Staff, Punjab, have done 94,409 vaccinations, a total which is 19,113 in excess of the previous year, and many more than has been done in any year before. (See Table I.) TABLE I. Total of Vaccinations done by the Special Staff. Years. Primary Vaccinations. Re-vaccinations. Total. 1889-90 ... ... ... ... ... ... 61,017 10,121 71,138 1890-91... ... ... ... ... ... 50,266 22,852 73,118 1891-92 ... ... ... ... ... ... 43,979 28,030 72,009 1892-93 ... ... ... ... ... ... 49,336 25,960 75,296 1893-94 ... ... ... ... ... ... 58,963 35,446 94,409 This large increase is due to the fact that a very large number of vaccinations were done in Mandi and Chamba States by our Vaccinators. The Rájás of these States took a personal interest in vaccination, and one of them (the Rájá of Mandi) had his eldest son and two daughters vaccinated. It is needless to add that after this the people of these States were most anxious to have their children done. The Vaccinators have not been called away on any special duty (e. g., cholera) and have therefore been able to work continuously throughout the year. Last summer by the order of the Sanitary Commissioner (Surgeon Lieutenant- Colonel W. A. Crawford Roe) the Vaccinators of the Special Staff worked in a different way to formerly. They were divided into three groups;- two under Native Supervisors, and the third under a senior 1st class Vaccinator, who acted as Supervisor. In this way the Vaccinators were kept more or less together and were under better control. The advantages gained by this arrangement have been even greater than were anticipated. The men have been under much better supervision, and their work has, in consequence, been of a better quality. Fewer complaints have reached the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's Office from local authorities and villagers, and the Vaccinators have been able to work in 37 localities instead of only 31 as they did last year (see Table II). I cannot too strongly recommend the continuance of this arrangement. But in order to put it on a more permanent footing, it is necessary that another Native supervisor be appointed to take charge of the third group. TABLE II. Localities in which the Special Staff Vaccinators have worked during the year 1893-94. 1. Hánsi tahsil ... ... ... Hissar District. 2. Sirsa x 15. Anandpur town ... ... ... Hoshiárpur District. 16. Una tahsíl ... ... ... ... 17. Simla ... ... ... ... ... Simla xi 2nd Supply September 26th, to 31 Districts. Successful ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 Failed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Broken or not used ... ... ... ... ... 4 3rd Supply September 30th, to 31 Districts. Successful ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 Failed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 Not used ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 The only place which required a fourth supply was Jullundur. In consequence of the success of the supply this year the vaccination in the plains was started much earlier than usual. The weather was probably much better suited to the storing and transmis- sion of lymph last autumn than in the year before. During the cold weather 33 Medical Officers received lymph from the Amritsar depôt. Of these 21 were successful, 3 un- successful, and in 9 cases the results were not communicated. As the Medical Officers in the unsuccessful cases did not indent for more lymph, it is presumed they got lymph locally from the District Vaccinators.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1894-95. Price Re. 0-8-0 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: THE &quot;CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS. Contractors to the Punjab Government.. 1895.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1894-95. Published by Authority. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lohore: THE ''CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS, Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1895.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Depart- ment, No. 604 S., dated 15th August 1895. READ( 2 ) Paragraph 6. *1892-98 ... ... ... 515,639 1893-94 ... ... ... 520,189 1891-95 ... ... ... 592,992 Primary operations. ( 3 ) cow and buffalo are possible, and how far native feeling may prefer them to the more usual vaccinifers. The report of experiments in the use of donkey lymph are, as far as they go, very encouraging, and deserve a prolonged trial. Paragraph 16. 9. With regard to the diagram showing the death rates from small-pox with reference to the proportion of successful vaccinations for the years 1881-82 to 1894-95, the Lieutenant-Governor remarks that as the figures of mortality represented by the red lines are those of only a single year, and as the degree to which small-pox prevails in a particular district in a particular year is to a great extent the result of accidents, it would be unsafe to compare one single district with another. The only safe comparison that can be made is by comparing the most highly vaccinated districts, say the first 8 taken as a whole, with the remaining districts, and such a comparison will be seen to present a striking indication of the efficacy of vaccination as a preventive measure. Sir Dennis Fitzpatrick would suggest that in future years a blue line be added for each district showing the average mortality for the last five years. In comparing the blue lines with the black it would of course have to be borne in mind that the latter represent the state of things in the last year of the five years' period, but even allowing for this source of error, His Honor would say the comparison between the blue lines and the black would be more reliable than that between the red lines and the black. Paragraph 17. 10. In regard to the matter of vaccination in the Native States, His Honor observes that the circumstance of there having been 76,966 re-vaccinations in the Patiala State against only 57,535 primary vaccinations is one that requires looking into. It is to be hoped that the passive obstruction which the Raja of Keonthal has shown to the progress of vaccination in his State, which borders on the confines of Simla, will soon be surmounted. Paragraphs 18 and 19. 11. The Divisional Inspectors seem to have shown considerable activity in the number of cases inspected. His Honor is glad to see that the experiment, proposed by Dr. Roe, of using this agency for the checking of the work of the District Vaccination Staff, has proved so successful. The percentage of primary vacci- nations found successful (97 per cent.) is satisfactory, but only about 38 per cent. of re-vaccinations seem to have left distinct marks of success. There is much reason to fear that, in the past, statistics have often been vitiated by the promiscuous vaccination year after year of children, whose parents raised no objection, and perhaps also by the inclusion of fictitious names. His Honor is glad to notice that Dr. Roe is taking stringent measures to put a stop to such irregularities. 12. In conclusion, Sir Dennis Fitzpatrick desires to thank Brigade-Sur- geon-Lieutenant-Colonel W. A. C. Roe, Sanitary Commissioner, and Surgeon- Captain H. J. Dyson, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, for their respective reports and efficient supervision of the Department. ORDER.TABLE OF CONTENTS. Para. Subject. Page. Review of the Report of Government. 2 Strength of the Vaccination Establishment ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 Cost of the Department ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 Cost of each successful operation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 5 General results of vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 6 Work of District Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 7 Work of the Special Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 8 Work of Cantonment Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 9 Work of Dispensary Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 10 Vaccinations with animal lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Inspections by Sanitary Commissioner ... ... ... ... ... ib. 12 Inspections by Deputy Sanitary Commissioner ... ... ... ... ... ib. 13 Inspections by Civil Surgeons and District Supervisors ... ... ... ... ib 14 Places in which the Compulsory Vaccination Act was introduced ... ... ib. 15 Vaccination with donkey and goat lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 16 Small-pox diagram ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 17 Vaccination in Native States ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 18 Appointment of Divisional Inspectors and the work done by them ... ... ib. 19 The satisfactory work performed by the Divisional Inspectors ... ... ... 10 20 Instructions issued for verifying results of vaccination with the least possible trouble to the people ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. ANNUAL FORMS. I Showing particulars of vaccination in the Punjab during the year 1894-95. ii Appendix to Statement No. I showing the details of vaccinations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs according to localities during the year 1894-95 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... iv II Showing the cost of the Vaccine Department in the Punjab Province during the year 1894-95 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... v III Showing dispensary vaccinations in the Punjab Province during the year 1894-95 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... vi IV Comparative statement showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years ... ... ... ... ... vii V Showing total number of primary and secondary vaccinations performed, the number inspected by Civil Surgeons and Native Supervisors or other Inspecting Officers, the percentages of those inspected, together with the percentages of cases found successful by them as contrasted with the percentages reported by the vaccinators in each district of the Punjab during the year 1894-95 ... viii APPENDIX. A.No.27/1720 FROM BRIGADE SURGEON-LIEUT.-COL. W. A. CRAWFORD ROE, F.R.C.S., Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, To A. E. HURRY, ESQUIRE, C. S., Junior Secretary to Government, Punjab. Dated Lahore, the 1st July 1895. Sir, In submitting my remarks on the Annual Vaccination Statements for the year 1894-95, I have the honor to state that Surgeon-Captain James held the office of Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, up to 24th May 1894, after which date he was relieved by Surgeon-Captain Dyson, the permanent in- cumbent. Strength of the Vaccination Establishment. Average number employed. 1893-94. 1894-95. Native Supervisors ... ... ... 35 34 Vaccinators, I Class ... ... ... 43 43 Do., II 2 Staffs, there was an increase of Rs. 148 on account of travelling allowance and of Rs. 544 under contingencies. There was a decrease, however, of Rs. 79 under the cost of District and Cantonment establishments, so that the net increase was Rs. 613. The salaries drawn by the 6 Divisional Inspectors have not been shown in the cost statements submitted by the Civil Surgeons. But from a statement furnished by the Accountant-General it appears that these officials drew a sum of Rs. 3,550 from 1st October 1894 to 28th February 1895, and by adding this sum to the District and Cantonment Staffs the net increase comes to Rs. 4,163. Cost of each successful operation. 4. The average cost of each successful vaccination was one anna and nine pies* as compared with one anna and six pies during the preceding year. General results of vaccin- ation. 5. The total number of vaccinations performed by all establishments was 909,842 (500,879 males and 408,963 females). During the previous year the total operations amounted to 1,056,805 (581,597 males and 475,208 females), showing a decrease of 146,963 in 1894-95. The total primary vaccinations were 657,582 or 72,420 more than in the previous year. In the number of re-vaccinations performed by all establishments there was a decrease of 219,383. Work of District Staff. 6. The total number of vaccinations done by the District Staff was 817,346, of these 592,992 were primary and 224,354 secondary operations, the corresponding numbers for the previous year being 520,189 and 433,924, respectively, showing an increase of 72,803 in primary vaccinations, and a decrease of 209,570 in re-vaccinations in 1894-95. The decrease in secondary operations was most marked in the district of Kángra, in which the number fell from 275,844 to 119,941. The percentage of success in primary vaccinations was 93.75 and in re-vaccinations 47.32 against 94.21 and 47.23, respectively, during the previous year. The increase in primary operations was most noticeable in the districts of Gujrát, Jhelum, Hissár, Lahore, Ráwalpindi, Gurdáspur, Gujránwála, Shahpur, Siálkot, Jhang, and Ferozepore, in which it varied between 4,407 and 8,634. The results noted above show that the directions given to Civil Surgeons to discourage indiscriminate re-vaccination, and to have a larger number of primary vaccinations performed by their staffs were attended to. There were only two districts in which there was a large decrease in primary vaccinations, viz., in Jullundur (7,620) and in Dera Gházi Khan (3,414). The Civil Surgeon of Jullundur attributes the decrease to &quot; very severe sickness and high mortality among children last autumn.&quot; He adds that &quot; a great many children were so weak that vaccination would have endangered their lives or caused them much suffering and inconvenience.&quot; The decrease in Dera Gházi Khan district is said to be due to the prevalence of malarial fevers. The number of primary operations performed successfully on children under one year of age by the District Staff was 433,536 against 369,643 in 1893-94 and 387,749 in 1892-93. Work of the Special Staff. 7. The Special Staff performed 58,578 primary vaccinations and 24,657 re-vaccinations during the year, as compared with 58,963 and 35,446 respectively in 1893-94. The number of primary operations is almost the same in both years. The decrease in re-vaccination is stated by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner to be '' due in all probability to the stringent orders recently issued against the custom which was formerly in vogue of re-vaccinating Chamárs or low-caste children yearly to swell the numbers.&quot; The percentages of success in primary and secondary operations done by the Special Staff were 93.49 and 50.31 against 95.14 and 68.05 in 1893-94. Work of Cantonment Staff. 8. The Cantonment Staff vaccinated a total of 6,987 persons, i. e., 4,929 primary and 2,058 secondary vaccinations, the numbers for the previous year being 4,938 and 2,213, respectively. The percentage of primary cases successfully vaccinated was 96.19 against 94.67 in 1893-94, and re-vaccinations 66.86 against 67.65. * Note.Diagram showing the Death rates from Small-Pox during the year 1894-95 and the proportion of successful Vaccinations during the years 1881-82 to 1894-95, per 10,000 of Population in each District of the Punjab, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Black lines indicate the proportion of successful vaccinations per 10,000 of Population during the years 1881-82 to 1894-95.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
3 Work of Dispensary Staff. 9. The number of persons vaccinated by the Dispensary Staff was 2,274, of which 1,083 were primary vaccinations and 1,191 re- vaccinations. In 1893-94 the Dispensary Staff performed only 1,072 primary and 60 re-vaccinations, thus showing an increase of 1,142 in the total number performed in 1894-95. Of the 1,191 re-vaccinations performed during the year under review, 996 were done in Simla, with a percentage of 38.96 of success. Vaccinations with ani- mal lymph. 10. The number of operations done with animal lymph in the Province was 798,151 out of 909,842, or 88 per cent. of the total operations. Vaccination inspections by Sanitary Commissioner. 11. I inspected vaccination work in some of the Hill States of Simla during the months of September and October 1894, and during January, February and March 1895 I saw the work done in the districts of Siálkot, Gurdáspur, Amritsar and Kángra. The , results of my inspections are given in the following statement :4 Vaccination in Native States. 17; The subjoined statement shows the number of vaccinations, with results, performed in the large Native States from which returns were received together with those performed in Kurram:5 Re-vaccinations. Divisions. Inspectors. Total. 6 5 4 3 2 1 distinct or 2 indistinct. No mark. Percentage of suc- cess. Delhi ... ... Nihál Chand ... ... 1,582 129 89 60 295 195 156 658 49 Jnllundur ... ... Saltán Ahmad ... ... 613 71 27 30 50 44 36 355 36 Lahore ... ... Dev Ráj ... ... ... 444 46 13 32 41 26 48 238 35 Ráwalpindi ... ... Nizám Dín ... ... 365 23 4 10 14 28 16 270 22 Pesháwar ... ... Gbulám Mohai-ud-dín ... 132 3 1 4 44 19 17 44 54 Deraját ... ... Basant Rám ... ... 945 83 39 45 72 23 9 674 28 Total ... 4,081 355 173 181 516 335 282 2,239 ... Percentage of marks to total number inspected ... 9 4 1 13 8 7 55 ... The very serious defects in the work of the District Vaccination Staff brought to light by the Inspectors have proved beyond doubtA.ii A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1894-95. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vaccinat- ed per 1,000 of population. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF PERSONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINATED DURING PREVIOUS FIVE YEARS. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DUR- ING PREVIOUS FIVE YEARS. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year and under 6 years. Total of all ages. Primary. Re-vaccination. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 24,926 16,212 7,754 23,966 826 275 96.15 33.29 31.25 20,430 26.33 297 0.38 14,905 11,375 3,211 14,586 1,351 1,020 97.86 75.50 26.43 15,256 25.84 141 0.24 21,637 16,138 3,592 19,730 220 130 91.19 59.09 29.69 19,933 29.80 432 0.65 18,605 14,769 3,405 18,174 596 368 97.68 61.74 29.19 16,425 25.86 79 0.12 22,745 16,398 5,475 21,873 9,867 4,929 96.17 49.95 39.20 18,951 27.72 654 0.96 19,926 13,907 3,972 17,879 4,489 1,387 89.73 30.90 19.61 20,710 21.08 627 0.64 566 220 185 475 404 219 83.92 54.21 19.69 697 19.78 16 0.45 20,780 16,256 3,845 20,101 119,941 55,852 96.73 46.57 100.01 64,368 84.76 13 0.02 22,610 17,336 2,570 19,906 10,879 5,892 88.04 54.16 25.50 35,232 34.83 156 0.15 16,280 11,749 811 12,560 510 152 77.15 29.80 14.26 22,796 25.57 166 0.19 15,709 10,219 2,235 12,454 4,005 680 79.28 16.98 20.25 16,955 26.14 315 0.49 23,386 13,670 6,685 22,355 4,455 2,149 95.59 48.24 28.44 25,198 29.25 405 0.47 19,076 16,133 2,713 18,896 769 413 99.06 53.71 1.10 28,145 45.33 43 0.07 13,602 11,119 2,302 13,421 2,851 899 98.67 31.53 32.78 12,387 28.36 7 0.02 11,146 9,084 1,881 10,965 3,459 1,783 98.38 51.55 25.52 16,202 32.44 298 0.60 33,993 25,839 4,712 30,551 14,902 3,809 89.87 25.56 32.55 28,228 26.74 336 0.32 32,842 28,010 4,627 32,637 12,892 9,527 99.38 73.90 42. 55 47,519 47.95 230 0.23 28,003 20,243 6,580 26,823 15,528 8,842 95.79 56.94 37.91 39,050 41.51 154 0.16 31,443 25,578 5,300 30,878 2,763 941 98.20 34.06 28.96 34,258 31.18 423 0.38 27,549 22,323 4,211 26,534 379 187 96.32 49.34 35.12 20,650 27.14 140 0.18 23,470 18,932 1,484 20,416 3,524 1,496 86.99 42.45 31.75 20,533 29.76 41 0.06 16,604 12,482 2,622 15,104 1,618 767 90.97 47.40 32.16 12,706 25.74 104 0.21 21,490 18,940 2,093 21,033 1,278 994 97.87 77.78 36.36 19,554 32.28 70 0.12 23,594 17,069 3,885 20,973 1,634 866 88.89 53.00 25.84 22,319 26.40 174 0.21 7,113 5,557 694 6,253 463 139 87.91 30.02 13.43 7,388 15.52 85 0.18 14,556 6,629 6,610 13,317 688 597 91.49 86.77 20.73 13,667 20.36 619 0.92 4,076 2,334 1,555 3,931 459 251 96.44 54.68 21.95 3,913 20.54 126 0.66 10,879 6,412 4,021 10,533 147 69 96.82 46.94 28.66 8,484 22.93 397 1.07 23,095 7,903 14,267 22,170 1,257 535 95.99 42.56 47.06 14,299 29.64 94 0.19 17,993 11,654 5,559 17,213 939 121 95.66 12.89 43.35 18,177 45.46 24 0.06 10,393 7,046 3,190 10,236 1,261 866 98.49 68.67 29.13 11,158 29.28 60 0.16 58,578 37,905 13,080 54,765 24,657 12,404 93.49 50.31 ... 64,038 ... ... ... 651,570 471,441 135,126 610,708 249,011 118,559 93.73 47.61 35.48 719,626 3,501 6,726 0.33 NOTE.iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to localities, during the year 1894-95. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 No. DISTRICTS. Name of localities. Average number of vac- cinators employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Total. Successfu/. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One year and under six years. Total of all ages. The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Hissár ... Bhiwáni Tahsíl ... 3,173 3,168 2,563 266 2,830 5 2 ... ... 2 Sirsa v A.vi B.-DISPENSARY VACCINATION. Statement No. IIIvii Comparative Statement No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Punjab in each of the undermentioned official years. PERSONS PRIMARILY VACCINATED. ESTABLISHMENT. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH. 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1876* (see note). For three months end- ing 31st March 1877.viii Statement No. V.-Showing total number of primary and re-vaccinations performed and number inspected by Civil Surgeons and Native Supervisors or other inspecting officers, the percentages of those inspected, together with the percentages of cases found successful by them as contrasted with the percentages reported by the vaccinators, in each district of the Punjab during the year 1894-95. No. DISTRICTS. TOTAL NUMBER OF PERSONS VACCINATED. TOTAL NUMBER INSPECTED. PERCENTAGE OF INSPECTIONS OF TOTAL NUMBER VACCINATED. PERCENTAGE OF CASES FOUND SUCCESSFUL OF TOTAL NUMBER INSPECTED. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS REPORTED BY VACCINATORS Primary. Re -vaccinations. By Civil Surgeons. By Native Supervisors or other inspecting officers. By Civil Surgeons. By Native Super- visors or other inspecting officers. By Civil Surgeons By Native Super- visors or other inspecting officers. Primary. Re-vaccinations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. Primary. Re-vaccin- ations. 1 Hissár ... ... ... ... ... 24,926 826 913 17 20,973 513 3.66 20.6 84.14 62.11 97.04 41.18 98.00 35.48 96.15 33.29 2 Rohtak ... ... ... ... ... 14,905 1,351 3,185 55 10,070 699 21.37 4.07 67.56 51.74 96.89 63.64 97.87 77.97 97.86 75.50 3 Gurgáon ... ... ... ... ... 21,637 220 6,500 66 17,309 132 30.04 30.00 80.00 60.00 74.77 60.61 80.00 68.18 91.19 59.09 4 Delhi ... ... ... ... ... 18,605 596 388 44 12,213 258 2.09 7.38 65.64 43.29 97.42 59.09 98.76 67.83 97.68 61.74 5 Karnál ... ... ... ... ... 22,745 9,867 1,942 684 9,738 2,473 8.54 6.93 42.81 25.06 97.68 97.51 94.42 41.73 96.17 49.95 6 Umballa ... ... ... ... ... 19,926 4,489 1,016 ... 13,270 1,759 5.10 ... 66.60 39.18 98.92 ... 97.36 44.00 89.73 30.90 7 Simla ... ... ... ... ... 592 1,400 ... ... 592 1,400 ... ... 100.00 100.00 ... ... 83.45 43.36 83.92 54.21 8 Kángra ... ... ... ... ... 20,803 119,941 849 377 7,992 18,567 4.08 0.31 38.42 15.48 93.88 71.88 94.69 87.27 96.73 46.57 9 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... ... ... 22,627 10,902 2,597 690 13,114 1,634 11.48 6.33 57.96 14.99 99.96 39.13 98.97 81.82 87.85 54.15 10 Jullundur ... ... ... ... ... 22,731 588 487 5 5,720 80 2.14 0.85 25.16 13.61 98.15 20.00 97.47 53.75 77.15 29.80 11 Ludhiána ... ... ... ... ... 20,349 6,513 4,325 1,168 12,931 1,860 21.25 17.93 63.55 28.56 99.01 33.82 99.39 67.26 79.28 16.96 12 Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... 23,391 4,955 1,051 203 20,398 1,787 4.49 4.09 87.20 36.05 94.77 79.31 99.51 86.68 95.59 48.24 13 Mooltan ... ... ... ... ... 19,076 769 ... ... 8,650 ... ... ... 45.34 ... ... ... 99.26 ... 99.06 53.71 14 Jhang ... ... ... ... ... 14,237 2,949 1,370 280 3,887 660 9.62 9.49 27.30 22.38 99.27 31.78 99.69 42.57 98.67 31.53 15 Montgomery ... ... ... ... ... 11,146 3,459 1,015 193 9,580 2,297 9.11 5.58 85.95 66.41 97.44 63.21 98.64 65.30 98.38 51.55 16 Lahore ... ... ... ... ... 34,769 15,080 11,097 538 23,034 10,112 31.92 3.57 66.25 67.06 91.40 57.62 95.96 27.54 89.87 25.56 17 Amritsar ... ... ... ... ... 32,846 12,874 72 51 14,592 5,081 0.22 0.40 44.43 47.23 100.00 100.00 99.91 82.82 99.38 73.90 18 Gurdáspur ... ... ... ... ... 28,003 15,528 8,133 3,488 12,117 6,346 29.04 22.46 43.27 40.86 97.87 55.93 98.05 52.00 95.79 56.94 19 Siálkot ... ... ... ... ... 32,238 3,067 1,751 ... 21,730 900 5.44 ... 67.41 29.34 99.43 ... 98.80 47.22 98.20 34.06 20 Gujrát ... ... ... ... ... 27,549 379 1,357 3 16,907 67 4.93 0.79 61.37 17.68 96.61 ... 98.47 65.67 96.32 49.34 21 Gujránwála ... ... ... ... ... 23,479 3,524 1,262 124 14,630 265 5.38 3.52 62.31 7.52 95.96 81.45 98.60 53.96 86.99 42.45 22 Shahpur ... ... ... ... ... 16,604 1,618 974 83 9,222 595 5.87 5.13 55.54 36.77 99.38 84.34 97.80 63.36 90.97 47.40 23 Jhelum ... ... ... ... ... 21,509 1,278 1,117 75 18,603 1,143 5.29 5.87 86.49 89.44 98.84 66.67 98.22 83.20 97.87 77.78 24 Ráwalpindi ... ... ... ... ... 23,594 1,634 1,119 543 12,942 1,533 4.74 33.23 54.85 93.82 98.30 60.59 98.65 79.39 88.89 53.00 25 Hazára ... ... ... ... ... 10,630 984 ... ... 5,978 110 ... ... 56.24. 11.18 ... ... 99.30 85.45 87.91 30.02 26 Pesháwar ... ... ... ... ... 9,259 326 1,059 203 4,485 262 11.14 62.30 48.40 80.30 95.40 90.10 94.30 93.10 91.49 86.77 Mardán sub-division ... ... ... ... 5,888 496 ... ... 1,344 193 ... ... 22.83 38.91 ... ... 94.64 77.20 27 Kohát ... ... ... ... ... 4,076 459 11 110 3,396 260 0.27 23.97 83.32 56.64 90.91 91.82 91.49 78.46 96.44 54.68 28 Bannu ... ... ... ... ... 10,879 147 182 74 3,686 43 1.67 50.34 33.88 29.25 97.80 36.49 97.59 65.12 96.82 46.94 29 Dera Ismail Khan ... ... ... ... 23,096 1,257 438 340 6,925 689 1.90 27.05 29.98 54.81 86.30 45.29 98.17 35.85 95.99 42.56 30 Dera Gházi Khan ... ... ... ... 17,386 762 588 ... 16,171 619 3.38 ... 93.01 81.23 99.66 ... 99.27 13.89 95.66 12.89 31 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... 10,393 1,261 4,758 323 9,209 913 45.78 25.61 88.61 72.40 92.85 64.09 98.99 67.91 98.49 68.67 Special Staff ... ... ... ... ... 58,578 24,657 *1,068 *134 33,096 13,193 1.82 0.54 56.50 53.51 98.31 97.01 93.81 56.02 93.49 50.31 Total ... 668,472 254,156 60,627 9,871 394,504 76,443 9.07 3.88 59.02 30.08 93.79 58.23 96.94 62.91 93.74 47.58 * NOTEix APPENDIX A. The Annual Vaccination Report of the Special Staff, Punjab, for the year 1894-95, by H. J. DYSON, F.R.C.S., Surgeon-Captain, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab. Number of operations performed by the Special Staff. I returned from leave in May 1894, and took over the post of Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, from Surgeon-Captain. James, I. M. S., on the 25th of that month. During the year 1894-95 the Special Staff performed 58,578 primary operations and 24,657 re-vaccinations, yielding a total of 83,235, against 58,963 primary and 35,446 re-vaccinations, giving a total of 94,409 in the year 1893-94. There is a decrease, therefore, of 11,174 during the current season. The decrease is most marked in the number of re-vaccinations. This decrease in re-vaccinations is due in all probability to the stringent orders recently issued against the custom, which was formerly in vogue, of re-vaccinating chamárs and low-caste children yearly to swell the numbers. The number of primary operations is almost identical in both the two seasons. I had anticipated a considerable increase in primary operations during the past season, but the Vaccinators were employed for five months in the Hill State of Keonthal, and during that period were able to vaccinate only 5,053 persons. They met with constant passive obstruction in this State. The proximity of the State of Keonthal to Simla, owing to the large majority of its inhabitants being unprotected, is a grave and standing menace to the health of that station. An attempt will again be made during the present season to induce the Rája of Keonthal to insist on his people being properly vaccinated. Animal lymph. 2. 79,796 operations were performed with animal lymph during the year 1894-95, against 76,704 in the preceding season, showing an increase of 3,092. Out of the total of 79,796, 1,206 operations were performed with donkey lymph and 3 with goat lymph. Donkey lymph. 3. Donkey lymph has now been used for the last five years by the Special Staff and yields very satisfactory results. It is only employed where it is found that the high caste Hindús refuse to use buffalo lymph. It is most readily accepted in the towns and villages to the west of Delhi. As Hindustán proper is approached it is found that the Hindús consider the donkey to be an unclean animal and refuse to be vaccinated from it. Goat lymph. 4. I have been unable to carry out any series of experiments with goat lymph owing to my constantly moving about. It is not easy to raise a stock of goat lymph, and in the Punjab, where buffalo lymph is being so readily accepted, there appears to be no great necessity for its employment. Inspections by the Deputy Sanitary Commis- sioner. 5. 1 inspected 1,068 primary operations and 134 re-vaccinations, total 1,202. The number inspected is not great, but during the whole of the cold weather vaccinating season I was busily engaged in examining the health of towns and villages by means of the spleen test. This report has been sent to the Sanitary Commissioner. The detail of the people inspected is as follows : With 6 cicatrices ... ... ... = 735 Primary vaccinations. x Changes in the Special Staff. 8. Devi Dyál, 3rd class Vaccinator, was transferred at his own request to the staff of the Gujránwála district. Siri Chand, an English-speaking Middle pass man, was appointed in his place. 2nd class Vaccinator Lál Chand was granted one year's furlough from the 20th of August 1894, and Khushál Singh, 3rd class Vaccinator, officiated for him, and a probationer of the name of Khazán Singh was appointed on Rs. 5 per mensem. The appointment of this probationer involved no extra expenditure to Government. Punishments. 9. In April 1894 Partáb Singh, 2nd class Vaccinator, who was adversely reported on by the Civil Surgeons of Abbottabad and Ludhiána, was fined Rs. 2. Jawáhar Lál, 2nd class Vaccinator, was fined 4 annas for bad work. Muhammad Sharíf, 1st class Vaccinator was fined Re. 1, and Shah Muhammad, 2nd class Vaccinator, with Ghulám Rasúl, 3rd class Vaccinator, were fined 8 annas each for irregular work in the Fázilka tahsíl. Udho Rám and Mának Chand, both 3rd class Vaccinators, were fined Re. 1 each; and Khazán Singh, officiating 3rd class Vaccinator, was fined 8 annas for falsifying returns in the Jullundur district. Places in which the Special Staff worked. 10. The Special Staff carried out work in 28 localities ; a list of them is noted as below :xi It would make a report on the working of the Animal Lymph Depôt more complete if indenting officers would return the counterfoils. Chamárs and small-pox. 12. Under the present system of registration the castes of people who die from small-pox is not shown. I would beg to suggest that in the case of any death from small-pox the caste of the person should also be shown, for, owing to the steady vaccination which has gone on for years amongst Chamárs, Mehtars and low-caste people, one might reasonably expect to find hardly any mortality from small-pox among them. If this proceeding were adopted some evidence could be obtained as to the protective value of vaccination.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1895-96. BY BDE.-SURGEON-LIEUT.-COL. W. A. CRAWFORD ROE, F.R.C.S., D.PH., CAMB., Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PriceREPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1895-96. BY BDE.-SURGEON-LIEUT.-COL. W. A. CRAWFORD ROE, F.R.C.S., D.PH., CAMB., Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: THE &quot;CIVIL AND MILITARY GAZETTE&quot; PRESS, Contractors to the Punjab Government. 1896.
Proceedings of the Hon'ble the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, in the Home (Medical and Sanitary) Department, No. 693 S., dated Simla, the 19th of August 1896. READ The Sanitary Commissioner's Report on Vaccination in the Punjab for the year 1895-96. REMARKS.2 the Province. But in three districts, viz. Lahore, Amritsar and Jhang,3 Statement V. The statement shows a very large difference in the number of operations each vaccinator does in different districts, the average per man being as high as 6,300 and 6,201 in Ráwalpindi and Gurdáspur, and as low as 1,603 and 1,500 in Delhi and Kohát respectively; the figures for Simla are still lower, but the district is an exceptional one. The high averages seem in some instances to be largely swollen by re-vaccinations. Thus in Ráwalpindi there were one-third more re-vaccinations than vaccinations, and in Gurdáspur re-vaccinations exceed- ed vaccinations in number. But as the percentage of success in re-vaccinations was as high as 76.58 in Ráwalpindi and reached 50.27 in Gurdáspur,* it would appear that they had not been indiscriminately performed. * Appendix A, page ix. There seems reason to fear that in some districts like Bannu and Gurgaon the necessity for judicious re-vaccination may have somewhat been lost sight of. Dr. James in his report remarks* that the orders against re-vaccination in some cases had the effect of preventing vaccinators from doing any re-vaccina- tion at all. This was not intended, and care should be taken that re-vaccinations, wherever necessary, are performed. Paragraph 15. 6. With reference to the falling-off in the number of operations performed by the Special Staff, the Deputy Sanitary Commis- sioner explains in his report that frequent calls on the Special Staff dislocated their work and necessitated their spending time, which they would otherwise have spent in work, in travelling. The Special Staff were also employed in places in going over again tracts of country, where small pox was prevalent, which had already been vaccinated, but regarding which there were doubts as to whether the vaccinations had been as complete as possible, and this naturally decreased the number of cases done by them. Paragraph 18 and Statement B III. 7. In regard to dispensary vaccination, the Lieutenant-Governor observes that in only 12 out of 31 districts did the Dispensary Staff perform any vaccinations The number of vaccinations this year is better distributed over the various districts than last year, but much more might be done in dispensaries. The reason given for so little having been done by the officers in charge cannot be consdered satisfactory or creditable to them. Paragraphs 20.21. 8. The blue line in the diagram exhibiting the death-rate from small-pox and the proportion of successful vaccinations should show, in future, not the average annual mortality from small-pox for the previous five years, but the average annual death-rate from that disease per 10,000 of population for the period indicated. As the diagram is now prepared it is difficult to see from it at a glance the remarkable contrast that the best vaccinated districts and the other districts present, but from working out the figures it appears that for the years 1890-91 to 1894-95 the average death-rate from small-pox per 10,000 in the 12 best protected districts (Kángra to Gujránwála in diagram opposite paragraph 20 of Report) has been 1.3, while in the 19 other districts it has been 4.5. Paragraph 25. 9. With reference to the desirability of the use of animal lymph, it is to be regretted that the Sanitary Commissioner finds that the difficulty in obtaining buffalo calves for vaccination purposes is increasing. In spite of this difficulty, however, buffalo lymph seems to be making very satisfactory progress ; for with a generally increas- ing number of vaccinations the percentage of vaccinations from animal lymph has been steadily rising for the last three years, and is now what it was in 1892-93. The figures are 4 Paragraphs 26TABLE OF CONTENTS. Para. Subject. Page. 1 Review of the report of government ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Strength of the Vaccination Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 3 Cost of the Department ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 4 Cost of each successful case ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 5 Total vaccinations performed by the different branches of the establishment ... 2 6 Number of successful primary vaccinations performed ... ... ... ... ib. 7 Decrease in re-vaccinations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 8 Work of District Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 9 Reason for introducing uniform system of carrying on vaccination in the Province ib. 10 Instructions issued to Civil Surgeons ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 11 Result of vaccinations performed under the new system fairly satisfactory ... 3 12 Inspection work of Civil Surgeons ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 13 Inspection work performed by the Divisional Inspectors ... ... ... ... ib. 14 Inspections by Sanitary Commissioner, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Civil Surgeons, Divisional Inspectors and District Native Supervisors ... ... ib. 15 Work of the Special Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 16 Vaccination work in Hill States ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 17 Work of Cantonment Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 18 Work of Dispensary Staff ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 19 Vaccination in large Native States ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 20 Annual numbers of successful vaccinations and the annual rates of deaths from small-pox per 1,000 of population for five years ending 1895-96 ... ... ... 6 21 Blue lines added to small-pox diagram ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 22 Vaccination done under Compulsory Vaccination Act ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 23 Dr. James' notes on vaccination in relation to small-pox ... ... ... ... ib. 24 Experiments on goat or kid lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 25 Difficulty of obtaining buffalo calves for vaccination purposes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 26 Reasons on the use of vaseline paste lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... ib. 27 The superiority of vaseline paste over every other kind of lymph demonstrated 8 28 Proposal to introduce vaseline paste in the Province in future ... ... ... ... ib. 29 The services of Drs. Bamber and James in the cause of vaccinations brought to notice of Government ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 ANNUAL FORMS. 1 Showing particulars of vaccination in the Punjab during the year 1895-96 ... ii Appendix to Statement No. I. showing the details of vaccinations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs according to localities during the year 1895-96 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... iv
ii TABLE OF CONTENTSMEMO. OF ERRATA. 1. Page 1, para. 3, line 5, instead of Statement No. 1, read Statement No. II. 2. Page 4, para. 14, line 13, read 657773 instead of 675773. 3. Page 6, para. 21, lines 2 and 7 omit the words &quot; per 1000 of population.&quot; 4. Page 6, para. 22, line 1, read Appendix G instead of Appendix F. 5. Page 6, para. 22, in marginal heading, read Statement G instead of Statement F. 6. Appendix G, Town Rohtak, in column Number of notices issued, read 217 instead of 211. 7. Appendix G, Town Murree, in last column, read 14th December 1893 instead of 14th December 1894. 8. On page XV, Appendix A, expunge column marked &quot; Days &quot; from table.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PUNJAB FOR THE YEAR 1895-96. As Sanitary Commissioner and Superintendent-General of Vaccination, I directed the work of the Vaccination Department throughout the year, assist- ed by Surgeon-Captain H. J. Dyson, from 1st April 1895 to 14th, August 1895; Surgeon-Major M. O'Dwyer, from 15th August 1895 to 6th October 1895; and by Surgeon-Captain C. H. James, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, from 7th October 1895 to 31st March 1896. The strength of the Vaccination Staff. 2. The strength of the Vaccination Staff in 1895- 96 is compared below with that of 1894-95 :2 The total vaccinations performed by the different branches of the establish- ment. 5. As directed in paragraph 2 of Punjab Government Review of the Vaccination Report for 1894, the number of vaccination operations performed by the different branches of the Vac- cination Department is shown in Statement No. I. The total number of primary vaccinations and re-vaccinations performed by all establishments in 1895-96 was 923,175 compared with 909,842, an increase of 13,333 operations over those in the preceding year. Of the total numbers operated upon during the year, 527,973 were males and 395,202 females, or in the proportion of 134 males to every 100 females. The number of success- ful primary vaccinations performed. 6. There were 645,846 primary cases returned as successful, against 616,456 in the previous year, giving a percentage of success of 93.10 as compared with 93.75. Of the total suc- cessful primary vaccinations, 487,217 were performed upon infants under one year of age, 153,692 upon those of over one and under six years, and 4,937 upon children of six years and over. Decrease in re-vaccina- tions. 7. There has been a falling-off in the number of re-vaccinations in 1895-96 as compared with those in 1894-95, (the numbers being 229,431, against 252,260) due to orders recently issued against the practice of indiscriminate re-vaccination. District Staff Vaccination. Vaccination work by distrcts. 8. The total number of primary operations performed by the District Staff was 624,896, compared with 592,992 in the previous year, and the number of re-vaccinations 204,832 as against 224,354, showing an increase of 31,904 under &quot;Primary&quot; and a decrease of 19,522 under &quot; Re-vaccinations &quot;. In the districts of Jullundur, Hoshiárpur, Ferozepore and Jhang there was a very considerable increase in the number of primary vaccinations, while in the districts of Jhelum, Kángra, Dera Ismail Khan and Pesháwar the amount of work done was much below that of 1894-95. In all the remaining districts, with few exceptions, the numbers were either slightly above or slightly below those of the previous year. Reasons for introducing a uniform system of carrying on vaccination in the Pro- vince. 9. Since the amalgamation of the Vaccination with the Sanitary Depart- ment in 1881, no systematic method of carrying on vacci- nation has been in force. During my winter tours for the pass two years I have paid particular attention to this matter, and found that the manner in which it has been worked varied greatly in different districts. Sometimes Civil Surgeons allowed Native Supervisors to allot the work amongst the Vaccinators; others allowed the Vaccinators to work in pairs in different parts of the district; while in other places all the Vaccinators worked at the same time in one locality or tahsíl. On comparing the Lambardárs' lists with those of the Vaccinators', and examining the children brought before me for inspection, I was able to confirm some of the irregularities that were brought to my notice last year by the Divisional Inspectors, and was satisfied as to the truth of what they reported, viz., returns falsified, children returned as successfully vaccinated when they were not, the signatures of the Native Supervisors on the lists either illegible or entered in pencil, &c. In some of the districts I found that the Native Supervisors were actually ignorant of the whereabouts of their men, or, if they knew, were perfectly indifferent as to whether they were really working or gone to their homes. The latter is a very common practice amongst Vaccinators who are employed in districts close to their villages; they take every opportunity of running away, without leave, to their homes, and coming back after a few days with the excuse that they were engaged in vaccinating a buffalo calf for the purpose of obtaining lymph. The instructions issued to Civil Surgeons on the subject. 10. As it was necessary to put a stop to such irregularities, the only way that suggested itself to me was to introduce a uniform system of carrying on vaccination operations in the Pro- vince, and, after consultation with several Medical Officers,
3 I issued the following Circular to all Civil Surgeons in September 1895, for their information and guidance :4 Inspection work of Civil Surgeons. Districts. In 1894-95. In 1895-96. Mooltan ... ... ... 3,895 Amritsar ... ... 123 3,450 Jullundur ... ... 492 2,489 12. In last year's review of the Vaccination Report, His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, in paragraphs 3 and 6, observed that special notice should be taken of the inspection work of the Civil Surgeons, and I am able to report that the inspections made this year by the majority (vide Statement No. V) are much more satisfactory. The inspections made by the Civil Surgeons of Jullundur, Amritsar and Mooltan, which were unfavorably noticed by His Honor in last year's reviw, are satisfactory this year, as the figures in the margin show, and excellent work was done in this respect by the Civil Surgeons of Ferozepore, Ráwalpindi, Muzaffargarh,Gurdáspur and Gurgáon, as will be seen from the under-noted figures. Ferozepore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19,664 Gurdáspur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,997 Rawalpindi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,542 Gurgáon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,486 Muzaffargarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,682 On the other hand, the Civil Surgeons of Hazára, Lahore, Hissár, Delhi, Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan did little or nothing in this respect. No inspection was made by the Civil Surgeon of Hazára, and 98 inspections only were made in Lahore. With regard to Hazára, the Civil Surgeon makes no reference in his report to his inspection work, but Mr. Bunbury, the Deputy Commissioner of Hazára, in forwarding the report, observes :5 recommend the appointment of Inspectors in every Division of the Province, as those already employed have done such good work in every respect. Special Staff. Work of the Special Staff. 15. The Special Staff performed altogether 79,305 operations, compared with 83,235 in 1894-95, a decrease of 3,930. This de- crease occurs under &quot; Re-vaccinations,&quot; and the falling-off is clearly and satisfactorily explained in the Deputy Sanitary Commissioner's Report (Appendix A) as being due to the orders against indiscriminate re- vaccinations, and particularly to the extra work thrown upon the staff owing to the fact of small-pox being epidemic in the Province, as these men were frequently called on to assist District Vaccinators in combating the disease. Vaccination work in the Hill States:6 Statement showing the number of vaccinations performed in the large Native States from which returns were received, together with those performed in Kurram, NATIVE STATES. Total number vac- cinated. PRIMARY VACCINA- TIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccin- ated. Patiála ... ... ... ... 98,845 61,096 57,094 37,749 15,288 93.45 40.50 Baháwalpur ... ... ... 9,388 9,060 8,339 328 206 92.04 62.80 Kapurthala ... ... ... 7,408 7,261 7,191 147 81 99.04 55.10 Nábha ... ... ... ... 3,835 3,835 . 3,551 ... ... 92.59 ... Jínd ... ... ... ... 6,488 6,079 6,079 ... ... 100.00 ... Farídkot ... ... ... ... 3,636 3,502 3,308 134 66 94.46 49.25 Kurram ... ... ... ... 3,037 2,995 2,954 42 20 98.63 47.62 Annual number of suc- cessful vaccinations and the annual rates of deaths from small-pox per 1,000 of population for five years ending 1895-96. 20. In accordance with Government of India, Home Department, Cir- cular No. 3/8796 (Sanitary), dated 16th June 1893, and paragraph 2 of Government of India No. 284, dated the 5th October 1895, forwarded with Punjab Government en- dorsement No. 442, dated 6th November 1895, the compa- rative statement showing the annual number of successful vaccinations and the annual ratios of deaths from small-pox per 1,000 of popula- tion for the five years ending 1895-96, district by district, is given as Appendix F. Blue lines added to the small-pox diagram. 21. In the small-pox diagram a blue line has been added for each district showing the average mortality per 1,000 of population for the last five years, as directed by His Honor the Lieutenant- Governor in paragraph 9 of the Review on the Vaccination Report for last year. It will be seen that in those districts (notably Kángra, Simla, Dera Gházi Khan and Gurdáspur) in which vaccination is comparatively more effectually carried out, the deaths from small-pox per 1,000 of population during the past five years has been very small as compared with the mortality in other districts in which vaccination is not so well done. Statement F, showing vaccinations done under the Compulsory Vaccination Act, as directed by Govern- ment of India No. 284, dated 5th October 1895. 22. In Appendix F is given the statement ordered by the Government of India in their letter No. 284, dated 5th October 1895, showing the vaccinations done under the Compulsory Vac- cination Act in certain municipalities in this Province. The figures in the statement appear to me to be inaccurate, the returns having been compiled in the offices of Civil Surgeons, but as I have no means of checking them, I refrain from making any observations this year. Dr. James' notes on vac- cination in relation to small-pox. 23. Dr. James, in paragraph 11 of his Vaccination Report, observes :Diagram showing the Death-rates from Small-Pox during the year 1695-96 and the proportion of successful Vaccinations during the years 1881-82 to 1895-96, per 10,000 of Population in each District of the Punjab. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
7 country like India, where religious prejudices are wide spread and difficult to combat, it is very desirable to ascertain what substitutes for the cow and buffalo are possible, and how far native feeling may prefer them to the more usual vaccinifers.&quot; With regard to the use of goat lymph, Dr. James writes :8 has already had influence in the case of several high caste Hindu Rajás, who have willingly allowed it to be used. It also possesses the advantage of remaining fairly solid at a moderately high temperature and not spilling when the tube is opened for use, and it seems to preserve the lymph for a considerable time at full strength. Both Drs. Bamber and James speak very highly -of it, and as I have also seen numerous vesicles produced by it, I can fully confirm all these officers have said, having inspected many children and adults vaccinated with it. It will be seen from Dr. Bamber's Report that it costs about half the amount now spent on fresh buffalo calf lymph, while its efficacy is equal, if not superior, to the latter. Further, the animals from which the lymph is taken are selected, num- bered, registered and watched from first to last, so that everything about them is known and any bad results can be traced; and, lastly, it at once puts an end to all trouble in obtaining calves in the districts, as Vaccinators can take their full supply with them at starting, and far more work can be done by them, as has been shown by the number of operations performed in the Ráwalpindi District; but, as has been pointed out by Dr. James, its chief disadvantage lies in the fact that to ensure success it must be prepared with the greatest care. It was the knowledge of this which made me stipulate with Dr. Bamber that he must prepare it with his own hands with every bacteriological precaution, and to his care in carrying out the conditions is most certainly due the great success which has followed. To collect, prepare and mix the vaccine required for 36,500 cases means physical labour of no ordinary kind, but the results have been well worth it; and there is no doubt that its success has been secured by the care and patience displayed in carrying out the work and in attention to detail. The superiority of vase- line paste over every other kind of lymph de- monstrated. 27. His Honor's remarks that &quot; it is very desirable (on the ground that in a country like India, where religious prejudices are wide- spread and difficult to combat) to ascertain what substi- tutes for the cow and buffalo are possible, and how far native feeling may prefer them to the more usual vaccini- fers &quot; have been carefully borne in mind, and so far as we are able to judge, the system now produced has been very favourably received by all classes. In 1893, when advocating the adoption of the method, I summed up its advantages under the following heads :9 lymph ; and at present I am of opinion that those existing at Murree and Amritsar -will be suitable, only managed and worked under a totally different system, and I think that districts which are provided with lymph may fairly be called upon to pay towards the maintenance of the depôts, the supply of calves, tubes and apparatus. So far as I can judge, there will be a large saving financially in all districts where this lymph is used, and Surgeon-Captain James is preparing a full account of how the depôts must be worked, with an approximate statement of the saving that will be effected in the general cost of the Department. The services of Drs. Bamber and James brought to notice of Government. 29. In conclusion I beg leave to bring to the notice of Government the very valuable assistance I have received from Surgeon-Major Bamber, as this office has at the cost of much time and personal labor done everything in his power to make the experiments successful, and his work will undoubtedly be of the great- est value to this Province. To Surgeon-Captain James my thanks are also due for the willing and energetic manner in which he has worked and assisted me at all times, and I trust that the services of these officers in the cause of vaccination will meet with the recognition of Government. W. A. CRAWFORD ROE, F.R.C.S., D.Ph., CAMB., BDE.-SURGN.-LIEUT.- COLONEL, Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab.
A.ii A.iii DEPARTMENT. in the Punjab Province during the year 1895-96. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES. Persons successfully vac- cinated per 1,000 of po- pulation. AVERAGE AN- NUAL NUMBER OF PERSONS SUCCESS- FULLY VACCINA- TED DURING PREVIOUS FIVE YEARS. AVERAGE ANNUAL NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM SMALL-POX DUR- ING PREVIOUS FIVE YEARS. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year and under six years. Six years and over six years Total of all ages. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccina- tion. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 23,289 15,736 7,196 ... 22,932 1,304 707 98.47 54.22 30.47 20,987 27.05 333 0.43 16,967 12,459 3,206 3 15,668 607 355 92.34 58.48 27.14 15,288 25.89 143 0.24 20,863 14,015 3,534 2 17,551 62 32 84.13 51.61 26.29 19,278 28.82 405 0.61 18,378 13,318 4,034 536 17,888 869 755 97.33 86.88 29.35 16,789 26.43 115 0.18 23,409 16,601 5,246 285 22,132 9,207 5,497 94.54 59.70 40.41 21,457 31.39 647 0.95 20,799 15,487 3,186 ... 18,673 2,900 1,196 89.78 41.24 20.23 20,746 21.12 828 0.84 233 102 67 20 189 909 394 74.70 43.34 16.54 729 20.68 16 0.45 17,795 14,043 3,233 1 17,277 6,297 3,445 97.09 54.71 27.29 58,809 77.44 12 0.02 28,588 22,522 5,454 ... 27,976 24,937 15,296 97.86 61.31 42.77 33,664 33.28 122 0.12 24,6761 16,897 1,702 84 18,683 13,791 3,753 75.71 27.21 25.17 20,553 23.06 164 0.18 15,564 10,522 2,140 ... 12,662 5,865 1,159 81.35 19.76 21.31 15,893 24.50 319 0.49 28,114 17,274 9,148 524 26,946 16,890 11,801 95.85 69.87 41.98 25,209 29.26 367 0.43 19,679 14,712 4,215 ... 18,927 6,833 3,820 96.18 55.91 36.64 26,840 43.24 44 0.07 18,881 14,206 4,413 ... 18,619 1,068 583 98.61 54.59 43.96 11,843 27.11 16 0.04 11,328 11,932 1,887 ... 13,819 5,045 2,572 96.45 50.98 32.82 13,582 31.20 203 0.41 37,195 28,717 5,104 .. 33,821 2,903 1,344 90.93 46.30 33.31 29,042 27.48 250 0.24 32,697 25,520 3,992 244 29,756 9,560 5,499 91.01 57.32 35.58 11,439 44.84 181 0.18 30,158 20,565 8,780 ... 29,315 38,060 19,134 97.30 50.27 51.53 38,736 41.17 101 0.11 34,037 25,972 7,562 102 33,636 1,470 520 98.82 35.37 31.09 33,505 30.49 241 0.22 27.880 22,160 4,730 176 27,066 4,599 2,490 97.08 54.14 38.85 21,093 27.72 108 0.14 22,944 19,015 1,065 26 20,106 8,090 3,575 87.63 44.19 34.32 20,112 29.15 32 0.05 17,118 12,542 3,443 43 16,028 2,422 1,277 93.63 52.73 35.06 13,148 26,61 122 0.25 15,269 12,795 1,616 308 14,719 917 653 96.40 71.21 23.38 20,475 33.80 86 0.14 25,596 18,773 5,591 21 24,385 37,436 28,669 95.27 76.58 62.77 22,387 26.49 159 0.19 8,211 4,986 1,907 ... 6,893 277 202 83.95 72.92 14.90 7,157 15.03 66 0.14 12,724 5,383 5,945 45 11,373 358 311 89.38 86.87 17.40 14,585 21.73 580 0.86 5,399 2,394 2,264 240 4,898 601 413 90.72 68.72 27.88 4,093 21.48 131 0.69 11,258 5,505 3,126 ... 10,631 33 12 94.43 31.29 28.77 9,359 25.30 382 1.03 20,516 8,886 11,014 .. 19,900 923 373 97.00 40.32 42.02 17,897 37.10 237 0.49 20,610 10,674 8,670 50 19,394 501 164 94.10 32.73 48.91 18,402 46.02 15 0.04 11,701 7,598 3,813 84 11,500 94 57 98.28 60.64 30.33 11,365 29.82 51 0.13 624,896 441,311 139,288 2,794 583,393 204,832 116,058 93.36 56.66 34.03 649,443 31.60 6,476 0.32 61,708 41,814 12,118 1,786 55,718 17,597 9,013 90.29 51.22 ... 64,806 ... ... ... 4,858 2,694 1,589 321 4,604 6,015 4,546 94.77 75.58 53.52 6,143 35.93 3 0.02 2,282 1,398 697 36 2,131 987 509 93.38 51.57 ... 2,077 .. ... ... 693,744 487,217 133,692 4,937 645,846 229,431 130,126 93.10 56.72 37.44 722,469 34.76 6,479 0.31 the Sanitary Report for 1894.
iv APPENDIX TO STATEMENT No. I. Statement showing the details of the Vaccination Operations performed by the Special and Cantonment Staffs, according to localities, during the year 1895-96. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 No. DISTRICTS. Names of localities. Average number of Vaccina- tors employed throughout the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINA- TION. PERCENT- AGE OF SUC- CESSFUL CASES. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. One year and under six years. Six years and over six years. Total of all ages. Primary. Re-vaccination The vaccinations performed by the Special Staff are included in Statement No. I. 1 Hissár ... Hánsi Town and Tahsíl 21 5,266 4,813 3,525 664 117 4,306 453 166 ... ... 2 Rohtak ... Gohána V A.vi B.vii Comparative Statement No. IV.viii Statement No. V.ix APPENDIX A. The Annual Vaccination Report of the Special Staff for the year 1895-96 by Surgeon- Captain C. H. JAMES, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab. The Deputy Sanitary Commissioners. The office of Deputy Sanitary Commissioner was held by Surgeon-Captain H. J. Dyson from the beginning of the vaccination year (April 1st) to August 14th, 1895, and by Surgeon-Major O'Dwyer from August 15th to October 6th. I relieved Dr. O'Dwyer on October 7th, and have held charge since that date. Work done by the Special Staff Vaccinators. 2. The Special Staff Vaccinators performed 79,305 vaccinations during the year 1895-96. Of this number 61,708 were primary operations and 17,597 were re-vaccinations. There is a decrease of 3,930 on the total number of vaccinations performed in the previous year, when 83,235 people were vaccinated by the Special Staff. The decrease is entirely in re-vaccinations. Last year 24,657 re-vaccinations were done as against 17,597 this year, a decrease of 7,060. On the other hand, the primary vaccinations have risen from 58,578 last year to 61,708 this year, an increase of 3,130. This is the largest number of primary operations ever done by the Special Staff. The falling-off of re-vac- cinations is due to the &quot; stringent orders ' issued by my predecessor against indiscriminate re-vaccinations.* He found that a large number of unnecessary re-vaccinations were being performed in order to swell the numbers in the returns. The orders given had such an effect on the Vaccinators that, at one time, I found they were doing no re-vaccinations at all. In fact, they ran from one extreme to the other. They were, therefore, directed to re-vaccinate wherever it was necessary, and reminded of the Lieutenant-Governor's order that a second vaccination was permitted seven years after the first.x for a Vaccinator, and when he arrived, found there was no work for him, and sent him back without his having done a single operation. I should therefore like to ask Medical Officers in future to be careful not to send for men unless they are really required. When a Vaccinator is moved from one district to another it makes a break of nearly a week in his work, as each time he has to prepare a fresh stock of lymph from capillary tubes or glass slides. Three Vaccinators were either absent without leave or under suspension from 28th October to 16th December, a time when their services were most needed. They have since been severely punished by the Sanitary Commissioner. (See paragraph 7 of this Report). These are the chief reasons which have caused a decrease in the number of vac- cinations performed during the year. TABLE No. I. Statement showing the different kinds of lymph with which vaccination operations were performed during 1895-96 by the Vaccinators of the Special Staff, Punjab, as well as percentages of success of each kind. Kind of lymph used. PRIMARY. SECONDARY. PERCENTAGES OF SUCCESS exclud- ing unknown cases IN REMARKS. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Primary. Secondary. Buffalo calf ... 53,512 1,394 4,320 59,226 7,706 3,604 4,293 15,603 97.46 68.13 Vaseline ... 2,016 22 141 2,179 1,164 269 138 1,571 98.93 81.23 This includes vase- line lymph supplied both by Dr. Bamber and also from Amrit- sar Depôt. Donkey .... 94 4 17 115 ... ... ... ... 95.92 ... Goat (kid) ... ... 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 00 ... Human ... 96 6 84 186 143 57 223 423 94.11 71.50 Total ... 55,718 1,428 4,562 61,708 9,013 3,930 4,654 17,597 97.50 69.64 Kinds of lymph used. 3. Table No. I gives the details of the work done with the various kinds of lymph, together with the percentages of successes. I have excluded from the latter the results which are &quot; unknown&quot; as I found that when these were added they made the percentages absurdly low. For instance, more than half the results of the human lymph are unknown. This would therefore make the percentage of primary successful vaccinations only 51.61 which is obviously- much below the actual amount. I have therefore only taken the percentage of known cases. Buffalo calf lymph. The greater part of the work has been done with buffalo calf lymph which gives very fair results, 97.46 primary and 68.13 re-vaccinations being successful. Vasseline lymph paste. Three thousand seven hundred and fifty vaccinations have been performed with vaseline lymph paste, which was introduced by Doctor Bamber with 98.93 per cent. primary and 81.23 per cent. re-vaccinations successful. This is a wonderfully high average of successes. I shall refer to this lymph again in paragraph 9. Donkey lymph. One hundred and fifteen vaccinations have been performed with donkey lymph chiefly in the Fázilka tahsíl. The results have been 95.92 per cent. successful. This year only primary vaccinations have been carried out with this lymph. It will be seen that the results are not quite as good as with buffalo calf and vaseline lymph, but better than with human lymph. But the number is too small for definite conclusions, and as only one Vaccinator (Anant Ram II) used donkey lymph, too much depends on the individual efficiency of the Vaccinator for purposes of comparison. However I saw some of the results and was quite satisfied that, should this kind of lymph be required as a substitute for other kinds, it could always be used, but I am not prepared at present to state whether it is better or worse than buffalo calf lymph. Kid (goat) lymph. Dr. Dyson submitted a report on his experiments on kid lymph. The results are not at all encouraging. Only 3 out of 5 goats &quot; took&quot; after vaccination and 2 children vaccinated from these were unsuccess- ful. In 1890, seven people are stated to have been vaccinated with &quot; goat or sheep &quot; lymph (see Vaccination Report of that year). But no details are given. I presume, as the practice
xi was not continued, that these animals were found to be a failure. I have myself vac- cinated or had vaccinated by an experienced Vaccinator no less than 10 kids. They all failed. This may be due to some detail of technique, of which I am ignorant. But in 1893, when staying in Abbottabad, I vaccinated a donkey, a buffalo-calf, a monkey and a kid. Doctor Nelis kindly inspected the cases for me. As the kid was the only animal that did not take, I came to the conclusion that it was not a very reliable animal to use as a vaccinifer. However, I cannot help appreciating Surgeon-Captain Moir's work in Calcutta. He has several times vaccinated kids successfully though he is unable to vaccinate one kid from another. In my experiments on kids I used human, buffalo calf, lanoline and vaseline lymph in turn, and both puncture and scarification with a scarifier were unsuccess- fully tried. The children and buffalo calves, which were used to prove the efficacy of the lymph, &quot; took&quot; in every case. The results therefore seem to me to be far from encouraging. Human lymph. Only 609 operations were performed with human lymph, giving 94.11 per cent. primary and 71.50 re-vaccinations successful. Human lymph is being used less and less every year on account of its obvious dis- advantages. But a few operations are still necessary for the purpose of &quot; renewing &quot; the lymph when it begins to get weak, as it does, if it is only passed through buffaloes. Inspections made by the Deputy Sanitary Commis- sioner. 4. The total number of inspections made by the Medical Officers who held the post of Deputy Sanitary Commissioner during the year amount to 9,424 people. Of these 4,055 were people vaccinated by the Special Staff, and the remainder by the District Staff. The details of the former are given in the following table:xii Changes in the Special Staff. 6. The only changes which have taken place in the Special Staff have been (1) Lál Chand (2nd class Vaccinator) returned from one year's fur- lough which caused Khushál Singh to revert to 3rd class, and Officiating Vaccinator Khazán Singh to be discharged; (2) Ghulám Rasúl went on three months' leave without pay, an Officiating Vaccinator Núr Alam was temporarily entertained in his place. In neither of these cases was the Government put to extra expense. Punishments. 7. The following punishments have been inflicted during the year :xiii One of Dr. Bamber's experiments, I think, should be mentioned, as it shows that this vaccine is as good as the Mysore lanoline lymph which is supposed to be the best in India. On December 4th 8 children were vaccinated on each arm in three places. The upper insertion was made with Dr. Bamber's vaseline lymph prepared on November 21st (13 days previously), the next place was inoculated with lanoline lymph paste prepared by Dr. Bamber also on November 21st (13 days old) from the same buffalo calves which gave lymph for the vaseline lymph. The third place on each arm was vaccinated with Mysore lanoline lymph prepared on November 26th (8 days old). 1 inspected 7 of these children (the other child did not come up for inspection), and found that all the vaseline lymph vaccinations had taken well, and 14 vesicles had been produced. Eleven of the lanoline lymph paste made by Dr. Bamber had taken, while 3. places had failed, and only 9 of the Mysore lanoline lymph vaccinations had &quot; taken &quot; and 5 failed. To make more sure of this I repeated the experiment at Amritsar. The only difference being that I used Calcutta lanoline lymph instead of lanoline lymph made by Dr. Bamber. On February 24th, 7 children were vaccinated in three places on each arm. The highest place was vaccinated with Dr. Bamber's vaseline lymph, dated 15th January 1896 (i.e., 40 days old). The middle insertion was made with Mysore lanoline lymph, dated 6th February 1896 (18 days old), and the lowest with Calcutta &quot;lanoline vaccine paste&quot; dated 21st February 1896 (3 days old). The vaseline and the Calcutta lymph each gave 9 vesicles and the Mysore lymph 8 vesicles. On the same date a buffalo calf was vaccinated with the same three supplies of lymph. On the right side five scratches were made and Calcutta lymph inserted. This &quot; took&quot; well. On the left side five similar scratches were made and vaseline lymph inserted. This took in every place. On the inner side of both the thighs and on the permium and scrotum scratches were made (5 in all) and Mysore lymph inserted. This failed in every case., It will be noticed that the vaseline lymph, after being kept 40 days, acted as well as Calcutta lanoline lymph which had just been received and was only. 3 days old, and better than Mysore lanoline lymph which was 8 days old. From what I have seen I have come to the conclusion that vaseline lymph has the following advantages over fresh lymph:xiv The only disadvantage which I know of against all these advantages is that the new vaccine requires much more careful preparation than the older kinds. The Animal Lymph Depôt. The animal lymph depôt. 10. From 12th April to October 13th, 1895, the animal lymph depôt was stationed at Murree, and from October 15th, 1895, to March 31st, 1896, at Amritsar. Summer supply of lymph. While the depôt was at Murree 51 indents for lymph were received. Pure lymph both human and from buffalo calves stored in capillary tubes, as has hitherto been the custom in the Punjab, was sent out. 22 supplies gave successful results. 10 xv Town. Serial No. Name of child and parentage. Caste. Sex and age. Nature of attack. Remarks. Male or female. Years. Months. Days. Akálgarh Tahsíl Wazírabad, District Gujránwála. 1 Fazal Dín, son of Lahna .. Muhammadan Male ... 0 3 12 Slight The child was vaccinated the day previously to small-pox appearing. xvi Now to go to the 108 cases of small-pox examined by me for signs of successful vaccination. Of these 73 had certainly never been vaccinated, 27 had been vaccinated, and in 8 cases the persons affected were stated to have been vaccinated; but after careful search I could find no marks. However, as there is an element of doubt in these cases, I have omitted them from the following deductions. Among 100 people affected, 73 per cent. had never been vaccinated, and of these 26 had the disease mildly, 22 had a moderate attack, i.e., neither severe nor very mild, in fact, had the disease in a typical form. The remaining 23 had the disease severely, and 10 of these in the &quot; confluent &quot; form (one was a case of &quot;malignant small-pox,&quot; there being hæmorrhages into the vesicles. The child died shortly after I saw it). This grouping is done simply on observations made at one visit, and is cheifly taken from the character of the rash. I, of course, had no opportunity of watching the disease throughout. I could only see the cases when passing through affected villages. And I have also been unable, up to the present, to get the number of deaths. But so far as my observations go, they show that among the unvaccinated this year about one-third had the disease mildly, one third had it severely, and the remaining one third had the disease in a form which we may call &quot;moderately&quot; for want of a better term. Turning to the vaccinated cases, I find that 23 out of the 27, or 85 per cent., had the disease in a mild form ; 2, or 7 per cent., had a moderate attack ; and 2, or 7 per cent., had the disease in a severe form. From this we see that not only does vaccination protect most people against small-pox, but also that those who afterwards contract the disease, 85 per cent. get only a mild attack. Some of these were so mild that I have recorded in my notes that &quot; only a few spots appeared.&quot; Of the 2 cases which had the disease badly, one had been vaccinated 23½ years ago, and the others 7½ years ago. Looking at these cases from another point of view, 1 child (already noted in the table) got the disease a year after vaccination, 2 after 3 years, 2 after 5 years, 1 after 6 years, 4 after 7 years, 2 after 9 years, 1 after 10 years, and the remaining 11 after 11 years. I have not recorded dates in 3 cases, but as the children were all over 8 years of age, it is probable that they were all vaccinated more than 7 years ago. Omitting these last cases, we may make three groups; (1) those vaccinated within the last 5 years, when buffalo lymph has been exclusively used in the districts under consideration; (2) those between 5 and 7, when they may or may not have been vaccinated with buffalo calf lymph, and, lastly, those over 7 years, who must have been vaccinated with human lymph. In the first group we have 3 cases; all had the disease very mildly, and in two the notes record that the marks were very indistinct. In the third case the character of the marks is not stated. I therefore presume they were distinct. In the second group (between 5 and 7 years since vaccination) 2 cases had the disease very mildly (only a few spots in each case), one had a moderate rash, and the third had a severe attack. In every case the marks of vac- cination are stated as being &quot;faint &quot; or &quot;very faint.&quot; After this date the attacks from small-pox get more frequent, but as all acknowledge that re-vaccination becomes necessary after this time, and as the vaccinations were done with human lymph, the efficacy of which few will contest, I need not go into details. I think I may safely draw the conclu- sion that buffalo calf is protective for some time from the fact that I have seen many cases of small-pox and found only 3 cases which got the disease after vaccination with buffalo calf lymph, and these were all probably badly vaccinated as shewn by the indis- tinctness of the marks, and yet all had the disease very mildly. Perhaps my strongest point is the following. I visited 23 houses where there was small-pox present, and noted what other children were living in the same buildings, and whether or not they had been vaccinated. I found 78 children altogether, of whom 40 had, some time or other, been vaccinated; only 2 got small-pox. Of the remaining 38 who had not been vaccinated, 28 got the disease, and only 10 escaped. In one house 1 child out of 6 had not been vaccinated. It got the disease, and the rest escaped. In another house 1 out of 5 children had not been vaccinated, and was the only one who contracted the disease. In a third house, that of a Khatri Sikh, none out of 5 children had been vaccinated. They all got small-pox. When I first started inspecting cases of small-pox, I did not take notes, and even afterwards my notes were not very complete. All these cases have been eliminated for want of sufficient and exact information. Those recorded afterwards were taken in the order seen by me. I have used no other selection except those mentioned in the preceding paragraphs. I had no intention at first of publishing these cases, but the in- formation seems to me so definite, and as people have expressed doubts as to the efficacy of vaccination among natives, I have thought it necessary to give my results. There is nothing new about the investigations, except, perhaps, that they have not before been applied to buffalo-calf vaccination. This, I believe, is the first direct investigation that has been attempted to determine the prophylactic power of buffalo calf lymph, and it is very consoling to find that we are using so powerful and effective an agency to protect us from a disease justly dreaded as being one of the worst ills to which the human race is liable.
APPENDIX B. Report on Vaseline Vaccine by Surgeon-Major BAMBER, I.M.S., Civil Surgeon, Ráwalpindi. The present method of vaccination is by taking lymph directly from the buffalo- calf. The drawbacks to this are the large number of calves required, and the delay of six days caused from the date of inoculation to the date on which the vesicles are ready. The villagers object to their buffalo-calves being inoculated, and then being taken about; another disadvantage is that people do not like seeing the lymph being taken from the buffalo-calf, not a particularly inviting looking object. This is especially felt by the Hindús. Some years ago vaccination with preserved lymph was introduced into Germany. Since then it has been carried out in India both in Mysore and Bengal. The substances used to preserve the lymph have been glycerine and lanoline. Glycerine is used in Berlin and lanoline in Bengal and Mysore. The reason that vaseline has been introduced by the writer as the preservative, is that it is a mineral substance, which does not decompose, and is therefore preferable to glycerine or lanoline, both of which are animal substances. The latter point would especially affect the susceptibilities of the Hindús. White vaseline which is used in the preparation of vaseline vaccine by the author is refined from ordinary yellow vaseline, it is odourless, does not turn rancid and melts at the body temperature. In Bactereology vaseline is used to prevent evaporation in humid chambers under the microscope. It acts in the same way when mixed with particles of any animal substance. After having thought of vaseline, the question to be settled was whether it would have a deleterious effect on the lymph or whether it would preserve the lymph for some length of time of unimpaired strength ? What first determined the writer to introduce preserved lymph into the Ráwal- pindi District was the trouble there was in procuring calves and the delay in commencing vaccination in any village where small-pox broke out. As soon as notice was received of an outbreak of small-pox, a 'Vaccinator was sent to the spot with a little fresh lymph, with this he vaccinated a child which was ready in a week to provide lymph, from which a buffalo-calf was inoculated. This calf was ready at the end of six days to provide lymph for the community. One sees that in this way there must be a delay of thirteen days before general vaccination takes place. Now, with preserved lymph the day the man arrives he can begin vaccinat- ing and can go on only being limited by the supply he has brought with him. On the 9th September 1895, Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Roe, the Sanitary Commissioner, was written to on the subject and he stated that he had no objection to vaccination with preserved vaccine being carried out in the Ráwalpindi District, if Surgeon- Major Bamber would prepare the vaccine with his own hands. This was agreed to, but it was not then foreseen the amount of labour that would be required before a rapid means of preparing the vaccine would be evolved. On the 19th October 1895, the first experi- ments with vaseline were commenced. The first thing to determine was what effect the vaseline would have on the vaccine. A buffalo-calf A1, aged about one month, which belonged to the Civil Hospital, was -taken. This was inoculated with vaccine taken from a healthy child about three months old. The method of inoculation was that carried out in Mysore, for a description of which Surgeon-Major Bamber was indebted to a paper read by Assistant-Surgeon Palpu, at the Indian Medical Congress. This method was afterwards partly modified, and Brigade- Surgeou-Lieutenant-Colonel Roe afterwards sent a copy of a letter he sent in 1893, to the Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, detailing the method used at the Vienhof in Berlin for vaccinating calves. The method used in the case of buffalo-calf A1 was as follows :xviii vesicles of the child, was introduced. The lancets used were previously sterilised in the- flame of a spirit-lamp. To prevent the calf from licking the lines a collar was applied. On the 24th October, the sixth day from the date of inoculation, the vesicles were found to be fit for inoculation. The calf had been seen regularly in the interval and found to have passed through the usual succession of symptoms that an inoculated calf does. On the 24th October a healthy buffalo-calf A, aged six months, was inoculated from calf A1. There were only four of the lines in calf A1 that had taken successfully. From these lymph was taken and inoculated into sixteen lines in calf A in an exactly similar manner to that previously described. On the 30th October buffalo-calf A was inspected, and it was found that thirteen of the sixteen lines had taken, and vesicles had formed. These were well washed with soap and water afterwards with sterilised water. They were kept moistened with a warm sterilised towel. All the thick crusts having been removed with sterilised forceps and scalpel, the vesicles were scraped off the skin, without causing bleeding, with a sterilised scalpel, and put into a sterilised cover glass, which was covered with another cover glass, these were all weighed together in same scales. The mass of vesicles weighed 6 grains. These were pounded up in a sterilised agate mortar till they became broken up into a well disintegrated mass. To the above, 24 grains of white vaseline, which had been sterilised by heat in a test tube, was added. The whole was thoroughly mixed and put away in a small wide-mouthed glass-stoppered bottle which had been previously sterilised by heat. This bottle was labelled &quot;vaseline vaccine calf A, October 30th, 1895.&quot; This is the original vaseline vaccine which was kept and found to be of perfect strength, and without the least unpleasant odour, two months and a half afterwards. A buffalo-calf B was inoculated from two of the vesicles of calf A in the same way as before, except that mercurial lotion was not applied as it was thought that this might prevent the vesicles from forming in large numbers. But it has since been found that it does not inhibit them, and it is now always used as a certain means of destroying any foreign microbes that might be on the surface of the vesicles, and not have been removed by the soap and water. To return from this digression : calf B had longitudinal scratches made on the abdomen on both sides of the udder, those on the right were inoculated with lymph from the two unused vesicles, those on the left with, the lymph and serum that oozed from the scraped lines. One cross-shaped scratched patch was made. Into this some of the vaseline vaccine that stuck to a scalpel which was used to put the vaseline vaccine into the bottle, was rubbed. On the 5th November calf B was examined ; all the lines were found to have taken except two. The cross-shaped patch had not taken well. On the left side of the udder six or seven vesicles had appeared where no lines had been made, they were probably caused by some lymph, accidently implanted on some places where the skin had been scraped by the razor in shaving the hair. These vesicles were washed as before, but no mercurial lotion applied. The mass of vesicles together with some of the serum that flowed out were weighed as before, and amounted to 10 grains, this was pounded and mixed, as before, with 40 grains of vaseline, and put in a bottle labelled &quot; vaseline calf B, November 5th,1895.&quot; This has been kept, but was only used to vaccinate two children on one side only (the other having been vaccinated with fresh lymph) on the l6th, as it was found to have an unpleasant odour, all the vaccinated spots were successful, and the vesicles looked better than those on the other arm done with fresh lymph. From this calf B another buffalo-calf C was inoculated with twenty-two lines. On the 9th November Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colenel Roe came to Ráwal- pindi to see the experiments and to suggest anything that might occur to him from what he had seen in Berlin. He also kindly brought a mill that is used in Berlin for crushing the vesicles, and also the glass tubes used for distributing the vaccine. The mill was only once used, as it can only be used when a fluid such as glycerine is employed as the preservative. The tubes are now being used for distributing vaseline vaccine and are undoubtedly better than the pots used in Mysore. Surgeon-Captain James, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, accompanied Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Roe, and he remained at Ráwalpindi some time to see the first experiments carried out. The table and glass case, a photograph of which is attached to this Report, were suggested, the table by Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Roe, from one seen by him at Berlin, and the glass case partly by Surgeon-Captain James. On this day a buffalo-calf D was inoculated, as before, with 11 longitudinal lines radiating forward from the udder and eight punctures on the udder and perineum, vaseline vaccine from calf A of 30th October 1895 was applied. Three children Haro, Ishro and Faqir, who had never been vaccinated and were aged two years, six: months and nine months, respectively, were vaccinated on both arms in three places on each arm. The arms were first washed and sterilised and scratches made, into each of which the vaseline vaccine of 30th October was rubbed.
xix The above experiments were made to see whether the vaseline vaccine after an in- terval of ten days was still as good as ever. On the 10th November another series of calves was started as the previous lymph had passed through three buffalo-calves, and was considered to have deteriorated after this to be used again without being first passed through a child. A buffalo-calf (alif) was inoculated as before with lymph from a Kashmíri child, Khanon. On 15th November calf D, which was inoculated on the 9th November with vaseline vaccine, was examined. Out of eleven lines on the abdomen eight had taken, but the vesicles- had been rubbed and spoilt, out of the eight punctured scratches seven had taken, but only five vesicles remained intact. Of the three children vaccinated on the 9th, Haro had five vesicles for six places, Ishro had four vesicles for six places, Faqir had three vesicles for six places. The results in the calf and these three children show that vaseline does not modify the lymph and keeps it from deterioration for ten days. On the same day experiments were carried out to find the difference between fresh lymph from a buffalo and the vaccine that had been preserved with vaseline since the 30th October, that is 16 days. Four unvaccinated children were taken and were inoculated on the left arm with fresh lymph taken from calf D and on the right arm with the vaseline vaccine of October 30th. Different lancets were used and were first heated in the flame. (1). Feroze, son of Ghulám, Kábulee Pathán, age 7 months. Healthy, arms washed, scratches made in three places on both arms, blood just drawn. (2). Alt Bahádur, son of Nádir, aged 7 months. Healthy, treated same as above. (3). Zahra, daughter of Amínullah, aged 14 months. Treated same as above. (4). Shahbáz, son of Ján Gul, aged 12 years. Previously inoculated in infancy. A buffalo-calf E, aged 12 months, horns 3 inches long, was inoculated with lymph from calf D in four lines and four punctures on the left side of the abdomen and with vaseline vaccine of October 30th in four lines and four punctures on the right side of the abdomen. The results of these experiments were known on the 20th Novemberxx The 9 grains taken for the vaseline was finely ground in a sterilised agate mortar, and to it was added 36 grains of sterilised white vaseline. This was also put into another sterilised glass bottle with a glass stopper. The 9 grains taken for the lanoline was also finely ground in a sterilised agate mortar, and to it was added 54 grains of sterilised neutral lanoline. This was also put into another sterilised glass bottle like the others. These three bottles were kept together and were not used until December 4th, a fort- night from the date on which the vaccines in them were made. This time was allowed to elapse so as to test the preservative properties of the several mixtures. It was now intended to vaccinate unvaccinated children with them, making three places of inoculation on each arm. The contents of the bottle containing the glycerine vaccine was found to have putre- fied and moulds were growing inside the bottle. The contents of the other two bottles were quite unaffected and odourless. This result confirmed what was found in Mysore and Bengal that the glycerine failed to preserve the vaccine. On the 2nd December a pot of lanoline vaccine had been received from Bangalore in good condition, it was stated to have been made on the 26th November; as the glycerine vaccine had already failed, it was determined to compare the effect of the Mysore lano- line vaccine with the vaseline and lanoline vaccine made by the author on the 21st November. The Mysore lanoline vaccine had the advantage of being five days fresher, but the disadvantage of a warm journey by post. Seven children were vaccinated in three places on each arm in the shape of a triangle. In each case the upper place was vaccinated with vaseline vaccine. The front place with lanoline vaccine made here. The back place with Mysore lanoline vaccine. The children's names and the results found on the 10th December by author and Surgeon Captain James were as follows :xxi (2). Mungtu,aged two-and-a-half years, unvaccinated previously.xxii This is the sketen of tne lancet of the exact size. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] On the 2nd December, a buffalo-calf &quot; a&quot; was inoculated in the usual way with lanoline vaccine received from Mysore; sixteen lines were made. On the 7th December, all the lines were found to have taken. The vesicles Were removed after the usual precautions and weighed 19 grains, to these 76 grains of white vaseline were added, and treated as before. The vaccince when ready was packed in 8 tubes. These tubes were distributed as follows:xxiii No. 11xxiv The advantages of vaseline over glycerine and lanoline are better results in pro- ducing vesicles, a much greater preservative action, and being a mineral substance, much more acceptable to the natives of India than either lanoline or glycerine. Before closing this Report I wish to thank Brigade-Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Roe for allowing me to introduce vaseline vaccine into my district. Also Surgeon-Captain James, Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, for assisting me, and lastly, for the valuable assistance I have received throughout from Assistant-Surgeon Bhugwan Dass (II) in charge of the Ráwalpindi Civil Hospital. C.J. BAMBER, SURGEON-MAJOR, I.M.S., Civil Surgeon, Ráwalpindi.
No. I. REGISTER OF BUFFALO-CALVES VACCINATED FOR VASELINE VACCINE
xxvi No. I. Register of Buffalo-Calves vaccinated for Vaseline Vaccine. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Serial No. Date of inocula- tion. Name of owner. Age, months. Number of teeth. Length of horns. Colour. Number of lines or spots. Source of lymph. Amount of vesicles. Date of collection. Number of tubes. Amount of hire paid. REMARKS. Rs. a. P. 1 1st January 1806... Muhammad Núr, of Rutta... 3½ 7 1&quot; White ... ... ... ... 15 lines and 5 spots ... C. calf of 16th November 1895 ... ... 3¼ grains, 6th January 1896. 5 3 0 0 2 Do. ... Do. do. ... 1 6 ½&quot; Black ... ... ... ... 12 xxvii 16 23rd January 1896, Jíwan, Ghumár, of Rutta ... 4 8 1½&quot; Black ... ... ... ... 16 1inse ... ... ... Vaseline lymph from B. C. Nos, 7 to 11, ... ... ... ... Previously vacci- nated, no result. 17 Do. ... Rája, Jat, of Rutta ... ... 8 8 2½&quot; Do. ... ... ... ... 13 xxviii No. Ixxix No. II. Register of Vaseline Vaccine Tubes prepared and supplied. Date and mouth. NAMES. VASELINE VACCINE. No. or empty tubes return- ed. REMARKS. Marks and date. No. of tubes. 4th Decr. 1895 ... Bhai Jai Singh, late native Supervisor of Vaccination. 2nd December 1895 ... 1 ... 8th xxx No. IIxxxi STATEMENT A. Statement showing the results of Vaseline Vaccine supplied by the Civil Surgeon, Ráwalpindi. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Names. Total number of persons vaccinated. PRIMARY. RE-VACCINATION. PERSONS VACCINATED WHO HAVE MARKS OF PREVIOUS SMALL-POX. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL CASES EXCLUDING UN- KNOWN FROM THE TOTAL. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Primaiy. Re-vaccination. Small-pox (column 5). Surgeon-Major Dennys, Civil Surgeon, Delhi. 24 24 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Surgeon-Lieutenant-Colonel Pal- mer. Senior Medical Officer, Ráwalpindi. 73 36 ... ... 18 2 ... 16 1 ... ... ... ... Medical Officer, Station Hospital, Attock. 9 8 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Medical Officer, 5th Bengal Cavalry. 77 ... ... ... 68 9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Medical Officer, Station Hospital, Ráwalpindi. 73 30 2 1 35 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Medical Officer, 27th Punjab Infantry, Ráwalpindi. 164 24 1 ... 70 10 1 54 4 ... ... ... ... Medical Officer, 33rd Punjab Infantry, Ráwalpindi. 45 15 ... ... 25 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Civil Surgeon, Hoshiárpur ... 20 14 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Pesháwar ... 23 17 ... ... 2 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Lahore ... 11 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Jhang ... 70 69 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Umballa ... 6 1 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Muzaffargarh ... 12 8 ... ... 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Amritsar 20 ... ... ... 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Ludhiána ... 5 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Jullundur ... 6 2 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. Ditto, Jhelum ... 47 25 ... 2 11 7 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Siálkot ... 80 59 1 20 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Mooltan ... 80 79 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto, Kasauli ... 33 1 1 ... 20 10 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Surgeon-Captain James and his Vaccinators. 696 573 6 62 36 8 11 ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto ditto ... 1,548 935 8 42 347 110 106 ... ... ... ... ... ... Ditto ditto ... 114 3 ... ... 75 19 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... Civil Surgeon, Ráwalpindi ... 101 62 ... 1 37 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Assistant Surgeons and Hospital Assistants, &c. 802 407 10 ... 280 53 52 ... ... ... ... ... ... Bhái Jai Singh, late Native Super- visor of Vaccination. 74 32 ... ... 32 ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... District Vaccination Staff ... 31,543 13,992 155 514 13,584 1,051 2,247 ... ... ... ... ... ... Cantonment Vaccinator, Ráwal- pindi. 818 204 ... 4 535 12 59 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... 36,574 16,640 197 648 15,204 1,303 2,507 70 5 ... 98.83 92.1 93.33
xxxii STATEMENT B. Comparative statement showing the cost and number of buffalo and vaseline vaccinations performed by the District Vaccination Staff in the Ráwalpindi District. Total number of persons vaccinated. RESULTS. AVERAGE COST. Primary. Re-vaccination. Total number of successful cases. Total cost. PARTICULARS. Total number vaccinated. Successful cases. Total number vaccinated. Successful cases. Each successful case. Each case vaccinated. REMARKS. Rs. Pies. Pies. Buffalo vaccination ... ... ... ... ... 29,713 9,263 8,797 20,450 15,013 23,810 1,001 8 6 From 1st October 1895 to 24th January 1896. Vaseline vaccine ... ... ... ... ... 31,617 14,693 14,024 16,924 13,616 27,640 577 4 3 From 25tb January to 31st March 1896.
xxxiii STATEMENT C. Statement showing difference between the cost of Buffalo and Vaseline Vaccine per each successful case. PARTICULARS. Total number of persons vaccinated. RESULTS. Total number of successful cases. Lymph expenses. AVERAGE COST PER. REMARKS. Primary. Revaccination. Persons vaccinated, who have marks of pre- vious small-pox. Each successful case. Each case vaccinated. Total number vacci- nated. Successful cases. Total number vacci- nated. Successful cases. Total number vacci- nated. Successful cases. Rs. Pie. Pie. Buffalo vaccination for 1894-95 ... 25,228 23,594 20,973 1,634 866 ... ... 21,839 101 0.88 0.77 Vaseline vaccine ... ... ... 36,574 17,485 16,640 19,014 15,204 75 70 31,914 63 0.33 0.33
xxxiv APPENDIX C. Notes on Vaccination in which is included a description of the method now employed in Germany to produce pure animal lymph, by W. A. C. ROE, F. R. C.S.,E., D.P.h., CAMB., Surgeon-Lieutenant- Colonel, I. M. S., Civil Surgeon, Sialkot. Dated Sialkot, March 1893. The principles on which a public system of vaccination should be based are not only of interest and importance to the medical profession, but to the public generally, who are mainly concerned ; and as there are many others than professional men to whom a knowledge of these principles is indispensable, it is hoped that this brochure will be sufficiently clear for a right understanding of these principles, as it is always a difficult matter to present a technical subject so as to make it thoroughly intelligible to those who have had no professional training. Cow-pox is never met with in the human species except as the result of inoculation. Only in the cow have we any certain knowledge of it as a natural disease, though it pro- bably does occur as such in some other animals. It is a specific eruption in the cow, limited to the teats and udder, and.is generally sporadic, but sometimes appears in an epidemic form, especially in dairies. In the natural disease the period of inoculation is about three or four days, but may be of longer duration. The earliest symptoms noted are heat, swelling and tenderness, followed by the appearance of hard pimples or papules, which increase in size as the disease progresses, and after three or four days many of them become distinct vesicles with a central depression ; the circumference of the vesicle then increases in extent and the centre becomes wide and deep, until a flattened vesicle with a depressed centre is formed about the eighth or ninth day, when they are fully developed. The colour of these vesicles varies according to their age and the animal's skin, but they have always a shining look of a white or silvery aspect with a dark centre, and around the base there is a pinkish circle only a few lines wide ; but sometimes this inflamed and hardened base is much more extended. About the tenth or eleventh day the disease is at its height, and after this the vesi- cles become darker and hardened until they acquire their greatest size, when they begin to dry and shrink, falling off about three weeks after their first appearance, and leaving a smooth cicatrix where they were situated. During the time this process is progressing scarcely any constitutional symptoms are developed, the animal feeding as usual. Some- times the secretion of milk is lessened, but this is more apparent than real, and arises from difficulty in milking. There are other kinds of pock of a spurious nature that may sometimes be mistaken for the true cow-pox, but any careful professional man can usually distinguish between the dirty brown or black vesications of these spurious pocks and the true disease ; but the necessity for caution and accuracy is very great, as these spurious pocks are in some instances highly contagious and afford no protection whatever against subsequent attacks of small-pox. Other diseases of a pustular character can be propagated from the cow to human beings, and produce in them exceedingly severe symptoms, without affording protection of any kind ; so that care and caution is absolutely necessary when making use of the natural disease, that it may not produce unexpected results, more especially a false and delusive idea that persons so inoculated are efficiently protected. The true vaccine disease can be artificially produced in the cow by different methods, and is constantly so induced in order to keep up the lymph supply ; and the following are the means most generally employed for this purpose both in England and on the Continent of Europe : xxxv This is a phenomenon observed in many other vaccines as well as in cow-pox. Certain virus which are employed for experimental purposes are found after one or two removes to lose their effect altogether in the case of animals in which the disease does not occur naturally. For example, rabies, which is produced in the most virulent form in the rabbit, if transmitted to the ape will after three or four removes completely die out and fail to produce the disease in this latter animal ; but if re-transmitted back to the rabbit before it has actually reached vanishing point, will gradually resume its former virulence. The third and last method which I shall notice is the inoculation of cattle with human small-pox. The production of this disease in the cow is sometimes difficult, although if care be taken in selecting the animal it can generally be successfully accom- plished. Many experiments have been made, and the result is that when successful the cows show the symptoms of cow-pox, and the lymph taken from them produces genuine vaccine vesicles in the human being. This has been the method by which cow-pox as now seen in England and on the Continent has been principally started. The pioneers in this movement were Dr. Thile of Kasan, Dr. Ceely of Aylesburg, and Dr. Badcock of Brighton, and thousands of children have been vaccinated from the stock of lymph raised in this manner on many occasions. It has been supplied to hundreds of practitioners, and is without doubt the method that should invariably be resorted to if at any time genuine and efficient lymph be required. It would surprise many medical practitioners in England if they were told that they were doing wrong in using such lymph, or that they were likely to give their patients small-pox. Such a suggestion would meet with scant consideration at their hands. The best method of inoculating in this way is to select a young animal, free from all disease, with as fair a skin as possible, and, after making a series of punctures, to leave a number of points charged with variolous matter in them. About the fifth or sixth day distinct papules will be observed, and on the seventh to the ninth day they will generally have the appearance of true vaccine vesicles and be found to contain small quantities of lymph, which if taken and employed on the human subject will produce exactly the same symptoms as the ordinary cow lymph, but with the symptomatic fever more severe not the slightest appearance of small-pox can be seen, and statements to this effect are founded on ignorance of the actual facts and want of observation. In passing through the body of the cow small-pox is modified, just as many other diseases are now found to become when passed through the bodies of animals in whom they do not occur as natural complaints, the virus of small-pox thus undergoing such modification and attenuation as to deprive it of all danger, and it can be used with the most perfect safety and success, affording protection of the most efficient kind to those in whom this method of vaccination is practised. Transmission of the lymph from the cow in the first instances very frequently induces constitutional symptoms of a severe kind, but in succeeding removes the severity of the local symptoms diminish greatly, and so soon as the lymph becomes humanized the ordinary symptoms of vaccination are preseut. I have so far briefly mentioned the methods chiefly used for raising lymph for ordinary vaccination, and before proceeding to consider the system now employed in Germany to avoid accidents and to produce lymph of the purest kind, it may be well to consider the objections which the natives of India raise against the present custom of vaccinating from arm-to-arm or from calves obtained from zamíndárs ; and in doing this, I shall confine myself as closely as possible to the matter from the natives point of view as ascertained from inquiry and personal experience. With regard to arm-to-arm vaccination, they complain that they are at times compelled to take their children about from place to place; that the children are thereby unnecessarily exposed and fatigued ; that the lymph taken from the arm if it falls upon an abraded portion of the skin elsewhere produces sores, and in some cases the original vesicles are turned into bad ulcers and the whole arm is inflamed, severe fever and illness often following, sometimes causing the death of the child. Secondly, as a rule, the children of low caste parents are those mostly used as vaccinifers, and the better classes strongly object to their children being done from such persons both on religious grounds and because such people and their children are dirty, and very often diseased. Thirdly, the people will often remark that in thus vaccinating you are introducing the blood of one child into that of another, and therefore are likely to produce disease of whatever nature the vaccinifer may be suffering from. With regard to animal vaccination, it may be said that there are very few who object to the lymph from the baffalo from religious scruples ; but at times fanaticism will produce an outcry, such as occurred in Pesháawar in 1890, when buffalo vaccination was first introduced into that city. This objection was made both by Hindúus and Muhammadans, the latter saying that the English wished first to take away the religion of the Hindúus by cow vaccination, and then intended, to do the same to the Muhammadans by vaccination from swine.
xxxvi This of course is an exceptional case, but in the majority of places where animal vaccination is used the difficulty is to get calves for the purpose, as very few zamíndárs will willingly give their animals, and these have generally to be got through the influence of the village lambardár or Tahsíldárs of districts from the poorest of the villagers on payment. Whether the animal be healthy or not is a matter of indifference, and the Vaccinator who operates is not anxious to raise objections so long as he obtains a calf for the purpose. Then the calf after being vaccinated remains in a filthy shed until the lymph is ready, possibly at a time when cattle disease may be prevailing, and on this account a very strong objection is raised by the people, who say that we are propagating disease from the animal to man. Lastly, it will be noticed by many who have had experience of animal vaccination in this country that it is nearly always the bull calf that is given for vaccination purposes. This arises chiefly from a curious idea that has got about among the zamíndárs that if the cow-calf be vaccinated she will never become pregnant. To many persons these ideas of the natives may seem fanciful, but although many of them have no foundation in fact and others purely sentimental, if such a term may be used, still it is necessary to consider them and see how far the objections are real and how they may be overcome. With regard to the arm-to-arm system, there can be no doubt that their objections are often well founded, and that frequently children have been exposed and fatigued by Vaccinators, whose chief object was to multiply cases and swell their record of results ; that the lymph falling on an abraded surface will produce a vesicle in such sports, is also true, but that the child frequently becomes ill and sometimes dies is not an ascertained fact, so far as my experience and observation extends ; doubtless the symptomatic fever is at times severe and the child suffers considerably, but this is more a matter of constitution and personal idiosyncrasy than any fault of the lymph or the Vaccinator; that these vesicles do at times turn into ulcers is a matter of frequent obser- vation, but this occurs just as readily with animal lymph, and depends almost altogether on the state of health in which the child is when vaccinated, and if due care be exercised in examining the child before operating such accidents should be very rare. The transmission of disease from one child to another is a hotly debated question, but that syphilis and possibly other diseases have been accidently introduced in this way in some cases cannot be denied ; and to any one acquainted with bacteriology it is perfectly clear that this can easily be done, not only from one human being to another by means of a drop of infected blood, but also from animals to human beings in exactly the same way; hence the absolute necessity exists for seeing that the lymph used is perfectly pure and free from blood, and that the animal, as well as the child, used as vaccinifer is per- fectly healthy. This possibility of transmitting disease constitutes the strong argument advanced by those who advocate the abolition of vaccination altogether; but against this is the fact that it rarely occurs, and if proper care be exercised ought never to happen. But herein lies the weak point of our animal lymph operations in India, for this reason that any calf that can be obtained is taken and used as the vehicle for raising the lymph. The Vaccinators who work in the districts are not salútris. They take any animal they can get, without knowing if it is free from disease. This is not their fault, as they are not supposed to know anything of Veterinary medicine, but it shows that the native objection is founded on reason, and this objection should, if possible, be removed. Again, the fact that the calf remains in a dirty shed after vaccination in many places is a very reasonable and serious objection, for the animal should be looked after and kept as clean and healthy as a child would be by its parents under similar circumstances, a point which, I fear, is very rarely considered or thought worthy of attention. With regard to the very curious prejudice existing against the use of heifers for vaccination purposes on the ground that they remain sterile, it is difficult to eradicate such an impression, although it is utterly groundless, and might equally apply to the human species, which, we know, is not the case, and in Europe, where female calves are selected by preference, such has never been observed ; but this objection need not be seriously considered, being mentioned here merely as one of the ideas in existence on the subject of animal vaccination. Having now briefly reviewed the disease as it occurs naturally and by inoculation and considered the objections raised by natives to the operation of vaccination and shown how far they are reasonable, I propose to bring to notice the methods at present in use in Germany, where I have very recently had the most favourable opportunities of seeing and studying the practice in force in that country, as I believe that if the German system was introduced, it would tend to reduce opposition to vaccination and vastly facilitate its per- formance, doing away to a great extent with all the objections I have noted. The institute for vaccination at Berlin is situated at Vien-hof outside the town at a distance of several miles, this being the central depôt for vaccination lymph for the whole city, vaccination being compulsory under severe penalties.
xxxvii As arm-to-arm vaccination has been abolished altogether, the lymph for use is taken from animals, and those used are female calves, preferably from ten to twelve weeks old, and the lymph is passed on from one animal to another without being humanized. The calf selected is perfectly healthy, and with regard to its temperature the rule is that it must never exceed 41C°. 106°F. and ought not to exceed 39°F. 102°F. If this examination is favourable, it is fed for three days (previous to vaccination) on milk, eggs and whole meal, so that its digestion shall be as perfect as possible and the animal itself in the high- est state of health. During the time it is thus being fed its conditions are carefully noted, and if all are satisfactory it is then passed as fit for vaccination purposes. The calf is then strapped to a special table (the top being made to revolve from the vertical into the horizontal position) by means of broad leather bands, one round the body, another round the head and neck, and one round the forelegs, which are confined together in the same strap ; the left hind leg is also fastened to the table, the right being left free, this fastening being done while the table top is vertical. It is then turned over into the horizontal position so that no struggling shall take place on the part of the animal. While lying thus on its side an iron upright bar with a ring at the top is slipped into a catch on the table, and to this ring the right hind leg of the calf is raised and strapped, thus exposing freely the whole of the belly and inside of the thighs of the animal. The hair is then shaved as closely as possible off one-half of the belly and down the soft part of the thighs, and for this reason female calves are chosen as being most suitable and affording a larger surface for vaccination. The whole surface thus shaved is now washed with sterilized water and soap, and carefully dried ; then again washed with corrosive sublimate solution (1 in 1,000), and finally again washed with sterilized water and dried, so that the entire surface shall be free from contamination with germs of any sort previous to inoculation. The surface thus prepared is then scarifed with rather a blunt scalpel (which has also been sterilized), in long parallel lines, and done so carefully that no oozing of blood shall take place, any that appears being most carefully wiped away, an assistant holding the skin so as to tighten it for the operator. These scarifications are not deep, and between the teats punctures are employed. As this scarifying process goes on the vaccine fluid is poured over the wounds and lightly rubbed into them with the scalpel in use, and when this is done the first steps of the operation are complete. The animal is now lowered into the vertical position, carefully loosened and led into its box (which is scrupulously clean and well littered down with straw), and its head fastened so that it cannot in any way lick itself, and is in this way left for 72 hours, being fed, watched, and its temperature regularly taken all the time. At the end of this period, if everything is favourable, the calf is again strapped to the table as before. The belly and thighs being exposed, the vaccinated portions are most carefully washed with soap and sterilized water, the rubbing being done very gently (by means of a woman's hand on account of its softness), so as to detach gently all dirt, scabs, &c., and afterwards the whole surface is repeatedly washed with sterilized water just warm enough to be pleasant. The animal thoroughly enjoys this and never moves while it is being done. The second part of the process ended, the next consist in scraping off with a sterilized bowl spoon the whole of the vaccine matter from the scarified surface, which is done rapidly and effectually, and is at once placed in sterilized glass boxes (known as Pet- ris) and covered over. When all has been thus collected the amount is noted and careful- ly weighed, and for each part of vaccine matter is prepared two parts of sterilized water and two parts of neutral glycerine, also sterilized. The water and glycerine having being pre- viously got ready, the collected vaccine is now spread out under the glass cover, and all hairs or particles of dirt carefully picked out, and the water and glycerine added little by little until the mass is sufficiently loose and soft to be pressed between the rollers (porce- lain) of a vaccine rolling machine, through which it is passed until it comes out an opaque white fluid, perfectly limpid and ready for use. The porcelain rollers are previously washed and sterilized so that no contamination may attach itself to them and infect the fluid, and in this condition it is filled into glass tubes drawn out and closed by heat at both ends, or into small glass flasks half inch in diameter and one inch long, closed with a new cork (both flasks and tubes being previously sterilized). Each of these tubes and flasks contain enough lymph to vaccinate 50 children, and from one calf successfully manipulated enough lymph is obtained to vaccinate about 3,000 children as the vaccine keeps well in these tubesxxxviii If all proves to be satisfactory the lymph is then sent out for use, otherwise it is all destroyed and a fresh animal taken for the purpose. Every animal is numbered, and each little flask has the number of the calf on it from which it was taken, so that in case of inquiry everything is known at once about the animal or the lymph. This system is as nearly perfect as it is possible for any to be, and as the lymph is taken from perfectly healthy animals, vaccinated with the greatest care and collected with every possible precaution, it will be clear to any who has read the objections I have noted as raised by the natives that it effectually meets and removes most, if not all, of them, and as the lymph thus prepared keeps well and produces remarkably good vesicles, it is evident that it economises labour to a great extent and facilitates the operation ; for a man can carry with him half a dozen of these flasks and move from village to village with ease and rapidity, and vaccinate many more children in this way than by any other means, and thus it would be quite possible to reduce the number of Vaccinators required for a district, and money thus saved would probably cover the expense of obtaining pure vaccine lymph from a central depôt. A single establishment of the kind could easily supply the amount for a whole province at a very small cost, and districts might-, fairly be called upon to assist in its maintenance in return for receiving whatever lymph they may require. In this way I believe it is possible to carry on vaccination during the hot weather, but that is a point which experience alone can decid . Reasoning from analogy I see nothing impossible in this, for I find that the virus of rabies will keep unimpaired in vitality for a period of at least five weeks if preserved in neutral sterilized glycerine, although exposed to considerable heat of weather, and as the vaccine virus is preserved in a precisely similar manner, there is nothing present to set up putrafaction if sterilization has been complete; and I have been able in this way to preserve in my private laboratory many substances of weak vitality for considerable periods so as to have them ready whenever I may require to use them for experimental purposes. The advantages of this system may therefore be summed up as follows: xxxix APPENDIX D. Statement showing the results of vaccinations seen by each Divisional Inspector during the year 1895-96. DIVISONS. Inspectors. Total. NUMBER OF MARKS. 6 5 4 3 2 One distinct or two indis- tinct No mark. Percentage of success. PRIMARY. Delhi ... ... Nihál Chand ... ... 23,387 18,542 1,874 1,139 786 398 326 322 97 Jullundur ... ... Sultán Ahmad ... ... 19,617 16,515 1,353 715 473 236 161 164 98 Kángraand Hoshiár- pur District. Pundit Bál Kishen ... 12,656 10,906 796 451 272 99 71 61 99 Ráwalpindi ... Nizám Dín ... ... 21,052 15,884 1,917 1,514 776 398 32 531 97 Pesháwar ... ... Ghulám Mohai-ud-d i n 9,133 6,408 727 473 714 302 264 245 94 Deraját ... ... Basant Rárn ... ... 18,548 14,579 1,305 1,054 613 383 188 420 97 Total ... ... 104,393 82,834 7,972 5,346 3,634 1,816 1,042 1,749 ... Percentage of marks to total number inspected. ... 79 8 5 3 2 1 2 ... RE-VACCINATIONS. Delhi ... ... Nibál Chand ... ... 2,066 471 169 145 231 155 104 791 57 Jullundur ... ... Sultán Ahmad ... ... 3,431 524 177 412 439 282 192 1,405 53 Kángraand Hoshiár- pur District. Pundit Bál Kirshen ... 1,079 ... ... ... 483 285 144 167 71 Ráwalpiudi ... Nizám Dín ... 1,626 495 75 84 138 118 55 661 56 Pesháwar ... ... Ghulám Mohai-ud-dín ... 298 20 4 4 148 22 25 75 66 Deraját ... ... Basant Rám ... ... 160 16 3 14 10 10 7 100 33 Total ... ... 8,660 1,526 428 659 1,449 872 527 3,199 ... Percentage of marks to total number inspected ... 18 5 8 17 10 6 36 ...
xi APPENDIX E. Statement showing detail of vaccination work inspected by Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Punjab, during 1895-96 in the districts noted below. By whom inspected. District. Number of vill- ages inspected. PRIMARY. SECONDARY. Total. REMARKS. Cicatrices. Cicatrices. Males. Females. 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 SPECIAL STAFF WORK. Surgeon-Captain H. J. Dyson ... Mandi State ... ... 1 96 19 10 6 5 3 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 142 xli APPENDIX F. Statement showing the annual number of successful vaccinations and the annual ratio of deaths from small-pox per 1,000 of population for five years ending 1895-96, district by district. No. DISTRICTS. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1893-94. 1894-95. 1895-96. Number of successful cases. Annual ratio of deaths from small-pox per 1,000. Number of successful cases. Annual ratio of deaths from small-pox per 1,000. Number of successful cases. Annual ratio of deaths from small-pox per 1,000. Number of successful cases. Annual ratio of deaths from small-pox per 1,000. Number of successful cases. Annual ratio of deaths from small-pox per 1,000. * * * * 1 Hissár ... ... ... 22,901 0.39 17,766 0.99 17,822 0.04 24,241 0.31 23,639 1.52 2 Rohtak ... ... ... 14,614 0.53 13,243 0.46 13,713 0.02 15,606 0.03 16,023 0.08 3 Gurgáon ... ... ... 20,261 0.39 16,452 0.71 20,498 0.36 19,860 0.69 17,583 1.06 4 Delhi ... ... ... 11,110 0.34 21,392 0.08 17,839 0.01 18,542 0.37 18,643 0.58 5 Karnál ... ... ... 14,380 0.54 21,639 0.81 25,823 0.61 26,802 1.23 27,629 0.40 6 Umballa ... ... ... 20,948 0.36 20,489 1.00 21,359 0.43 19,266 1.34 19,869 0.94 7 Simla ... ... ... 745 0.28 451 ... 550 0.14 694 0.03 583 0.09 8 Kángra ... ... ... 29,636 0.01 26,173 0.03 143,555 0.03 75,953 0.001 20,722 0.01 9 Hoshiárpur ... ... ... 49,248 0.04 33,450 0.31 24,979 0.11 25,798 0.07 43,272 0.02 10 Jullundur ... ... ... 21,709 0.02 23,346 0.45 20,408 0.22 12,712 0.19 22,436 0.04 11 Ludhiána ... ... ... 18,106 0.20 16,437 1.23 12,569 0.26 13,134 0.30 13,821 0.49 12 Ferozepore ... ... ... 26,172 0.29 28,807 0.92 21,263 0.26 24,504 0.24 38,747 0.32 13 Mooltan ... ... ... 27,973 0.02 30,295 0.15 23,499 0.09 19,309 0.06 22,747 0.53 14 Jhang ... ... ... 11,547 0.01 10,552 0.004 9,581 0.03 14,320 0.06 19,202 0.36 15 Montgomery ... ... ... 15,282 0.21 12,981 0.72 16,079 0.26 12,748 0.46 16,391 0.45 16 Lahore ... ... ... 28,112 0.14 27,565 0.40 26,768 0.34 34,360 0.07 35,165 0.04 17 Amritsar ... ... ... 37,154 0.04 41,855 0.35 41,125 0.21 42,164 0.10 35,255 0.01 18 Gurdáspur ... ... ... 38,723 0.03 48,376 0.04 35,074 0.03 35,665 0.06 48,479 0.001 19 Siálkot ... ... ... 35,939 0.01 37,313 0.04 31,869 0.04 31,819 0.04 34,156 0.07 20 Gujrát ... ... ... 22,088 0.01 20,828 0.01 18,768 0.06 26,721 0.23 29,556 0.81 21 Gujránwála ... ... ... 23,541 0.002 18,749 0.004 16,791 0.01 21,912 0.03 23,681 0.44 22 Shahpur ... ... ... 14,698 0.04 9,280 0.25 11,447 0.51 15,871 0.35 17,305 0.31 23 Jhelum ... ... ... 17,461 0.01 27,008 0.14 16,356 0.24 22,027 0.21 15,372 0.18 24 Ráwalpindi ... ... ... 25,091 0.03 23,171 0.56 18,791 0.27 21,839 0.03 53,054 0.18 25 Hazára ... ... ... 8,202 0.05 5,610 0.41 6,476 0.16 6,392 0.03 7,095 0.03 26 Pesháwar ... ... ... 14,406 0.55 13,425 1.81 16,499 0.55 13,914 0.93 11,684 1.33 27 Kohát ... ... ... 5,202 0.22 3,880 2.45 3,887 0.44 4,182 0.22 5,311 0.48 28 Bannu 10,037 0.68 7,184 4.08 9,171 0.19 10,602 0.04 10,643 0.47 29 Dera Ismail Khan ... 14,203 0.19 18,106 0.33 21,589 0.21 22,705 1.06 20,273 1.56 30 Dera Gházi Khan ... 18,715 0.002 16,516 0.03 21,595 0.03 17,334 0.01 19,558 0.06 31 Muzaffargarh ... ... 9,733 0.002 10,836 0.52 9,256 0.01 11,102 0.07 11,557 0.13 Total ... 627,937 0.17 623,175 0.54 694,999 0.20 662,098 0.30 699,451 0.41 Special Staff ... ... ... 55,448 ... 60,223 ... 80,221 ... 67,169 ... 64,731 ... Cantonment ... ... ... 5,887 ... 6,996 0.01 6,172 0.02 6,117 0.02 9,150 0.02 Dispensary Staff ... ... ... 3,752 ... 1,527 ... 1,009 ... 1,450 ... 2,640 ... GRAND TOTAL ... ... ... 693,024 0.17 691,921 0.54 782,401 0.20 736,834 0.29 775,972 0.40 * Vide Statement No. VIII of the Annual Sanizary Report.
xlii APPENDIX G. Table showing the Vaccination work done under the Compulsory Vaccination Acts Nos. V. (B. C.) and XII of 1880 in certain Municipalities of the Punjab during the years 1891-92 to 1895-96. Name of Municipalities. Population according to the Census of 1891. Number of children in the register since the Act has been in force. NUMBER OF VACCINATIONS. 1895-96. MORTALITY FROM SMALL- POX DURING THE FIVE YEARS 1891 to 1895. Date on which the Compulsory Vaccina- tion Act came into force. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1893-94. 1894-95. 1895-96. Number of notices issued. Number of prosecutions. Number of punishments. Average annual number of deaths from small-pox. Death rate per 1,000 of population from small-pox. Total number. Number successfully vaccin- ated. Total number. Number successfully vaccin- ated. Total number. Number successfully vaccin- ated. Total number. Number successfully vaccin- ated. Total number. Number successfully vaccin- ated. Rohtak 16,191 4,036 1,378 1,299 598 574 488 488 623 609 778 693 211 12 4 27 1.67 22nd July 1890. Beri 9,825 2,377 ... ... ... ... 174 161 832 705 675 532 603 17 12 26 2.65 31st July 1893. Umballa 26,856 6,285 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,962 1,308 1,970 51 ... 3 0.11 1st October 1895. Simla 13,279 1,832 667 486 732 450 406 360 1,992 1,101 1,493 692 12 ... ... 3 0.23 7th August 1889. Jullundur 50,375 4,570 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,671 1,204 2,051 1,097 ... ... ... 15 0.30 9th July 1894. Jhang-cum-Maghiána 22,342 2,140 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,366 1,291 1,237 1,142 1,306 70 ... 5 0.22 20th March 1894. Lahore 159,597 9,682 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,756 8,200 10,534 8,228 1,075 ... ... 50 0.31 August 1894. Amritsar 135,401 81,784 9,882 9,283 13,052 11,882 12,674 11,498 11,735 10,953 11,602 9,114 92 ... ... 19 0.14 29th March 1887. Murree 1,459 78 ... ... ... ... 205 166 408 270 180 118 ... ... ... ... ... 14th December 1894. Edwardesabad 6,095 596 ... ... ... ... ... ... 294 269 202 193 2 ... ... 14 2.30 November 1894.
