ANNUAL REPORT UPON VACCINATION IN THE N. W. PROVINCES FOR THE SEASON 1866-67. No. 46 OF 1867. FROM F. PEARSON, ESQUIRE, SURGEON, Superintendent-General of Vaccination, N. W. Provinces, To R. SIMSON, ESQUIRE, Secretary to Government, N. W. Provinces. DATED ALMORAH, THE 22ND APRIL 1867. SIR, I have the honor to submit, for the information of His Honor the Lieutenant- Governor, the Returns of Vaccination for the North-West Provinces for the season of 1866-67, showing a grand total of 161,711 known successful cases( 2 ) 2. In Kumaon and Gurhwal the increase in the numbers successfully vacci- nated amounts to 4,534. This increase is owing chiefly to the fact of two additional Vaccinators (paid out of Local Funds) having been employed in the Kumaon Bhabur during the past season. In December and January, small-pox prevailed to a consider- able extent in the towns of Kasheepore and Jhopore, marts in the Moradabad District, between which and the hills there is much commercial intercourse; consequently several cases of the disease were imported into the Kumaon Bhabur and lower hills. Hence arose the necessity for an addition to the Normal Vaccine Establishment. By immediately protecting everybody in the vicinity of a small-pox case, and by iso- lating the case itself, no spread of the disease ensued, and altogether I do not suppose a dozen deaths occurred throughout the whole of the above-mentioned tract, which, but for the precautions taken, might have become a wide-spread epidemic. To Colonel H. Ramsay, C.B., Commissioner of Kumaon, belongs the merit; of making and carrying out the above arrangements for thus stamping out the disease; for I myself was at thai time away on my tour of inspection in the Benares Circle. The average number of operations performed by each Vaccinator in Kumaon and Gurhwal per mensen (viz., 354) and the percentage of success (viz., 92.57) have, I think, reached their extreme limits, for the Vaccinators are now thoroughly trained, and there are no hindrances to the spread of vaccination beyond those to be encountered by reason of a scanty population and scattered villages, which will always continue to exist. Now that the whole district has been provided with a staff of Vaccinators amply sufficient to meet all the require- ments of the people, inoculation of small-pox has been prohibited, and it is to be hoped that in the course of time the superiority of vaccination will not only be acknowledged, but really believed in. A generation or two must, however, pass away ere such a con- summation can be expected, for old habits and prejudices are not easily or quickly overcome. 3. In Rohilkund the increase in the number of successful cases is 7,820. This also is chiefly to be accounted for by the strength of the Vaccine Establishment having been augmented by five men, viz.,( 3 ) more by 35 than in the preceding year. This is very satisfactory, for the establish- ment has been increased by two Vaccinators only, viz., one at Etah (paid by Local Funds), and one at Mynpoory (entertained by the Municipality); and therefore these results can only be attributed to a diminishing unwillingness on the part of the people to accept vac- cination, and to an increasing influence and skill on the part of the Vaccinators( 4 ) Returns of the Kumaon and Gurhwal Depot. Seasons. Crusts. Tubes. 1865-66, 19,150 1,895 1866-67, 22,315 2,214 8. From the returns it will be observed that the total number of successful cases of vaccination throughout the whole North-Western Provinces has been but 1,61,711. With the present establishments ultimately it might be possible to double this number( 5 ) now imposed( 6 ) chiefly to be met with amongst Hindoos ;but these are the offspring of the general conservation of the Hindoo mind, and are not, strictly speaking, matters of religion or caste, as such. 11. As regards the mooted point, &quot;ought inoculation to be prohibited ?&quot; I am decidedly of opinion that we ought not thus to take away the right of people to protect themselves, when we are not in a position to confer the protective power of vaccina- tion. But, as in the case of Kumaon and Gurhwal, where there are a sufficiency of Vaccinators to thoroughly protect the whole population, then it becomes a duty to suppress inoculation, which undoubtedly is a great source of infection to others, and has many evils attending it, yet is much better than no protection at all, as regards the general welfare of the community. In the Benares Division inoculation is almost uni- versal, and, being regarded as a sort of religious ceremony, vaccination will have a hard fight to supplant it; but in the end truth will prevail, I believe, though probably it will take some generations to effect it. With the exception of the Benares Division and the hill districts, elsewhere in the North-Western Provinces small-pox inocula- tion is comparatively unknown. 12. The total cost of the Vaccine Department of the North-Western Provinces during the past year amounted to Rs. 62,588. Of this sum Government contributed Rs. 59,000, the remainder being furnished by Municipal and Local Funds. The cost per head of each successful case has been a fraction under 6 annas 3 pie ; but I hope in the course of a few years, even with the increased charge for establishments now asked for, to reduce the cost to 4 annas per head, being one-fifth of the sum allowed by the State for each successful case in England. I have, &c., F. PEARSON, SURGEON, Superintendent-General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces. Return of Vaccine Operations in the North-West Provinces during the Season 1866-67. Province. Number of opera- tors. PERSONS TREATED. Total. Cost of operations during the year. Total number suc- cessful opera- tions recorded to date. Remarks. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Result un - known. North-West Provinces. 211 1,61,711 20,802 6,800 14,585 2,03,916 Rs. 62,588 or 6 annas and a fraction under 3 pie per head for each successful cases. 1,61,711 Percentage successful. 80.53; average No. of operations by each man per mensem for season of five months, 210. F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General, Vaccination, N. W. Provinces. From Secretary to Government, North-Western Provinces, to Superntendent-General, Vaccination (No. 1850A,).( 7 ) 2. The returns are, on the whole, very satisfactory. The total number of Vacci- nations, the percentage of successful cases, and the average number of operations performed by each Vaccinator, have all increased. The number of Vaccinators paid by Municipalities and from Local Funds has also increased, though still very much less than it ought to be. 3. The attempt made in the Benares Circle to induce Brahmin inoculators to qualify themselves as Vaccinators, though it failed last year, appears well worthy of a renewed trial. The greatest opposition to vaccination has proceeded from Benares and its neighbourhood; and the employment in vaccination of some of those who have heretofore been employed in spreading inoculation cannot fail to have a good effect in disarming opposition and overcoming prejudice. 4. As regards your recommendation in favor of the Deputy Superintendent, Baboo Bunde-deen, I am to remark that his services in Rohilkund have been very meritorious but the Lieutenant-Governor is of opinion that they will be most suitably recognized by presenting him with a sum of Rs. 500, which is sanctioned accordingly. 5. Your proposal to enlist the services of native practitioners in the cause of vaccination is deserving of a fair trial; and the grant of Rs. 500 for the purpose is therefore sanctioned, on the understanding that there is Budget provision to meet it. Endeavours should also be made through the Commissioners of Divisions and District Officers to enlist the sympathies and obtain the aid of wealthy and influential native gentlemen in this matter. With this view District Officers will be requested to take advantage of the presence of the Superintendent of the Circle in their districts in the ensuing cold season to call meetings of intelligent and influential natives in convenient localities, at which the Superintendent could be present and might address them on the subject. They will also be instructed to encourage Municipal Committees and wealthy zemindars to employ one or more Vaccinators in their own towns or villages., at their own cost, pointing out the great advantages which have already resulted in several districts from the adoption of this course. 6. Your proposal to revise the present Vaccine Establishments, and to appoint a Native Superintendent to every zillah, together with 18 additional Vaccinators, has this day been recommended to the Supreme Government. The supervision of Ajmere will, as suggested by you, be made over to the Civil Surgeon of that station, who will be made ex-officio Superintendent of Vaccination for that Circle, receiving travelling allowance whenever he visits the interior of the district for purposes of supervision. 7. Your recommendation that, for the future, a certificate of having been suc- cessfully vaccinated (in the absence of having had natural or inoculated small-pox) should be exacted from all candidates for Government employment meets with the ap- proval of Government, and orders to that effect will be issued. S. The Lieutenant-Governor fully concurs in the opinion expressed in the 11th para. of your Report. Now that the Vaccination Establishments in Kumaon and Gurhwal are sufficient for the requirements of the whole population, inoculation may be very properly prohibited in that province ; but it will be time enough to enforce a similar measure elsewhere when Government has not only provided an efficient substi- tute, but made it easily available for all, and has shown the people so thoroughly the superiority of vaccination as to induce them voluntarily to adopt it in preference to inoculation. This has been the result of patient persevering effort in the Kumaon Division, and there is every reason to hope that similar exertions will eventually produce similar effects elsewhere. 9. In conclusion, His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor desires me to convey the thanks of Government to yourself and Drs. Pringle, Watson, and Sutherland, for your exertions during the year. I have, &c., R. SIMSON, Secy. to Government, N. W. P.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON OF 1869-70. BY W. WATSON, ESQ., M.B., Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. 1870.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON OF 1869-70. BY W. WATSON, ESQ., M.B, Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinees. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. 1870.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION For the Season of 1869-70. No. 13 of 1870. FROM W. WATSON, ESQUIRE, M.B., Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, Worth- Western Provinces, To R. SIMSON, ESQUIRE, Secretary to the Government, North-Western Provinces. DATED ALMORAH, THE 1ST MAY, 1870. SIR, I have the honour to submit, for the information of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, the returns of Vaccination for the North-Western Provinces for the season of 1869-70, shewing a total of 237.298 successful cases, being a decrease of 29.289 on the work of the preceding year. This very great decrease has principally occurred in the Circles of Allahabad and Jhansie, and of Agra and Meerut, and the Superintendents of these Circles agree in the explanation they give to account for the decrease. They state that it is owing to the fact that this year there has been no epidemic of small-pox in the plains, and I see no reason to doubt the correctness of this opinion. When small-pox is epidemic in a district, the people naturally apply to the Vaccinators, and bring their children to them in crowds. In a non-epidemic season, the reverse is the case. There is apparently no immediate necessity for the operation being performed, and the parents of the children either object altogether to having it done, or allege some excuse for delay. 2. During the earlier part of the period embraced in this Report I held the appointment of Superintendent of the 4th or Allahabad and Jhansie Circle ; but on the 1st of January, 1870, I was appointed to officiate as Superintendent-General, North-Western Provinces, and as Superintendent of Kumaon and Rohilkhund during the absence of Dr. Pearson, who was obliged to leave India on account of bad health. 3. When he quitted India, Dr. Pearson had served in the Vaccine Depart- ment for nearly sixteen years, and the value of his services can be appreciated only by those who have had the privilege of serving under him. In the year 1853, when employed by Government to report on Mahamurree, a disease then raging in the hills, he commenced vaccinating in Gurhwal, and his success was so great that in his Sanitary Report for 1853-54 he stated that he had vaccinated no less than 7,000 persons. Long before this, vaccination had been attempted in the plains of India, but the difficulties were very great. It was found that successful vaccination was impossible in the hot weather and rains, and that even in the cold weather it was necessary to vaccinate with perfectly fresh lymph, or to employ the crusts imported from England, as vaccine crusts collected in the plains were practically useless. This state of things was in great measure changed by Dr. Pearson's success in the hills. It was soon generally admitted that the vaccine crusts collected by him in the higher parts of Gurhwal were not only equal, but were actually superior to those imported from England. 1 1
( 2 ) This was owing partly to the fact that the elimate of Upper Gurhwal is colder than that of England, but principally from its being so much nearer the plains of India. A crust collected in England could hardly be brought into use in India until after a period of two or three months, while one collected in Gurhwal could be used in less than as many weeks. 4. In consequence of Dr. Pearson's success in Gurhwal, he was ordered to extend vaccination to Kumaon; and in the year 1855 he was ordered to introduce it into Rohilkhund. In 1856, a second circle, that of Agra and Meerut, was formed, under the superintendence of Dr. Farquhar; and in 1863 two other circles were organized, and Dr. Pearson, hitherto only Superintendent of Kumaon and Rohilkhund, was appointed to act as Superintendent-General of Vaticination in addition to his other duties. 5. The Vaccinators employed in these four circles are regularly supplied with lymph from the Kumaon and Gurhwal Depôt, thus saving Government a large sum which would be spent if the necessary lymph were annually imported from England. Lymph is also supplied gratuitously from the Kumaon and Gurhwal Depôt to most of the Inspectors of Hospitals, Civil Surgeons, and Regimental Officers stationed in the North-Western Provinces, as well as to many in Bengal, the Punjab, Oudh and the Central Provinces. The following quantities of lymph have been supplied during the last five years from the Kumaon and Gurhwal Depôt:( 3 ) Compared with vaccination by the lancet, it has but one disadvantage, which is that, though equally effective as far as the child itself is concerned, yet it does not yield so large a supply of lymph with which to vaccinate other children. This objec- tion is of no importance with regard to vaccination in the plains, as no largo store of lymph is required. In Kumaon and Gurhwal, however, from which stores of lymph are annually drawn, with which to supply the plains, vaccination is still performed by the lancet. 8. Some time after the introduction of the vaccine needle, another very useful novelty was introduced ; this was the bringing into use of Dr. Husband's capillary tubes for storing lymph. These tubes were used in the North-Western Provinces long before they were generally known in England. 9. In the month of July, 1869, Dr. Pearson submitted, for the consideration of Government, a plan for the extension of the benefits of vaccination. Hitherto there has been one Vaccinator in each Tehseel, and one Native Superintendent in each Zillah. Dr. Pearson recommended that the number of Vaccinators should be doubled, but that the number of Native Superintendents should remain as before. He recom- mended, however, that an addition of pay, amounting to Rs. 10 a month, should be given to one-third of the number of Native Superintendents, the other two-thirds remaining on the old scale of pay. The mode of carrying out this recommendation is still under consideration, but in the event of its being adopted I would recommend that the whole number of new Vaccinators should not be entertained at once. My reason for advising this is that I think if so large a number of untried men were brought all at once on the strength of the establishment there would almost certainly be among them a certain number who would bring discredit on the Vaccine Department A Vaccinator, especially one posted to an out-of-the-way Tehseel, has great oppor- tunity of extorting money, and although his misconduct would certainly be detected by the European Superintendent when he arrived at the Tehseel in the course of his tour, yet during the three or four months that might intervene between the commencement of the season and the arrival of the Superintendent, much mis- chief might be done, and an amount of prejudice might be excited in the minds of the natives of the place, which it would take years to remove. 10. During the past year the sum of Rs. 500 was sanctioned for the education of Hukeems and Baids. The money was distributed as follows:( 4 ) from them a correct report of their work. Few of them can read or write, and probably none of them are capable of filling up the complicated returns and forms which have recently been introduced. If, however, a grant of money were made, specially for paying inoculators, this difficulty would be obviated, as one or more of them would be directed to accompany a Vaccinator, who would make out their returns as well as his own. Inoculators are chiefly met with in the Benares Circle, and the greater part of this money would, therefore, be expended there. This is desirable on other grounds, as, in proportion to the population, the number of Vaccinators stationed in Benares is much smaller than in any other circle. 11. In the Kumaon and Gurhwal Circle, which is directly under my own man- agement, the number of successful cases has been 21,334, being an increase of 1,278 on the past year. As was mentioned in the last Annual Report, no great increase of numbers can be expected in this circle. The population has been thoroughly vacci- nated, and the annual number of vaccinations only represents the number of children annually born. As may be seen from the Mortality Reports, small-pox is almost unknown in Kumaon and Gurhwal. It is, however, necessary to mention that cases of small-pox frequently occur in the Bhabur. This is a district lying at the foot of the hills, which until recently was an uncultivated jungle, but within the last few years has been brought under cultivation. It is politically attached to Kumaon, and the majority of the inhabitants are Hill men ; but there are also numerous settlers from various parts of the plains, many of whom have never been vaccinated, and are of course liable to small-pox. There are also occasional cases in Kumaon itself, in which death from measles is erroneously entered under the head of small-pox. Measles is a very com- mon disease in the hills, as in most cold countries, and although the distinction be- tween it and small-pox is, as a rule, well-known to the Hill men, yet now and then, in secluded villages, cases occur where the one disease is mistaken for the other. 12. In the Rohilkhund Circle the total number of successful cases has diminished from 68,276, the number for last year, to 67,290 ; but this decrease is owing entirely to the reduction in the number of Municipal Vaccinators. Last year there were 15 Municipal Vaccinators ; but this year there have only been 10. The average number of cases performed monthly by each Vaccinator in the Rohilkhund Circle has in- creased. Last year it was 347; this year it has been 385. I am afraid that next year the number of Municipal Vaccinators will be still further reduced, as many of the Municipalities complain that in the present state of their funds they are unable to pay for the services of a Vaccinator. During the past year I was only able to see a small part of the Rohilkhund Circle. I managed, however, to visit most of the Vaccinators stationed in the Shah- jehanpore and Bareilly Districts, and was exceedingly pleased with all I saw. I was accompanied during my tour through Rohilkhund by Baboo Bundadeen, Deputy Superintendent of Vaccination, whom I found to be a most energetic and conscien- tious officer. Since the re-organization of the Vaccine Department in 1863, the management of the Rohilkhund Circle has practically been entrusted to Baboo Bunda- deen, who is, I may mention, the only officer in the Nor th-Western Provinces holding the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Vaccination. His management has always been most successful, and he has repeatedly been favourably mentioned by Dr. Pearson in his reports. 13. The Agra and Meerut Circle is considerably larger than any other in the North-West Provinces, and it has attached to it a district in the hills, the Native Kingdom of Tehree. In this respect it differs from the other circles of the plains, and it receives its supplies of lymph partly from its own Hill district, and is in great measure independent of the Kumaon and Gurhwal Depôt. The Superintendent, Dr. Pringle, reports that he has carried out the instructions given him by Dr. Pearson, and that vacancies have been filled up by entertaining
( 5 ) Hindoos. He states, however, that he himself decidedly prefers Mahomedans as Vaccinators. Dr. Pringle also refers to the great success which has attended vaccina- tion this year in the Saharunpore District, the only part of the circle in which small- pox has been epidemic. In paragraph 7 Dr. Pringle reports that he has this year attempted to fill vaccine tubes with lymph collected in the plains, but that the results have not been satisfactory. In trying such an experiment there is great danger of exciting the prejudices of the people, and the operation itself is by no means an easy one, requiring in the Vaccinator constant practice and considerable manual dexterity. In concluding my notice of the Agra and Meerut Circle, I may mention that in January, 1870, I marched through the Futtehghur Zillah, on my way from Allahabad to Rohilkhund, and saw the Vaccinators stationed along the road. Their work was most satisfactory, especially in Futtehghur itself. 14. The Benares Circle is the only one in the North-Western Provinces in which decided progress has been made this year. In this Circle there has been an increase of 13,378 in the number of successful cases. This increase is no doubt to be attributed to the great zeal and energy of the Officiating Superintendent. Dr. Milne took charge of this circle in 18G7, and since that date there has been a steady increase in the number of cases successfully vaccinated. A peculiarity of the Benares District is the existence in it of a number of hereditary Inoculators. In this respect it resembles Lower Bengal rather than the North-Western Provinces. Dr. Milne has endeavoured to enlist these Inoculators in the cause of vaccination, and has met with great success, an account of which is given in his Annual Report, and also in a Special Report which he has written on the Practice of Inoculation in the Benares Division. Both of these valuable reports I have the honour to forward, in original. Dr. Milne has also conducted a series of experiments on animal vaccination. He mentions the names of two Tehseeldars who have given him great assistance,( 6 ) animal with a lancet was a direct insult to their religion. With regard to the general question of the superiority of animal over ordinary vaccination, the opinion of the best authorities in England is in favour of the latter. Thus Dr. Seton, in his Manual of Vaccination, paragraph 42, says: &quot;While lymph transferred from one human being to another will, if used under proper conditions, infect with almost unerring cer- tainty, cow lymph will fail to infect in a great number of instances. Ceely found that more than half his attempts to vaccinate with primary cow lymph resulted in entire failure, the same individuals being successfully vaccinated immediately afterwards with ordinary lymph.&quot; In paragraph 9, Dr. Hutchinson strongly recommends that a batta of Rs. 5 a month should be given to Native Superintendents while travelling. In this recommendation I would cordially concur, as I have always thought that the pay of Native Superintendents was far too small, considering the responsible duties they have to perform. In paragraph 12, Dr. Hutchinson notices the great success which has attended the introduction of vaccination into the Independent States of Bun- delkhund. He particularly mentions the great assistance he has received from the Dewan of Chirkaree, the Rajah of which State is at present a minor. I would esteem it a favour if Government would in any way notice the valuable services of the Dewan in introducing vaccination into one of the leading States of Independent Bundelkhund. Dr. Hutchinson also makes favourable mention of several of his Native Superinten- dents ;( 7 ) Vaccination Return of the North-Western Provinces for the Seasons of 1868-69 and 1869-70. Native Superintendents. Divisions. Seasons. Number of Vaccinators. Total number of Vaccina- tors. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Result unknown. Total. Average percentage sum. Average number of opera- tions of each Vaccina- tor per mensem. Paid by Government. Paid by Municipalities. Paid by Local Funds. Paid by Natives. 2 Kumaon and Gurhwal ... 1868-9 ... 10 ... 3 ... 13 20,056 336 574 835 21,801 95.65 279 1869-70 ... 10 ... 3 ... 13 21,334 442 624 853 23,252 95.24 298 6 Rohilkhund ... 1868-69 ... 30 15 1 ... 46 68,276 4,731 3,490 3,334 19,831 89.26 347 1869-70 ... 30 10 1 ... 41 67,290 4,657 3,178 3,811 78,936 89.57 385 12 Agra and Meerut ... 1868-69 ... 61 23 ... 4 88 94,912 10,157 1,919 5,796 112,778 88.70 256 1869-70 ... 61 23 ... 4 88 76,467 9,309 1,633 5,573 92,982 87.48 211 9 Allahabad and Jhansie ... 1868-69 ... 55 5 ... 6 66 61,118 15,906 2,778 8,815 88,617 76 268 1869-70 ... 55 5 ... 17 77 37,298 15,187 2,036 6,981 61,502 68.41 159 6 Benares ... 1868-69 ... 28 4 1 1 34 15,367 2,285 856 1,273 19,781 83.02 116 1869-70 ... 28 4 1 1 34 28,745 2,934 942 1,532 34,153 89.03 200 1 Ajmere ... 1868-69 ... 4 3 ... ... 7 6,858 741 741 442 8,782 82.23 250 1869-70 ... 4 3 ... ... 7 6,164 841 847 680 8,532 78.5 243 36 Grand Total, N.W. Provinces ... 1868-69 ... 188 50 5 11 254 266,587 34,150 10,358 20,495 331,590 85.69 261 1869-70 ... 188 45 5 22 260 237,298 33,370 9,250 19,429 299 ,857 84.77 230 ALMORAH: W. WATSON, M. B., Offg. Supdt.-Genl., Vaccination, N.-W. P. The 1st May, 1870.
( 8 ) A.( 9 ) Annual Report of Vaccine Operations in the Agra and Meerut Divisions for the season 1869-70, under the superintendence of Surgeon R. Pringle M. D., Superintendent of Vaccine, Agra and Meerut Division. Establishment. 1 Superintendent. 12 Native Superintendents. 61 Vaccinators. 1 Writer. 2 Chupprassees. THE establishment of the Vaccine Depart- ment of the Agra and Meerut Division during the season 1869-70 was the same as that of the previous one, being as per margin. The collection of vaccine lymph under the Snowy Range for the plains operations of the season under report. 2. This was commenced in May, 1869, under my own direct supervision; and the supply collected, though not so large as that of the previous season owing to there being only one Native Superintendent and fewer Vaccinators at work, was yet sufficient for my wants, and to meet all demands on my office for vac- cine lymph. The quality was equally good with that of last year. Tour of the Superintendent. 3. During the past season this has been limited to the Meerut Division, as I thought it better to thoroughly inspect one division than to march rapidly through two, which latter would have entailed my inspecting only the villages and work lying near my line of march; by adopting the former plan, I have been enabled to visit districts unvisited before, and, so to speak, shewn myself to people who had only vaguely heard of the existence of my appointment, and who perhaps had doubts of my own. The occur- rences met with in this tour deemed worthy of note will be found noticed in the general remarks at the conclusion of this Report. MUNICIPAL VACCINATION. No. Municipalities. 3 Agra. 2 Allyghur. 2 Hattrass. 1 Atrowlee. 1 Hurdooagunge. 1 Secundra Rao. 1 Muttra. I Bindrabun. 1 Kosee. 1 Mynpoory. 1 Saharunpore. 1 Moozuffiernuggur. 4 Terrce. 1 Furruckabad. 1 Julleysur. 1 Etawah. 1 Kassgnnge. 1 Boolundshuhar. 1 Anoopshuhur. 1 Koorjah. 27 (Extra.) 2 Meerut. 29 4. During the past season the only addition to the roll of Municipal Vaccinators was the two Vaccinators temporarily employed by the Meerut Municipality. It will be in the recollec- tion of the Government the objections this Municipa- lity raised either to contribute funds for a Municipal Vaccinator, or place him under this Department; but, when at Meerut, in December, 1869, a member of the Municipality applied for the services of two Vaccinators, but merely for the vaccinating season, though this was contrary to the rules of this Depart- ment, yet in the interests of suffering humanity I at once complied with the request, and the numbers vaccinated in less than 3½ months, viz. 1,509, are a proof of the necessity of some better arrangements being made in the future for a large city like Meerut, with a large force of Europeans in the adjoining Can- tonments. During the past season there has been a considerable falling off in the numbers of the ope- rations in nearly all the Municipalities, but the rates of success are as a rule good. This falling off is mainly due to the entire absence of small-pox this season, not as an epidemic alone, but even to the extent of a few isolated cases. Till March I heard of no cases of small-pox, and these only in Gungoh, a town about 20 miles from Saharunpore, to which I shall allude hereafter. Another cause, which has tended to reduce the numbers of the operations, has been the desire to confine the work of the Municipal Vaccinators within, as far as practi- cable, Municipal limits; while the district work is made over to the Government Vaccinator. The reason of this is, that the services of the Municipal Vaccinator may be available at any time should the Civil Surgeon require them, and this could only be calculated on if he were at work in the villages near. The result of my experience is that the residents of towns are as a rule less anxious to accept vaccination for their children than the villagers at some distance from the Sudder Station, owing, 4 3
( 10 ) I fear, to the inducements of trade among the former leaving them little time to think of aught else. Remarks on the Annual Returns. 5. These this season have been drawn up according to those supplied by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India. I am aware that the returns this season show a considerable falling of in number, due entirely, in my opinion, to the complete absence of any epidemic of small-pox. When the disease is present as an epidemic, the benefits of vaccination are apparent and can be realized, and, if the season will admit of it, put to the test at once. When no such alarm or inducement exists as was sup- plied by the fatal and severe epidemic witnessed in 1868-69, the necessity for vacci- nation seems less apparent, and the prophylactic consequently is despised. A very good instance of this was witnessed in the Saharunpore District this season. On the appearance of small-pox the services of a Vaccinator were applied for; and upwards of 200 cases were operated on in two or three days in one single large village. 6. The rate of success has fallen 1 per cent., and would have been much lower but for the improvement in some places. This is mainly due to the inferior class of applicants for appointments, or &quot; Omedwars.&quot; By a late order these now are confined to Hindoos ; and to any one who knows the habits and mode of living of the Hindoo and Mussulmans, it is needless to say which forms the best &quot; Omedwar.&quot; A Hindoo, owing to the expenses attendant on cooking, &c., will only do &quot; Omedwaree &quot; for a short time, while a Mussulman, from sharing his food with his friends and thus reducing his expenses, can afford to hold on without employment for a longer period, and thus learn his work better. General Remarks. 7. I have found it impossible to carry out the instructions of the late Superin- tendent-General of Vaccine, North-Western Pro- vinces, regarding filling tubes with plains' lymph, as it would very seriously have injured my season's work, from the absurd story raised about the child with milk instead of blood who was to rule the world and turn the British out of India, and to detect whose advent the present scheme of vaccination was designed by the Government, and the excuse of filling the tubes was the method adopted to find out this child. During my late tour I was astonished to find that many Native Superintendents whom I had recommended to my predecessor, Mr. Waghorn, as good Vaccinators, and as such fit for promotion, failed so entirely in their new posts ; but their conduct has now convinced me of what I long suspected, that a good Vaccinator does not always make a good Native Superintendent; and now that the system of rewards and punishments has been stopped, I am at a loss to know how to reward a good Vaccinator who is clearly unfit for the post of a Superinten- dent, but nevertheless deserving of some encouragement. This subject having been so fully discussed in the Report of last season, it is unnecessary to allude to it further. Agreeably to the orders contained in Government Circular No. 9A. of 1870, dated 12th March, 1870, the Municipal Vaccinators in the Division under my superinten- dence have been directed to place themselves under the orders of the Magistrates during the non-vaccinating season. During the past season I have met with no cases of Hukeems who have in my opinion come up to the standard which should be reached before a native can be safely entrusted with the practice of vaccination, unless under the control of the Department, as with very few exceptions I should be inclined to fear that the diploma to practice vaccination would, in most native hands, be made use of as a means of extortion, and thus do more harm to the cause of gratuitous and voluntary vaccination than could be compensated for by the good which might be expected from a system of vaccination carried on independent of the control of the Department. DEYRAH: R. PRINGLE, M. D., SURGEON, Supdt. of Vaccine, Agra and Meerut Divisions. The 7th April, 1870.
( 11 ) No. 40 OF 1870. FROM J. A. C. HUTCHINSON, M. D., Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination, Allalwbad and Jhansie Divn. To R. SIMSON, ESQUIRE, Secretary to Government, North- Western Provinces. DATED AGRA, THE 9TH APRIL, 1870. SIR, I have the honour to forward the Annual Report on Vaccination carried on in the Allahabad and Jhansie Divisions during the season of 1869-70. 2. In the middle of the working season a change was made in the superinten- dency of the divisions, owing to Dr. Watson having been selected by the Lieutenant- Governor to officiate for Dr. Pearson during that officer's absence in Europe. 3. A large extent of the two divisions was travelled over by Dr. Watson and myself, and the work of numerous Vaccinators was carefully inspected. Dr. Watson inpected vaccination work in the Zillahs of Cawnpore, Futtehpore, Banda, Allahabad and Jounpore, and I inspected the work in the Zillahs of Humeerpore, Jhansie and Lullutpore, and also in those of Futtehpore, Allahabad, and Banda. 4. The work accomplished during the past season is as follows :( 12 ) cannot speak in equally favourable terms of the three others I saw. Of the remaining three I can only speak by the results of their work, which for Cawnpore and Jounpore are very satisfactory. Amongst the Vaccinators there is necessarily a considerable diversity in character and qualifications; some have been found untrustworthy and have been discharged, and others again have been lazy and careless. The Mahomedans, as a rule, are the most active and successful; the high caste Hindoo is, as a rule, indolent, and he expends a needless time in the operations of cooking and bathing, and above all exhibits a decided repugnance to carrying on work amongst the lowest castes. But still it would not be politic to entertain the Mahomedan to the exclusion of the Hindoo. The most efficient establishment, of course, would be a Mahomedan and a Hindoo Vaccinator attached to each Tehseel, but this would entail an amount of expenditure which would not be advisable. 6. The prejudice against vaccination amongst the population at large continues to be very considerable, and the most absurd stories of the objects we have in view are circulated on every hand. One of the most absurd is that the crusts which are collected from the arms of the children are employed in some mysterious manner for the support of our Railway. So long as the crusts are gathered, so long will the Railways continue to work. The consequence of this belief is that the parents are very averse to allowing the crusts to form properly, but are always tearing them off in the process of forming. There are comparatively few natives who, if left entirely to themselves, would have their children vaccinated ; the great majority are opposed to it, and would be glad were they never to see the face of a Vaccinator again. 7. This prejudice would be lessened by the introduction of animal vaccination. This would be a great desideratum as affording the means of obtaining a plentiful sup- ply of active and pure lymph, and so ensuring a large percentage of successful cases( 13 ) It is most necessary, therefore, to select men, as far as is possible, whose disposi- tions and manners are good, and who are intelligent in their ideas and conversation. The Native Superintendents especially should be men of education and good manners, as their duty consists not only in supervising work but in disarming prejudice and con- ciliating the chief men of the villages and towns, whose influence and example it is most necessary to secure, by explaining to them the benefits of vaccination and the object which Government has in encouraging its spread. 10. A serious objection to the present system is that all the Native Superintendents and Vaccinators are placed in the same classes as regards allowances. This would be remedied if the Government would grant an allowance of Rs. 150 or Rs. 200 per annum to form a fund from which the most enterprising and zealous could be rewarded. But as it is, the careless and untruthful servant receives the same pay as the truthful and active. 11. Again, the expense to which Native Superintendents are put in travelling over their districts is considerable, and it is hardly possible that they should do this in an efficient manner without incurring expenses which the pay they receive is not sufficient to meet. I would recommend, therefore, that during the working season each Superintendent should receive Rs. 5 per mensem as travelling allowance. 12. I have now the pleasing duty of bringing to the notice of Government the remarkable success which has attended the establishment of vaccination in the Native States of Bundelkhund through the exertions of Dr. Watson, now Officiating Superinten- dent-General, and Dr. Stratton, Political Agent in Bundelkhund. All the States which are under the care of the last-mentioned gentleman have entertained Vaccinators. I had the opportunity of visiting the States of Chirkaree, Oorcha, Duttia and Allipoora, and in each of these I was glad to find that vaccination had obtained a footing. Of course the work is still in its infancy, and many prejudices must be combated and obstacles removed. In the State of Chirkaree, the Rajah, who is still a minor, and his minister, a man of great intelligence, have taken a very active part in the work. The Dewan had to set the good example in having his own children and those of his relatives vaccinated, and he likewise distributed small sums of money to induce people to come forward, and the result has been a very considerable success. After the interview I had with the young Rajah, he asked all his Sirdars to have their children vaccinated. I have every reason to believe that the work so favourably commenced will be prosecuted with equal energy, and that the other Native States will be led to follow the example set by Chirkaree, and use their influence to spread the benefits of vaccination amongst their subjects. 13. Before concluding I have to allude to two cases in which small-pox of a discrete type immediately followed on vaccination. These cases occurred in the Cawnpore Zillah. Such a phenomenon following vaccination is to be attributed to the fact that the virus of small-pox was latent in the system in each of the children, and that the irritation of vaccination developed it, and at the same time exercised a remarkable influence in rendering the disease of a milder form than it independently would have been. 14. In conclusion, I desire to ask that the Government would authorize the furnishing of the Putwaree papers, so far as they refer to the number of births in the towns and villages, to my office. 1 4
( 14 ) The advantage of these papers would be that a salutary control could be exercised over the work of the Vaccinators, and the Superintendent in his annual tour could point out to the head men of the villages the number of births which had occurred during the previous months with the view of asking them to use their influence to have a corresponding number vaccinated. Moreover, the Superintendent would be enabled in his Annual Report to give inter- esting statistical information which he is precluded from doing at present. I have, &c., J. A. C. HUTCHINSON, M. D., Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Divn. No. 108 OF 1870. FROM R. M. MILNE, M. B., Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination, Benares Division, To W. WATSON, M. B., Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, North- Western Provinces. DATED BENARES, THE 1ST APRIL, 1870. SIR, I have the honour to submit, for your information, the results of the Vaccine Operations in the Benares Division for the season 1869-70. 2. Arriving in Benares in the end of October, I remained there until each Vacci- nator had succeeded in establishing the vesicle ; then, commencing my tour of inspec- tion, I have examined the instruments, books, and work of every Vaccinator in the division. 3. The establishment of Government Vaccinators remains the same as it was on the date of last report, but among Municipal and Extra Vaccinators there have been several changes. At the commencement of the season, the Municipal Committee of Ghazeepore intimated that on account of the funds at its disposal being so limited, the services of the Additional Vaccinator for that city must be for a time dispensed with; since then I have heard that the difficulty was only temporary, and that there is a prospect of its being in a position to support a Vaccinator the ensuing season. The Magistrates of Azimgurh and Goruckpore gave pecuniary embarrassment as their reason for not supporting Additional Vaccinators. As the want of an Extra Vaccina- tor is much felt in Goruckpore, the Magistrate of that District has promised to supply the necessary funds for next year. The Municipality of Benares continues to enter- tain two, and that of Mirzapore to support one Additional Vaccinator. During the season under report an Extra Vaccinator has been working in Chunar, but the funds of the Municipality are so straitened that there is little hope of his services being retained. The Maharajah of Vizianagram, K. C. S. I., has for the two last years entertained a Vaccinator who works in the vicinity of His Highness's Dispensary in Benares. The inhabitants of Sugnee, in the Azimgurh District, have again liberally subscribed for the support of an Additional Vaccinator for the more distant parts of that Tehseel. The custom of subscribing annually for this Extra Vaccinator was begun through the
( 15 ) influence of a former Tehseeldar of Jeunpore, and has now continued for three years. The Vaccine Establishment of this Division now stands as follows:( 16 ) were comparatively trifling. All the vacancies that have occurred during the season have, when suitable men were available, been filled up by old Inoculators. 7. These illiterate men have this year worked very fairly, but I am convinced that their work would have been still greater had not much useful time been taken up in preparing Dr. Cunningham's forms. These forms, simple as they may appear to us, give the uneducated Vaccinator a great amount of trouble and act as a drag on his work. It is much to be regretted that this difficulty will henceforth be increased by the more complicated modifications of these forms which are now required by the Government of India ; for the loss entailed in their preparation will by no means be balanced by any good that can result from the very trivial amount of information furnished to the statistical and sanitary branches. 8. For facilitating the comparison of the work done during the season under the report with that of the previous year, the following abstract of the returns is here introduced :( 17 ) toms are also a little more marked. For these reasons it is urged that the protection afforded to the system is more complete than that given by ordinary vaccination. This question is now, and must for several years remain, sub judice. As the number of inoculations which may at one time be made on a single heifer is nearly unlimited, the quantity of cow-pox matter produced is very considerable. On the outbreak of small- pox epidemics this might be taken advantage of; for, by sending one or more inocu- lated heifers into the infected locality a supply of fresh cow-pox lymph would be given sufficient to vaccinate at once all the unprotected in the vicinity. Again, to such people as believe that syphilis is communicable by vaccine lymph, animal vaccination gives a protection against their fears; for, as far as experiments go, that disease is not inoculable upon bovine animals. On the other hand, in addition to needless expense and trouble, the opponents of animal vaccination shew that the percentage of success from it falls far short of that attainable by arm-to-arm vaccination. The rapid passage of the eruption through the active stage is also given as an objection. Dr. Seaton in his work on Vaccination says : &quot; There is no one in England whose opinion on this subject will be received with so much respect as Mr. Ceely's, because there is no one who has nearly the knowledge he possesses of the disease in the cow and its transplan- tation into the human species. He looks upon this proceeding as not only open to the objections of impracticability as applied to the general population and of unsuccess; but he says that, so far from being likely to produce fewer ailments and cutaneous eruptions in the pre-disposed, he knows from his experience that it would, as being more irritating, produce more. He regards it as uncalled for either for regenerating lymph or preventing syphilis.&quot; Notwithstanding the opinion of this high authority, animal vaccination has, for some time, been gaining ground in England. It was lately suggested that, as the Hindoos of this district were so much opposed to arm-to-arm vaccination, they might more readily accept it if the lymph was taken direct from the sacred cow. When Dr. Pearson heard of my intention of commencing animal vacci- nation in Benares he recommended me not to begin in the cities either of Mirzapore or Benares, but to select some thinly populated rural spot, as he was apprehensive of the Hindoos imagining that blood would be taken from the cow. This opinion agreed with that of almost all the educated Hindoos whom I consulted. On explaining the process and the advantages which I hoped to derive from it to my Native Superinten- dents and Vaccinators, they also were averse to its introduction, alleging that their work would be stopped, and reminded me that all the more successful Vaccinators in their intercourse with uneducated Hindoos refrain from mentioning the cow as the original source of lymph, and call the vaccine matter simply &quot; dawai&quot; or &quot;pani.&quot; Having selected Hatta, a small village in the Goruckpore District, I purchased a couple of healthy young heifers, and, with the assistance of a Brahmin Vaccinator and Native Superintendent, vaccinated both of them in many places, partly from English and partly from Indian virus. A few on-lookers, to whom also I had explained the process and its advantages, watched proceedings until I began to use lancet and needle, when they sullenly departed, ominously shaking their heads. Forthwith, all the children who had been playing about the camping ground were recalled by their parents, nor was a child to be seen during the following day while my camp remained there. On the sixth day, when the vesicles on the heifers were ripe, I arrived at Khulelabad and after long persuasion succeeded in vaccinating direct from one of them the child of a &quot;bun- neah&quot; and two children belonging to the &quot; teli &quot; of the village. Two more heifers were then vaccinated, and, as it was impossible to get any more of the villagers to consent to their children being vaccinated direct from the former heifers, the remainder of the lymph was collected on vaccine points and distributed to different Vaccinators. At Tirkolia the same opposition was experienced, and but two children were vaccinated direct from the second couple of heifers, the greater part of the virus being again col- lected on points and distributed. Here not one of the villagers would on any condi- tion sell me any of their cattle, and on the two following days my Native Superinten- dent and the local Vaccinator failed both at Domeriagunge and Bhanpore in inducing any of the people to part with their cows. At Ahma, I succeeded in purchasing three 1 5
( 18 ) heifers, and one of these was immediately inoculated ; and with the lymph obtained from this source animal vaccination was continued until the end of my tour, with nearly the same modicum of success. In no single village were more than two or three children vaccinated direct from the cow, and these in almost every case were of the lowest castes. The people themselves would not give me any tangible reason for not having their children vaccinated from the cow, but my subordinates told me they were greatly afraid of blood being drawn, and that they were convinced that the animals would die from the effects of the operation. 10. During the present season small-pox has been much less prevalent than usual, and only in some villages near Azimgurh did it threaten to become epidemic. By the co-operation of the Magistrate and Superintendent of Police, the unprotected in the vicinity were vaccinated, and the progress of the disease stopped. 11. In conclusion, 1 would beg to mention the names of Syud Mehndi Ali, Teh- seeldar of Mirzapore, and Dabee Pershad, Tehseeldar of Russrah, as having afforded efficient assistance to the cause of vaccination during the present season. I have, &c., R. M. MILNE, M.B., Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination. No. 27 OF 1870. FROM W. WATSON, ESQUIRE, M. B., Offg. Supdt.-Genl. of Vaccination, North- Western Provinces, To F. HENVEY, ESQUIRE, Offg. Junior Secy. to Govt., North- Western Provinces. DATED ALMORAH, THE 6TH JUNE, 1870. SIR, I HAVE the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter No. 1904A., dated Allahabad, 5th May, 1870, and to apologize for the delay in replying to it; but it reached me while absent on a tour of inspection of the Gurhwal Dispensaries, and the Vaccine Report of the Bengal Government, to which it has reference, had been left behind in my office in Almorah. 2. I entirely agree in the opinion, expressed by Dr. Charles, that inoculation, if practised under proper conditions, ought not to be discouraged by Government, unless they are prepared to incur the large expense which is required for the entertainment of an efficient Vaccine Establishment. There is, however, a great difference between the North-Western Provinces and the Government of Lower Bengal. In Bengal, as I gather from Dr. Charles's Report, the practice of inoculation is all but universal, In the North-West Provinces, it is unknown in the Commissionerships of Rohilkhund, Agra, Meerut, Jhansie, and in five out of the six districts of Allahabad, and it is practised only in the Commissionerships of Benares and Goruckpore, and in the District of Jounpore. Even in these divisions of the country inoculation is not prac- tised on the same extensive scale that it is in Lower Bengal, and many of the Inocula- tors are not natives of these Provinces, but are Bengalees, who come to the North- West on a sort of inoculation tour, and return to their homes in Bengal after the expiration of the vaccine season.
( 19 ) 3. Although the practice of inoculation, when conducted on a very extensive scale, is undoubtedly beneficial to the community, it is the very reverse when conduct- ed on a small scale. If, for example, an Inoculator comes to a large city and inoculates two hundred persons, the result, however beneficial to the two hundred inoculated, is most pernicious to the thousands who remain uninoculated, as an epidemic of small- pox, originating from these inoculations, is almost certain to spread over the whole community. In this respect, the difference between inoculation and vaccination is very great. If, in the same place, instead of two hundred inoculations, the same number of vac- cinations had been performed, the persons vaccinated would have been equally gainers, and the thousands remaining unvaccinated would have been no worse off, though no better, than they were before the Vaccinator came to the place. 4. With regard to the supposed failure of vaccination in India as a protective against future attacks of small-pox, I can only say that my experience has been very different, and I believe that an attack of small-pox after the successful performance of vaccination is a thing of the very rarest occurrence, provided the operation be performed in the cold weather, and in the North-Western Provinces. I attribute the very different results which have been observed in Burmah and in Lower Bengal entirely to the difference of climate. The climate of both of these countries is very damp, whereas that of the North-West is one of the driest in the world. Even in the North-Western Provinces during the rainy season vaccination is rarely successful; but the amount of moisture in the atmosphere during the rainy months is probably less than the amount contained in the atmosphere of the districts bordering on the Bay of Bengal at the driest part of their year. With regard to moisture, the climate of England is intermediate between that of the North-Western Provinces and that of Bengal; and I am inclined to believe that if vaccination were conducted in the three countries, by operators of equal efficiency, it would be found that vaccination in the North-Western Provinces was in a higher degree a protection against a future attack of small-pox than the same operation performed in England ; while vaccination performed in Lower Bengal would be so to a very much less extent. 5. I believe, therefore, as regards Lower Bengal, the merits of the two operations, vaccination and inoculation, are pretty nearly balanced;( 20 ) themselves properly, and that they would not be dismissed merely on account of the comparatively small number of operations performed by them. A grant of money given one year, and withdrawn the next, would do more harm than good. I have, &.c., W. WATSON, M. B., Offg. Supdt.-Genl. of Vaccination, N.-W. P. No. 109 OF 1870. FROM R. M. MILNE, ESQUIRE, M. B., Asstt.-Surgeon, Officiating Superintendent of Vaccination, Benares Division, To W. WATSON, ESQUIRE, M. B., Offg. Supdt.-Genl. of Vaccination, North- Western Provinces. DATED BENARES, THE 1ST APRIL, 1870. SIR, I HAVE the honour to request that you will forward, for the considera- tion of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, the following remarks on the practice of inoculation in the Benares Division. 2. The ravages of small-pox had been so appalling in England during the six- teenth and seventeenth centuries that the introduction of inoculation in 1721 was at once welcomed by the majority of the population. This practice had been preva- lent in Turkey since its introduction from Circassia in the sixteenth century by two Italian physicians, Emmanuel Timoni and Jacques Pylarini, who get the credit of introducing the custom into Europe. 3. The earliest record we have of it in India is far more ancient, and is found in the works of the Hindoo sage Dhanwantari, who was physician to Vikram, King of Ujein, and wrote about 57 B. C. It is here worthy of remark that the Pundits of Southern India, while they accept Dhanwantari's description of inoculation in the Sakteya Grantham as orthodox, scout the description of a kind of vaccination in the same work as a recent interpolation. The most learned of the Pundits in Northern India go much further, and throw doubts on the authenticity of the whole work 4. In Benares, inoculation is said to have been discovered by the Brahmins, and by them handed over to the Malees, who are the special worshippers of Sitla, the goddess of small-pox. In the present day, however, its practice is not confined to the Malees, but is also performed by Kaiths and a few Brahmins, and the custom is not, as we would expect were the Brahminical theory of its discovery true, co-existent with the Hindoo religion, but is confined to Bengal Proper, the Benares Division, the Himalayas, the hilly parts of the Punjab, and some portions of the Bombay Presidency. 5. In illustration of the circumscribed limits of inoculation in the parts more immediately under consideration, the following tables, for which I am indebted to Dr. Sutherland, of Lucknow, are here introduced. It will be observed that Jounpore, the only district in the Allahabad Division in which inoculation prevails, is here included in the Benares Division.
( 21 ) Number. Division. Jails. Number of pri soners. Percentage plainly marked by natu- ral small-pox. Percentage plainly marked by inocu- lation. Total percentage of those marked by small-pox inocu- lation. Percentage unpro tected. 1 Benares. Benares ... ... 100 62 18 80 20 2 Mirzapore ... ... 400 40 16 56 44 3 Ghazeepore ... 100 23 24 47 53 4 Jounpore ... ... 100 39 18 57 43 5 Azimgurh ... ... 100 46 23 69 31 6 Goruckpore ... 100 68 12 80 20 Total ... 900 46 18 64 36 1 Oudh. Lucknow Central Prison 200 97 ... 97 3 2 Ditto Jail ... 200 96 ... 96 4 3 Fyzabad ... ... 200 93 ... 93 7 4 Gondah ... ... 200 81 ... 81 19 5 Seetapore ... ... 200 82 6 88 12 6 Sultanpore... ... 95 98 ... 98 2 Total ... 1,095 91 1 92 8 Here we find that while 18 per cent. of the prisoners in the Benares District bore distinct marks of having been inoculated, but one per cent. was found so marked in the adjacent province of Oudh. This one per cent. even Dr. Sutherland thinks a mistake, as in those cases the marks were described as multiple, while the mark of inoculation is always single. 6. In addition to the resident Inoculators of the castes above-mentioned, many Bengalees cross over from Sarun every spring and continue their operations during the hot weather. Thus, an Inoculator, unless he is a known resident, is always described as a Bengalee or Purbee. This custom, though a little more prevalent towards the eastern side of the division, is nearly equally common in the various districts, if we except the southern part of Mirzapore, where it is unknown, and Bustee, where there are no resident Inoculators, but the people to a certain extent avail themselves of the services of the itinerant Bengalee Inoculators. 7. The mode of procedure here practised differs in several important particu- lars from that described by Dr. Charles as seen near the Presidency, and also from what was until lately seen in the Kumaon hills. It is something as follows :( 22 ) go out until the eruption begins to fade, about the fourteenth or sixteenth day. During this time the other people belonging to the house in which the inoculated children reside are allowed to hold communication with, but not to touch any of the other vil- lagers on pain of being pronounced unclean. Should any one of these not have had small-pox, either naturally or by inoculation, no further restriction is placed on him, but he is treated with a little medicated conserve and is directed to breathe over a few cloves to prevent his catching the infection ! 8. Regarding the measures adopted to prevent the spread of the disease, state- ments vary considerably. Some Bengalee Inoculators allege that previous to the operation all the infants, delicate children and unprotected adults are removed to a separate house and are there secreted until danger is past. This degree of care is, however, in this district excep- tional ; for the majority affirm that the recently inoculated children are allowed to play with the others during the greater part of their illness. The attempts at segregation must, as a rule, be practised in a very loose way; for all the Inoculators I have asked have admitted that the small-pox is occasionally spread by the Inoculator, and this is in the opinion of many the reason why small-pox is in this district more prevalent during the spring and hot months when the Inocu- lator is at work than at other seasons. 9. The mortality direct from inoculated small-pox depends much on the care of the operator. On its introduction into England, it was about two per cent. of the operations performed, and even when done with the greatest care in the small-pox and inoculation hospital was never less than three per mille. In Bengal, the actual death- rate from the operation is believed by Dr. Wise to be from a half to one and a half per cent., which Dr. Charles, after mentioning instances where the mortality was so high as 30 and even 50 per cent. and so low as only 0.73 per cent., states as his belief that with proper precautions the mortality might here be reduced to the minimum recorded, i. e., three per mille. From the reports of various Inoculators and from the number of cases that have come under my own notice, I am inclined to consider the mortality in this division to be nearly two per cent, of the cases operated on. 10. But the great danger of inoculation does not lie in the mortality direct from the operation, but, in its spreading the disease it is supposed to remedy, by multiply- ing the foci of contagion. For, though small-pox thus introduced into the blood usually produces a mild form of the disease on the individual operated on, still this mild form is so contagious that it may give rise to virulent small-pox on any unpro- tected person who comes within the sphere of its contagion. Thus it was found that during the first thirty years after the practice had become common in England, the mortality from small-pox in proportion to 1,000 deaths from all causes rose from seventy- four to ninety-five, and in London alone from fifty-six to ninety-six. Thus, as Dr. Seaton says, &quot; it was becoming evident that unless inoculation could be made by com- pulsion universal, it would be better for the community that it should be abandoned altogether. &quot; This large increase in the mortality was doubtless in a great measure caused by the very reprehensible way in which inoculation was generally carried on in England; for the report of the Royal College of Physicians for 1807, after remarking that &quot; however beneficial the inoculation of the small-pox may have been to indivi- duals, it appears to have kept up a constant source of contagion which has been the means of increasing the number of deaths by what is called the natural disease, &quot; goes on to say( 23 ) 11. Though instances of small-pox having been spread by inoculation come more or less frequently under the notice of every observer, it is difficult to estimate the actual damage done in any particular locality. The restrictions undergone by inoculat- ed households in this division are quite inadequate to prevent the infection spreading. In Bengal it is usual for all the children in a village to be inoculated at the same time, but here it seldom happens that more than a single household is inoculated at a time; while the unprotected adults, delicate children, and infants under one year old are allowed to stay in the house with the inoculated children and by way of prophylactic are treated with a conserve of ginger, turmeric and assaf( 24 ) of inoculation. The second (b) is the regulation of inoculation such as was proposed by Doctor Charles for Bengal Proper. In a country where inoculation is almost universal, and where precautions are taken by the people themselves to prevent the infection spreading, such a measure may be feasible while Government is not in a position to provide vaccination for the masses. But in this district, where so large a proportion of the inhabitants is unprotected, and where the social restrictions on inoculated households are so lax, such a measure would, by encouraging the practice, but magnify the danger. The third measure (c) is prohibitory. 16. This may be either confined to the cities or applicable to the whole division, As there is a much greater chance of inoculation giving rise to cases of small-pox when it is performed in crowded bazars than in isolated villages, the Bengal Council in their Act IV. of 1865 made it penal for any one to inoculate small-pox in, or for any inoculated person to enter, within forty days after the operation, any of the large cities of the province. A similar prohibition might, with great advantage, be enforced for this division. This measure is more particularly applicable in cases where the staff of Vaccinators is not sufficient to protect the inhabitants, or where the people refuse to accept their services. In cases where the Vaccinators are sufficiently numerous to meet the wants of the people, and where inoculation is carelessly practised among a semi- protected population, I think it would be advisable to stop the practice altogether. But let me repeat that this measure cannot with fairness be adopted until Government provides a staff of vaccinators sufficient to protect the annual birth rate. 17. Taking the population of this division at eight millions, and calculating the annual birth rate at 25 per mille, we find there are some 200,000 children who ought to be vaccinated yearly. According to Dr. Pearson's standard, each Vaccinator should be able to protect 300 children per mensem, or 1,500 a season. At this rate it would require about 133 Vaccinators to protect the rising population. The Government estab- lishment at present consists of 28 vaccinators, one to each tehseel. This number would therefore require to be quadrupled. As it would not be necessary to increase the superintending force, the actual increase of cost to Government would be but small,( 25 ) season of 1869-70, submitted with your letter No. 13, dated 1st May last, and, in reply, I am directed to communicate the following remarks and orders. 2. In conveying the Lieutenant-Governor's thanks for your valuable and com- prehensive report, I am to intimate His Honor's full concurrence in the high estimate formed by you of the excellent service rendered by Dr. Pearson in his prolonged superintendence of the Vaccine Department, which was originated, and has now for some years been presided over, by that officer. Not the least of the benefits conferred by Dr. Pearson has been the provision of fresh supplies of effective virus on the spot, and also of trained Vaccinators and Superintendents for other parts of the country. It is a source of sincere regret that severe indisposition has obliged Dr. Pearson to retire, it is to be hoped only temporarily, from his office. 3. The result of the last year's operations may thus be shewn:( 26 ) * Vide G. O.No.9A./1249A. dated 12th March 1870. 6. The Lieutenant-Governor regrets to find that the financial position of many Municipalities should have forced them to retrench their Vaccine Establishments. But His Honor hopes that now that their funds are beginning to recover from the depress- ing effects of the Resolution of the Government of India on the subject of Octroi, the Municipalities will find it practicable to second the efforts of the Vaccination Depart- ment with even greater effect than before. The recent orders* suggesting the employment of Municipal Vaccinators during the recess in other useful work, as Hospital Attendants, &c., may aid in this respect; and I am to request that you will, in conjunction with the Superintendents, bring your personal influence to bear upon the several Municipalities, and induce them to add to the number of Vac- cinators. This is all the more necessary now that the Government of India has expressed its inability to strengthen the regular Establishments. 7. In future an abstract should be embodied in the circle reports similar to that adopted by Mr. Milne, shewing the number of Vaccinators in each district whether paid by Government or Municipalities or Native Gentlemen, &c., and giving the names of the Municipalities in which Vaccinators are entertained. 8. Referring to the comparative efficiency of Hindoo and Mahomedan Vacci- nators, Dr. Pringle writes as if the door had been entirely closed to the latter. This is not the case, although, the great bulk of the population being Hindoo, it is necessary to appoint the majority of Vaccinators of that caste which will find most acceptance with the Hindoos. But the character of the population should be studied, and where it is found that Mahomedans make way, there is no reason why they should not be entertained. 9. Adverting to the arguments adduced in favour of animal vaccination, I am to remark that the Lieutenant-Governor is in favour of the experiment being continued; yet it evidently demands the utmost circumspection, for it is abundantly proved by Mr. Milne's report (paragraph 9 et seq.) that a strong feeling may be aroused by subjecting the cow to the process of vaccination, and the Hindoo sentiment is so strong and excitable on the treatment of this animal that the success of the Department might be seriously hindered by any hasty or ill-advised action. It would be interesting to be informed whether the experiment of vaccination has ever been tried, and with what results, on any of the buffalo species. 10. The observations on inoculation by Mr. Milne, Officiating Superintendent of the Benares Division, are full of interest, and evidently the result of much research; as such they will be printed in the Selections from the Records of Government. The attraction of Inoculators to the Department in the capacity of Vaccinators is an object of prime importance, especially throughout the Benares Division and in the Jounpore District, and the Lieutenant-Governor very readily empowers you to divert, from the grant of Rs. 500 for the instruction of Hukeems, such portion as you may think fit, to be expended in drawing Inoculators to the work of vaccination. No doubt the attraction of Hukeems to the same duty is also an object of importance ; but in the case of the Inoculators a double advantage is attained; for, while vaccination is advanced, a check is put upon the centres of infection so profusely established by inocula- tion. It is also an additional benefit that vaccination will thus be advanced in the division which, notwithstanding the successful efforts of Mr. Milne, is still the most backward in these Provinces. 11. There is no reason, however, why in next year's Budget the sum of Rs. 500 should not be entered for each of the above objects, and this the more so as the state of the finances has obliged the Supreme Government to negative the scheme for strengthening the regular Vaccine Establishments.
( 27 ) 12. By the publication of Mr. Milne's report the attention of the various officers concerned in the tract where inoculation chiefly prevails will be drawn to the subject, and the expediency of adopting any legal measures of repression, especially in the larger centres of population as has been done in Bengal, will be kept in view. It is a question for grave consideration whether such a law should not be introduced into these Provinces, and you are therefore requested to ascertain from the Superintendent- General of Bengal how the legal provisions have worked there. 13. I am to convey an expression of the Lieutenant-Governor's great satisfaction at the countenance given by the Bundelkhund States to vaccination, and the success which has resulted. The thanks of Government are due to Dr. Stratton for his aid in this respect, and that officer will be desired to offer the acknowledgments of the Lieutenant-Governor to the Dewan of Chirkaree for his assistance in introducing vaccination into that territory. Baboo Bunda Deen, Deputy Superintendent, Rohil- khund Circle. Ahmed Yar Khan, Superintendents in the Allahabad and Jhansie Circles. Ally Mirza, Rujjub Ally Khan, Syud Mehndee Ally, Benares Division. Tehseeldar of Mirzapore, Debee Pershad, Tehseel- dar of Russrah, 14. The exertions of the officers noted in the margin are noticed with satis- faction, and His Honor is also pleased to acknowledge the aid rendered by His Honor the Maharajah of Vizianagram. I have, &c., C. A. ELLIOTT, Offg. Secy. to Govt., N.-W. P.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON OF 1870-71. BY W. WATSON, ESQ., M.B., Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces. ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. 1871.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON OF 1870-71. BY W. WATSON, ESQ., M.B., Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. 1871
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION For the Season of 1870-71. No. 62. FROM W. WATSON, ESQ., M.B., Offg. Supdt.- General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces, To C. A. ELLIOTT, ESQ., Offg. Secretary to Government, N.-W. Provinces. DATED ALMORAH, 8TH MAY, 1871. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit, for the information of his Honor the Lieute- nant-Governor, the returns of vaccination for the North-West Provinces, for the year 1870-71, showing a total of 242,614 successful cases of primary vaccination, the details of which are given in the annexed form. 2. The strength of the vaccine establishment was :( 2 ) owing to the absence of dispensary vaccination, that is to say, vaccination super- intended, not by the officers of the Vaccine Department, but by the Civil Surgeons of zillahs, whose pay is not drawn in the Vaccine Department. This system has many advantages, but it is open to the objection of throwing additional work on Civil Surgeons, whose time is already fully occupied, and it makes the Vaccine Depart- ment responsible for work which they have no opportunity of superintending. In very small stations where the Civil Surgeon has comparatively little to do, the dispensary system might be tried with advantage, but in all large stations I think that the plan adopted in the North-Western Provinces, of placing the vaccinators under the superintendence of a separate department, is on the whole the best. 5. During the past year, the following supplies of crusts and tubes were sent Crusts. Tubes. To the Superintendent, Allahabad, ... ... 1,724 924 ( 3 ) In one case both were unsuccessful, and the child was then vaccinated with fresh lymph taken from the arm of a Native child. This was perfectly successful on both arms, illustrating the well-known fact that tube-lymph, however good it may be, is never quite equal to fresh lymph. 6.In the month of November, I was asked by Doctor Harvey, Civil Surgeon of Eastern Rajpootana, to send some vaccinators who had been trained under Doctor Pearson, in order to commence vaccination in the Native State of Ulwar. I accord- ingly selected a Native Superintendent and 8 vaccinators, and sent them to Bhurtpore, Doctor Harvey's headquarters. I have since heard from him that he is pleased with the men who were sent to him. 7.During the past year Government sanctioned the expenditure of Rs. 500 for the purpose of teaching vaccination to hakeems, baids, and inoculators. Of this amount Rs. 50 was spent in Kumaon, where there are still many men who formerly practised inoculation; Rs. 100 was sent to the Superintendent of Allahabad, who, however, as stated in para. 33 of his report, has not spent any part of it; and the balance, Rs. 350, was assigned to the Benares Circle, of which Rs. 300 have been spent: so that in all Rs. 150 still remains to the credit of Government. As I have mentioned in previous reports, great difficulties attend the distribution of money to hakeems and baids, as the better class of Native physicians will not con- descend to practise the manual art of vaccination. Dr. Richardson tried to induce two baids to learn vaccination( 4 ) Owing to the great distance between the villages, the amount of work done by each vaccinator during summer is very small; but the tubes and crusts collected near the snowy range are very much better than those collected in the lower hills of Kumaon. The success of vaccination in this Commissionership is to be judged of, not by the number of reported cases, but by the quantity and quality of the lymph which it has for seventeen years past supplied annually to the plains. It may also be noticed that the districts of Kumaon and Gurhwal have been for many years an example of a large tract of country in which vaccination has afforded absolute protection against small-pox. In my last annual report I mentioned that for several years small-pox had been unknown in the Kumaon and Gurhwal hills. This is still true with regard to the interior, but, unfortunately, soon after my report was written, several cases of small-pox occurred in the military station of Raneekhet and in the adjoining district of Ata- gowlie. The infection was brought up from the plains by the numerous coolies who came to work at Raneekhet, and on the new cart-road leading from Raneekhet to Ramnugger. A vaccinator was immediately posted to Raneekhet, and continued to work in the station, and in the country around, during the whole of the past summer, and a similar arrangement will be made this year. The rise of this new station has greatly increased the amount of work to be done in Kumaon, and the work has also been increased by the influx of plains-men who have recently settled in the Bhabur and Terai, many of whom have never been vaccinated. Under these circumstances, I am of opinion that an increase to the Kumaon vaccine establishment is required. The existing arrangements were made many years ago, and at a time when the population was very much less. I would recommend that two additional vaccinators should be allowed, and that they should be posted during winter, one at Kotwara and the other near Hurdwar ; they would work during summer, one at Raneekhet and the other at Nynee Tal. I make this recommendation on the sup- position that it is intended to form a large military station at Raneekhet. Owing to the appearance of small-pox at Raneekhet, secondary vaccination was extensively practised in Kumaon during the summer of 1870, and this has greatly increased the total number of persons vaccinated. Should an outbreak of small-pox not occur this year, the practice of secondary vaccination will not be continued to the same extent, and in that case the total number of persons vaccinated will be less in next year's report than they are in the present one. 9. During winter I inspected all the vaccinators in the Rohilkhund Circle with the exception of one man stationed in the Shahjehanpore Zillah, whose work I had seen in March, 1869, and also in February, 1870. The vaccination which I saw in Rohilkhund was on the whole most satisfactory, and highly creditable to the Deputy Superintendent, Baboo Bunda Deen, who, owing to the illness of Dr. Pearson, has for the last two or three years had almost the entire management of the Rohilkhund Circle. I was particularly pleased with the work of the municipal vaccinators of Moradabad and Shahjehanpore, and with that of the Government vaccinators of Beharee, Sahuswan, Bijnour, Datagunj, and Gunnour. I found the work unsatisfactory in only two places, in the town of Chandpore and in the city of Bareilly. In Chandpore, the vaccinator had left in consequence of illness, and a substitute was acting for him. This substitute showed me forty cases which he called successful, and they were all successful to a certain extent, that is to say, in all a vesicle had appeared on the child's arm; but among the whole forty there was not a single really good case. It was doubtful whether any of the cases were efficiently
( 5 ) protected against small-pox, and, at all events, it is certain that in no one case was there any lymph good enough to be used for the purpose of vaccinating other child- ren. This man had been working most industriously, but, owing to want of judgment and care in selecting cases, his lymph had degenerated, and would soon have failed altogether. That the lymph had originally been of good quality was proved by an examination of the vaccine-crusts, and of the cicatrices of vaccination on the arms of children who had been vaccinated a month previously by the vaccinator for whom he was acting. This occurrence illustrates the necessity of constant and careful supervision, and explains the circumstance, which at first sight appears anomalous enough, that one result of efficient superintendence is to diminish the reported number of successful cases. This occurs in two ways: in the first place, in the absence of efficient supervi- sion, there will probably always be a certain number of vaccinators dishonest enough to send in reports which they know to be false, entering as successful cases which they have never vaccinated at all. This swells the column of total numbers vaccinated, as well as of successfully vaccinated. In the second place, there is a still larger number of vaccinators, who, without being absolutely dishonest, are far too easily satisfied with the result of their operations. Such men enter all their doubtful cases as successful, and in this way they have a large percentage of successful cases as compared with unsuc- cessful ones. With regard to the city of Bareilly, I found myself unable to account for the bad success of vaccination. The vaccinators seemed to be active and industrious men, and had been judiciously selected, as one was a Brahmin and the other a Mussulman. They were highly spoken of by the Civil Surgeon, Doctor Corbyn, and appeared to be popular in the city. Many of the leading Hindoo gentlemen, such as Rai Bukhtawar Singh, Subordi- nate Judge, Pundit Ajoodhia Pershad, Deputy Collector, and Luchmi Narain, banker took great interest in the cause of vaccination. In spite of all this, the vaccinators did very little work. On the 12th January, I attended a meeting of the leading men of Bareilly, which was presided over by Rai Bukhtawur Singh. I inquired from the various Native gentlemen present whether they could suggest any remedy for the unsatisfactory state of vaccination in Bareilly, and in reply, was advised by the meeting to entertain as vaccinators two or more &quot; Malis,&quot; the reason of the recommendation being that in Bareilly &quot; Malis &quot; are always called in to treat cases of small-pox. I adopted this advice, and entertained two &quot; Malis,&quot; but, hitherto, the reports I have received of the result of the experiment have not been satisfactory. I am now inclined to believe that the real cause of the non-success of vaccination in Bareilly was the excited state of the town, owing to disputes between the Hindoos and the Mahom- medans. Except in the city itself, the vaccination in the district of Bareilly was very good. After inspecting vaccination in the zillahs of Bijnour, Moradabad, the Terai, and Bareilly, I marched to Allygurh, and went down by rail to Allahabad, in order to meet Dr. Richardson, who had taken charge of the Allahabad and Jhansie Circle about two months previously. I then returned by rail to Allygurh, and marched through Budaon, Shahjehanpore, and Pillibheet to Huldwanee, at the foot of the hills. The mode of testing the truthfulness of the returns of Rohilkhund vaccination was the same as that which I adopted when I was Superintendent of the Allahabad Circle A letter was sent on ahead to the vaccinator, directing him to meet me on the boundary of the tehseel to which he was posted, and to bring with him his nominal rolls of all vaccinations performed by him since the commencement of the vaccino season 2
( 6 ) These rolls are kept on separate sheets of paper, one sheet being devoted to each village, except in the case of large towns, where there is a separate sheet for each quarter or mohullah. As soon as the vaccinator met me, I took from him the whole of his nominal rolls and compared them with the weekly and monthly abstracts which I had previ- ously received from him by post. After having satisfied myself that the numbers given in the abstracts were the same as the numbers entered on the nominal rolls, I collected the latter into a heap, and drew at random two or more sheets, and informed the vaccinator, that he must show me all the children whose names were entered on the sheets which I had drawn. This generally involved a ride of many miles from camp, but I made a point of seeing these particular children before inspecting any other vaccination. On arriving at the village, I first inquired from the villagers whether the vaccin- ator had been there on the day he mentioned in his report. This is a matter of great importance, as a vaccinater might attempt to deceive his European Superintendent by showing him vaccinations done on a different day from that mentioned in the report. I then proceeded to inspect all the children whose names were entered on the nominal roll; and this is easily done, as the roll gives the name, age, and sex of each child, as well as the father's name and his caste. Occasionally I was told that some of the children had either quitted the village or had gone away for the day to some neighbouring place, but in such cases I had little difficulty in satisfying myself whether the vaccinator's report was correct or otherwise. This was done by asking the people of the village to tell me the caste and age of the absent child, and their statements were compared with those given in the nominal roll, which had remained in my possession from the date of my arrival in the tehseel, so that the vaccinator could have had no opportunity of altering it to suit his purposes. After having inspected all the children whose names appeared on the rolls, I accom- panied the vaccinator to any other villages which happened to be near, or to any villages in which small-pox had recently occurred. 10. The Agra and Meerut Circle is the largest in the North-Western Provinces, and has attached to it a hill district, consisting of the Native State of Tehree and of the British territory of Jounsar Bawur. In para. 2 of his report, the Superintendent, Dr. Pringle, mentions the superiority of the tubes filled in his own hill district as compared with those which he received from England : 80 per cent of the former were good, and only 50 per cent. of the latter. The difference can easily be understood, as, however good the lymph may be when it leaves England, a considerable percentage may be expected to be found bad after a long sea voyage, and more particularly after exposure to the heat of the plains of India, consequent on transmission by post from Bombay to the headquarters of the Superintendent and from there to the address of the vaccinator who is to use the tubes. Hill tubes, on the contrary, are kept in a cold climate until the time for using them arrives, and are then sent direct to the vaccinator. In para. 9, Dr. Pringle states that in his return, vaccination of adults in jails, &c., has been entered under the column of &quot;primary vaccination.&quot; In all the other circles these cases have been included under column 10, &quot;revaccination.&quot; In para. 11, the question of animal vaccination is discussed at great length, and I entirely agree with the opinions therein expressed. As far as I know, no good autho- rity in England has ever approved of the introduction of the practice of animal vacci- nation. It has, however, been praised by some Continental authorities, and it has been found highly satisfactory in Bombay. In his report for 1869-70, the Superintendent of the Central Circle, Bombay, Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anento Chandaroba, says :( 7 ) &quot; In animal vaccination, we have now provided to us the means of producing a &quot; supply of lymph, the purest and most effective, to an unlimited extent &quot; It appears to me that these paragraphs explain the reason why the practice of animal vaccination has met with exceptional favour in Bombay. In that presidency vaccination is carried on all the year round, and there are within its limits no lofty mountains from which to draw fresh supplies of tubes and crusts. Under these circum- stances, there must be a constant tendency to degeneration of lymph, however carefully it may be transmitted from arm to arm; so that I can easily understand that the intro- duction of animal vaccination has proved a boon to the city of Bombay. On the other hand, I can see no advantage to be derived from its introduction into the North- Western Provinces, where ample supplies of lymph can always be procured from the Himalaya mountains, and where there is during winter no tendency to degeneration of lymph, provided ordinary care is used in transmitting it from arm to arm. In para. 8 of his report Dr. Pringle mentions that the Tehree establishment has been diminished. I am glad to say this is no longer the case, as Dr. Pringle has informed me by a letter that the Rajah of Tehree has acceded to his wishes, and that the full establishment has again been entertained. 11. Dr. Milne, in his report on the Benares Circle, mentions the difficulties he has experienced with regard to the new forms of vaccine returns. The difficulties attending the preparation of these forms have been severely felt in all parts of the North-Western Provinces, but, as can be easily understood, these difficulties are great- est in Benares, where, in addition to the regular establishment, Dr. Milne has entertained a number of old inoculators, men who are generally quite uneducated and unable to read and write. In para. 8 of his report, Dr. Milne mentions the attempt he made in Benares to keep separate returns of operations for each police-station, instead of keep- ing, as formerly, one register for each tehseel. This was also tried in Rohilkhund, and the Rohilkhund returns can be submitted to Government if required, but as the Superintendents of the Agra, Allahabad, and Be- nares Circles have sent in their returns for tehseels, and not for police-stations, I have preferred to send in the Rohilkhund returns so as to correspond with those of the other circles. In para. 13, Dr. Milne mentions the result of his experiments on animal vacci- nation. As it is difficult to judge accurately of such experiments, performed while marching daily, I propose, with Dr. Milne's assistance, to conduct a series of experi- ments on cows and buffaloes in Almorah this autumn. Hitherto I have not been able to try any experiments myself, as I was obliged to march rapidly during the whole of the last winter. 12. On the 14th November, 1870, Dr. Richardson took charge of the office of Superintendent of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Circle. The chief peculiarity of this circle is, that within the last three years, and owing chiefly to the exertions of Dr. Stratton, Political Agent at Nowgong, no less than thirty-one local vaccinators have been entertained and paid for by the various Rajahs of Bundelkhund. It cannot of course be expected that the work of these local vaccinators should be equal to that of old and well-trained Government vaccinators, and it is pro- bable that for some years to come the average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator, as well as the percentage of successful cases, will be lower in the Alla- habad Circle, taken as a whole, than in any of the other circles. At all events, such has been the case this year. In para. 10, Dr. Richardson mentions the great success that has attended arm-to- arm vaccination as compared with vaccination done from lymph carried on ivory points. The only argument in favour of the ivory-point system is that high-caste Natives sometimes object to have their children vaccinated with lymph taken in their presence from the arms of children belonging to any lower caste. This feeling will no doubt gradually disappear, but it is still felt in many parts of the North-Western
( 8 ) Provinces, and in these places it will, I think, be wise to continue the occasional use of ivory points. 13. The Ajmere Circle is under the superintendence of Dr. Murray, Civil Sur- geon of Ajmere, an officer who is also Superintendent-General of Vaccination and Dis- pensaries, Rajpootana. This district has lately been detached from the North-Western Provinces, but Dr. Murray's vaccination returns for Ajmere this year have been in- cluded in those of the North-Western Provinces, as, by Resolution No. 1995P., dated Fort William, 22nd November, 1870, Ajmere was only separated from the North- Western Provinces with effect from the 1st April, 1871. 14. The Superintendents of Circles in their reports make mention of the assist- ance they have received from various tehseeldars and Native gentlemen, and I have the honour to request that, as in former years, letters may be sent acknowledging their ser- vices. I have the honour to submit the following list:( 9 ) Abstract Return of Primary Vaccination in the North-Western Provinces for the years 1869-70 and 1870-71. Native Superintendent. Circle. Season VACCINATORS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Average percentage. Average number of primary vac- cinations by each vaccinator. Paid by Government. Municipal. Local. Native landlord. 2 Kumaon, ... ... ... ... 1869-70, ... 10 ... 3 ... 13 21,334 1,066 852 23,252 95.24 1,788 1870-71, ... 10 .. 3 ... 13 22,840 1,264 1,041 25,145 94.7 1,934 6 Rohilkhund, ... ... ... 1869-70, ... 30 10 1 ... 41 67,290 7,835 3,811 78,936 89.57 1,925 1870-71, ... 30 10 3 ... 43 63,215 9,844 4,395 77,454 86.52 1,801 13 Agra and Meerut, ... ... ... 1869-70, ... 61 23 ... 4 88 76,467 10,942 5,573 92,982 87.48 1,056 1870-71, ... 61 25 ... 3 89 72,239 8,947 6,650 87,836 88.9 986 9 Allahabad and Jhansie,... ... ... 1869-70, ... 55 5 ... 17 77 37,298 17,223 6,981 61,502 68.41 798 1870-71, ... 55 5 6 31 97 42,655 14,245 7,581 64,481 74.9 671 6 Benares, ... ... ... ... 1869-70, ... 28 4 1 1 34 28,745 3,876 1,532 34,153 89.03 1,004 1870-71, ... 28 4 1 2 35 35,672 4,462 2,403 42,537 88.96 1,215 1 Ajmere, ... ... ... ... 1869-70, ... 4 3 ... ... 7 6,164 1,688 680 8,532 78.5 1,218 1870-71, ... 4 2 ... 1 7 5,993 1,454 1,251 8,698 68.93 1,242 37 Grand Total, North-Western Provinces, ... 1869-70, ... 188 45 5 22 260 237,298 42,630 19,429 299,357 84.77 1,151 1870-71, ... 188 46 13 37 284 242,614 40,216 23,321 306,151 85.7 1,077 3
( 10 ) BENARES CIRCLE. No. 104, dated Mirzapore, 1st April, 1871. From( 11 ) The staff of vaccinators at work during the season under report has thus been 35, showing an increase of one to the number of last year. 4. What I reported in reference to the activity of the lymph received from the depôt last year, applies also to the store obtained at the commencement of this season. The vesicle consequently proved good, and care having been always taken to remove the lymph at the proper time, it continued effective until the close of the season. The re- gular supply received from the Central Vaccine Institution, Edinburgh, has enabled me to replace the lymph in use, when I found such at all weak, and also to meet the requirements of the Civil Surgeons in the division. The reason of their demand for English lymph is the prejudice that exists in the minds of many European mothers against having their infants vaccinated from Native children. It would not be inappropriate to mention here a case that came under my notice in the Azimgurh District, when small-pox was then prevalent. Two children on whom the vaccinator had operated showed perfect Jennerian vesicles, and at the same time an eruption of modified small-pox. I remarked that the villagers, instead of being alarmed at the appearance of this eruption, seemed rather satisfied, as it reminded them of the eruption that accompanies their favourite inoculation. I endeavoured to explain to them that the small-pox eruption was due to the poison of that disease having been imbibed previous to vaccination, and had no connection whatsoever with the operation on the arm. The vaccinator, thinking that the lymph from these cases would be more effectual than the ordinary virus, consulted me regarding the advisability of using it on others, but I told him that there would probably be no difference in the result. It is unusual to experiment from such cases, yet Mr. Simon, the Medical Officer of the Privy Council, has shown in his latest report that lymph taken from cases similar to those noted above does not communicate anything but the ordinary cow-pox; and this he adduces as a proof that neither syphilis nor other constitutional disease can be transmitted with the lymph taken from a pure Jennerian vesicle. 5. There can be no doubt but that the aversion of the Hindoos to vaccination, and their prejudice against the removal of the lymph, are both slowly giving way. Year by year I hear less of the absurd superstitious notions that vaccination, under the pretence of being a preventive to small-pox, was a mysterious means employed by Go- vernment to violate the religious feelings of the people. It was not to be wondered at, then, that deaths caused by other diseases were naturally laid at the door of vacci- nation. In some few unfortunate villages where this delusion still exists the vacci- nator has feared to risk showing his face again after the death of a vaccinated child from whatever cause. Happily, however, this state of ignorance cannot be lasting, since the beneficial effects apparent from vaccination must eventually bring the people from under it. 6. Following the plan I adopted last year for testing the accuracy of returns, namely, that of inspecting, not only the recent cases, but also those of an earlier date, and comparing these with the entry shown in the day-book, I found it necessary in three instances to remove the vaccinator for falsification of numbers. These three cases were too aggravated to be dealt with leniently. The first occurred at Nuggrah, in the Azimgurh District, and the culprit was one of the old inoculating &quot; Malis &quot; whom I had introduced into the department. The recent work he had ready for my inspec- tion was creditable, and correctly entered in the books, but on my riding to a village some six miles off, where the entry was seven successful cases, I found it totally false. The man, it is true, had gone to the village about the time specified, but, failing to persuade the people to allow him to operate on their children, he, rather than show a blank day, gave a false return. The second case which I detected, near Benares, was of a similar nature. The vaccinator had operated on several children in the village I picked out, but these were only about a third of the number recorded, and he could produce no village register of the cases entered in his day-book. The means
( 12 ) by which I have been able to secure approximate accuracy of returns have been to hold each Native Superintendent personally responsible for the truth of all reports forwarded through him. This is less hard than it seems, as it lies quite in the power of the Native Superintendent to check the slightest attempt at falsification, demanding only a moder- ate amount of activity on his part to scrutinise the work of the five or six men under him. Considering this, it has been my habit to fine the Native Superintendent in whose district anything of the kind has occurred, but in one of the cases mentioned above I had to dismiss him as well as the vaccinator, as he had connived at the deceit, and otherwise been guilty of remissness of duty. After the above was written, being in Benares for a few days, I thought I might as well examine the last work of the season, and see whether my men were to the very end equally prepared for inspection as when a visit from me was expected. The work of my oldest vaccinator, a man who has always given me much satisfaction, I found correct up to the latest entry, but I grieve to say that the manner in which the Native Superintendent and two of the vaccinators had been performing their work since my last inspection obliges me to dismiss them from the service and report them to Government. My suspicions were aroused when I saw in the day-book of one of the city vaccinators the name of a village, fourteen miles distant, where he had operated on three boys and three girls seven days previously. The Native Superintendent, Mahomed Bux, corroborated the correctness of this entry, but, to satisfy myself, I went out the following morning with the vaccinator to the village in question. My surprise may be judged when I found six boys of various ages waiting my arrival, and all with fresh scratches of the needle on their arms. Before making any remark, I asked the youngest child when and by whom he had been vaccinated. He replied without hesi- tation, &quot; late last night,&quot; at the same time mentioning the vaccinator's name. Another and older child repeated this statement, until the vaccinator came up with the village re- gister, when the cases entered corresponded with those before me, but not with the entry in the day-book. On inquiring into the matter, I discovered that the Native Superintendent was fully aware of the deceit practised, and that either he or the vaccinator himself had come out to this village during the previous night, and got up for my inspection these cases, to tally with the number recorded in the vaccinator's day-book. The other delinquent, a brother of the Native Superintendent, I found had lately made several false entries, and one in a village that did not exist. The verity of this man's book the Native Superintendent had also testified to. Having once before had occasion to warn this man on account of the false returns given by one of his vacci- nators, I consider it my duty to report him as unfit to hold an appointment under Government. 7. The remarks I made in my last report regarding the elaborate forms now re- quired from this department have been quite borne out by the experience of this year. In order to reach the capacity of the half-educated vaccinator, and wholly uneducated &quot; Mali,&quot; with whom I have to deal in this district, I had printed in Nagree, in a form calculated to meet the requirements of Statement No. I. of the new vaccine returns, some five hundred copies each of &quot;village registers,&quot; &quot;day-books,&quot; and &quot; monthly re- turns.&quot; Though these were simplified as much as possible, yet, to furnish all the in- formation required by the Government of India, they contained even then no fewer than from twelve to twenty columns. At first the number of mistakes was overwhelm- ing, and even now it is common to find a &quot; Mali&quot; making up his grand total of cases by adding the totals of the &quot; caste,&quot; &quot; age,&quot; and &quot; sex&quot; columns all into one, thereby multiplying on paper the number actually vaccinated. From this it will, I think, be evident that the vaccinators and &quot; Malis &quot; have a larger share of office-work than is compatible with the satisfactory performance of their manual duties. 8. In accordance with the views of the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India, instructions were received, just before the commencement of the vaccine season, to post the vaccinators to &quot; mortuary registration circles,&quot; i.e., to thannahs,
( 13 ) instead of to tehseels as formerly. Now, had Government at the same time sanctioned the appointment of a vaccinator to each such circle, there would have been no difficulty in carrying out the order, and undoubted good would have resulted from the increase to the establishment; but, with the present meagre staff, it has only served to cause confusion. The number of thannahs exceeds by many times the number of tehseels, so that the vac- cinator of each tehseel, instead of the one record as before, was supposed to keep sepa- rate the returns for each mortuary registration circle. As far as my experience goes, the result of this has been to hamper and limit the vaccinator in his operations For, during the month, he has either confined himself to one thannah, or, if embracing more, he has persisted in including all in one return. In the Punjab and Lower Bengal, where there is a travelling staff of vaccinators, the same difficulty is not experienced, as a separate vaccinator can be posted to each thannah ; but here, unless an increase of men is granted, it will, I fear, be impossible to obtain a trustworthy return in the form required. Since there are said to be many objections to the police force in this country having the executive registration in their hands, Government might, in appointing a vaccinator to each thannah, include in his work the office of registrar( 14) In October, with the assistance of my Native Superintendents and vaccinators, I had made out a list of the &quot; Malis&quot; best qualified in each tehseel to become vaccinators. To each of these I issued a purwanah defining the nature of his appointment, and forwarded the necessary instruments. As soon as the vaccinator had established the vesicle, he gave what lymph he could spare to his &quot; Mali&quot; assistant, who immediately began work on his own account. From what I saw of these men's work during the first month, I was sanguine of being able to show a good return for the money entrusted to me. But on the 8th December I received a letter from the Superintendent- General to the effect that only Rs. 300 of the grant could be spared for the Benares Division. Disappointing as this was after the arrangements I had made, I had no al- ternative but to recall my instructions and limit my operations to the means at my dis- posal. The withdrawal of so many men had a very insalutary effect on those kept on, for many who had begun to work in good earnest were discouraged, believing their appointment insecure and their pay doubtful; while those who were dismissed natur- ally became opponents of the cause. If Government were pleased to grant next season the sum of Rs. 500 to this division, I feel assured that there would be a considerable increase in the returns, though perhaps not equal to what it would have been had this withdrawal not taken place. 11. There are many advantages that vaccinators taken from the inoculating caste have over others. Being as a rule residents of the tehseel to which they are appointed, and known to the people as inoculators, they consequently meet with much less opposi- tion, and never require, as other vaccinators do, assistance from the tehseeldar or thanna- dars. In short, they carry on their work without aid, either direct or indirect, if kept in the district in which they are known. But being men of no social status, and almost illiterate, they are quite unfitted for the posts of Native Superintendent or municipal vaccinator, and are thus debarred from the rewards of the department. In connection with their work, however, there is one drawback to &quot;Mali &quot; vaccinators, and that is, their dislike to vaccinate children of very low castes. This arises, not from any idea of their own superiority, but from the fact that they were prohibited by one of the old inocu- lation rules to operate on any children below a certain caste. Notwithstanding the assistance rendered by some civilians to gain over inoculators to vaccination, many of these men still continue to practise their art more or less secretly, though, perhaps, not to the same extent as formerly. Only four deaths arising directly from inoculation have been reported to me this season : two of these took place in Benares, and two near Dohree Ghat. There seems to be a growing impression, doubtless due to the vaccina- tors, that to practise inoculation is now criminal. This is proved by the petition lately presented to Government by Purtej Dass and others of Mouzah Bahoopore, in Gha- zeepore, to be allowed to practise their old trade, from which they said they had been prohibited by the Magistrate. In accordance with the instructions of Government, I sent my Native Superintendent to try to induce these petitioners to adopt vaccination. He failed to make any impression on them, but I shall still do my utmost to bring what influence I can to bear, in order to prevail on them to change their practices. The case of these men is very different from that of the Tehseeldar of Seyedpore, who, though aware of the discountenance of Government, had two children inoculated in his own house at the close of last vaccine season. Much credit is due to Mr. Oldham for entering into this case, and expressing so plainly his views, and the displeasure of Go- vernment, at such behaviour on the part of a Government official. 12. In order to train efficiently the local &quot;Malis,&quot; it is necessary to have energetic Native Superintendents. Plains-men as a rule being more supine, I endeavoured to intro- duce for that purpose hill-men, who had been taught by Dr. Pearson. Unfortunately, however, the season at the end of the rains, when they have to join their appointments, is so very trying to the constitutions of men who have been all their lives in the hills, that I am doubtful whether I ought again to try the experiment. Two men out of the three sent died of fever within a week of their arrival,
( 15 ) 13. Acting on the instructions conveyed in letter No. 4655 of the Junior Secre- tary to Government, &quot;North-Western Provinces, I wrote at once to Bombay, and, through the kindness of Mr. Anunta Chandroba, was favoured, on 4th January, with six tubes of the animal vaccine lymph in use there, which is the same as that procured by Dr. Blane from Mr. Warlomont. The day after its arrival, I vaccinated a heifer of about six months old with the supply. Up to the fifth day there was no symptom, either local or constitutional, of the system being influenced by the presence of the virus, and I began to regret having used all my stock on one animal. On the sixth day, however, a few vesicles began to form, and from these I took as much lymph as I could collect, and vaccinated another healthy calf. As early as the fourth day strong fever set in, and on the fifth day this calf was so ill that it had to be carried on a charpoy the greater part of the march. This fever was accompanied by a large crop of vesicles, but I did not think it advisable to operate on the human subject with lymph which had caused so much constitutional disturbance to a healthy heifer. Ac- cordingly, with part of the lymph taken from this animal, I vaccinated a third calf. This case running a more normal course I was enabled to vaccinate two children with the virus taken on the seventh day. On only one of these did a vesicle appear, and it was in no way remarkable for size or development, nor was it accompanied by any marked febrile symptom. With lymph I had taken from the calf on the sixth day, I inoculated another heifer and a young buffalo. The former was successful, but the latter showed no result. I continued to experiment until the middle of February, when an unsuccess- ful case put a stop to my operations. From my experience I have not been able to detect any difference between the eruption produced on the animal from animal vac- cine and that resulting from retro-vaccination ; while the effect of the former on the human subject was less satisfactory than that caused by the usual humanized lymph. But in making such experiments I labour under great disadvantage, as, owing to my daily marching, it is impossible for me to watch to the end the individuals operated on, while I find I cannot sufficiently rely on the judgment of the vaccinator regard- ing the character of the eruption produced. Other difficulties with which I have to contend, owing to Hindoo prejudices, are the procuring of animals, and, when procured, obtaining the assistance necessary to perform the operation. This I have to do as best I can by having the animal held down, under a tree, instead of having him com- fortably secured on the operating table used for the purpose by regular experimenters or animal vaccine. The method recommended for operating on animals is to make with the lancet a large number of punctures and incisions, and insert in each a little of the lymph. This plan is tedious and difficult of performance on an animal held down by hand. I have therefore found it more expedient to draw with considerable force a large, strong, four-pointed vaccine-needle along the shaven surface, on either side of the teats, a distance of three to four inches ; and then, after inserting the lymph in these lines, to cross them at intervals with the same instrument, thus forming at each crossing sixteen points of intersection, equivalent to the same number of punctures with the lancet. 14. The chief, if not the only, reason why animal vaccine has become so deservedly popular in Bombay is on account of the deficiency of a good supply of lymph in that presidency, for, as they say, that was &quot; the burden of their annual reports.&quot; Having no such range of hills, they cannot, as we do, replenish the stock from opera- tions carried on there during the hot months. There being no such urgent reason here for change, or even increase of the present supply, I think any attempt to intro- duce animal vaccination into this division, considering the prejudices of the Hindoos, would soon prove detrimental to the progress of vaccination. Apart from this, the supposed advantages derived from animal vaccination are now believed to be very doubtful. After a very fair trial, the leading authorities at Home have decidedly expressed their opinion against its introduction. Consequent on a special report on the subject presented last year by Dr. Ballard, the English
( 16 ) Government deputed Dr. Seaton, the author of the &quot; Handbook of Vaccination,&quot; to visit the Continent, and report on the results of animal vaccination as seen there. He has embodied his observations in a most valuable and comprehensive report, which will be read with advantage by all who take any interest in the subject of vaccination. The conclusions he arrives at are thus shortly summarized by Mr. Simon :( 17 ) 4. Except in these Native States, the vaccine establishment has remained of the same strength as last season. The subjoined table will show the number and distribu- tion of the vaccinators and Native Superintendents:( 18 ) 9. This last favourable result is chiefly due to the success which followed the effort to introduce vaccination from arm to arm, to the supersession of vaccination by means of dried lymph on ivory points and lymph preserved in glass tubes. The lat- ter mode was all but universal in the two divisions under my charge, and to this no doubt is owing the low ratio of successful cases as compared with other circles. 10. Although I know that arm-to-arm vaccination was the rule in the Benares Division, my Native Superintendents and vaccinators assured me that this could not be adopted in my own circle, owing to the caste prejudices of the people. Such state- ments led me to be extremely cautious in attempting its introduction. I began by vac- cinating three children in a village in the Lullutpore District. I left the vaccinator to continue the work after me. The people made no objection either to myself or the vac- cinator. Subsequently, whenever lymph was obtainable, I continued to vaccinate from arm to arm, and during the whole of my tour I have never heard any objection urged. Of course I did not select a sweeper's child to supply lymph for the child of a Tha- koor, but I have vaccinated the children of the latter from those of Sonars, Kahars, and even Koris, without a remark on the subject of caste being made. 11. It will serve to illustrate the superiority of arm-to-arm vaccination when I state that of 2,952 vaccinated in this way in the Cawnpore District only 179 were unsuccessful. The result was unknown in 182 cases. This gives the ratio per cent. of successful cases to be 93.6. The ratio for the Allahabad and Jhansie Divisions was only 68.4 during last season, and this year only 74.9. 12. It was only set afoot in the Cawnpore District about the middle of January, and yet before the end of March 2,952 children had been vaccinated from arm to arm. In other districts it did not make such progress. This I attribute more to the igno- rance of the vaccinators as to its advantages, and the mode in which the operation ought to be done, than to any objection on the part of the people. 13. It is not so much the saving in labour which it effects, in preventing the necessity for repeating the operation again and again, which recommends arm-to-arm vaccination. Another great advantage is the diminution of the number of those cases in which, the operation having been unsuccessfully performed, the subject of it cannot again be found by the vaccinator, or, if found, cannot be induced to have it repeated. The operation having once been performed, the parents of a child assume that it has been vaccinated, no matter whether the vesicle follows or not. If it has proved unsuc- cessful, not improbably next epidemic the child is seized with small-pox and dies. This is immediately noised about as a proof that vaccination, if not harmful, is at least useless. I have met with several such cases, and the harm they do amongst an ignorant people is great. Arm-to-arm vaccination, if it would not entirely prevent the occur- rence of such instances, would greatly reduce their number. 14. Except in the Allahabad District, nothing like systematic or deliberate falsi- fication of returns, has been observed. 15. Taking them in the order in which they were visited by me, a few brief remarks may be made regarding each district. 16. Progress in the Jhansie District has not been satisfactory. The number vaccinated has fallen from 2,578 to 2,481. The Native Superintendent is ill-suited for his post, and will have to be removed. He is of low caste, and deficient in manners and energy. The vaccinator employed in the Ganotta Tehseel was caught falsifying his returns, and dismissed. In Mhowraneepore I found the people so opposed to vaccina- tion that a commencement could not be made until the Assistant Commissioner, Mr. Sturt, came to my aid. His influence with the people is very great, and to him is entirely due the credit of having placed vaccination on a firm footing in this sub- division.
( 19 ) 17. Like the Jhansie District, that of Lullutpore is unfortunate in its Native Superintendent. He is old and lazy: his removal will be necessary before much pro- gress can be expected. The numbers vaccinated last season were 1,592; this year they are only 1,369. Had it not been for the practical aid given the vaccinators by Colonel Davidson, I fear vaccination would have proved a greater failure. 18. In the Jaloun District, the vaccine staff were left almost entirely to their own resources. Little assistance, so far as I am aware, was received from the authorities. The Native Superintendent and vaccinators are energetic men, but the people are very hostile to vaccination. This is more particularly the case in the remote tehseels of Koonch and Madhogurh. Towards Calpee, where intercourse with the Cawnpore District is frequent, greater success has been attained. I spent a considerable time in this district endeavouring to clear the way for the vaccinators, and vaccinated upwards of 60 children, belonging chiefly to the better classes. The number vaccinated rose from 701 last year to 1,672 this year. 19. As in former years, vaccination has been attended with greater success in the Cawnpore than in any other district of this division except, perhaps, Humeerpore. The people appear really to appreciate its benefits, and applications to the Native Super- intendent for the services of a vaccinator have been numerous. The district autho- rities during their visits to the villages make it a point to test extensively the accu- racy of the vaccinators' returns. The advantage arising to vaccination from the re- cognition thus given to it by those to whom the people are accustomed to look up, cannot be over-estimated. The Native Superintendent, Nubbee Bux, is, without any exception, the best of all my subordinates. The total number vaccinated fell from 14,432 last year to 14,162 this year ; but the number successfully vaccinated rose from 9,357 last year to 10,292 this year. As already explained, this satisfactory result is due to the success which attended the introduction of arm-to-arm vaccination in the Cawnpore District. 20. In Humeerpore vaccination continues to progress favourably. The Native Superintendent is very industrious ; but, as vaccination extends throughout the States of Bundelkhund, he will be unable to do full justice both to these and his own district. It would be well if a separate Superintendent were appointed to each. The numbers vaccinated have increased from 9,181 last year to 11,504 this year. 21. Banda, although a neighbouring district to the above, offers a striking contrast in so far as vaccination is concerned. The Native Superintendent is energetic, and is well supported by his subordinates, but success does not result. The people, more especially in the eastern end of the district, are very hostile to vaccination, and not unfrequently threaten the vaccinators with personal violence. I have myself met with insolence from the inhabitants of a village, that of Bhowree, near Kirwee. The num- bers vaccinated this year were 4,577, and last year 4,617, showing a slight decrease. 22. Vaccination in Futtehpore is fortunate in having a good Native Superin- tendent, and in having the hearty and practical aid of the district authorities. The number of vaccinations have increased from 4,001 last season to 5,993 this. 23. I have already casually referred to the Allahabad District. Had it not been for the failure of vaccination here, I would have been able to show greatly more favourable returns for the year 1870-71. The Native Superintendent bore a high character for energy and ability in former years, and I was unwilling to attribute the decline of vaccination in Allahabad to any shortcomings on his part until I had made a thorough personal investigation into the way in which he had been conducting his duties. I visited every vaccinator in his district, and minutely examined the work and registers of each. It was soon apparent that some of the registers were false, and that the Native Superintendent, if he did not actually connive at this, at least took no trouble to detect and bring to notice the offenders. It was also proved that his own weekly account of his work was false, and that he had spent the greater part
( 20 ) of the season in the town of Allahabad, when he ought to have been visiting the district vaccinators. Some of the latter he had not visited once. As a consequence, they did little or no work, and some made up for this by drawing up imaginary lists of children vaccinated by them. On the conclusion of my inquiry, I obtained the dis- missal o the Native Superintendent and of the vaccinators of Barah and Soraon, both of whom had falsified their returns. In one tehseel of this district only did I find the work good : in the tehseel of Mega. This was owing to the interest taken in vaccination by the Tehseeldar, Mir Muddud Ali, who has on former occasions received the thanks of Government on this account. The numbers successfully vaccinated in Alla- habad this season were 4,797: last year they were 10,579. This will show the mischief which may be caused by the misconduct of one man. Another Native Superintendent of much experience and promise has been appointed, and I feel sure that next season Allahabad will regain its lost position. 24. I saw little of the state of vaccination in Jounpore, but what I did see was satisfactory. The Native Superintendent is a man of experience and energy, and is much assisted by the district officials. As in previous years, the Tehseeldar of Karakul has given every assistance to the vaccinator employed in his tehseel. Jounpore is the only district under my charge in which inoculation prevails. I visited a village in which the chief zemindar and several others had refused to have their children vacci- nated, but had them subsequently inoculated. So far as I could learn, no harm re- sulted to the children, nor had small-pox ensued. In this district there has been a slight falling-off. This year the numbers vaccinated were 3,938, and last year 4,450. 25. The municipal vaccinators, excepting those of Allahabad, have worked well. The numbers have fallen from 5,590 last season to 2,956 this ; a result chiefly due to the unfortunate state of matters in Allahabad. In this city the numbers fell from 2,819 last year to 779 this year. 26. Throughout the Native States of Bundelkhund, vaccination is making decided progress I was able to examine the work of five of the vaccinators employed in Dutteah, Teekumgurh, and Sumpter. In the first and last of these States, it struck me the authorities gave the vaccinators but very half-hearted aid. In Teekumgurh the case was different: there, the Rajah evidently understands the benefits likely to result to his people from the introduction amongst them of vaccination, and gives it his hearty support. 27. In certain districts somewhat unnecessary care, as it appears to me, is taken to assure the people that vaccination is entirely voluntary. In so far as nothing like compulsion is intended, no doubt it is voluntary ; but from what I have seen, the people are already sufficiently aware of the fact, and repeated assurances on this point, besides being unnecessary, tend greatly to render the people averse to its acceptance, and even insolent to, the vaccinators. To the solicitations of the latter they reply that the Magistrate has told them they may accept or decline vaccination just as they like, and that it is not their wish to have their children vaccinated. Were vaccination voluntary in the sense that, being simply placed within their reach, the people were left entirely to themselves to accept or to reject it, the thousands now being vaccinated would speedly sink to hundreds or even to tens. It is only by bringing it to their doors, and using every legitimate means to induce them to avail themselves of its benefits, that any progress can be made. When the influence of the district authorities is brought to bear in the same direction, the efforts of the vaccinators are greatly aided; in fact, to such an extent is this the case, that I attribute the difference in which vac- cination has made way in neighbouring districts as much to the degree in which the authorities have interested themselves in its promotion as to any difference in the caste or other prejudices of the people, or to greater or less industry and skill on the part of the vaccine establishment. 28. The very small extent to which the bulk of the population of the two divi- sions under my charge has yet been reached by vaccination, will appear from the
( 21) following calculations. The population being 6,524,763, and taking one-thirtieth of this as the number of children born annually, to thoroughly protect these there ought to have been 217,492 successful vaccinations. But, deducting those vaccinated in the Bundelkhund States, there remain only 35,245 such cases, and, even supposing all of these to be under one year of age, this would protect less than one child out of every six. Making similar calculations for each of the nine districts included in the Allahabad and Jhansie Divisions, the result, leaving out fractions, would stand nearly thus:( 22 ) still prejudiced and suspicious would cause more mischief than hundreds of successful cases could repair. 32. During my tour I saw only one instance of serious ill effect following vac- cination. In the town of Kurrah, in the Allahabad District, the child of a respectable Mussulman, a Cazee, had been vaccinated some time previous to my visit. Violent inflammation of the upper arm had ensued, and sloughing had followed. At the time of my visit a large, circular, healthy sore remained, and was evidently quickly healing up. Two other children of the same family had been successfully vaccinated at the same time with lymph from the same source. In both cases the vesicle had run its normal course without anything unusual. The father, a very intelligent man, made little of the accident; but several others were loud in their condemnation of vaccination, and in my wanderings through the town I was several times asked about the Cazee's child. 33. I received Rs. 100 on account of the instruction and payment of hakeems. As I made the performance of actual work, and the submission of a list of those vacci- nated, the claim upon me for payment, I have still the money in my possession. 34. During the working season, two large supplies of lymph were obtained from England at a cost of £13-8-0. This sum I paid from my contingent fund. I cannot say that I found this lymph superior to that obtained from the hills, either as regards its activity or the quality of the resulting vesicles. At first, I thought there might be some defect in my mode of performing the operation to account for my repeated failures. Of twelve children vaccinated by myself on two different days only five took. On the latter of the two days I got an experienced vaccinator to operate on other twelve. His success was even less: only three of his cases were successful. This was in the month of December. With the lymph from the hills other vaccinators succeeded better, and I saw several typical vesicles follow its use. Towards the end of the I received a supply of fresh crusts from the hills. In every instance in which these were used excellent vesicles followed. 35. In conclusion, I must not forget to mention the valuable assistance I received from my writer, Mir Ahmed Ali, when I first assumed charge of my appointment and was new to the work. AGRA AND MEERUT CIRCLE. Annual Report by R. PRINGLE, ESQ., M.D., Superintendent of Vaccine, Agra and Meerut Circle, dated Camp, Dehra Doon, 5th April, 1871. Establishment. 1 Superintendent. 1 Writer. 12 Native Superintendents. 2 Chuprassees. 61 Vaccinators. THE establishment of the Agra and Meerut Divisions during the season 1870-71 was as per margin, being the same as that for the previous year. The collection of vaccine lymph un- der the snowy range for the plains operations of the season under report. 2. This, as usual, was commenced in May, under my own superintendence, with vaccine lymph received from the National Vaccine Institution, London. The supply received amounted to 100 tubes, of which 50 per cent. contained vaccine lymph in a fit state for operating with, and proved eminently successful; 30 per cent. were unfit, from impurities, &c.; and in the remaining 20 per cent. the lymph had completely dried up. The operations with this vaccine lymph in the hands of our Native Super- intendent, and an average of two vaccinators, resulted in 1,066 tubes and 586 crusts( 23 ) for a good vaccine crust; but the unavoidable age of some, and the exposure to high temperature of others (probably in transit), made an unusually large number of them inert; and when the temperature at which a vaccine crust is rendered inactive is taken into consideration, their inefficiency from the latter cause in the first week in November was not to be wondered at. The quality of this lymph, however, particu- larly that in tubes, has been good, and none of the officers whom I have supplied with it have reported their failure in establishing a good vesicle from the first supply sent. This I think may be considered a good test of its quality in other hands than those of my own establishment. The establishment of the vaccine vesicle in the plains in November, 1870. 3. During the month of November, 1870, the heat for the first five days was unusually great, and the lymph employed during this time was therefore in a great majority of cases unsuccessful. On the 7th, however, the weather became cooler, and the operations more successful. Under these circumstances the vesicle could not be said to have been fairly established till the 15 th November, and lymph available for any considerable number of operations till the 20th. Closing of the vaccine season. 4. As usual, orders were sent to close work for this season on the 15th March, but the sudden rise in the temperature at the end of the first week in March virtually put a stop to vac- cination by the 10th, and some cases which I inspected on the 13th, though in young children who are generally kept in the house, and on whom the operation was lightly performed, were clearly injuriously affected by the heat. Actual period over which this sea- son's operations extend. 5. From the circumstances alluded to in the preceding paras., the vaccinating season in 1870-71 cannot be calculated on five months, as a reference to Statement No. II. will show. By this return, the operations for what is entered as the whole of November were 9,159, while that for what really was half of March was 11,666. Vaccination cannot be said to have fairly commenced till the vaccinator has a sufficient number of cases to admit of fresh lymph being available daily for at the very least ten cases, and as a rule, this was generally hardly possible much before the 20th of November. The season, therefore, to be taken into consideration when calculating the monthly number of each vaccinator, should be even less than four months at the most, and certainly not five, as is directed to be employed in this report. Tour of the Superintendent. 6. Acting up to the remarks I made in my annual report of last season under this head, viz., that it was better to inspect one divi- sion thoroughly each alternate year than to march hurriedly through two, inspecting only the work on the line of march, I have this year inspected the Agra Division with the same care which I devoted to that of Meerut in the previous season, with the addition of inspecting any work in the Meerut Division which lay on my line of march to Agra. I have thus seen and become personally acquainted with every Native Superintendent and more than two-thirds of the vaccinators in my divisions during the past season. My camp left Dehra on the 31st October, 1870 (as soon as possible after the despatch of the hill lymph to the various headquarters of the Native Superintendents for distribution among their vaccinators), and returned to Dehra on the 1st April, 1871. As was to be expected, much has been seen and heard during the above extended tour which appears to me worthy of record, and to which I shall allude in detail either in separate paras. or under the head of general remarks. Annual returns. 7. The returns this season have been drawn up according to those last furnished from the office of the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India, and though they have required greatly increased clerical work in their compilation, yet Statement No. I. is so full, and the means of comparison so ready at hand, that the labour spent on it is
( 24 ) No. of Vac- cinators. Terree, ... ... 3 Meerut Municipality, ... 2 Allygurh ditto, ... 2 Hattrass ditto, ... 2 Agra ditto, ... 3 12 more than compensated for in the perspicuity with which the results are recorded, since, with the exception of the twelve vaccinators noticed in the margin, where operations are taken on an average, the work of the remaining 77 vacci- nators for the season is most clearly shown. As I have in para. No. 10 discussed the subject of the numbers of the operations performed by each vacci- nator, I will not enter into it here. With reference to the decrease in the total of operations performed during the past season, I am afraid an indulgence, which I felt it to be my duty to grant (as no ordinary holidays are allowed during the vaccine season), after obtaining the consent of the Officiating Superin- tendent-General of Vaccine, North-Western Provinces, viz., of making Sunday a day of rest in this department, as it is in every other Government one, has had not a little to do with it. For instance, 986 is the average number for each vaccinator dur- ing the season, which, according to my calculation of four months, say of 30 days each, and deducting 16 Sundays, leaves 104 operating days, during which 986 opera- tions were on an average performed by each vaccinator, or upwards of nine on each working day; if, therefore, these 16 Sundays had not been exempted, there would have been 12,816 extra operations, or upwards of 7,000 in excess of the previous season. It is worthy of note, however, that the number of the cases per diem fixed as the maximum of good work, and alluded to in para. No. 10, has, during the past season, been nearly reached on an average by all the vaccinators. I am not aware if in the other vaccine circles of the North-Western Provinces vaccination is carried on on Sundays, but when I state that not a single holiday of the numerous ones occurring between the 1st November and the 31st March is allowed in my divisions, I think it will be granted that the vaccinators and Native Superintendents absolutely require some rest in five months. Sickness, and, perhaps, the risk of insult during the excesses of the two days in the Holee festival, are the only excuses accepted for a week day being blank in a vaccinator's or Native Superintendent's diary. There is also another cause for the decrease under notice, and which is well shown in Statement No. I., being due to the promotion to Native Superintendent of a good vaccinator, and his place being filled by a stranger to the district, and an inferior operator. The case I allude to is under the heading of Kerowlee, in the Agra District. The vaccinator who worked there in November and December performed 590 operations in these two months, while the man who succeeded him on his promotion to Native Superinten- dent, in the remaining three months performed only 424 operations, when vaccine lymph should have been in abundance, and the result has been a loss of upwards of 600 operations in the season when compared with the last Other similar instances could be adduced of this apparent injury to the department by the promotion of a good vaccinator to a Native Superintendent, though, perhaps, not exhibiting such a total loss in result; yet, not to reward a deserving vaccinator because it might affect the numerical returns, independent of being a grave injustice to the vaccinator him- self, would remove all stimulus to good work, and would end in making each vacci- nator do only enough work to retain his post, and nothing more. The rate of success is nearly 1½ per cent. higher than last season, and has now in my opinion almost reached its limit, unless steps are taken to convert the omedwars, or applicants for the post of vaccinator, into a recognized grade of the department. In the Vaccine Department of the North-Western Provinces the primary vaccine instructions are very defective. An omedwar may be described as an applicant for a post who lives on hope instead of pay, for a longer or shorter period depending greatly on his private means, or the salaries of his relations in the department; and more than once have I seen most promising men obliged to go home for some money to carry on a little longer, and when the nomination came, the answer not unfrequently sent was that the omedwar had returned to his home. To remedy this state of things, the only method I can think of is to form a grade of supernumerary vaccinators, as is recom- mended in Bombay, but this would involve an increase to the vaccine grant, which,
( 25 ) under the present financial difficulties of the country, seems impossible; and it is unne- cessary, therefore, to discuss the subject more in detail, or to propound a scheme by which a trained staff of vaccinators might be ready to fill up vacancies. The only other subject in Statement No. I. which calls for any special remark is the fact of the number of operations performed by each vaccinator varying as much as they do ; but having devoted a para. to this important subject, I need not enter into it here. Municipal Vaccination. Municipalities. No. Agra, ... ... 3 Allygurh, ... ... 2 Hattrass, ... ... 2 Atrowlee, ... ... 1 Hurdoegunj, ... ... 1 Secundra Rao, ... ... 1 Muttra, ... ... 1 Bindrabun, ... ... 1 Kosee, ... ... 1 Mynpoory, ... ... 1 Saharunpore, ... ... 1 Moozuffernuggur,... ... 1 Tehree, ... ... 3 Furruckabad, ... ... 1 Julleysur, ... ... 1 Etawah, ... ... 1 Khasgunj, ... ... 1 Boolundshuhur, ... ... 1 Anoopshuhur, ... ... 1 Khoorjah, ... ... 1 Meerut Extra, ... ... 26 2 28 8. The number of the municipal vaccinators during the past season has been as per margin, showing a decrease of one in the Tehree territory as compared with last year, to which I will allude hereafter, and the continuance of the two semi-attached vaccinators at Meerut, i.e., two selec- ted men taken from the omedwar list of this estab- lishment, and employed only during the vaccinating season by the Municipality. Their work has been ncorporated with the others, as it has been under the superintendence of the Native Superintendent of the district. Agreeable to the orders of the Govern- ment, all the municipal vaccinators were, at the close of last season's work, placed under the orders of the Magistrates of the district, or the several municipa- lities, who in turn transferred them to the Civil Sur- geons. With the exception of one district in which there are seven of the municipal vaccinators, all the others worked as compounders at the dispensaries in their various municipalities, thus one object of the Government in their late order has, as far as possible, been carried out, and these vaccinators have had an opportunity of seeing and becoming acquainted with the class of people who apply at the dispensaries for medical assistance. In the instance of the exception above alluded to, the reverse of this has been the case; and as a rule every municipal vaccinator has been sent to a dif- ferent dispensary from that located in the municipality to which he belonged. The result of this, and the withdrawal of the privilege of residing at their homes on a reduced pay during the non-vaccinating season, has led to these appointments being viewed as a punishment, and thus the only promotion in my gift to a deserving vaccinator, with the exception of that to the post of a Native Superintendent, has been removed, and some of the best vaccinators who have been promoted to a municipality for good work are now petitioning to be reduced to the establishment, or threatening to resign. During the past season, I have as far as possible appointed compounders who have learnt vaccination to these posts, and invited this class of applicants to qualify them- selves for the municipal vaccinators ; but the numbers as yet have been very limited. I regret to have to report that, during the season under notice, considerable difficulty has been experienced in regularly disbursing the pay of some of these municipal vaccinators ; and when it is taken into consideration that the credit of these men in the villages rests in a great measure on the regularity with which they receive their pay (they for the most part being total strangers), their efficiency as vaccinators is not likely to be promoted, and the temptation to practise extortion for self-support is im- mensely increased. In the instance of one municipality, their vaccinator's pay has not been remitted to this office since the 1st November, 1870, the date to which the last vaccination grant extended; and when I wrote to the President informing him of this, his was reply was that nothing could be disbursed till the budget was passed in April, 1871. In replying I remarked that a large municipality like that of which he was the president had surely larger funds to draw upon than an office like mine, and requesting a remittance; his answer was that it could not be granted. Had an intimation to this effect been sent to me when I wrote asking the municipality if they intended to keep on their vaccinator for another year, I should have provided for 7
( 26 ) the vaccinator at the time, but receiving a reply to the effect that they intended con- tinuing the grant, I kept the vaccinator at his place. With reference to the reduction in the Tehree staff of vaccinators, I regret to say this is a most serious blow to the efficiency of this department, as it is on this staff of vaccinators that I am dependent for my supply of hill lymph, and, owing to the unhealthiness of the interior of the hills in the rains, it is of the greatest importance to have two vaccinators ready to replace the two at work there should either of them fall sick, and now I have only one available. Since writing this the oldest of these three has been obliged to resign from weak health, brought on from repeated attacks of fever while in the interior during the rains. I am thus left with two vaccinators of only a season's instruction each, to collect vaccine lymph for next season's operations, as some time must elapse before the last-appointed vaccinator can be trusted with the duty of filling tubes. The vaccinators on the Tehree vaccine establishment are more highly trained than any of the others, as they have to fill tubes in such a manner that the vaccine lymph is not rendered inert in the process of filling or closing them. I most earnestly trust, therefore, that if the Rajah of Tehree is unable to meet the expense of a fourth vacci- nator, which is only Rs. 60 in addition to the Rs. 600 allowed, that the Government will be pleased to sanction it. The total allowance for the Tehree staff of four vacci- nators and one Native Superintendent was on its first establishment Rs. 660, and the withdrawal of Rs. 60 has compelled me to dispense with one vaccinator. Revaccination. 9. A reference to the returns will exhibit the circumstance of the revaccination column in Statement No. I. being left blank, and I there- fore feel that some explanation is required on the subject. The term revaccination is described in the foot-note of Statement No. I. by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India as follows :( 27 ) inserted for the cases which could alone be those of revaccination, then the seven years which it is generally considered should elapse before the second operation ought to be performed have not yet expired under the present scheme; and, supposing they had, I should think that revaccination in the strict sense of the term ought not to be thought of as far as the operations of the vaccinators in the villages are concerned, till the thousands unprotected by even a successful primary vaccination are immensely reduced in numbers. After what I have recorded, I need hardly add that no revaccinations of any kind have been performed during the past season, and the operations performed in the jails alluded to hereafter, happening as they did in the cases of prisoners who had been inoculated, or had had small-pox, have been entered, as they really were, under the primary vaccination column. Before closing this para., I would wish to add a few remarks regarding what, for want of a better name, I may call fictitious vaccination, as witnessed during the past season. During my tour I had an opportunity of seeing a considerable number of vaccine operations which had been performed on the prisoners in two jails in my divisions, the results of which have an important bearing on the subject of this para. The subjects of these operations were prisoners of all ages, from adults to old men, many of them deeply pitted with small-pox. In nearly all these cases there was, as might have been expected from the circumstances attendant on re- sidence in a jail, and no preparatory treatment, more or less irritation. Of upwards of fifty on which there should have been good crusts, only four were met with, and of twenty, within seventy hours of the operations there was an amount of irritation which quite precluded the probability of a characteristic vaccine vesicle resulting. With reference to these vaccinations in the jails, I would with all deference suggest that the operations be confined to those prisoners who have no mark of small-pox or of inoculation, including, perhaps, those on whom there is a primary vaccine cicatrix, for careful experiments with a second vaccine operation. The scheme of vaccination in the North-Western Provinces being a voluntary one, it is of importance to prevent a clashing of practice within and without the jail, more especially as it is possible that these prisoners when released might circulate in their villages a report to the effect that vaccination constituted one of the punishments of the jail, and these men would cer- tainly have the following circumstance in support of their report, viz., that outside of the jails all cases of small-pox and those who had been inoculated were exempted from vaccination, while all prisoners indiscriminately were operated on. The report, there- fore, alluded to in para. No. 14 might, as before stated, gain confirmation from the above circumstance. Numbers of operations performed by each vaccinator. 10. Under this head the new form of Statement No. I. exhibits differences in the total number of operations performed by each vac- cinator which demand some notice. It will be seen that in some tehseels the numbers of last season and of that under report show a strange similarity in the totals of operations performed during these two periods as regards the numbers being large and small. If, for in- stance, the returns in the Etawah District are compared with those of the adjoining one of Mynpoory, a very great difference in numbers is noted; similarly, when Agra is compared with Muttra and Allygurh, and Moozuffernuggur with Meerut and Saharun- pore. Now it is when making such comparisons that the real difficulty of effecting a standard for the number of operations makes itself manifest. The generally accepted number of 1,500 in the season, or 10 per diem in five months of thirty days each, is exceeded in some of the tehseels in the Mynpoory, Muttra, Allygurh, Meerut, and Saharunpore Districts, when the calculation is made on four months and Sundays ex- cluded, and sufficiently approached in many others in these districts ; but in Etawah and Agra far lower standards must be fixed as a rule. The vaccinators have been changed, and some of the best men, as will be shown by the rate of success, sent to these tehseels, but with little improvement in the totals of operations. That religious pre- judice has nothing to do with it is shown by the numbers attained in Muttra ; and where apathy might be advanced, as in Saharunpore, the results would not justify it. To what, then, is it owing ? If caste or religious prejudice and apathy are thus
( 28 ) removed from the category of objections, I fear the only feasible one must be an unac- countable opposition to the measure, confined to certain classes of the population, and exhibited chiefly in certain localities. Though I write thus, I would not wish it to be understood that I consider this opposition to vaccination met with in the districts alluded to as peculiar to them, or India generally, while it certainly has this advantage in this country, that it confines itself to simply declining the prophylactic, whereas in other countries it raises an organized opposition to it, and I must say I have never met with this in my divisions. In the Etawah District a vaccinator told me he was afraid to go to a certain village, as the police had told him that the villagers had re- ported that one of the vaccinated children had died of the operation. Being on the spot, I made inquiries, and found out that the parents had taken the child to another village. The object, however, of this report was clearly to bring vaccination into bad repute; but, being confined to the village and neighbourhood, this report could hardly be said to have been an organized one. As long as the system is voluntary, quality, not quantity, must be the real aim of the scheme, and it is to the former alone that it must look for a firm footing: an unsuccessful case attacked with small-pox, and the disease proving fatal, shakes the faith of the villagers in the prophylactic gene- rally, not only as regards future operations, but also with reference to those which may have been successful. The number 1,500 has been fixed as a standard for a good season's work, but if cases presented themselves this might safely be doubled, as fol- lows :( 29 ) undoubtedly be entitled to a small fee for each successful case, which I may mention is very frequently tendered under the present system, which the vaccinator is allowed to retain on reporting the circumstance to me. I always mark these cases with approval, as there can be no better proof in this country of a benefit having been conferred than when a pecuniary reward follows it. I would allow one municipal vaccinator to every 100,000 of the population, and, as no time would be lost in going from village to village, this man could with a little extra exertion for the first year or two protect the population requiring vaccination above a year old, and subsequently the annual birth-rate could be easily kept under protection. The only difficulty which I can think of would be with reference to the seven non-vaccinating months, but the risk to the children born between the 1st November and 1st April would be immensely diminished if these chil- dren were the only cases liable to small-pox. Animal vaccination. 11. With reference to letter No. 4655A. of 1870, dated the 9th November, 1870, from the Government of the North-Western Pro- vinces, a copy of which was supplied to me, I regret to say that, owing to my having been on tour from the end of October, 1870, to the pre- sent time, I have had no opportunity of making any experiment on the subject of animal vaccination: the observations which I am about to make are merely the result of studying the subject by means of the published articles and reports on it. The report of the Medi- cal Officer to the Privy Council, and of the medical officers deputed to make inquiries into the subject, are far from favourable to the scheme. The Medical Officer to the Privy Council, in his twelth report to the Council, at page 38, writes as follows :( 30 ) careful manipulation of Assistant Surgeon Anunta Chandroba himself. With re- ference to Mr. A. Chandroba's experiments, one important proof of the superiority of good humanized lymph over the ordinary, or even superior quality of animal lymph is wanting. In all Mr. Chandroba's experiments, no mention is made of the employment of humanized lymph when the animal lymph had failed; had he done this he might have met with the results witnessed in Rotterdam in 1869, when the following was noticed:( 31 ) diem, for four months at least; and, if the greatest difficulty was experienced in Bom- bay in keeping up the relay of calves, I fear this would be immensely increased in the North-Western Provinces, with its Hindoo population : and without these means of collecting the lymph, the scheme in its present state would fall to the ground. Further, this animal lymph, in the most experienced hands in Europe, stores and car- ries badly, and often proves very uncertain. While on the subject of the quality and quantity of the humanized lymph, as met with in India generally, necessitating or not the introduction of animal lymph, I would merely mention that during the past season I have not, from the 1st November, 1870, to the 11th March, 1871, met with in the course of my inspections a single instance of either scarcity of vaccine lymph, necessitating suspension of operations when the vesicle was fairly established in November, 1870, or its showing signs of deterioration till the 2nd week in March, 1871, with the exception, as regards the latter, of what I have in para No. 9 termed fictitious vaccination in two jails alluded to. Two careless and inefficient vacci- nators had let the supply of vaccine lymph get very low, which led to their dismissal; but the new men from, it might be, a few good vesicles, aided with a little lymph on points from the vaccinator in the next tehseel, soon restored the supply to its proper amount. Scarcity of subjects willing to submit to the operation, and not an ample supply of good vaccine lymph, is, and has been, the great drawback to the extension of the present voluntary scheme ; and yet, notwithstanding this limited supply of cases, vaccine lymph is always available, in the event of an outbreak of small-pox in a village, for 20 or 30 cases a day, and after a week or ten days for four times the above figures if necessary. Small-pox. 12. During the past season small-pox cannot be said to have been very prevalent in any portion of the Agra and Meerut Divisions. There were a few cases in the Muttra District, and in that of Saharunpore, where it chiefly occurred at Deobund. I had an opportunity of seeing the mortuary returns of one district, and though they exhibited what must have been a considerable outbreak of small-pox, yet no report of it was sent to me by the Native Superintendent of the district, though I had written to all the Superin- tendents of Police in my divisions, requesting the favour of their issuing orders to their subordinates in charge of mortuary circles, to report at once to the nearest vac- cinator, by whom it could reach me through the Native Superintendent, any cases of small-pox occurring within their circles, with the view of the vaccinator taking advantage of it to try and induce the villagers to accept the prophylactic, and test its benefits then and there. If I may judge by the reports of small-pox, which I have received, I must look on the past season as one peculiarly free from small-pox even in a slightly epidemic form. When small-pox has been reported, a vaccinator has been sent at once, and the Native Superintendents have a standing order that, no matter what the extent of the outbreak may be, they must proceed at once to the spot, with lymph collected from the operations of any vaccinator through whose beat they may pass, and use every means in their power to protect all the cases requiring it in the village, beginning in the neighbourhood of the infested house. I may mention that both Native Superintendents and vaccinators are, so to speak, on the look out for the disease, as its presence adds weight to their powers of persuasion, and generally ends in a good weekly or monthly return. Hakeems. 13. During the past season, I have been able to make a commencement in what I hope will prove a great aid to this department( 32 ) important project on a firm basis. Mr. Ward's first experiment with the municipal hakeem vaccinator at Baghput was not very successful, yet a failure or two at first should act only as beacons to avoid the dangers that caused them, and not lead to giving up the project. While at Boolundshuhur, I had several applications from the sons of ha- keems for leave to study vaccination, but as they applied at the close of the season, their instruction was obliged to stand over till the next, though I supplied them at once with the vaccine pamphlet and copies of the forms in use in the department. I am particularly anxious that these applicants should be thoroughly taught before they are permitted to vaccinate, as much of their future success, and, indeed, of this branch of the present scheme, will depend upon their thoroughly knowing their duties theoretically before entering on them practically. I am in hopes that through these hakeem vaccinators I shall be able to reach the children of the class of the commu- nity above alluded to, as vast numbers of them are, I fear, unprotected. Inoculation. 14. As this subject is noticed in column No. 8 of Statement No. V., I may make a passing allusion to it here, though merely to say that the practice of inoculation has, as far as I can hear, entirely departed from my divisions, never, I hope, to return. Having on two separate occasions fully discussed the subject of inoculation, in most if not all is bearings, from personal observation, once in 1867, when the report was submitted to the Government of the North-Western Provinces, and again in 1870, when it was sent to the Inspector-General of Hospitals, H. M.'s Indian Army, I will not re-open the subject here, except to state that the practice seems to have been con- fined to the Himalayan portion of my divisions and Dehra Doon, and also to the northern parts of Saharunpore ; and, if I might take the facility with which vaccina- tion has superseded it in Tehree, Ghurwal, and Dehra Doon as a test, my only regret is that inoculation was not general in my divisions, as I think it must be allowed that where it is practised a great deal of ground is gained, as it proves the fact of the population virtually acknowledging the necessity of some prophylactic against small- pox other than religious festivals and observances. Here it may not be out of place to allude to the festival called the &quot; Seetlah Poojah.&quot; &quot; Seetlah,&quot; as is probably known, is the name of the goddess who presides over small-pox, and in many districts &quot; Seetlah&quot; is the only name for this disease. At these &quot; Seetlah&quot; festivals, cases of small-pox in every stage of the disease are to be met with, and not unfrequently deputations are to be seen which have come from the neighbouring villages, with gifts, &c, for the shrine, in the hope that the goddess will accept them, and spare their villages from the fatal disease; but, alas! the reverse is too often the case, and these unfortunate people carry back the poison of disease to their villages, and thus innocently are the means, not only of bring- ing the scourge to their own villages, but of spreading the infection over the country. I would, therefore, suggest that orders be issued, prohibiting, under certain penalties, the custom of taking cases of small-pox, no matter at what stage of the disease, to these &quot; Seetlah&quot; festivals, or, indeed, among any other large concourse of people. Steps are taken by the authorities, under the orders of the Government, to prevent loss of life at Hurdwar, Juggernath, &c., during the celebration of the religious festivals at these places, and this interest is, generally speaking, exhibited on the behalf of those who are or ought to be capable of taking care of themselves. I trust, therefore, that the poor innocent children for whom I plead will not be denied their share of the pro- tection which the Government has extended to the fully responsible devotees at Hurd- war, Juggernath, &c. No alarm need be felt on the score of interference with either a religious prejudice or ceremony, if any conclusion may be drawn from the case of the car of Juggernath, which has for years been surrounded with nets, to prevent the devotees being crushed under the wheels. On one occasion, when I was at Jugger- nath, these nets were the means of preventing what otherwise might have been an immense loss of life; and yet, I never heard that sanctity of the car was injuriously affected, or the procession robbed of any of its accessories, except, perhaps, being de- prived of what I once witnessed, viz., a few mangled bodies on the road. It is true
( 33 ) that, as a rule, these &quot; Seetlah &quot; festivals affect the innocent infant population chiefly, but in a country like this, when for nearly two-thirds of the year there is no known method of protecting the young children from small-pox, they must become, I should consider, alike dangerous to European and Native children, especially when these festi- vals are held near a large cantonment like Agra, as I witnessed in the hot weather of 1864. Nothing is considered too minute to be noticed, or to be acted upon, if it will tend in any way to prevent an outbreak of cholera, while a gigantic centre of conta- gion like the &quot; Seetlah&quot; poojah at Agra is allowed to diffuse its poison broadcast over the country. General remarks. 15. Having discussed so fully in separate paras. many of the subjects to which I intended to allude in this, it only remains, therefore, to mention one or two circumstances met with in the course of last season's tour. The state of the water in the wells in encampments, and on the Grand Trunk and other main lines of road, has long attracted my attention, and in November, 1870, when encamped at Khoorjah, I had an opportunity of discussing the subject with the Commissioner of the Meerut Division and the Magistrate of Boolund- shur, who were both of opinion that my suggestions to purify these wells, and to keep up a supply of fresh, and, hence, pure water, were quite possible. I therefore recorded them in a letter, No. 335, dated 21st November, 1870, to the Commissioner of the Meerut Division, and sent a similar one to the Commissioner of the Agra Division. I am aware that this subject is foreign to vaccination, and my only reason for alluding to it is, that among a wandering population like that of the North-Western Provinces, whose only drink is water, the purity of this important commodity cannot but be of the greatest value in a sanitary point of view; and now that modern research has shown what a vehicle of disease impure water may become, I trust my digression under this head may be excused. Under the present voluntary system, great difficulty has been experienced in protecting, as far as possible, a given tract of country before leaving it for another; before next season, therefore, I purpose applying for vernacular maps of the district for each Native Superintendent, and if I can get the tehseels copied sepa- rately, I will furnish each vaccinator with one of his own tehseel. The object of this is for the Native Superintendent to mark the villages in his own map in which operations have been performed, which he can easily do by the weekly returns, and he will thus be able, not only to note any which may have been omitted, and ascertain the cause on his next inspection, but will know also the exact spot where to find the vaccinator on a given date when he goes to record the results of the operations noted in the weekly return &quot; without results &quot; which is forwarded to him on the evening of the day completing the week. If each vaccinator has a map of his tehseel, he will be unable to advance the excuse, not unfrequently given, that he did not know that a village lay in such and such a direction, and therefore did not visit it. Agreeably to the orders of the Government, I have despatched monthly to the Magistrates of the twelve districts in my divisions, a return of each establishment and municipal vaccinator's operations for the month; and before the commencement of the season I addressed a letter to each of these officials, in which I mentioned that the object of sending these returns was in the hope that the Magistrate of the district, or any other officials connected with it, would, if opportunity offered, test the correctness of these returns, which would answer the double object of placing an additional check on false returns, and show to the villagers the interest which the Government, through their officials, took in the scheme. Whether these returns have been thus tested or not I am unable to say, but I have received no report throwing doubt upon their veracity. During the past season I heard a strange objection brought against the present scheme of vaccination, which is only deserving of notice from its absurdity, though it tends to show how strangely most opposite circumstances appa- rently are taken to prove a statement. The objection was, that the Government in circulating vaccination gratuitously was, in addition to conferring some supposed benefit on the infant population, indelibly marking them; the object of the latter proceeding 9
( 34 ) being to obtain some data for future taxation. My visits of inspection, therefore, among these villagers may be viewed by them, not with reference to the supposed benefit con- ferred, but to the permanency or otherwise of the marks made. The natural result of refusing vaccination in these cases would therefore be, that the fewer the marked children the lighter would be the taxation; the carefully recorded results left in the villages, and entered in the vaccinator's diary, would, if the circumstance of the benefit were doubted, tend to strengthen the belief that the real intention of the Government was with reference to some future action. I have said above &quot; opposite circumstances,&quot; as nothing could be more opposite than vaccination and taxation, the one being purely optional, and the other compulsory by heavy legal penalties, and this, of course, was the answer to these objections. I am happy to state that the above objection was broached in only one district out of the twelve, and, strange to say, this was in Meerut, and in the adjoining tehseel to that in which the story of the search for the child with milk instead of blood originated. With reference to the castes of the cases operated on, there cannot be a doubt that, as a rule, vaccination is carried on most extensively among the lower castes ; and as these seem to be entered in the mortuary returns as &quot;other classes&quot; though Hindoos, from their not being Brahmins, probably, it would be interesting to note, were it possible, if these lower-caste classes in the villages enjoy an immunity from small-pox from which the Brahmins and higher castes are exempt. In conclusion, I would beg to bring to the notice of Government the name of Thakoor Koomar Jugmundo Singh of Budwas, in the Etah Zillah, to whom I am greatly indebted for the extensive operations of the vaccinator in the district in which some of his villages are situated : also to the Tehseeldar of Kalsee, who has taken con- siderable trouble in explaining the scheme to the villagers in the Jounsar Bawar Dis- trict ; and the numerous operations of the Kalsee vaccinator are due not a little to the good services of the Tehseeldar in question. I need not particularise by name other Government officials who have, while on tour in their districts, said a good word for vaccination; their best reward will be in the knowledge of their having done their best to extend to the ignorant villagers under their official protection the benefits which they and their famlies enjoy. As regards my Native Superintendents, I would beg to recommend for some mark of approval Native Superintendent Toolsee Ram of Dehra Doon. In April last year, when the conduct of the Native Superintendent of Tehree led to his dismissal, and my supply of lymph for the operations of the past season seemed doubtful, Native Superintendent Toolsee Ram at once volunteered to accompany me into the interior, and do the duties of Native Superintendent during the hot and rainy seasons, thus giving up his holiday. The mode in which he performed his duty, and stuck to his post when his vaccinators were down with fever, owing to the rains being not only unusually heavy but late, was worthy of the son of an old Ghor- kah havildar ; and though he had permission to come into Mussoorie in August or Sep- tember, he did not return till the end of October, and brought with him the supply of lymph alluded to in para. 2. I have no means of pecuniarily rewarding any of my es- tablishment, and as Toolsee Ram is a Native Superintendent, and merely drew the battah of the dismissed Native Superintendent, I therefore trust the Government will notify, in any way they think best, their approval of his zeal for the public service. Appendix to the Annual Report of the Vaccine Operations in the Agra and Meerut Divi- sions for the Season 1870-71: by SURGEON R. R. PRINGLE, M.D., Superintendent of Vaccine, Agra and Meerut Circle, dated Mussoorie, 29th April, 1871. WITH reference to the reduction in the Tehree staff of vaccinators, and alluded to in para. 8 of the annual report, I am glad to say that it has proved to be only temporary, having been caused by a doubt as to whether the full allowance would be available for the present season : this, however, having now been received, the number of vaccinators has been brought up to its original strength, viz., 4. I may here mention that vaccination seems most thoroughly to have superseded inoculation in Tehree, Gurhwal, and there
( 35 ) cannot be a doubt that this is due, not a little, to the circumstance alluded to in my annual report of 1866-67, when the comparative merits of vaccination and inoculation were tested in two adjoining villages, when both were had recourse to to prevent an epidemic of small-pox, and the victory was awarded to the former by the villagers themselves. 2. During the past season not a case of inoculation has been reported to me, and small-pox, even in the slightest form of an epidemic, has not been witnessed. I should, however, be withholding praise where it is due if I omitted all mention of the name of the Rajah of Tehree, Gurhwal, as without his influence and moral support these most satisfactory results would never have been attained in the few years during which I have carried on the present system of vaccination in his territory. On the occasion of my personal visits to the Rajah, I have not failed to mention to him how much I have been indebted to him and his durbar for the success of the present scheme of vacci- nation ; and I trust the Government of the North-West Provinces will view his good offices in the same light, and convey to the Rajah some expression of their approval of his conduct, and of the liberal grant he makes annually towards the support of the vaccine establishment in his territory. 3. I wish I could add the names of any of the other wealthy landholders in the Agra and Meerut Divisions as following the good example of the Rajah of Tehree, and not confining their support of vaccination to saying a good word here and there in its favour, but by giving some tangible proof of their belief in it by a pecuniary grant towards its support. This would show to their dependents their faith, at least, in the scheme, as it is always something to be able to point out to a Rajpoot villager that his acknowledged head believes in the scheme, or he would never aid it by a grant of money. AJMERE CIRCLE. No. 59, dated Ajmere, 20th April, 1871. From( 36 ) The population of the Ajmere and Mhairwara Districts is entered at 426,268; but this is according to the census taken in 1864: the famine of 1868-69 has probably reduced this number by 100,000. The Native Superintendent was unfortunately on the sick list with fever and dy- sentery during half the working season. I was therefore deprived of his services during this period. Much prejudice continues to exist in the Native mind on the subject of vaccina- tion among many of the Hindoos. The fear of offending the goddess of small-pox is very great, and prevents them from getting their children vaccinated. With regard to inoculation, I have made strict inquiries throughout the district, and I find that it is not practised in this part of the country.
( 37 ) A.( 38 ) A.( 39) A.( 40 ) A.( 41 ) A.( 42 ) A.( 43 ) A.( 44 ) A.( 45 ) ROHIL Surgeon W. 1 1 1 1 1,380 1,417 Shahjehan- pore. Muncpty. of 1,016,844 Shahjehanpore,... 686 731 ... 1,383 34 249 1,168 1,009 278 130 1,417 ... ... ... ... 78.19 ... ... ... 1 1 1,424 1,459 Tilhur, ... 649 810 2 865 592 193 1,266 1,087 285 87 1,459 ... ... ... ... 79.22 ... ... ... 1 1 1,526 1,749 Jallalabad, ... 889 839 ... 1,575 153 355 1,373 1,437 216 75 1,728 8 11 2 21 86.93 ... ... ... 1 1 1,418 1,752 Powayan, ... 814 938 ... 1,630 122 207 1,545 1,148 435 169 1,752 ... ... ... ... 72.52 ... ... ... 1 1 2,474 2,550 Town Shahjehan- pore. 1,475 1,075 147 1,191 1,212 552 1,998 1,884 448 218 2,550 ... ... ... ... 80.36 ... 1 1 5 5 8,222 8,927 ... ... ... 4,513 4,393 149 6,644 2,113 1,556 7,350 6,565 1,662 679 8,906 8 11 2 21 79.79 42.10 1,785 1 1 1 1 2,122 2,169 Bijnour. 690,975 Bijnour, ... 1,115 1,321 16 1,750 670 670 1,766 1,878 458 100 2,436 15 9 9 33 80.35 ... ... ... 1 1 1,968 2,789 Nujeebabad, ... 1,405 1,384 ... 1,907 882 839 1,950 2,038 567 184 2,789 ... ... ... ... 78.23 ... ... ... 1 1 1,379 831 Chandpore, ... 361 466 6 671 150 294 533 534 214 79 827 ... 4 ... 4 71.39 ... ... ... 1 1 1,558 1,701 Dhampore, ... 959 742 ... 787 914 156 1,545 1,275 360 66 1,701 ... ... ... ... 77.97 ... ... ... 1 1 1,350 1,438 Nageena, ... 732 699 ... 957 474 428 1,003 921 277 233 1,431 2 5 ... 7 76.87 ... ... ... 1 1 1,651 953 Muncpty. of Ditto of Nujeebabad, ... 425 525 ... 550 399 298 652 730 142 78 950 2 ... 3 83.71 ... ... ... 1 1 2,004 669 Chandpore, ... 300 369 ... 358 311 190 479 365 210 94 669 ... ... ... ... 63.47 ... 1 1 7 7 12,032 10,850 ... ... ... 5,297 5,506 23 6,980 3,800 2,875 7,928 7,741 2,228 834 10,803 19 18 10 47 77.65 51.35 1,570 1 1 3 4 2,712 4,202 Terai District. 91,802 Terai Districts,... 2,138 2,064 ... 2,835 1,367 3,035 1,167 3,865 209 128 4,202 ... ... ... ... 94.86 ... 1,050 6 6 41 43 78,936 78,040 ... ... Total Rohilkhund Circle. 35,888 4,566 302 58,365 18,787 22,048 55,406 63,215 9,844 4,395 77,454 157 366 63 586 86.52 30.01 1,814 8 8 54 56 1,02,188 1,06,577 ... ... Grand Total, Ku- maon and Rohil- khund Circle. 49,201 53,398 326 83,291 18,982 40,905 61,694 86,055 11,108 5,436 1,02,599 1,220 1,928 830 3,978 88.56 38.75 1,903 W. WATSON, M.B., Superintendent of Kumaon and Rohilkhund, 1st Circle.
( 46 ) A.( 47 ) AGRA AND MEERUT Surgeon R. 1 1 1 1 1,140 849 Allygurh, ... 925,538 Allygurh, ... 519 621 ... 1,053 87 346 794 970 143 27 1,140 ... ... ... ... 87.1 ... ... ... 1 1 1,539 1,554 Atrowlee, ... 754 785 ... 1,296 243 296 1,243 1,005 335 199 1,539 ... ... ... ... 75.0 ... ... ... 1 1 1,045 767 Iglass, ... 488 557 ... 983 62 370 675 731 242 72 1,045 ... ... ... ... 75.1 ... ... ... 1 1 1,275 1,026 Hattrass, ... 597 678 ... 1,181 94 779 496 912 231 132 1,275 ... ... ... ... 79.6 ... ... ... 1 1 1,035 1,202 Khyr, ... 466 569 ... 985 50 39 996 750 230 55 1,035 ... ... ... ... 76.5 ... ... ... 1 1 1,336 799 Secundra Rao, ... 647 689 ... 1,295 41 368 968 1,061 182 93 1,336 ... ... ... ... 85.3 ... 1 1 1 1 902 913 Muttra, ... 800,321 Kosee, ... 498 404 ... 864 38 387 515 749 87 66 902 ... ... ... ... 89.5 ... ... ... 1 1 1,228 1,533 Chatta, ... 566 662 ... 1,182 46 121 1,107 977 171 80 1,228 ... ... ... ... 85.1 ... ... ... 1 1 1,422 1,323 Muttra, ... 754 668 ... 1,367 55 630 792 1,291 81 50 1,422 ... ... ... ... 94.0 ... ... ... 1 1 1,184 1,126 Mat, ... 533 651 ... 1,157 27 488 696 988 102 94 1,184 ... ... ... ... 96.4 ... ... ... 1 1 2,302 1,527 Mahabun, ... 1,154 1,148 ... 2,265 37 737 1,565 2,190 65 47 2,302 ... ... ... ... 97.1 ... ... ... 1 1 990 1,155 Sydabad, ... 485 505 ... 917 73 591 399 857 99 34 990 ... ... ... ... 89.7 ... ... ... 1 1 1,008 1,265 Julleysur, ... 463 545 ... 938 70 348 660 800 78 130 1,008 ... ... ... ... 91.1 ... 1 1 1 1 664 909 Agra, ... 1,029,760 Agra, ... 272 392 ... 656 8 170 494 537 68 59 664 ... ... ... ... 88.7 ... ... ... 1 1 914 1,540 Kirowlee, ... 444 470 ... 851 63 478 436 749 89 76 914 ... ... ... ... 89.3 ... ... ... 1 1 955 1,133 Furrah, ... 499 456 ... 907 48 377 578 723 123 109 955 ... ... ... ... 85.4 ... ... ... 1 1 511 549 Itmadpore, ... 239 272 9 451 51 164 347 341 91 79 511 ... ... ... ... 79.1 ... ... ... 1 1 608 814 Pinhat, ... 326 282 ... 580 28 235 373 479 56 73 608 ... ... ... ... 89.5 ... ... ... 1 1 847 1,206 Iradutnugur, ... 408 439 ... 806 41 262 585 673 58 116 847 ... ... ... ... 92.06 ... ... ... 1 1 407 375 Futteabad, ... 190 217 ... 369 38 179 228 219 91 97 407 ... ... ... ... 76.4 ... ... ... 1 1 883 1,580 Khyragurh, ... 404 479 ... 833 50 419 464 726 83 74 883 ... ... ... ... 89.7 ... ... ... 1 1 688 625 Ferozabad, ... 303 335 ... 676 12 154 534 498 116 74 688 ... ... ... ... 81.1 ... 1 1 1 1 1,133 1,199 Etah, ... 614,351 Etah, ... 595 538 5 1,063 65 109 1,024 946 116 71 1,133 ... ... ... ... 89.07 ... ... ... 1 1 852 858 Kasgunj, ... 403 449 ... 783 69 235 616 681 109 62 852 ... ... ... ... 86.2 ... ... ... 1 1 710 700 Allygunj, ... 316 394 ... 621 89 95 615 563 103 44 710 ... ... ... ... 84.5 ... 1 1 1 1 1,251 1,534 Mynpoory, ... 700,220 Mustufabad, ... 610 641 ... 1,226 25 255 996 988 178 85 1,251 ... ... ... ... 83.8 ... ... ... 1 1 825 1,047 Shekoabad, ... 346 479 ... 773 52 120 705 573 175 77 825 ... ... ... ... 76.6 ... ... ... 1 1 818 913 Khural, ... 359 459 ... 787 31 364 454 628 92 98 818 ... ... ... ... 87.1 ... ... ... 1 1 1,090 1,263 Mynpoory, ... 477 613 ... 1,033 57 652 438 854 159 77 1,090 ... ... ... ... 84.3 ... ... ... 1 1 1,512 1,594 Bhogaon, ... 688 824 ... 1,447 65 449 1,063 1,281 144 87 1,512 ... ... ... ... 89.8 ... 1 1 1 1 887 936 Etawah, ... 626,444 Etawah, ... 405 482 ... 848 39 548 339 782 45 60 887 ... ... ... ... 94.5 ... ... ... 1 1 1,156 1,119 Bhurtnah, ... 568 588 ... 1,115 41 670 486 1,057 56 43 1,156 ... ... ... ... 94.9 ... ... ... 1 1 599 487 Bidhoonah, ... 262 337 ... 579 20 282 317 500 58 41 599 ... ... ... ... 89.6 ... ... ... 1 1 768 798 Phuppoond, ... 272 496 ... 747 21 219 549 669 50 49 768 ... ... ... ... 93.04 ... ... ... 1 1 572 570 Dullelnugur, ... 241 331 ... 558 14 283 289 475 55 42 572 ... ... ... ... 89.6 ... 1 1 1 1 663 826 Furruckabad, 915,883 Mohumdabad, ... 329 334 ... 547 116 76 587 530 81 52 663 ... ... ... ... 86.7 ... ... ... 1 1 677 910 Allygurh, ... 361 315 ... 627 50 79 598 493 89 95 677 ... ... ... ... 84.8 ... ... ... 1 1 874 1,114 Kaemgunj, ... 451 423 ... 806 68 68 806 568 133 173 874 ... ... ... ... 81.02 ... ... ... 1 1 1,025 1,083 Chubramow, ... 459 566 ... 968 57 265 760 830 71 124 1,025 ... ... ... ... 92.1 ... ... ... 1 1 718 790 Tirwatatia, ... 311 407 ... 685 33 89 629 556 78 84 718 ... ... ... ... 87.6 ... ... ... 1 1 473 721 Kunouj, ... 253 220 ... 426 47 42 431 212 98 163 473 ... ... ... ... 68.3 ... 1 1 3 4 2,562 3,293 Country of Tehree Ghurwal. ... Tehree, ... 1,272 1,290 ... 2,518 44 484 2,078 2,187 248 127 2,562 ... ... ... ... 89.8 ... 854 ... ... 1 1 1,400 1,367 Municipality, ... Saharunpore, ... 795 605 51 921 428 339 1,061 1,217 109 74 1,400 ... ... ... ... 91.7 ... ... ... 1 1 667 726 Moozuffernuggur, 352 315 ... 530 137 299 368 504 97 66 667 ... ... ... ... 83.8 ... ... ... 2 2 1,217 l,509 Meerut, ... 631 586 ... 670 547 352 865 1,078 347 105 1,217 ... ... ... ... 96.8 ... 608 13
48 A.( 49 ) A.( 50 ) A.( 51 ) BENARES.( 52 ) A.( 53 ) ALLAHABAD AND J. Richard 1 1 1 1 1,270 1,172 Cawnpore, ... 1,188,862 Cawnpore, ... 527 645 7 881 284 436 736 850 168 154 1,172 ... ... ... ... 83.5 ... ... 1 1 1,66 1,763 Shewrajpore, ... l,080 683 ... 1,683 80 536 1,227 l,226 347 190 1,763 ... ... ... ... 77.9 ... ... 1 1 1,676 1,555 Rasoolabad, ... 713 842 ... 1,489 66 125 1,430 1,267 183 105 1,555 ... ... ... 87.3 ... ... 1 1 1,259 1,309 Billourh, ... 710 599 ... 1,259 50 59 1.250 690 425 194 1,309 ... ... ... ... 61.8 ... ... 1 1 1,150 1,417 Bhogncepore, ... 692 706 ... 1,248 150 173 1,225 906 350 142 1,398 14 4 1 19 72.1 77.7 ... ... 1 1 1,616 1,840 Dehra Mungul- pore, ... 867 973 ... 1,770 70 896 944 1,585 171 84 1,840 ... ... ... ... 90.2 ... ... 1 1 1,634 1,120 Sarh Salempore, 538 582 ... 1,028 92 215 905 848 164 108 1,120 ... ... ... ... 83.7 ... ... 1 1 1,108 1,474 Akburpore, ... 781 693 ... 1,255 219 663 811 975 383 116 1,474 ... ... ... ... 71.0 ... ... 1 1 1,426 1,417 Ghatumpore, ... 658 759 ... 1,341 76 132 1,285 1,168 160 89 1,417 ... ... ... ... 87.9 1 1 1 1 767 661 Banda, ... 724,372 Banda, ... 335 326 ... 626 35 186 475 424 140 97 661 ... ... ... ... 75.1 ... ... 1 1 606 544 Girwan, ... 250 294 ... 517 27 147 397 208 152 184 544 ... ... ... ... 57.7 ... ... 1 1 528 507 Badousa, ... 220 287 ... 483 24 161 346 292 122 93 507 ... ... ... ... 70.5 ... ... 1 1 314 323 Kirwee, ... 160 163 ... 287 36 173 150 174 67 82 323 ... ... ... ... 71.3 ... ... 1 1 262 349 Mawo, ... 250 98 ... 280 68 69 279 218 65 65 348 1 ... ... 1 77.0 100 ... ... 1 1 548 561 Babaroo, ... 256 305 ... 498 63 103 458 277 183 101 561 ... ... ... ... 60.2 ... ... 1 1 502 574 Kamasin, ... 259 315 ... 558 16 278 296 457 67 50 574 ... ... ... ... 87.2 ... ... 1 1 440 536 Pylanee, ... 267 269 ... 510 26 253 283 325 135 76 536 ... ... ... ... 70.6 1 1 1 1 472 1,771 Humeerpore, 520,941 Humeerpore, ... 814 899 ... 1,518 195 333 1,380 1,200 274 239 1,713 38 17 3 58 80.7 69.0 ... ... 1 1 642 1,161 Raat, ... 515 646 ... 1,094 67 235 926 865 195 101 1,161 ... ... ... ... 81.6 ... ... 1 1 1,144 684 Soongra or Pun- waree, ... 315 369 ... 645 39 90 594 420 214 50 684 ... ... ... ... 65.2 ... ... 1 1 1,019 795 Mahoba, ... 319 476 ... 768 27 101 694 483 240 72 795 ... ... ... ... 66.8 ... ... 1 1 618 1,093 Maudah, ... 443 650 ... 982 111 104 989 913 97 83 1,093 ... ... ... ... 90.0 ... ... 1 1 1,208 834 Jalalpore, ... 373 461 ... 712 122 258 576 588 158 88 834 ... ... ... ... 78.8 1 1 1 1 119 279 Jaloun or Oraie, ... 405,272 Jaloun, ... 122 157 ... 254 25 54 225 132 110 37 279 ... ... ... ... 54.5 ... ... 1 1 207 436 Oraie, ... 198 238 2 367 67 78 358 218 155 63 436 ... ... ... ... 58.4 ... ... 1 1 165 435 Attah, ... 203 231 ... 372 62 83 351 253 145 36 434 1 ... ... 1 63.7 100 ... ... 1 1 100 223 Madhogurh, ... 114 109 ... 217 6 38 185 91 82 50 223 ... ... ... ... 52.0 ... ... 1 1 110 300 Koonch, ... 118 182 ... 213 87 24 276 125 122 53 300 ... ... ... ... 50.6 1 1 2 2 978 757 Jhansie. 357,774 Jhansie, ... 416 333 70 550 129 43 706 302 273 174 749 4 3 1 8 52.5 57.1 378½ ... ... 1 1 919 809 Mowo Ranee- pore. ... 463 334 ... 704 93 335 462 473 251 73 797 4 2 6 12 67.0 66.6 ... ... 1 1 344 409 Garoutha, ... 165 243 10 347 51 32 376 177 134 97 408 ... ... 1 1 56.9 0 ... ... 1 1 337 527 Moth, ... 354 173 ... 494 33 36 491 203 260 64 527 ... ... ... ... 43.8 1 1 1 1 735 789 Lullutpore. 248,146 Lullutpore, ... 361 428 ... 618 171 189 600 479 206 104 789 ... ... ... ... 69.9 ... ... 1 1 857 580 Mehrownie, ... 298 282 ... 541 39 136 444 394 119 67 580 ... ... ... ... 76.8 ... ... 2 2 2,819 779 Municipality, ... Allahabad, ... 441 338 139 417 223 262 517 521 177 81 779 ... ... ... ... 74.6 ... 389½ ... ... 1 1 484 542 Jounpore, ... 386 156 1 346 195 31 511 381 87 74 542 ... ... ... ... 81.4 ... ... 1 1 1,637 1,114 Cawnpore, ... 536 578 3 879 232 463 651 777 174 163 1,114 ... ... ... ... 82.8 ... ... 1 1 650 523 Banda, ... 259 264 ... 411 112 364 159 341 89 93 523 ... ... ... ... 79.3 ... ... 1 1 555 1,248 Local, ... Humeerpore, ... 566 626 ... 1,079 113 248 944 790 213 189 1,192 37 16 3 56 78.7 69.8 ... ... 1 1 694 1,004 Raat, ... 426 578 ... 918 86 304 700 806 151 47 1,004 ... ... ... ... 84.2 ... ... 1 1 605 628 Soongra or Pun- waree, ... 319 309 ... 586 42 74 554 402 151 75 628 ... ... ... ... 72.6 ... ... 1 1 825 815 Mahoba, ... 325 490 ... 785 30 105 710 503 240 72 815 ... ... ... ... 67.6 ... ... 1 1 799 1,093 Mowdah, ... 443 650 ... 982 111 104 989 913 97 83 1,093 ... ... ... ... 90.4 ... ... 1 1 600 492 Jalalpore, ... 212 280 ... 465 27 94 398 341 107 44 492 ... ... ... ... 76.1
( 54 ) A.( 55 ) A.ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT. No. 4240½A. OF 1871. FROM C. A. ELLIOTT, ESQ., Offg. Secretary to Govt., N.-W. Provinces, To W. WATSON, ESQ., M.B., Offg. Supdt.-Genl. of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces. DATED NYNEE TAL, THE 23RD SEPTEMBER, 1871. SIR, GENERAL DEPARTMENT (SANITATION). I HAVE received and laid before the Lieutenant-Governor the Annual Report and Returns of Vaccination in the North-Western Pro- vinces for the season of 1870-71, submitted with your letter No. 62, dated 8th May last, and am directed in reply to communicate the follow- ing remarks and orders. 2. The results of the season's operations may be thus shown :( 58 ) which reduces the number of primary vaccinations per man from 1,151 in 1869-70 to 1,077 in 1870-71. 3. Three causes of this decrease are pointed out. One is referred to in your 3rd para., viz., the introduction of the new postal rules, which interfered with the circulation of lymph among the vaccinators at the beginning of the season. This was a curious and unexpected result of what was meant to be an administrative improvement, and your remarks on this subject will be communicated to the Director-General of Post- offices. Another is doubtless to be found in the more careful testing of the returns by the Superintendents of Circles. A third is the fact that the increase in the vaccinating staff consists chiefly of men employed in the Native States of Bundelkhund, who are not as yet sufficiently supervised, and whose work in not up to the general average. 4. Assuming the birth-rate at 40 per thousand, there are 1,200,000 children born every year in the North-Western Provinces. Reckoning that each vaccinator can perform 1,500 operations a year, a staff of 800 men, or more than double the present number, would be required (suppos- ing the population favourable) to secure perfect protection from small-pox. This is a strength which, in the present state of the finauces, the Depart- ment can hardly hope to reach, but it is a standard which should be kept constantly in view. If the charitable efforts of Native gentlemen and of municipalities continue to be directed to this end, the Lieutenant-Governor on his part will not be slow to meet them half way, or more than half way, so far as the Provincial revenues admit of this being done. 5. The number of deaths from small-pox registered during the year 1870 is shown in the Sanitary Commissioner's report as 23,564, or .79 per 1,000 of the population. The ratio of deaths to persons attacked by the disease is not accuratley known ; but if the proportion of deaths be assumed at about 12 or 13 per cent., this would give about 200,000 cases of small-pox during 1870, or less than the number of successful vaccinations performed in 1870-71 by 44,862. The use of the prophylactic has not reached very far when the number protected by it hardly exceeds the number protected by having undergone the disease itself. 6. Of the staff employed 188 of the vaccinators were paid by Go- vernment, 46 by municipalities, and 50 from local or private sources. The last class have increased by 23 in the year under report, chiefly in the Agra and Meerut Circle and in the Native States of Bundelkhund. The average number of successful operations per man for the whole staff was 854.4. The average for Government vaccinators appears to be about 925, and for those entertained by municipalities 942, but the statements are not drawn up with sufficient uniformity and precision to enable these figures to be stated with accuracy. It appears, however, that the vaccinators entertained by Municipalities are, as a rule, well supervised and diligent in work. Still, a greater difference in the number of operations might have been ex- pected, since in large towns the subjects lie close at hand or within easy reach, while the district vaccinators have to spend a large portion of their time in travelling in search of the children to be operated on.
( 59 ) 7. Considerable variations are also observed in the average number of operations performed by each vaccinator in the different circles. In Ro- hilkhund this was 1,801, in Agra and Meerut 986, in Allahabad 671, and in Benares 976. Thus in Rohilkhund each man did twice as much work as in the Meerut or Benares Circle, and nearly three times as much work as in Allahabad. Some attempt is made in the report to account for this, but it is not very satisfactory. The explanation given is simply that the character of the people varies in different districts. I am to re- quest that the subject may be more thoroughly investigated next year. 8. The average cost of each successful operation has been 5 annas 3½ pies, being 3½ pies more than last year. The greater part of this con- sists, as you remark, in the pay of the supervising establishment, the maintenance of which is part of the North-Western Provinces system. His Honor is satisfied that this Department is managed with due regard economy. 9. His Honor observes with much gratification the record of the ser- vices rendered by the Kumaon Depôt in the supply of vaccine virus to Medical Officers in other provinces. Fresh virus from the cold regions of the Himalayas is shown by you to be more efficient than that imported from Europe : and in these hills the North-Western Provinces possess an inexhaustible storehouse of the prophylactic, which, as facility of communication increases, will doubtless prove of the greatest benefit to the whole empire. 10. The system of inspection described by you in the 9th para, of the report involves considerable personal exertion and labour, but the result in ascertaining the extent of actual success, and more especially in keeping the vaccinators on the alert, well repays the labour and trouble. You have shown clearly how necessary it is that the work done by the vac- cinators should be constantly and vigilantly supervised by European In- spectors or trustworthy Native gentlemen. The reports of Dr. Milne in in the Benares Circle and Dr. Richardson in Allahabad are evidence to how great an extent returns are liable to be falsified by ignorant or fraudulent subordinates. This is one great difficulty in the way of ascer- taining the progress of vaccination in this country. 11. His Honor observes with pleasure the interest taken by several Magistrates in vaccination in their districts. Were these officers and their subordinates while on their tours occasionally to devote a few hours to inspecting the work of the vaccinators in the way now practised by the Superintendents of Circles, the gain to the Department would be great. Civil Surgeons might also, without inconvenience to themselves, inspect from time to time the work done by vaccinators in municipali- ties and in the vicinity of the sudder station of the district. 12. The experiments made with animal vaccination during the year have not tended to any very hopeful or decisive result. They should, however, be proscuted as opportunity offers ; and His Honor will await with interest the result of those which you propose to make with Dr.
( 60 ) Milne's assistance at Almorah during the current autumn. I am, how- ever, to observe that all such experiments should be conducted with the utmost caution with reference to the prejudices of the people ; any serious offence in this respect might be followed by lamentable effects in alienating the people from the use of the lymph. 13. With respect to the use of ivory points in lieu of arm-to-arm vaccination, I am to say that the Lieutenant Governor agrees with you in considering that it will be desirable still to continue the former prac- tice, even though it be generally less effective than the latter, in cases where the prejudices of the people demand it. The establishment must use their discretion carefully in this respect. Everything should be stu- diously avoided that would render the people less favourable to vaccina- tion, or offend their ideas and feelings in respect of it. 14. The Lieutenant-Governor has in a separate communication approved of the suggestion made in your 7th para., that the whole of the Rs. 500 entered for inoculators in the budget for the current year should be allotted to the Benares Circle. His Honor hopes that much good will result from the experiment, which should be prosecuted wherever there is fair opportunity for doing so. 15. The addition of two vaccinators to the establishment of the Kumaon Circle, as recommended in your 8th para., is also sanctioned, provided that the cost can be met out of your budget allotment for 1870-71. But with reference to this proposal and that noticed in the pro- ceeding para., I am to observe that such matters should have been sub- mitted separately for the orders of Government, and not embodied in the annual report. 16. The assistance given to vaccination in the Bundelkhund States attached to the Allahabad and Jhansie Circles is most gratifying, and the large number of additional vaccinators entertained by these States during the season under report forms one of its most favourable features. His Honor will have great pleasure in conveying his acknowledgments to Dr. Stratton for the aid given by him in this respect. The benefit must be great, not only to the States themselves, but indirectly to our own districts, in reducing the chances of infection spreading to them. Colonel Daly will also be requested to convey the thanks of the Lieu- tenant-Governor to the Rajah of Teekumgurh for the hearty support given by him to the cause of vaccination. 17. His Honor agrees with Dr. Richardson that it is extremely de- sirable that a Native Superintendent should be entertained specially for the supervision of vaccination in the Native States of Bundelkhund, and this will be suggested to Dr. Stratton. It is impossible for one man efficiently to supervise the operations of 43 vaccinators scattered over a wide ex- tent of difficult country, both British and Native. At the same time, the value, and indeed the absolute necessity, of close supervision is amply shown by the facts stated in your report and those of your Superinten- dents.
( 61 ) * Agra Circle. The Rajah of Tehree, Gurhwal. The Tehseeldar of Kalsee, Jounsar Bawur. Thakoor Koomar Jugmundo Singh, of Budwas in Etah. Benares Circle. Oudh Behare Lall, Tehseeldar of Nuggra, Zillah Azimgurh. Allahabad Circle. Mudud Ally Khan Bahadoor, Tehseeldar of Mejha, in Alla- habad. Kifayut-oollah Khan, Tehseeldar of Karakut in Jounpore. Rohilkhund Circle. Rai Bukhtawur Singh, Sub-Judge, Bareilly. Moulvie Khyrooddeen Ahmed, Deputy Collector, Bareilly. Lalla Luchmi Narain, banker, Bareilly. Wajeeboollah Khan, Mohullah Jalalnuggur, Shahjehan- pore. 18. The Lieutenant-Governor has great pleasure in requesting you to convey to the gentlemen* mentioned in your 14th para the thanks of Government for the interest taken by them in the extension of vaccination, and he trusts that the numbers of the Native gentlemen who so interest themselves will rapidly increase. His Honor regrets that notwithstanding the exertions of the leading residents of Bareilly, the results of vaccination in that city have not been so favourable as elsewhere. The subject should be pressed on the atten- tion of the Municipality, and it is to be hoped that the efforts of the gentle- men named by you will eventually overcome the backwardness of the population. 19. The Lieutenant-Governor also desires to record his sense of the ready support given to the Department by His Highness the Maharajah of Vizianagram, who has this year added a second vaccinator to the one formerly entertained by him. Toolsee Bam, ... Dehra Doon. Nubbi Bux, ... Cawnpore. Rujjub Ally, ... Humeerpore. Ally Hussun, ... Jounpore. Puddum Niddhie, ... Goruckpore. 20. His Honor has been pleased to approve of your proposal to give gratuities, amounting to Rs. 100 in all, to the five Native Superintendents whose names are given in the margin. 21. Vaccinators are now entertained by most of the larger munici- palities and many of the smaller ones. The duty of furthering vaccina- tion is incumbent upon them under the Circular Order of Government No. 9A., dated 3rd April, 1871, and is constantly enjoined in the Govern- ment orders on their budgets. This should be followed up by the Super- intendents in their several circles by the exercise of personal influence and persuasion wherever the municipalities appear backward in the ap- pointment of vaccinators. Great results may be looked for from the in- crease, especially in the larger cities, of these vaccination establishments, which in the working season might be temporarily strengthened ; and the Lieutenant-Governor thinks that the services of the various Civil Sur- geons might also with great prospect of success be enlisted to aid in supervising the work. 22. In conclusion, I am to convey to you the thanks of Govern- ment for your interesting report and the punctuality with which it has been submitted. His Honor's thanks are also due to the Superintendents of Circles. Their reports give ample proof of the assiduity and zeal with which they have prosecuted their duties during the past year. To your- self the Lieutenant-Governor desires that his acknowledgments may be specially conveyed for your able conduct of the duties of the office dur- ing Dr. Pearson's absence. The Department under your guidance is performing a great and useful work, not only in the direct protection of affordedby its operations, but also in gradually breaking down prejudices against vaccination and leading the people to appreciate its advantages.
( 62 ) The best proof of this is the increasing number of vaccinators entertained from local and private funds and by municipalities; and His Honor thinks that in the results of the year's operations there is ample encour- agement to redoubled exertion for the future. 23. The issue of orders on your report has been delayed for the consideration of the proposals made by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India for the localization of vaccine operations within limited areas. His Honor's opinion on these proposals has been separately communicated to you ; and it will be sufficient here to say that the subject was very thoroughly discussed, and that the advantages upon the whole of the existing system appeared to be so decided that the project was put aside. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, C. A. ELLIOTT, Offg. Secy. to Govt., N.-W. Provinces.
NORTH-WESTEM PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON OF 1871-72. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT TEH NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1872.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON OF 1871-72. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Offg. Supdt.-General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1872.
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. RETURNS OF VACCINATION For the Season of 1871-72. No. 252 OF 1872. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces, To C, A. ELLIOTT, ESQUIRE, Secretary to Government, N.-W. Provinces, DATED ALMORAH, THE 29TH APRIL, 1872. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit, for the information of His Honor the Lieutenant- Governor, the Returns of Vaccination for the North-Western Provinces, for the year 1871-72. 2. General Remarks.( 2 ) SUMMARY. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Season. No. of Native Superintendents. No. of Vaccinators. Total No. of persons vaccinated. Sex. Caste. Age. Primary Vaccination Result. Secondary Vaccination Result. Primary per cent. of success. Secondary percentage of success. Average No. of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator per mensem. Male. Female. Christian. Hindoo. Mussalman. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful and Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. 1870-71, ... 37 284 311,610 154,861 151,290 1,649 252,236 52,266 91,994 214,157 242,614 40,216 23,324 306,151 2,248 2,285 926 5,459 85.7 49.5 219.4 1871-72, ... 36 270 321,742 159,751 159,417 1,541 267,678 49,949 108,263 210,905 261,914 34,527 22,727 319,168 1,682 607 285 2,574 88.26 73.48 238.2
( 3 ) 3. The Kumaon and Rohilkhund Circle: (a) Kumaon Division.( 4) be made in the Saharunpore Zillah. I am, however, of opinion that this change should not be made ; for by reason of the large Cantonment and European population in the Meerut Zillah, it is desirable that it should enjoy the extra protection to be conferred by the increase of establishment. As regards the permission requested for letters of thanks to be sent to the several Native gentlemen who have evinced interest in vacci- nation, mentioned by the several Superintendents in their reports, I would suggest that His Honor authorize me to send expressions of his approval. Dr. Pringle's enthusiastic efforts on behalf of the people committed to his vaccine care continues unabated. 5. Benares Circle.( 5 ) change in the establishments) are I think the evident causes. Any how I feel convinced it it not attributable to any want of interest on the part of Dr. Watson, for in know- ledge of the Natives, both as regards their language, customs, and feelings, he is unsur- passed, and is most conscientious in the discharge of his duties. I quite agree with Drs. Pringle's Watson's, Richardson's, and Milne's views regarding animal vaccination, and I trust that no more attempts will be made in that direction. Any interference with the cow is most impolitic and dangerous; it can moreover lead to no possible good, for the vaccine virus that we have in use is of most excellent quality and needs no improvement. Animal vaccination has not been accepted in England, for it is not found to possess any of the advantages claimed for it by the few enthusiasts who brought it forward. I have not embodied the vaccination performed in the Bundelkhund States in the North-Western Provinces Returns, for the system in vogue there is entirely different I will make it the subject of a separate communication. Para. 7. Kumaon and Gurhwal Vaccine Dept.( 6 ) Sufficiently. Insufficiently. Not at all. Boolundshuhur. Saharunpore. Meerut. Anoopshuhur. Bareilly. Ghazeeabad. Khooja. Sumbhul. Barote. Coel. Agra. Baghput. Hattrass. Furruckabad. Shahdera. Secundra Rao. Muttra. Deobund. Hurdwagunj. Cawnpore. Hurdwar. Atrowlee. Benares. Beesulpore. Mussoorie. Mirzapore. Futtehpore Sikri. Dehra. Sirsa. Kajpore. Azimgurh. Bharutgunj. Pillibheet. Ghazeepore. Chunar. Moradabad. Goruckpore. Bulliah. Chundowsee. Jhansie. Dhunourah. Mowraneepore. Amroha. Calpee. Shahjehanpore. Koonah. Bijnour. Almora. Nugeena. Nynee Tal. Nujeebabad. Dhampoor, Dhandpoor. Budaon. Bilsee. Oojhanee. Ferozabad. Etawah. Mynpoory. Khasgunj. Etah and Soron. Brindabun. Kosee. Julleysur. Allahabad. Banda. Jounpore. Oorai. Lullutpore. As soon as I receive replies from those Municipalities who have made insufficient or no provision for their own vaccination, I will communicate the results to His Honor. It is possible that some Municipalities may have their own private arrange- ments, with reference to vaccination, unknown to me (in fact, I believe Meerut has some such scheme of its own), but I am so strongly impressed with the conviction that vaccination should be a separate State Department, conducted only by trained and skilled men, servants of, and alone responsible to, the Government for their acts, that I trust His Honor will deprecate any such private arrangement, and direct that the Vaccinators so engaged should be brought under the sole control of the Vaccine Department during the vaccine season. Nothing can conduce so much to the spread of vaccination as the active co-opera- tion of Magistrates, Civil Surgeons and members of Municipalities in persuading the people to accept the Vaccinator's services, searchingly looking into the Vaccina- tor's work, and reporting the results of their investigations to the Superintendent of the Circle (where any communication is desirable) ; but beyond this their control is not expedient, for authority cannot be divided. The system now in vogue has proved itself fully adapted to meet the requirements of the people, and needs only to be extended to its full limits to answer every expec- tation. I trust that no amateur theories, so much the fashion of the time, will be allowed to uproot the present system, which is now beginning to bear the fruit, the labour of so many years. Para. 9. Municipal Vaccinators and Apprentices. ( 7 ) When the present system of vaccination (superseding the old Dispensary system) was introduced in the year 1854, its operations were confined in the first instance to Rohilkhund, and from that Division it was gradually extended over the entire North- Western Provinces, Rohilkhund forming the training ground and centre from which all the establishments were disseminated. As long as these men were permitted to return to their homes during the non-vaccine season, they were content with their position and half-pay, but, now that the conditions of their service are altered, it has become necessary to replace them with local men, and with this view I applied that an apprentice, an inhabitant of the Zillah, might he attached to each Native Superintendent (since sanctioned) in order that a trained local man might always be ready to step into any vacancy that might arise. In time the entire establishments of the Zillah (Govern- ment as well as Municipal) will thus become composed of local men only. The system will have its advantages, in the local men being more conversant with the localities and the feelings of the people, and will therefore thus tend to advance the spread of vaccination. The disadvantage is, that there is only a smaller circle from which to select efficient men. The apprentices will as a rule be taken from the Inoculator, Hukeem and Baid class, so as to enlist their sympathies in our favour; and also, as a matter of justice, so as in some measure to compensate them for the inroads that we are making upon their means of livelihood. Para. 10. Employment of Government Vaccine Establishments during the non- Vaccine season.(8 ) donkey to the bedside, enticed thereto by a basket of grain, which, if he is wise enough to approach sufficiently near to eat, the evil spirit inhabiting the patient avails itself of that favourable opportunity for a change of residence; preferring, it is believed, a heal- thy asinine, to a pustular human home. Isolation of the patients, however, might be carried out with advantage. Para. 11. Custody of Vaccine Village records.( 9 ) after the other children left behind at home during her absence. The consequence is, they prefer to let their children go unvaccinated, and take the chances of swelling the small-pox columns of the Registrar-General's Returns. In India the principle is to take vaccination to the homes of the people. The system in the North-Western Provinces is in its infancy; we are crippled in our efforts for want of money, and the services of a solitary Vaccinator for each tehseel cannot reach far; but I am convinced that our principles are right, and would be sorry to see them changed, for they have proved themselves by large experience to be sound, and, what is more to the point, successful. I will here sketch what that system is. To every tehseel in the North-Western Provinces is posted a Vaccinator ; his duties are to proceed systematically from village to village in one onward direction, vaccinating as many as he is able during the vaccine season. At the time of performing vaccina- tion in a village, he has to enter in a return the names of the children operated upon, together with all particulars as to age, sex, parents' names &c.,; and 7 days afterwards, he revisits the village, inspects the arms and records the results in the return, which is then deposited with the headman of the village or the tehseeldar of the district, to be kept as a record. All these daily proceedings are moreover entered in the Vaccinator's diary. To every Zillah is appointed a Native Superintendent; he has himself been a Vacci- nator, and consequently is acquainted with all the details of the system, and has been promoted to the position for proved good conduct, zeal, and efficiency. To him is relegated the duties of supervising the work of all the Vaccinators under him, and he is held responsible for the correctness of the Vaccinators' returns. To every two Divi- sions is appointed a European Superintendent, a medical man; he has the control of the staff under him, and on his tours of inspection devotes his particular attention to the character of the vaccine virus, the truth or otherwise of the returns (which is readily ascertained by comparing the village record with the Vaccinator's diary) not only for the present, but for previous seasons, and in influencing the people generally on behalf of vaccination. Over the whole is placed a Superintendent-General who is responsible for the entire working of the system, and maintaining it in a high state of efficiency. In the North-Western Provinces the Superintendent-General has also (with the assist- ance of a Deputy Superintendent) the charge of two Divisions, and the vaccine Depôt in the Hills. I am of opinion that this system might be imitated with advantage in England. There is no necessity whatever for the actual operation of vaccination being performed by a medical man ; all that is needed, is that the operator should be trained and any intelligent neat-handed man who can read and write is fitted for the post (a small salary of £1 or 30 shillings a week would suffice,) and with due arrangements as to area and population, the sphere of a Vaccinator's and Superinten- dent's duties could be readily fixed: and I feel sure that the system would not only work far better than their existing one (which bears failure on its very face), but would be also more economical, There is a tendency to believe that every thing in England is far ahead of what we are doing or even capable of, in this country; the experience gained by my visit there has led me to opposite conclusions. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, F. PEARSON, Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination, N.-W. P. V 3
( 10 ) Annual Report of the Vaccine Operations in the Agra and Meerut Divisions during the season 1871-72, by SURGEON R. PRINGLE, M.D., Superintendent of Vaccine, Agra and Meerut Divisions.( 11 ) at once, to enable me to send another supply. The absence of these reports may, as remarked last year, be considered as a good test of the quality of the vaccine lymph despatched from this office during the past season, The establishment of the vaccine ve- sicle in the plains in November, 1871. 4. With the exception of the Northern Districts of my Divisions, the vaccine vesicle could not be said to have been established sooner than last year, viz., the 15th of November, and lymph in any quantity was not generally avail- able till the 20th of the month. Closing of the vaccine season. 5. At one time I thought I could carry on vaccination till the 15th March, but even in the Northern Districts, the weather became unusually hot by the 10th, and as Native Superin- tendents have orders to be careful that ulcerating surfaces are not left by the Vac- cinators at the close of the season, by carrying on operations when the weather has become too hot for all practical purposes, the season might be said to have closed by the 12th April, 1871. Actual period over which this season's operations extend. 6. This, for all practical purposes, may be said to have been the same as that of last season, with the exception that, having satisfied myself that the cessation from work, allowed on Sunday, was being taken advantage of by some Vaccinators to make long journeys to see their friends at a distance, and thus return unfit for Monday's work. At the middle of Feburary, 1872, I issued orders withdraw- ing this privilege ; thus the operations of four working days, at the height of the vac- cinating season, must be deducted from the total of this season's work to institute a fair comparison with the work of last season. Tour of the Superintendent. 7. This during the past season has been confined to the Meerut Division, with the exception of a hurried visit to Muttra, and every Vaccinator in the Meerut Division has been seen, and his work inspected; and as the Vaccinators were all working in different parts of the Tehseels, as compared with their work of 1869-70, which I inspected, oppor- tunities have been obtained of visiting villages not seen before, and generally of mak- ing the present scheme of vaccination known to the population in a way it would be impossible to accomplish, if a hurried visit was made to each district. After the vaccine operations had been closed, on the march to head-quarters I employed the time in testing vaccine returns, and, though my inspections were made in such a man- ner as to make it impossible to correct returns against my visit, with the exception of the results of two days' work not entered in a village return (which was clearly an accidental omission, the results seen corresponding with the entries in the diary) I found no errors or omissions. During the past season, I carefully inspected the Meerut District, with reference to the proposed increase in the establishment of Vac- cinators, and am of opinion that that district does not hold out much prospect of an increase in the number of the operations, in proportion to the proposed increase in the establishment, and I would recommend the increase being made in the Saharunpore Dis- trict. Further I would suggest, that the Rs. 20 per mensem for five months, and Rs. 10 for seven months be divided into two sums, of Rs 10 and Rs. 8, one for each division to be given as a reward, so to speak, to be held for a year by the two Native Superin- tendents, one from each division, who have performed their duties best, and that it be awarded at the end of the vaccinating season. My reason for recommending the above is because the increase of the establishment at Saharunpore will not give the Native Superintendent more work than that performed on the same pay by other Native Superintendents( 12 ) Suc- cessful Unsuc- cessful Un- known. Total, Landoura , 361 34 36 431. While at Landoura in the Roorkee Tehseel I had a good opportunity of seeing the bene- fits of a good word on behalf of vaccination, even when spoken by a village school-mas- ter. This man named Pundit Ramchunder Dass, to set the example, had himself vacci- nated, and, though it was unsuccessful from previous small-pox, yet his example had so much influence, that many of the parents of the school children permitted them to be operated upon, and the operations this season have been very numerous in this town. I am also indebted to Rao Sahib Sing of Landoura for his kind assistance in the cause of vaccination, and I expect much good to result from the extensive operations noted in the margin, not only in Landoura itself, but in the vicinity. Rajah Teekum Singh, on whom I had the pleasure of calling at Moorsan, rendered a great ser- vice to vaccination, by not only inpressing its benefits on his retainers, but gave a proof of his continued belief in the prophylactic by having another of his own children vacci- nated before them all. If this Rajah's and school-master's example were more exten- sively followed, vaccination would soon become general, as it is a well known fact that the illiterate portions of the population hold back for a lead, either from one who has the credit of some knowledge, and is generally of good caste, like a school-master, or per- sonal or hereditary influence like a Rajah, or head man of a village or villages. When the putwaree's or lumberdar's child is vaccinated, the rest of the village soon follow, but when the Vaccinator is sent to the Chumar mohullah, his operations must of necessity be limited, as this class form but a small portion of the inhabitants in a village, even of a considerable population. It is strange to see the readiness with which vaccination is accepted in one village and the almost systematic opposition to it in another, per- haps not half a mile off; but this opposition is explained in the case of villages composed of female infant murderers, who, as I have said in para. 8 in my letter to Mr. Palmer, object to vaccination on grounds which I would hesitate to record, did not the acknow- ledged fact of their murderous practices leave little doubt, that they view female infant life in a very different light to most other notions. Municipal Vaccination. 1870-71. 1871-72. Atrowlee, ... ... ... 1 1 Municipal. Hurdoagunj, ... ... 1 1 Dehra, Rajpore, and Mussoorie, 0 1 Secundra Rao, ... ... 1 1 Saharunpore, ... 1 1 Muttra, ... ... ... 1 1 Local. Bindrabun, ... ... 1 1 Moozufïernuggur, ... 1 1 Kosie, ... ... ... 1 1 Shamlee, ... ... ... 0 1 Julleysur, ... ... ... 1 1 Kyranah, ... ... ... 0 1 Agra, ... ... ... 3 3 Kandlah, ... ... ... 0 1 Ferozabad,... ... ... 0 1 Meeranpore, ... ... 0 1 Kasgunj, ... ... ... 1 1 Municipal. Etah and Sorun, ... ... 0 1 Meerut, ... ... ... 2 0 Mynpoorie, ... ... 1 1 Boolundshuhur, ... ... 1 1 Etawah, ... ... ... 1 1 Khoojah, ... ... ... 1 1 Furruckabad, ... ... 1 1 Anoopshuhur, .... ... 1 1 Terru, ... ... ... 3 4 Allygurh, ... ... ... 2 2 Total, ... 28 34 Hathrass, ... ... ... 2 2 8. During the past season the staff of Municipal and Local Vaccicators has been as per margin, and for facility in re- ference, that for the previous year is also given. The two principal Vac- cinators of Meerut, having been work- ing independently of this office, their returns are there- fore not included among those now submited. The additions to the staff of Municipal Vaccinators are the reappointment of the 4th Vaccinator for Terree, the appointments of one for Dehra, Rajpore, and Mussoorie, from November, 1871, one for Etah and Soron from 15th December, 1871, and one for Ferozabad from the 1st January, 1872. The four Vaccinators for the towns of Shamlee, Kyranah, Kandlah, and Meeranpore in the Moozuffernugger District, enter- tained from the 15th November, 1871, to 31st January, 1872, will be alluded to hereafter as theirs is a special case. The Municipal Vaccinator for Dehra, Rajpore, and Musssoorie receives his pay as follows, Rs. 40, from Dehra, Rs. 20, from Rajpore, and Rs. 60, from Mussoorie, and works six months at Dehra and Rajpore, if the state of the weather will admit of it, and six months at Mussoorie. The pay of the Municipal Vac- cinators has been regularly remitted to this office, and the difficulties met with last year, under this head have not been experienced during the season under report. The cir- cumstances of the Vaccinators for the four towns in the Moozuffernuggur District noted
( 13 ) above or as follows; before the commencement of the season Mr. Palmer, the Magistrate of Moozuffernugger, consulted me with reference to the appointment of Vaccinators for the towns named above, and asked what was the lowest sum for which I would undertake to supply a Vaccinator during the vaccinating season to the four towns in question, and, being anxious to do what I could to assist Mr. Palmer, I fixed the sum of Rs. 60, for the season, intending, if the Vaccinators worked well, to give them the first vacan- cies in the establishment after the 1st April, 1872. Of course, I could not give other than good &quot; Oomedwars&quot; to these towns, as it would not have been just to take a Vaccinator from Rs. 120 per annum, and, by filling up his place, leave him perhaps without an appointment at the end of the season, when the grant of Rs. 60 was expended; to say nothing of the inadvisability of taking a Vaccinator from a palce where he might be well known, and setting him to work in a town where he was a total stranger. The work of these four men for fifteen days in November, 1871, and all December, 1871, and January, 1872, was as under, and it was after seeing what was done in December, that I wrote to Mr. Palmer the letter alluded to hereafter. 15th to 30th Novem- ber, 1871. December, 1871. January, 1872. Total. Successful. Unsuccesful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Shamlee, ... ... 14 8 4 26 29 19 2 50 8 16 2 26 44 43 15 102 Kyranah, ... ... 4 7 6 17 81 38 36 155 13 21 3 37 98 66 45 209 Kandlah, ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 ... 5 19 21 15 8 44 35 15 13 63 Meeranpore, ... ... 24 2 1 27 87 22 17 126 131 9 16 156 242 33 34 309 Total, 42 17 11 70 211 79 60 350 173 61 29 263 419 157 107 683 As I have given extracts from my letter to Mr. Palmer below, in which I have fully discussed the subject, and the advisabillity, as it appeared to me, of continuing the vaccine grant to these towns, I need not allude to the subject in greater detail, except to again record my regret that this scheme of what might be turned local vaccinations (as the operations were to be performed in these towns alone, which as yet are not Municipal from funds supplied from local sources,) should have failed. There are other towns in which the operations of the Municipal Vacci- nator should be more numerous, and personally and by letter, I have endeavoured to impress upon the Municipalities, but chiefly upon the Native gentlemen compos- ing them, that there is no greater boon they can confer upon the residents, who have in many cases elected them to their honorary posts, than by doing their utmost by example and advice to urge upon them the great benefit which will accrue to the town, if they generally accept vaccination for their children. I am happy to think that my efforts have not been quite in vain, but much remains yet to be done, as it really seems that the struggle to give wealth in the larger cities puts all other considerations not only out of sight, but even out of mind. I must, however, in justice state, that the conduct of the Native Superintendent of the Moozuffernug- gur District was not such as to give the experiment under notice as fair a trial as I could wish, and his carelessness and bad superintendence have led to his dismissal. The conduct of the Native Superintendent again illustrates one of the greatest difficul- ties to be met with in the present scheme of vaccination, as regards promotion, and if it were possible to reward a Vaccinator, without promoting him to Native Superin- tendent, a great point would be gained as regards efficiency, since, what was once considered as promotion, viz., the post of Municipal Vaccinator, is now viewed as a punishment, except in the cases, which as yet are comparatively rare, of the men pro- moted being residents of the Municipality or its neighbourhood. But as noted in last Report not to reward a Vaccinator for good work injures the Department by checking V 4
( 14 ) energy, and results in the Vaccinator doing work sufficient, and no more, to enable him to retain his appointment. Before I made a point of selecting Native Superintendents from those promoted to Municipal Vaccinators, and if a man appeared unfit for the duties of a Native Superintendent, he had his promotion for past good work, and the risk of going back to the establishment if he showed any carelessness or want of energy. The Native Superintendent under notice was a very good operator, well educated, and apparently respectable, and was promoted for the good work of last year, but not- withstandiug the examples I have made of reducing Native Superintendents for laziness and neglect, when they have reached the highest grade of promotion, this man, in addition to being lazy and careless, allowed serious irregularities to be performed by some of his Vaccinators, which I detected in my inspeetion, and of which he must have been well aware, but which I fear he left unreported for some pecuniary or other con- sideration. Had not Mr. Palmer in his vernacular order, alluded to hereafter, ex - pressed his wish that these four Vaccinators should confine their work to the towns to which they were nominated, I might have been induced to keep on the Vaccinator at Meeranpore, but I felt he would have vaccinated all he could get to submit to the ope- ration in this town before the end of January, 1872, and thus the returns for February, 1872, would have shown little or no work. The following are extracts from my letter to Mr. Palmer, No. 45 of 1872, dated 19th January, 1872, and though I may appear to enter into too minute details, yet I considered the efforts of Mr. Palmer to promote the good of the people entrusted to his charge demanded a detailed report from me of the causes which led to my recommending a discontinuance of the grant to vaccina- tion in the towns under notice. &quot; If I may judge by the last month's returns of the four Vaccinators at these towns, I cannot feel myself justified in asking you to continue the grant for vaccina- tion to these four towns after 1st February, 1872, more especially as it seems to be your wish, as expressed in Vernacular order No.( 15 ) the grant after 1st February, 1872. I know it is the opinion of many, that, if you increase the numbers of Vaccinators in a given locality, you increase in a similar propor- tion the number of operations. No belief could be founded on more false data than this. With a voluntary scheme of vaccination, which character is in many instances well impressed on the villagers, with a population suspicious to a degree, with the prospect of a census before them, and an idea that vaccination is the last plan of the Government to indelibly mark the rising generation to afford sound data for future taxation, you might as well expect a large crop from an &quot;ôôsa maidan&quot; by working a dozen ploughs on it, and putting in maunds of seed, when it reality there may be only a patch or two in the whole &quot; maidan,' for which one plough and one maund of seed would be ample, and that yield but a poor return. Vaccinating in many districts with a large number of operators is like expecting results from an &quot; ôôsa maidan&quot; in proportion to the ploughs run over it, and the seed put in, instead of calculating first on the cap- ability of the district to find work for these men, in the present voluntary scheme, as a cultivator does with an &quot; ôôsa maidan.&quot; If the scheme were compulsory, this simile would not hold, except by changing the soil, and then the Vaccinators might be in proportion to the ploughs, and seed on highly irrigated land. You have the satisfac- tion of having done your best with the means at your disposal, and you can not regret more than I do, that your efforts have failed.&quot; During the past season, I have addressed a letter to all the Municipalities in the Agra and Meeaut Divisions, suggesting that the following bye-law be added to those in force, and all the Presidents of Municipalites who have replied to my letter, have ex- pressed their entire approval of the suggestion, and have promised to bring the sub- ject to the notice of the Municipalities at their next meeting. The bye-law is as follows. &quot; Any person or persons failing, within two days after the fact has come or been brought to their knowledge, to report to the proper authorities, the presence either of the two following contagious and infectious diseases, viz., cholera and small pox in their houses or compounds, will, on conviction be punished by a fine of Rs.( 16 ) Shasters. I am glad to say I succeeded in convincing this Pundit, and he accepted the prophylactic for some of the younger numbers of his family. The outbreak in Dehra Doon was the most serious reported to me during the past season, and during the year 30 cases of the disease were recorded; of which seven proved fatal, and 23 recovered. This outbreak originated from a case of the disease, which a Hukeem of Dehra took into his own house to treat, and from which two of his own family were attacked with the disease and died. Since these cases one or two fresh ones have appeared from time to time, but the outbreak seems to have been chiefly confined within a radius of five miles of Dehra. I must allow that I was not prepared for these cases, but it only shows, when vaccination has been apparently extensively carried on, many children are not unfrequently hidden by their parents, when they hear of the Vaccinator's presence in the neighbourhood, and these are sure to get the disease, if its contagion enter the village. While at this station I made close inquiries into the causes of these cases being omitted, and am satisfied that they are due to the fault of the parents, generally the mothers of the children. In one village I saw two cases of the synchronism of small-pox and vaccination, which had both recovered, and in another, where small-pox had appeared, the villagers seemed perfectly satisfied with the fact that vaccination is a preventive against small-pox, and well they might be, when they saw the immunity enjoyed by the successfully vaccinated children who were visible proofs of its benefits, and the gratitude they expressed to the Government for the present gratuitous scheme of vaccination was, I feel sure, genuine. I found on inquiry that in one village two cases occurred in the families of Mahomedans, who in the Doon exhibit more opposition to vaccination than their co-religionists in the plains. Notwithstanding the trial upon which vaccination has been placed by the late epidemic of small-pox in the Dehra Doon and Terree, not a single instance of the disease has been seen in a successfully vaccinated case (if I except the very slight attack of small-pox from which Civil Surgeon of Dehra suffered) though some have been met with in inoculated cases, but mostly above twenty-five years of age. Hukeems, 10. I regret to say that the results expected from the Hukeem's sons and nominees in the Booìundshuhur District, alluded to in para. 13 of my last Annual Report have not been realized. Of those who presented themselves during my inspection of the Booìundshuhur District only one has fully qualified himself for the post of Vaccinator, and has been appointed Municipal Vaccinator of Boolundshuhr. Of the other applicants, a few studied for a short time and then left, while others on hearing what was required of them, ceased to attend at once. I was more successful with the son of an old hereditary Inoculator of the Doon, who has fully qualified himself, and as stated in a foregoing para., has been appointed Vaccinator at Jownsar Bawur from the 1st April, 1872. I have another Inoculator's son learning vaccination and hope during my hot season tour in the Hills to get two or three others, and if they turn out as well as the one alluded to above, they will be most useful in Terree Gurhwal, and will help to show the people of that territory, that, if I am supplanting inoculation, I am ready to do what I can for the deserving sons of hereditary Inoculators whose small income may be injured by the present scheme of vaccination. Judging from the experience I have acquired of these Hukeem Vacci- nators, I fear the expectations which I expressed of being able to reach the children of the better classess through them are doomed to disappointment, and vaccination must become not only more general, and have some recognized fee attached to the practise of the operation, but must be raised to the dignity of an operation not unbecoming a Hukeem, before men of this class will take up the practice, in addition to what they already enjoy, and consider not beneath their dignity. Inoculution. 11. In para. 14 of my report for 1870-71; I wrote, &quot;that the practice of inoculation has as far as I could hear departed from my Divisions, never I hoped to return,&quot; and in the appendix to the same report (para. 2) that, &quot; during the past season, not a case of inoculation had been
( 17 ) reported to me, and small-pox even in the slightest form of an epidemic has not been wit- nessed&quot; in Terree Gurhwal, but I very much regret to have to record that, during the season under report, inoculation has been extensively practised, and that in one or two villages on the Bhageruthee, an outbreak of small-pox (severe for the Hills) was the consequence, which first appeared in the villages up the Bhageruthee, and extended down this river to Terree itself, where however it was confined to a few cases. The cir- cmstances were the following:( 18 ) children, and 1 may add that the quarantine, which is generally supposed to be placed on a village in which inoculation is being practised, was of the most useless kind, as I passed several of the Udni villagers on my road to Udni and Rhotul, who were going to the other side of the river, and must thus have to pass through several villages, of which Tolara was one. It certainly does seem a hard case, and shows that inoculation is not so popular as it is supposed to be. The late Rajah of Terree,on every occasion when I saw him, expressed himself as well pleased with vaccination, but I fear there were, and it is possible may now be, some officers in his durbar, who think differently, for I was told it was one of them who sent for the Inoculator whose operations were put a stop to at Terree itself. My present staff of Vaccinators in Terree Guhrwal, if not capable of thoroughly protecting the whole of the population requiring vaccination in a year or two, are quite sufficient with previous inoculation, and present vaccination, to stamp out small-pox at once, if it should appear, if timely notice is given, but if inoculation is allowed to spread the disease, as it did this year, it may very seriously affect my collection of vaccine lymph for my plains operations, which, as before noted, seemed in danger this last hot season. Independent of this injury to the Department, there is one to me unsurmountable difficulty, which the supporters of inoculation in place of vaccination, (when the latter cannot be thoroughly carried out) seem either to lose sight of, or undervalue; I allude to the extension of small-pox, which inoculation must entail. Take for example the instance under notice, from one single case of small- pox, how many have resulted, and it may be asked, where would the epidemic have ended, had it not been stamped out by vaccination, and if the experience of nearly eight years in the plains can give me any claim to answer the above, it would be, not till every person liable to the disease had been either attacked by it, or seemed proof against it, of which latter cases, however, I fear there would be very few. If vaccination requires an establishment in proportion to the extent of the unprotected cases in a given locality, I should consider that, in the case of inoculation, in addition to a large staff of Inoculators, a preventive establishment, quite as large would be necessary to carry out the rules of quarantine, in such a manner that spontaneous small-pox with its awful mortality should not spread to villages, waiting for the visit of the Inoculator and quarantine necessary to prevent this untoward contingency, would produce first a stageration, then cessation, and finally in certain seasons of the year, perhaps, a diversion of trade, with all its attendant bad results. I am aware that Terree Gurhwal is independent territory, and the law prohibiting inoculation in British Gurhwal cannot be extended to it, yet, while most grateful to Colonel Ramsay for the kind help he has always rendered, 1 have little doubt, that, if the new Rajah of Terree, in consideration of his late father's encouragement of vaccination, could be prevailed upon to issue orders to the effect, that he would punish or view with displeasure, any attempt at inoculation in his territory, when he was continuing the support to vaccination rendered by his late father, it would soon lead to the extension of inoculation, as the entire population are now sufficiently accustomed to vaccination, and have had proofs of its benefits, and superiority to inoculation. If to this order were added another, viz. that the first appearance of small-pox was to be at once reported to my Native Super- intendent of vaccine, or the nearest Vaccinator (all of whom are residents in Terree Gurhwal) I need hardly add that measures would be immediately taken to prevent the disease spreading. Number of operations performed by each Vaccinator. 12. The difference met with under this head are most striking, but as they are clearly shown in Statement No. I., I need not enter into detail, nor again go over the same ground which I did in para. 10 of last year's report. I will only allude to one case for comparison, that of the Municipal Vaccinators at Moozuffernuggur and Saharunpore. Now both are superior men of their class, very good operators, and most respectable and zealous ;but yet there is a striking difference in the totals of their work, due, I believe, entirely to the different spirit in which the present scheme is viewed in Moozuffernuggur and Saharunpore. I could multiply instances like this, but speaking generally, when such
( 19 ) marked difference does exist, it is not due to want of zeal in the Vaccinator, or his fitness for his duties, but to the simple refusal of the villagers or residents in the towns to accept the present voluntary scheme of vaccination ; its acceptance is optional, and they simply decline it. I have myself had not a little difficulty in getting a simple hearing among some Rajpoot Thakoor Jat villagers, who, I dare say, for reasons before given in my letter to Mr. Palmer, had some object in declining the scheme, and it need not therefore be wondered at, if a man, with the small influence a Vaccinator has, is simply passed on from village to village, and in some cases, to hurry his movements, has the village dogs set on him, or, what amounts to the same thing, not a hand is raised, or a word said, to drive them off. If, in addition to the present means used to prevent infant murders, a clause were added to the Act, to the effect that all female infants in the villages in which it is in force were to be vaccinated before they were four months, a very good record of their existence would remain in the village, and a fertile means of accounting for their deaths, after six months old, viz., from small-pox, would in great measure be removed. I allow that this would border on compulsory vaccination, but the case is exceptional and must be met by exceptional measures. Annual returns. 13. As remarked in para. 7 of last year's report, these are so clearly exhibited in Statement No. I., that I need only allude to the grand total. This, during the past season (one in which small-pox could not be said to have been prevalent), amounted to 96.646, being an increase of 8,810 as compared with 1870-71. This increase, however, must have deducted from it 2,993 or nearly 3,000, as these were the number of operations in the Hills during the hot and rainy season of 1870, which were omitted in Statement I for 1870-71, though subsequently furnished, but too late to appear in it. The work of the increased staff of Vaccinators must also be taken into account in drawing a comparison with 1870-71, but after making due allowance for this, the returns exhibit an improvement as regards the total number of operations. The rise in the rate of success, viz., from 88.9 to 90.8, will, I trust, be considered satisfactory, as the improvement in the quality which it represents must be the great aim of the present voluntary scheme, since its ultimate success rests in a great measure on the quality of the work performed. A reference to the work of the season under report in the district of Saharunpore exhibits a total of upwards of 8,000 operations, performed by five Vaccinators, and had it not been for the very severe illness of the Vaccinator at Deobund (who would no doubt have doubled his present number of 1870) the average number of operations performed by each Vaccinator would have been upwards of 1,700, and the rate of success above 90 per cent. If the establishment in this district is doubled, as I have recommended, I have great hopes that if the number of operations are proportionally increased, vacci- nation ere long will become fully established, and, with but a few exceptions, be recognised as one of the greatest benefits a parent can obtain for his child. A great point is gained when a large village like Gungoh sends a second time for the services of a Vaccinator, and no better proof could be adduced of the benefits his first visit conferred. In the district of Dehra Doon it will be noticed, that, for all practical purposes, the birth-rate calculated at 30 to 1,000 has been reached, but only one-third of the opera- tions were performed on children under one year. The epidemic of small-pox alluded to in para. 9 included every case of the disease, which occurred during the year under report, and when it is considered that during this period 1,500 operations were perform- ed on persons above a year old, I think, it will be granted that vaccination, allowed to be considerably short of complete as regards the protection of all the cases requiring the operation, nevertheless exercises a very beneficial influence, when small-pox is pre- valent, by reducing the amount of contagion, and thus limiting the spread of the disease, and confining it within bounds, which will admit of its being stamped out. The extent which the epidemic under notice attained was reached, not by half the number of of cases appearing on a single day, or within a week, but as follows : 4 in September, 4 in December, 2 in January, 1872, 10 in February, and 10 in March. Of these, 30 cases, eight appeared in Dehra, during September, October, November, December,
( 20 ) and January, originating as described in para. 9, and seven in one village in February, and the remainder appeared in twos and threes in different villages near Dehra, and were all unvaccinated cases, which must have been concealed by their parents, when the Vaccinator visited these villages. A very different result to this would have been noticed had small-pox been similarly imported into the Meerut or Moozuffernuggur District, from the former of which I only lately received a report to the effect, that, nearly as many cases of small-pox were present in one village at the same time, as have been met with during the past year in the Dehra Doon. During the past season, a copy of the returns of each tehseel and Municipality has been sent monthly to the Magistrate of the several districts in the Agra and Meerut Divisions, and these officers have been requested to test their accuracy in any way they may think best, either by doing it themselves, while on tour in their districts, or deputing their official subordinates to do it. In support of the correctness of the returns now submitted, I must add that I have received no reports of any false entries from the officers, while those who have examined them have, up to the present, reported that they have been found correct. The more these village returns are inspected and tested, the better for the Department, as it ensures their correctness, and also exhibits to the villagers the interest which the Government, through its District Officers, takes in the present scheme of vaccination. General remarks. 14. Though, perhaps, encroaching upon the province of the Sanitary Commis- sioner, yet I must allude to a strong conversation, which occur- red in a village neare Sirdhunah, owing to its direct bearing on vaccination, as regards the permanence of the benefits it confers. When pointing out to the villagers these benefits, in the cases of the children successfully vaccinated in previous years, and whose unpitted faces were my best proofs, the villagers remarked though these are alive, many have died. This conversation took place in the centre of the village, so I took the head men with me to their chief well, which I had noticed when entering the village, and pointing to the manure heaps, which surrounded it in high mounds, said, I wondered that so many of these vaccinated children are alive, and the villagers are failing to prove that the children died when small-pox was even prevallent. I added that no doubt they died of the prevailing fever, which they allowed spared the aged and attacked chiefly the adult and young portion of the po- pulation. I fear the state of the village which I am about to describe, may be taken as a type of also too many, and when the scourge of small-pox is added to the train of fatal diseases, which must result from such a total absence of any attempt at sanitation among a water-drinking population, the wonder to me is, not that so many deaths occur among the successfully vaccinated cases, but that the population attains the figure it does. This village was surrounded with sugar-cane cultivation, the yield of which the villagers know by experience is in proportion to the amount of manure given to the soil, and, except where the houses were too close to admit of it, the village was convert- ed into a mass of dung heaps, and, as in this case, which I fear is not an exception, the greatest collection of these village sweepings, as noted before, was around the chief well of the village, which was almost on a level, with and close to, a nearly stagnant swamp. I asked these villagers two questions, which I trust will make them view these heaps in a different light; the first was, &quot; where do the children in the village go for the purpose of nature ?&quot; And, their answer was &quot; to the lane front of their houses,&quot; I remarked then ; &quot; you know what is added to these village sweepings.&quot; My second question was, &quot; when it rains, is not the water from heaps likely to find its way into the well?&quot; to this I got no reply. On suggesting that these heaps of manure should be collected at a distance from the village, the answer of one and and all was that it would be stolen at night. In the Moozuffernugur District, I am told that it is not unusual to find this manure stored in the houses for better security ! ! I can, under these circumstances, therefore only again wonder, not that a few proofs of the benefits of vaccination exist in village, like that, I
( 21 ) have described, but that any cases survive such poisoned water and air. During the past season, I had to make an example of a Native Superintendent and Vaccinator, whom I detected in making false returns, and owing to the system of returns in use in this office, both these men stood convicted on their own handwriting, and I prosecuted them in the Magistrate's Court at Muttra. This officer committed them to the Sessions, but, as the case had been pending some time, and it was possible that those men were ignorant of the light in which the law viewed their conduct, this being the first instance of the kind I had taken up, I allowed the case to drop, after having shown the Department the punishment which these men narrowly escaped, and which awaited any one detected in similar practices. Frequently during the past season I have experienced great diffi- culty in obtaining the vaccine village returns of previous years, the answer generally given being, that the returns had been put for safety into a hole in the wall of the houses, and during the past rainy season the wall had fallen, and buried the returns. As these vaccine village returns are invaluable to the Department in proving the bene- fits of successful, as compared with unsuccessful Vaccination, I would take the liberty of suggesting that the Magistrates of the districts be requested to issue orders to the effect, that the vaccine village returns, being Government records, the Government expect that the parties who receive them, be they chowkeedars, lumberdars, or put- warees, will take as much care of them as they are required to do of other Govern- ment records. I would also suggest, that orders be issued to the chowkeedars through the Superintendents of Police, directing them, when taking the mortuary returns to the nearest Police-station, to receive any returns, letters, &c., which may be made over to them by the Vaccinator working in the neighbourhood, and that the subordinate Police officials be directed to post letters without delay, as unless a Native Superintendent is kept well informed of the movements and work of his Vaccinators, it is impossible for him to exercise that supervision which is necessary to keep his men up to their work, and to enable him to go at once to the assist- ance of any who may require his help in persuading the villagers to accept the prophylactic. The Vaccinators will be directed to ascertain the day on which the vil- lage chowkeedar goes to the Police-station to make his reports, so as to send their returns, &c. by him. I am glad to see that the suggestion contained in my last Annual Report is to be carried out, and though the maps can, as a commencement, be supplied only to the Native Superintendents, yet I am in hopes that I shall be able to get the tehseels extracted from the zillah maps, at a very cheap rate, by asking some of the subordinates in the survey at Dehra to employ their leisure in drawing them out roughly and though these from their price can hardly be very accurate, yet the names of the villages being given, and an approximation to their locality obtained, the Vac- cinator will be able to make his visits in a more systematic manner, and will thus save both time and labour in searching for villages. By studying the map, I often surprised my Vaccinators by asking them why such and such villages were omitted, and though it is true that, with a little trouble, they could get the names of the villages from the putwarees, yet these maps will remove any excuse for having a single village unvisited in a given tract of country. As remarked in last year's report, these maps will enable Native Superintendents, by the aid of his weekly returns, to come unexpectedly upon my Vaccinator, by nearly calculating what village he should visit on a given date to obtain fresh lymph. One visit and inspection conducted in this manner is worth twenty visits made when accompanied by the vaccinator. In conclusion, I trust the Government will mark with their approbation, the valuable assistance rendered by Rajah Teekum Singh, and Rao Sahib Singh, of Lan- dowrah, and also be pleased to express to the village School-master of Landowrah Pundit Ramchunder Dass, their approval of his thoughtfulness for the welfare of the children in his school, and disinterested help in the cause of vaccination, for it must be borne in mind, that the Pundit could not have had the least idea, when he was assisting vaccination, that I would visit Landowrah, and personally thank him for what he had done. V 6
( 22 ) If Vaccinators could calculate on the assistance of a person of the position and education of this Pundit in each village, its benefits would be rapidly extended, and the class of the community, who now hold aloof, would soon prove its most ardent supporters. I would also recommend for some reward Native Superintendents Mohomed Syed Khan of Saharunpore, and Vaccinator Fyz Rasool of Meerut. The certificates which this young Vaccinator holds from some of the medical officers in the Meerut Cantonments are most creditable to him, and, as he is too young to promote to the post of Native Superinten- dent, I have no means of rewarding him for the credit he has brought upon vaccina- tion in the Meerut Cantonment. My office establishment continues to give me entire satisfaction, though the late additions to the establishment have made the work very heavy during the vaccinating season. R. PRINGLE, M.D., SURGEON, Supdt. of Vaccine, Agra and Meerut Divisions. Dated Camp Raneebaugh, April 1st, 1872. From( 23 ) Superintendent was dismissed, and this year the numbers have fallen from 6,176 to 5,101. This enormous discrepancy in the case of Mirzapore, at all events, can hardly be the consequence of less industry on the part of the Vaccinators, and the new Native Superintendent; in fact, the Mirzapore Vaccniators are about the hardest- working in the Division. 5. During the months of November, December, and January, there was also a decrease in the amount of work as compared with the preceeding season. This was most marked in the Goruckpore District. Here, the number fell from 2,765 to 1,389 in December, and from 2,584 to 1,571 in January. This is satisfac- torily accounted for. So prevalent was malarious fever throughout the district during these months, that healthy children could not always be found. If this be true, the falling off in the numbers speaks well for the discrimination and care of the Vaccinator. That it is true, appears probable from a remark made by Mr. Robinson, the Assistant Magistrate, stationed at Kussya. In a note to me, he states &quot; I am afraid your returns will not be large this year an account of the unusual severity of the fever which rendered so many unfit to be vaccinated.&quot; This observation may thoroughly be relied upon. There is perhaps no officer in these Provinces more throughly acquainted with the condition of the Natives in the portion of the district under his charge, than Mr. Robinson. 6. The greatest number vaccinated by any Vaccinator, was 3,352. This Vaccina- tor has advantage over most. He is a wealthy zemindar, the owner of many villages, and his influence with the people is great. This number is, moreover, the result of the conjoint labours of two men, himself, and his brother. His success furnishes another proof of the desirableness of having the Vaccinators natives of the district in which they are employed. 7. The lowest number vaccinated by any one man was 420. This was in the Municipality of Azimgurh. The Vaccinator besides being lazy, got sick and ultimately resigned. This also reads a lesson. The Azimgurh Municipality voted funds for the working season only. A good Vaccinator cannot be obtained for temporary enployment. 8. As might be expected, the Vaccinator who did most work, did also the best work. The highest percentage of successful Vaccinations was 94.8. On the other hand, the Vaccinator who did almost the least work showed the lowest percentage of successful cases. Only 63.3 of his vaccinations were successful. 9. Altogether, although the numbers operated upon this season, may not be considered unsatisfactory, the quality of the work is not what it should be. This cannot fail to be the case so long as the present system of employment and paying &quot; oomedwars&quot; continues in force, With the exception of the Inoculators, these men take to vaccination because they are out of employment, or are friends of some Vaccina- tor or of a Native Superintendent, and not because they possess any special aptitude for the work. They are paid according as the numbers successfully vaccinated reach, or fall below, a fixed standard. Although this may stimulate to exertion, it also incites to fraud. The numbers vaccinated are thus greatly increased, but at the same time a large amount of indifferent vaccination is the result. Whilst we are endea- vouring to establish faith in the efficiency of the protection which vaccination affords against small-pox, nothing can surely be more fatal to our efforts than its unsuccessful or indifferent performance. It would be better to leave it alone, than do it badly. 10. The measures chiefly required for the employment of the quality of vacci- nation in this Circle are the better institution of the Vaccinators, and the substitution of arm-to-arm vaccination for that by dried lymph. 11. As our Vaccinators are now to a great extent, and in future will still more be recruited from the inoculating class, I would offer a few remarks regarding Inocu-
( 24 ) lators. The graphic description of their history and mode of working, given by my predecessor, leaves nothing further to be said on these heads; but there are a few points bearing on their extensive employment as Vaccinators, which may be worthy of notice. In nearly all of the districts of the Division, they have for centuries been looked to for the means of protection against small-pox, by those of the people who recognize the necessity for such protection. Even now, after the introduction of vac- cination, and when it is known that inoculation is proscribed by Government, these men are in some parts secretly, and in others openly encouraged, by the people to visit their villages. If, therefore, they could be prevailed upon to substitute the practice of vaccination for that of inoculation, the result so much desired by Government, of at length seeing vaccination accepted and voluntarily maintained by the people as one of their own institutions, would to a certain extent be obtained. 12. Those who write on the subject, without understanding it, express the opinion, that is merely necessary to teach Inoculators the theory and practice of vaccination. They will then, they believe, at once become convinced of its superior advantages and voluntarily discontinue the more &quot; risky&quot; practice of inoculation. Facts are decidedly against such a conclusion, and it is easy to see why they should be so. Every year, numerous instances occur of Inoculators, instructed in the practice of vacci- nation and supposed to have become converts to its superiority over inoculation, going back to their old faith. This season I have myself met with two instances in which Inoculators in the pay of Government as Vaccinators, could not even wait until the vaccinating season was over and the season proper for inoculation had begun, before returning to their old practices. Besides these, it has several times been reported to me by Native Superintendents and Vaccinators, that Inoculators provided with vacci- nating instruments and authorized to vaccinate, have visited their districts and carried on inoculation. Such reports reached me from various places in Ghazeepore, Azim- ghur, and Bustee Districts. Of their truth I entertain no question. I myself found a child recently inoculated by a man to whom Government vaccinating instruments had been given. This was in the Seyadpore Tehseel of the Ghazeepore District. 13. Facts, therefore, are against the conclusion that Inoculators have only to be taught the advantages of vaccination to ensure their practising it. The explanation is, I think, to be found in the riskiness of inoculation already mentioned. 14. The Inoculator finds the vaccine vesicle runs a mild course, and terminates favourably without having excited a serious symptom. The people are also not slow to make the same discovery. Consequently, the services of the Inoculator during the progress of the vesicle are not called for. If he obtains a fee at all, it is only the fee for performing the operation. But even this, as the people can have it done gratis by a Government Vaccinator, he is little likely to receive. Inoculation, on the other hand, is always attended with severe and often with serious or dangerous symptoms. When these arise, the parents of a child send for the Inoculator, who administers various heating or cooling medicines, as the case may require; should these fail, a goat is pro- cured, and the evil spirit which is supposed to have taken possession of the child is, by the process of &quot;jaru,&quot; transferred from the child to the goat. All this means hand- some profits to the Inoculator. An intelligent man who had long practised inoculation informed me that when the parent got greatly alarmed about their child, they paid him liberally on the occasion of each visit, in the hope that he would exert himself to the utmost to save its life. He told me that he not unfrequently received as much as eighty or ninety rupees in a single month. 15. With all this, vaccination does away. It argues therefore, it appears to me, a somewhat child-like belief in the virtue of an Inoculator to suppose that he would at once, on witnessing the less riskiness of vaccination, take to its practice and ruin himself by giving up inoculation. 16. To induce an Inoculator to abandon his own craft and take to vaccination, he must be secured a sufficient income. He cannot, as yet at least, depend upon the fees
( 25 ) he may receive for vaccinating. But even this is insufficient, as I have shown, to ensure his practising vaccination only. The temptation of greater profits to be gained from inoculation proved too much for his fidelity. Hs must therefore be authoritatively prohibited from practising inoculation. So many of those who profess the possession of superior wisdom have given it as their opinion, that they cannot with justice put a stop to inoculation until vaccination has been placed within the reach of the whole popu- lation, that it would be presumptious of me to differ from them. It is sufficient to point out the position and the only effectual mode, so far as I can see, of dealing with it. If those are correct who state that Inoculators, on being taught the superiority of vaccination, eagerly adopt its practice, there can be no difficulty. Instruction can be extended to every Inoculator in the country, and as a consequence, inoculation ought at once to be voluntarily discontinued. But I have already shown that instruction in many cases merely furnish a cloak for the prosecution of inoculation in a more undisturbed and authoritative manner. 17. Fortunately, the interests of the people are quite opposed to those of the Inoculator. To the conviction which is beginning to grow upon them, that protection from small-pox can be attained as effectually, and at the same time more safely, and at less expense by vaccination, I look to the decline of inoculation, rather than to the converson of the Inoculators. At the same time, the protection of the people fram Small-pox being the hereditary birthright of the Inoculators, confirmed to them by the usage of centuries, it would be impolitic, if not unfair, to transfer this to other hands. So far as possible, their occupation should be secured to them, with the pro- viso that vaccination should take the place of inoculation. 18. What is chiefly required to make Inoculators efficient Vaccinators is proper instruction. The majority of them are excessively ignorant. Few of the Mali caste can read or write. But until they are themselves able to keep an accurate account of their work, they ought not, I think, to be employed as Vaccinators. This season, I have several times detected false or incorrect returns in the books of these men, but could not fairly punish them, as the books had been written up by some one else. It is unfortunate that some should be excluded from practising vaccination on this account, but it would be a greater misfortune to have the value of our returns impaired by fraud or error. Upon the correctness of these rests our only knowledge of progress being made. Instructions in the theory and practice of vaccination is a still more important matter. Instead of supplying them with instruments or appointing them as Government Vaccinators on the recommendation of the Native Superintendent, with whom other considerations than those of fitness for the post may have weight, I would insist upon their serving an apprenticeship under the personal observation of the European Superintendent. With this view, they should accompany his camp, receiving a monthly allowance from the Inoculators' fund, until considered qualified to practise on their own account. The hardship of having to remain with the Superintendent's camp would not be great; in the Punjab, the whole staff of Vacci- nators travel with his camp in any part of the Province in which work is being carried on. In the case of an &quot; oomedwar&quot; it would usually be sufficient for him to accompany the Superintendent during the time the latter was inspecting the district in which he resided. That this suggestion is practicable, I was able to some extent to prove. Last year, having noticed that many of the new Vaccinators were sadly igno- rant of their duties, I resolved, at the beginning of this working season to attempt the better instruction of applicants for appointment With this view, I let it be understood that no vacancy would be filled up by an applicant who had not travelled with me until I considered him fit to fill it. Four promising men agreed to this, and after teach- ing them the principles of vaccination, and daily seeing them operate, I appointed three of their number to vacancies. The fourth proved lazy and was discharged as unsuitable. My transfer about the middle of the working season prevented my carry- ing out this plan thoroughly. In the Benares Division likewise, two old Inoculators accompanied my camp for six weeks and finally returned to their villages for the pur- V 7
( 26 ) pose, they said, of practising vaccination. No vacancy occurred whilst they were with me. This, I believe to be the only way in which properly instructed men can be secured as Government Vaccinators. It has been suggested that a class should be opened at some of the medical schools for the instruction of Vaccinators. This would not, I think, answer. Men might, no doubt, be taught the theory of vaccination, but they could never understand even this, unless it were combined with actual practice. Except in the eold weather, the latter would be impossible, and even then it could not be effectually carried out. It would be found difficult to induce parents to bring their children to be operated upon, and daily afterwards to exhibit the progress of the vaccine vesicle. After these difficulties had been overcome, the Vaccinator would still be unacquainted practically with the modes of persuasion by which he must induce the people to except vaccination. His tact in this last respect has no little share in his success. 19. Although believing that properly instructed Inoculators should, as far as possi- ble, be appointed as Vaccinators, I do not think they should be permitted to monopolize vaccination. If this were the case, they might combine to impart into its practice some of the profitable traditions of their former craft, and so place it beyond the reach of the poor. Converted Inoculators are by no means the best Vaccinators. Those in this Division are greatly inferior in skill and also in tact and energy to many of the educated, high-caste Vaccinators. A few of the latter should be retained in the service as a check upon the old Inoculators, and to show them that, in the event of their abusing their trust, their services might be dispensed with, without detriment to the progress of vaccination. 20. Besides the better instruction of applicants for appointment as Vaccinators, I have given it as my opinion, that the other chief requirement for the improvement of the quality of vaccination in my Circle is the substitution of the operation direct from arm-to-arm, for that by means of dried lymph. There may be difficulties in the way of this, but they are worth overcoming. In Lower Bengal, Bombay, and the Punjab, arm-to-arm vaccination is all but universal. From having this season throughout the various districts vaccinated with my own hand no fewer than 836 children, and seen at least as many more vaccinated in my presence, I can pretty con- fidently assert that caste prejudice is not one of the difficulties in the way of arm-to- arm Vaccination. The operation is thus shown in its simplest form. There is no carrying way of lymph which still excites so much suspicion. It is asserted that lymph preserved on ivory points is effective for two days after removal from the vesi- cle. This may be true, but I have rarely met with a Vaccinator who, after taking the trouble to charge points, would fail to use them on account of the lymph having got old. Regarding the comparative excellence of the two modes of operating, I need say nothing. Of the 836 children vaccinated by myself, nearly all from arm-to-arm, only 3 failures were reported to me. In Lower Bengal, in the metropolitan Circle, the ratio of successful cases is nearly cent. per cent.: in the Benares Circle it is only 88 per cent. 21. This year, I have met with many proofs tending to show that vaccination is coming gradually to be appreciated by the people. In the Akbarpore Tehseel of the Cawnpore District, 1 visited a village in which the unprotected children had been vaccinated for the past three years. The people welcomed the visit of the Vaccinator and told me that, since they had taken to vaccination, small-pox had never been seen in their village. The inhabitants of the neighbouring villages had observed this and were, of their own accord, having their children vaccinated ; many similar instances came to my notice during my tour. In order to prove to the people more clearly the benefits of vaccination, it has been proposed that the operations of the Vaccinators should be limited to a certain prescribed tract of country. This would be a change but not an improvement. It is difficult to understand in what way the protective power of vaccination can better be exemplified than by the vaccination of entire
( 27 ) villages. This is the basis of the present system and, until a better can be discovered, it might be allowed to remain undisturbed. Those who are practically acquainted with vaccination in India must feel convinced that, short of actual compulsion, there is no royal road to its immediate and universal adoption by the people. 22. Throughout the season, a vesicle of typical excellence has been maintained in all the districts, although not by all the Vaccinators. From ignorance or careless- ness, some of the latter occasionally permitted their lymph to deteriorate. This I found more particularly the case with men appointed on probation, and with Inoculators authorized to vaccinate, but not brought on the regular establishment. One of these latter was so anxious that I should see his work, that he insisted on my going 12 miles to visit 8 children whom he believed he had successfully vaccinated. I found all of them, on the 7th day after the operation, with thin crusts of dried blood on their arms. Another man showed me 24 children, each with a sore of some sort on its arms, but not one with a vaccine vesicle. 23. In spite of the effectual measures taken last year by Dr. Milne for putting a stop to falsification of returns, this has again been found to prevail to some extent. Instead of going on from Bustee to the Fyzabad and Azimgurh road, as the Vaccinators I had visited expected me to do, I turned back through Goruckpore. This somewhat threw them out in thelr calculations. On my return journey, I found one Vaccinator, a converted Inoculator, had left his post and done nothing since my first visit. An- other, likewise an old Inoculator, had, on the 29th of February, completed his returns for that month and carefully entered in his register the number he intended to vac- cinate on the 1st of March. One other, also an old Inoculator, had entered as success- ful, cases which were failures. He had never taken the trouble to visit the children after operating on them. The rest of the Vaccinators I found at their posts and their books correct. 24. Although I let it be known, that funds had been placed at my disposal for the instruction and payment of Hakeems and Baids, I met with only one respectable man who took a real interest in vaccination and practised it amongst his patients. Zaioolah, a Hakeem, in extensive practice in Benares, vaccinated upwards of 200 children. I saw nearly 50 of these and have seldom met with better work. Several other persons, calling themselves Hakeems, would have willingly accepted money from me, but I could get no work from them in return. 25. From Municipal Committees, beyond the furnishing of funds, little assistance has been received. On the contrary, in one important town, some of the Native mem- bers of the Municipal Committee, not only gave no assistance, but even went out of their way to discredit vaccination and hinder its progress. It may appear enlightened to vote funds for the payment of a Vaccinator, but it would only be consistent to afford him, at the same time, their countinuance and support. 26. Of small-pox I have seen little. I saw one child suffering from a slight attack in the Azimgurh District. Five cases were reported as having occurred in the Bustee District, and several in the town of Chunar. Last year the Magistrate of Gha- zeepore gave it to be understood that inoculation in his district would meet with his displeasure. This had a most salutary effect in limiting the operations of the Inocu- lators, and, as a consequence, of small-pox, I have been informed that the Inoculators are, this year, entering the district in numbers, and shall not be surprized to learn that small-pox keeps pace with their movements. 27. As Drs. Watson and Milne were directing their attention during the summer to animal Vaccination, I carried out the experiment of transmitting the ordinary humanized lymph back through the calf, and again vaccinating with it. Retro-vacci- nation has been so repeatedly performed, that there is no need to describe the operation in detail; suffice it to say, that I succeeded in establishing the vesicle in the calf, that I
( 28 ) vaccinated a child from this, and that the lymph from the latter was propagated and extensively used by the Vaccinators in Almorah and its vicinity. I have since heard that it is still being used in different parts of Gurhwal and Kumaon. The Vaccinators declared it to be better than the ordinary lymph ; but, from a careful examination of many cases, I could see nothing to warrant such a conclusion. The vesicles appeared to be of the ordinary typical character, and to run the usual course. I filled eight tubes with this lymph after the third transmission, and took them with me to the plains. That in use in the town of Cawnpore during the cold weather was chiefly propagated from these. 28. With the exception of the crusts, which in nearly every instance proved inert, the lymph received from the Hills was of good quality. Whilst on duty in Kumaon, I filled twenty tubes with lymph. This was on the 14th October. These I used in the plains during November and December. Of twenty children vaccinated from these, I know of only one failure having occurred. I have found neither English nor Hill lymph filled by Natives give such results. Much may depend upon the careful selec- tion of the vesicles from which the lymph is drawn, but the chief thing is the short- ness of the time which elapses between the filling of the tubes and their use. To the latter circumstance, I attribute the success of the lymph filled by myself. 29. It may not be out of place to mention that the box of medicines supplied by Government has been of much service; not a day passed without several applications for medicines or medical treatment. Except an ordinary pocket dressing-case, no other instruments were supplied, but a few more would be useful. With the means available, hewever, I performed several operations of more or less importance. I cut down upon and removed a stone from the urethra, restored a woman's nose, the aloe of which had been cut of by a jealous or injured husband, tapped for dropsy, operated for the removal of deformities caused by the contraction of the cicatrices of several burns, &c. A pair of properly fitted field-hospital panniers would be more conve- nient for camp than the clumsy box in which medicines are now carried, whilst they would furnish all the medicines and instruments required for the treatment of the more ordinary medical and surgical cases. 30. In conclusion, I would bring to your favourable notice, the following Native Superintendents, Nursing Pershad, in Ghazeepore; Bismillah Jan Baig, in Azimgurh, and Pundit Pidum Niddee in Goruckpore have worked to my entire satisfaction. J. RICHARDSON, Supdt. of Vaccination, Benares Division. No. 40, dated Camp Almorah, 15th April, 1872. From( 29 ) This list does not include the Vaccinators working in the independent States of Bundel- khund. In former years the work done in these States was inspected by the Native Superintendent of the Humeerpore Zillah, and their returns were included in those of the Allahabad and Jhansie Circle, but the number of Vaccinators working independent in Bundelkhund has increased year by year, and is now so great, that the old arrange- ment has been found impracticable. This year the Native Princes have entertained a separate Native Superintendent to inspect the work done in their territories, and in con- sequence of this new arrangement, I have been directed by the Superintendent-Gene- ral of Vaccination to send in two reports, one for vaccination in the North-Western Provinces, and the other for vaccination performed in Independent Bundelkhund. 3. In the early part of the season the districts of Cawnpore, Futtehpore, and Allahabad were inspected by Dr. Richardson, but in consequence of the return to India of Dr. Pearson, Superintendent-General of Vaccination, I was directed to re-assume charge of this Circle, to which I was permanently posted. On the 21st December, the date of Dr. Pearson's return, my camp was at Etawah, but I proceeded by rail to Allahabad to meet him, and to take over charge of the Allahabad and Jhansie Circle from Dr. Richardson. After doing so, I returned by rail to my camp, and marched from Etawah to the Shergurh Ghaut, the nearest point of the Allahabad and Jhansie Circle. I have since inspected the work of the majority of the Vaccina- tors employed in the Jaloun, Jhansie, Lullutpore, Humeerpore, and Banda Districts, and I have also again visited some of those in Futtehpore and Cawnpore, who had previously been inspected by Dr. Richardson. 4. In the Jaloun District great progress has been made this year, owing to the assistance given by Mr. White, the Deputy Commissioner, Dr. Bond, the Civil Surgeon, and the other district authorities. Last year there were five Vaccinators in the district. All of whom were paid by Government. This year five additional Vaccina- tors have been entertained by the district authorities, two of them Municipal, for the towns of Koonch and Kalpee, and three paid by the Rajahs of Rampoora, Jagummun- pore and Gopaulpoora. Unfortunately, with the exception of the Koonch Municipal Vaccinator, the whole of these five have only been appointed temporarily. They will receive no pay after the end of the vaccine season, and they have no security that they will be re-appointed next year. I need scarcely say that men thus appointed can hardly be expected to do so much work as men who have been permanently posted to a place, and who are likely to remain there for many years. There is also more danger of their being tempted to send in false returns. By sending in very large returns, they may hope to get a permanent appointment in some other district, and the danger of detection is less in their case than in that of other Vaccinators, for if the falsehood of their return is not detected during the current year, there is little probability of its being found out next year, after they have left the place, and have either been discharged altogether, or have been transferred to a permanent appointment in some other district. 5. In the Jhansie District, great progress has also been made, owing to the assistance given by the authorities. In former years, Jhansie was the worst district in the Circle, but this year I saw first-rate work done by the Vaccinators of Moth, of Mow Raneepore, and of Jhansie itself. The quantity however was rather small, but this is owing, not to the inefficiency of the Vaccine establishment, but to the strong prejudice felt by the inhabitants of this district against vaccination. This prejudice is much stronger in the Non-regulation District of Jhansie, Jaloun, and Lullutpore, than it is in the districts lying north of the Jumna, and the difference can, I think, be easily enough accounted for. The districts lying north of the Jumna came under British sway more than sixty years ago, and the inhabitants have, from their earliest childhood, been accustomed to British institutions, and have acquired the greatest confidence in our superiority as physicians, and surgeons. The Non-regulation Dis- tricts, on the other hand, have only comparitively recently been brought under v 8
( 30 ) British authority, and in many places the old Hindoo system of medicine is still implicitly believed in, and the old Hindoo baids, who practised before the annexation, are still a numerous and important class. These men are naturally strongly opposed to all European discoveries, especially to such an one as vaccination. Another great obstacle to the spread of vaccination in these districts is the absence of any Mahomedan population. In 1865, when vaccination was first started in Allahabad, Futtehpore, and Cawnpore, the Mahomedans were the only natives belonging to the higher classes, who were willing to have their children vaccinated, and it was only Mahomedans who were willing to take appointments as Vaccinators. Gradually, though very slowly, the higher classes of Hindoos have permitted their children to be vaccinated, and there are now numerous Brahmin applicants for every vacant appointment. But all this is undoubtedly owing to our early success among the Mahomedans. In the Non-regulation Districts, there are hardly any Mahomedans, so that we have, as it were, no means of showing to the Brahmins and Rajpoots the benefits of vaccination. In connexion with this, I may mention that, as a rule, the great class of Bunyas are still unconvinced and are still unwilling to have their children vaccinated. The is true of every district in the Circle, even of Cawnpore, the most advanced of all this districts. 6. In the Lullutpore District, I inspected at and near Talbehut, the work of the Government Vaccinator of the Lullutpore tehseel, and at Lullutpore I inspected the work of the temporarily entertained Municipal Vaccinator. Great interest is taken in the cause of vaccination by the Deputy Commissioner, Colonel Davidson, and he has made great exertions to further it. Owing to this and to the help given by the Civil Surgeon, Dr. Saunders, the average number of operation performed by each Vaccinator in Lullutpore is higher than that performed in any other district, with the exception of the three districts of Cawnpore, Futtehpore, and Humeerpore, which have for many years been the three best districts in the Circle. This is the more remarkable as neither the Native Superintendent nor the two Vacci- nators I inspected are men of much energy, and none of them are natives of the zillah. Although I made all possible enquiries I could not find any native of Lullutpore who was anxious to serve as a Vaccinator, and who was at the same time qualified for such an appointment. On the other hand, in former years when good Vaccinators have been sent from other districts to serve in Lullutpore, they have invariably disliked the place and generally suffered from bad health. The result of this has been that they at once commenced petitioning for transfer, and, if their petitions were not soon attended to, they sent in their resignation. The same is true of the appointment of Native Superintendent, and on one occasion when the appointment was offered to a Vaccinator in the Futtehpore Zillah, who was well fitted for the post, he declined it, preferring to remain as a Vaccinator in Futteh- pore to going as a Native Superintendent to Lullutpore. Some time after my inspection, the Government Vaccinator of Lullutpore of his own accord tendered his resignation, principally I believe because I declined to promise him a speedy transfer to another district. I have given the vacant Government appointment to the temporarily-entertained Municipal Vaccinator, and in the event of the Municipality sanctioning a permanent Municipal Vaccinator for Lullutpore, a Native of the place will, if possible, be appointed with effect from the commencement of the ensuing vaccine season. 7. The Humeerpore Zillah was in former years one of the very best in the Circle, and it still holds a high place, although hardly so good a one as formerly.
( 31 ) The vaccination in this district has of late years suffered considerably, owing to the time of the Native Superintendent being taken up inspecting the work of Vaccinators in the adjoining Native States. This year a new arrangement has been made, and the former Native Superin- tendent of Humeerpore has been posted to the new appointment of Native Superin- tendent of Vaccination, Independent Bundelkhund, and in his place a new man has been sent to act as Native Superintendent of the Humeerpore Zillah. This man, a Vaccinator, named Hydur Bux, was specially recommended to me by my predecessor Dr. Richardson, as being in his opinion the man in the Circle most fit for promotion. 8. In the Banda District I was able to inspect the work of seven out of the nine Vaccinators, and found that, with one exception, the vaccination was well and carefully performed. In former years the Banda District was a very backward one, but this year much progress has been made. The Native Superintendent is a hardworking, painstaking man, and several of the Vaccinators showed me very good work, particularly the Municipal Vaccinator and the Government Vaccinators of Banda, Kamasin, and Geerwa. This progress, however, is most marked in the western part of the district, for judging from the Native Superintendent's report, the work in the two tehseels of Mhow and Kirwee, at the eastern end of the district, is not so satisfactory. Unfor- tunately, these were the only two tehseels I was unable to visit, but I hope to be able to inspect them early in the course of next season, and judge myself whether the want of progress is owing to the inefficiency of the Vaccinators. In the Budowsa tehseel of the Banda district the Native Superintendent also reported unfavourably of the Vaccinator, and, on going to see one of the villages in which he had vaccinated and had reported two cases as being both successful, I found that only one of them was successful, and that the other had totally failed. On enquiry I found that the Vaccinator had never gone to see whether his cases were successful or not, but had reported both as successful. I also found that this Vaccinator, a Mahomedan, had been fined by Dr. Richardson, the year before. I therefore dismissed him, and entertained in his place a Brahmin, who had officiated for some time as a substitute owing to the illness of one of the Vaccinators. 9. In the Futtehpore District I inspected the work of two Vaccinators, and in both cases found it exceedingly good. In this Zillah there are no Municipalities, so that hitherto there have been no Municipal Vaccinator, but the Magistrate, Mr. Turner, promised to try to make arrangements next year for the payment from local funds of a Vaccinator who will work in the important town of Futtehpore. Mr. Turner also sanctioned the entertainment of a local Vaccinator for Futtehpore from the 1st to 22nd March, 1872, and this man's work is accordingly shown in the returns. 10. In the Cawnpore District I first inspected the work of the Government vaccinator of Sarh Sulempore at the towns of Maharajpore and Nurwul, and at various villages in the neighbourhood. This man is one of the oldest and best vacci- nators in the circle, and his work was as usual first-rate. I next spent some days ins- pecting the Municipal Vaccinator of Cawnpore, and the Government Vaccinator of the same place, and in both instances was much pleased. At Cawnpore, I saw a case of small-pox occuring immediately after vaccination. This was of course, owing to the child having caught the disease before vaccination was performed. Small-pox re- mains on an average 12 days dormant in the system, and it is only on rare occasi- ons that either the febrile symptoms or the characteristic rash appears until the 12th day after the child has been exposed to infection, This is well-known in England, but in India parents often express great surprise, when they see small-pox appear ing on the child one, two, or three days after the operations of vaccination has been performed. In this case the disease was very mild, and the parents
( 32 ) fortunately made light of it. On arriving at the boundary of the Sheorajpore Tehseel. I was met by the Vaccinator, a Brahmin, who informed me, that the nearest village to camp in which he had performed vaccination, was 13 miles distant. I accordingly rode out there, and he showed me some children upon whom he had operated, but there was not a single successful case among them; all were either doubtful, or un- successful. There was not the slightest reason to suspect the man of intentional untruthfulness, but his work had been most carelessly done, and he was greatly to blame in not having reported to his Native Superintendent that his lymph was bad. Had he done so, the Native Superintendent would at once have sent him good fresh lymph, as there was abundance in Cawnpore, and also I believe in every other tehseel in the Cawnpore District except Sheorajpore. As the man was a Brahmin, and as his returns were apparently truthful, I did not like to dismiss him without further enquiry. I accordingly directed the Native Superintendent to remain some time in Sheo- rajpore Tehseel and inspect as many of the Vaccinator's old cases as possible, and send in a report to me of the result of his observations. From Sheorajpore tehseel I proceeded to tehseel Bilhour, where the Vaccinator is a Mahomedan, and where I found the vaccination in the highest degree satisfactory. After inspecting his recent work in the town of Bilhour, and seeing eighteen perfectly successful cases, I told him to bring me his diary of old work and selected at random two villages in the neighbourhood. I went in the evening to these villages, and found the entries in the diary perfectly correct. In one village there were 17 cases, 15 successful and 2 unsuccessful; and in the other village, there were 25 cases, 23 successful and 2 unsuccessful; a state of things, which exactly corresponded with the entries the Vaccinator had made in his diary. In a former part of my report, I mentioned that there were numerous Brahmin applicants for vacant appointments, but as yet none of the Brahmins I have entertained have done nearly so well as the generality of Mahomedans do. Whenever I have been fortunate enough to engage a Brahmin who worked with any thing like activity, and whose returns were not incorrect, I have retained him, even although his work was far inferior to that done by Mahomedans in his neighbourhood. It is necessary to sacrifice the present for the sake of the future, and I am fully persuaded, that if vaccination is ever to become popular among the masses of the Hindoo population, it will only be through the instrumentality of Brahmin Vaccinators. In the comparative statement of the merits of Brahmins and Mahomedans, I must be understood as referring solely to my own Circle, that of Allahabad and Jhansie. In the Circles of Rohilkhund, and Agra, and Meerut where vaccination has been longer practised, and is consequently more appreciated by Hindoos generally, there are, I believe, some good Brahmin Vaccinators. I hope that some of the Brahmins who are now on my list of applicants, will, when entertained, turn out eventually as well as the men who are now serving under the Superintendent of the older established circles. 11. In the month of August, 1871, I received a supply of animal vaccine lymph, from Bombay, which was most kindly sent me by Mr. Anento Chandaroba, Superintendent of the Central Vaccine circle, Bombay. With this lymph, I vaccinated two calves, one male and the other female. The vaccination in the former was a total failure; from the latter a little lymph was obtained, with which three children were vaccinated by Dr. Richardson and myself. In two of the children, no result at all followed; in the third a small vesicle rose, but a scab formed as early as the third day. In striking contrast with the failure of this experiment was the success which attended attempts to vaccinate calves, with ordinary human lymph. Neither Dr. Richardson, nor I, found any difficulty in doing this.
( 33 ) The vesicles appeared regularly enough on the calves, and lymph was taken and employed in vaccinating children. The resulting vesicles on the childrens' arms were apparently neither better nor worse than those which are seen when ordinary vacci- nation is performed from one child's arm to another. This lymph, which had been once passed through a calf, was regularly used in Almorah in the end of last autumn, and after five or six transmissions from one child's arm to another, supplies of it were packed in tubes and sent to Vaccinators in the lower hills and in the plains. When the tubes were opened, the lymph was found to be just as good as ordinary human lymph. The conclusion I came to, was, that animal lymph, however good it may originally be, does not bear keeping, and cannot be used after any long interval, however care- fully it may have been preserved in hermetically sealed tubes. If this is true, it follows that animal lymph cannot be used for vaccine purposes in a district like the North-Western Provinces where towns and villages are small and widely scattered. In the hands of the Superintendent-General of Vaccination, Bombay, and of Sub- Assistant Surgeon Anento Chandaroba animal vaccination in Bombay has been a brilliant success, but the children were vaccinated directly from the calf or from one child's arm to another, no tubes or points being used, I see from the Bengal Vaccine Report for the year ending 31st March. 1871, para 8 (Animal Vaccination) that Dr. Pinkerton who had met with such success in his own Presidency, failed in the attempt to vaccinate children in Calcutta with lymph brought from Bombay in hermetically sealed tubes. Another disadvantage attending the practise of animal vaccination was strikingly illustrated during the course of my experiments. One of my servants whom I asked to hold the calf I was operating on, left my service, rather than be accessary to the infliction of a wound on the sacred animal. The only native I could get, who was really willing to assist me, was a Kumaon Vaccinator. This man assisted me heartily enough, but when it became known in the bazaar that he had done so he incurred so much odium that he came to me, and begged me to transfer him, at all events, temporarily, to the plains, and this I was obliged to do. I found also much difficulty in getting calves, as many persons refused either to lend them, or to sell them, so soon as they discovered for what purpose I wanted them. All this prejudice could no doubt be overcome in time, but it seems unwise to offend Native prejudice unless some great benefit is to be gained, and I believe that animal vaccina- tion is, in every respect, inferior to ordinary human vaccination. The operation itself, is much more difficult; there is a great amount of trouble and expense in procuring the requisite number of calves, and the percentage of success is much lower. 12. The Tehseeldar of Mejha, Mudud Ally Khan Bahadoor, has, as usual, done more for the Vaccine Department than any other Native official in the North-Western Provinces and I have the honour to request that some special mark of the thanks of Government may be conveyed to him for the great assistance he has given this year, and for many past years, to the cause of vaccination. I have also to place on record the great assistance I have received from the following officials :( 34 ) A.( 35 ) ROHILKHUND CIRCLE. Surgeon-major F. Pearson. 1 1 1 1 2,350 3,172 Budaon. 889,810 Budaon, ... 1,437 1,735 ... 1,425 1,747 1,519 1,653 2,773 249 150 3,172 ... ... ... ... 91.76 ... 634.40 ... ... 1 1 1 759 1,771 Besowlee, ... 804 967 3 1,560 208 1,329 442 1,527 156 88 1,771 ... ... ... ... 90.78 ... 354.20 ... ... 1 1 2,167 2,314 Sehuswan, ... 1,065 1,249 ... 1,974 340 767 1,547 2,142 128 44 2,314 ... ... ... ... 95.24 ... 462.80 ... ... 1 1 3 515 3,750 Goonour, ... 1,953 1,797 ... 3,415 335 1,021 2,729 3,456 132 162 3,750 ... ... ... ... 96.31 ... 750.00 ... ... 1 1 2 029 2,305 Datagunj, ... 947 1,358 ... 2,151 154 238 2,067 2,081 158 66 2,350 ... ... ... ... 92.94 ... 461.00 ... ... ... 1 ... 1,129 Municipality. Omaidwars No. 2, 626 503 ... 822 307 470 659 734 317 78 1,129 ... ... ... ... 69.83 ... ... ... ... 1 1 3,704 2,651 Budan, ... 1,642 947 3 1,633 923 1,301 1,288 2,340 162 87 2,589 53 7 2 62 93.52 86.33 530.20 ... ... ... 1 ... 2,185 Ojhanee, ... 930 1,255 2,159 26 817 l,368 1,755 345 85 2,185 ... ... ... ... 83.57 ... 437.00 ... ... 1 ... 1,899 ( 36 ) A.( 37 ) A.( 38 ) A.( 39 ) AGRA AND MEERUT CIRCLE. Surgeon R. Pringle, M. D. Superintendent of Vaccinati 1 1 1 1 1,427 1,181 Meerut, ... 1,199,593 Meerut, ... 723 458 38 951 192 572 609 980 70 131 1,181 ... ... ... ... 93.3 ... 236.2 ... ... 1 1 932 568 Sirdhunah, ... 274 294 ... 496 72 71 497 479 18 71 568 ... ... ... ... 96.3 ... 113.3 ... ... 1 1 1 064 1 107 Hauper, ... 493 614 ... 958 149 344 763 968 18 121 1,107 ... ... ... ... 98.1 ... 221.4 ... ... 1 1 916 906 Bagput, ... 548 358 ... 730 176 125 781 801 28 77 906 ... ... ... ... 96.6 ... 181.2 ... ... 1 1 1,329 1,115 Gazeeabad, ... 687 428 12 981 122 174 941 1,026 13 76 1,115 ... ... ... ... 98.7 ... 223. ... ... 1 1 734 985 Moanah, ... 489 496 ... 814 171 425 560 794 63 128 985 ... ... ... ... 92.6 ... 197. 1 1 6 6 6,402 5,862 3,214 2,648 50 4,930 882 1,711 4,151 5,048 210 604 5,862 ... ... ... ... 96.0 ... 195.4 1 1 1 1 919 969 Booluudshu- hur. 800,481 Booluudshuhur, ... 458 511 ... 835 134 159 810 662 188 119 969 ... ... ... ... 77.9 ... 193.8 ... ... 1 1 1,328 1,337 Anoopshuhur, ... 624 317 ... 1,015 322 160 1,177 1,019 163 155 1,337 ... ... ... ... 86.2 ... 267.4 ... ... 1 1 951 1,073 Khoorjah, ... 536 537 ... 996 77 442 631 1,007 56 10 1,073 ... ... ... ... 94.6 ... 214.6 ... ... 1 1 1,008 1,401 Secundrabad, ... 652 749 2 1,271 128 413 988 1,234 91 76 1,401 ... ... ... ... 93.1 ... 280.2 ... ... 1 1 968 1,267 Municipality. Boolundshuhur, ... 624 643 1 1,114 152 385 882 928 228 111 1,267 ... ... ... 80.2 253.4 ... ... 1 1 928 1,545 ( 40 ) A.( 41 ) AGRA AND MEERUT CIRCLE.( 42 ) A.( 43 ) A( 44 ) A.( 45 ) A.( 46) A.( 47 ) ALLAHABAD AND Surgeon W. Watson, M. B., 1 1 1 1 1,226 1,114 Futtehpore, ... 680,786 Futtehpore, ... 455 437 6 661 225 538 354 624 136 132 892 147 59 16 222 82 71 222.8 ... ... 1 1 969 444 Khukreroo, ... 275 169 ... 198 246 142 302 216 144 84 444 ... ... ... ... 60 ... 88.8 ... ... 1 1 892 951 Kullianpore, ... 414 537 ... 799 152 411 540 520 299 132 951 ... ... ... ... 63 ... 190.2 ... ... 1 1 1,109 1,016 Gazeepore, ... 502 514 ... 925 91 303 713 534 204 278 1,016 ... ... ... ... 72 ... 203.2 ... ... 1 1 879 849 Khaga, ... 418 430 ... 803 45 296 552 543 117 188 848 1 ... ... 1 82 100 169.8 ... ... 1 1 1,068 1,258 Korajchanabad, ... 598 660 ... 1,072 186 190 1,068 746 246 266 1,258 ... ... ... ... 75 ... 251.6 ... ... ... 1 ... 150 Municipality 22 days only, Town Futtehpore, ... 43 41 ... 53 31 45 39 69 10 5 84 51 15 ... 66 87 77 30. I 1 6 7 6,143 5,782 2,705 2,788 6 4,511 976 1,925 3,568 3,252 1,156 1,085 5,493 199 74 16 289 73 72 186. 1 1 1 1 1,172 1,517 Cawnpore, ... 1,188,862 Cawnpore, ... 771 686 123 1,114 220 754 703 1,186 128 143 1,457 50 10 ... 60 90 83 303.4 ... ... 1 1 1,763 1,713 Sheorajpore, ... 927 786 ... 1,606 107 390 1,323 1,282 317 114 1,713 ... ... ... ... 80 ... 342.6 ... ... 1 1 1,556 1,340 Rasoolabad, ... 634 706 ... 1,300 40 131 1,209 1,025 197 118 1,340 ... ... ... ... 83 ... 268.0 ... ... 1 1 1,309 1,274 Bilhour, ... 594 680 ... 1,196 78 82 1,192 1,080 145 49 1,274 ... ... ... 88 ... 254.8 ... ... 1 1 1,417 1,482 Bhogneepore, ... 660 822 ... 1,247 235 330 1,152 1,056 212 214 1,482 ... ... ... ... 83 ... 296.4 ... ... 1 1 1,840 1,107 Dehra Mungleepore, 482 625 ... 1,046 61 322 785 902 113 92 1,107 ... ... ... ... 88 ... 221.4 ... .... 1 1 1,120 1,323 Sarh Salempore, ... 595 728 ... 1,267 56 195 1,128 1,111 137 75 1,323 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 264.6 ... ... 1 1 1,474 1,512 Ukburpore, ... 791 721 1 1,381 130 814 698 1,182 240 90 1,512 ... ... ... 83 ... 302.4 ... ... 1 1 1,417 1,808 Ghatumpore, ... 768 1,040 1,704 104 488 1,320 1,566 181 61 1,808 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 361.6 ... ... 1 1 1,114 1,594 Municipality. Town Cawnpore, 784 675 47 1,162 250 809 650 1,220 129 110 1,459 120 4 10 134 90 96 318.8 1 1 10 10 14,181 14,669 7,006 7,469 171 13,023 1,281 4,315 10,160 11,610 1,799 1,066 14,475 170 14 10 194 86 92 293. 1 1 1 1 661 662 Banda, ... 724,372 Banda, ... 292 370 ... 643 19 147 515 411 167 84 662 ... ... ... ... 71 ... 132.4 ... ... 1 1 544 1,084 Girwa,... 464 619 ... 1,032 51 213 870 787 121 175 1,083 1 ... ... ... 1 86 100 216.8 ... ... 1 1 507 606 Badousa, ... 286 314 ... 572 28 205 395 393 117 90 600 4 2 ... 6 77 66 121.2 ... ... 1 1 323 415 Kirwee, ... 200 215 ... 394 21 168 247 204 100 111 415 ... ... ... ... 67 ... 83.0 ... ... 1 1 349 497 Mow, ... 307 185 ... 434 58 119 373 320 76 96 492 2 3 ... 5 80 40 99.4 ... ... 1 1 561 618 Babaroo, ... 289 328 ... 554 63 98 519 408 127 82 617 1 ... 1 76 100 123.6 ... ... 1 1 574 789 Kamasin, ... 350 439 ... 761 28 418 371 652 90 47 789 ... ... ... ... 87 ... 157.8 ... ... 1 1 536 863 Pylanee, ... 413 450 ... 838 25 249 614 596 145 122 863 ... ... ... 80 ... 172.6 ... ... 1 1 523 1,479 Municipality. Town Banda, ... 788 571 10 1,170 179 594 765 904 291 164 1,359 87 22 11 120 75 79 295.8 1 1 9 9 4,578 7,013 3,389 3,491 10 6,398 472 2,211 4,669 4,675 1,234 971 6,880 95 27 11 133 79 77 155.8 1 1 1 1 1,771 884 Humeerpore, ... Local. 520,941 Humeerpore, ... 411 464 ... 834 41 318 557 537 228 110 875 8 1 ... 9 70 88 176.8 ... ... 1 1 1,161 1,327 Raat, ... 633 694 ... 1,251 76 668 659 1,107 122 98 1,327 ... ... ... ... 90 ... 265.4 ... ... 1 1 684 1,053 Soongraor Punwaree, 459 594 ... 998 55 440 613 613 348 92 1,053 ... ... ... ... 63 ... 210.6 ... ... 1 1 795 584 Mahoba, ... 262 322 ... 558 26 203 381 540 31 13 584 ... ... ... ... 94 ... 116.8 ... ... 1 1 1,093 952 Mondah, ... 456 496 ... 862 90 110 842 758 102 92 952 ... ... ... ... 87 ... 190.4 ... ... 1 1 834 630 Jalalpore, ... 298 332 ... 579 51 161 469 443 121 66 630 ... ... ... ... 78 ... 126.0 ... ... 1 1 1,248 1,098 Humeerpore, ... 480 618 ... 1,059 39 354 744 749 257 92 1,098 ... ... ... ... 74 ... 219.6 ... ... 1 1 1,004 950 ( 48 ) A.( 49 ) A.( 50 ) A.ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT. No. 2523A. OF 1872. FROM THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, NORTH WESTERN PROVINCES, TO THE SUPDT. GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH WESTERN PROVINCES. DATED NYNEE TAL, THE 13TH JULY 1872. SIR, GENERAL DEPARTMENT. I AM desired to acknowledge the receipt, on the 17th June, of your report on the operations of the Vaccination Department for the year 1871-72. The report is dated the 29th April, and is understood to have been delayed in the Press. 2. The returns of Vaccination shew steady and continued progress. The work done in the Native States of Bundelkhund, which are not pro- perly a portion of the North Western Provinces, has been rightly excluded from the statistics ; but it would be well if you in future added a para- graph to your report in which an account of this work (as well as of the work in the Principality of Rampore). should be given, in so far as it is conducted under the supervision of your Department. Excluding it, and the figures for Ajmere, the number vaccinated was 3,22,887 against 2,91,762 in the year before, an increase of 31,125, or 10.7 per cent. The proportion of successful operations was 87.8, or 2 per cent. higher than last year, when it was 85.7. The total cost of the Department was Rs. 82,317-10-0, (against Rs. 80,989 last year) and the cost of each success- ful operation fell from 0-5-3 to 0-5-0. The only unfavorable feature is the decrease of the work done per mensem by each vaccinator, which fell from 239.2 to 221.
( 2 ) 3. The following table shews the manner in which the work has been distributed over each of the four circles into which the Department is divided :( 3 ) 4. The number of vaccinators was 244 in 1870-71, and rose to 272, exclusive of &quot; Omedwars,&quot; in the present year. Of the increase two are Government vaccinators appointed in Kumaon, 16 are paid by Municipali- ties, and 10 by local subscriptions or private charity. This increase is highly encouraging, and testifies both to an enlightened liberality on the part of the donors, and to a growing appreciation of the benefits confer- red by your Department. 5. The 28 local vaccinators are thus supported,:( 4 ) Class of Vaccinators. Number of men. Number of opera- tions per month. Percentage of Suc- cessful. Government, ... 26 229 91 Municipal, ... 12 211 88.9 Local, ... 5 58 81.5 Ditto, in Tehree, ... 4 444 92.6 Government, ... 35 187 90.3 Municipal, ... 13 167 93.6 Government, ... 43 182 80.8 Municipal, ... 6 161 82.4 Local, ... 6 161 81.7 Government, ... 12 137 79.7 Municipal, ... 3 83 88.1 Local, ... 3 60 73.5 a Government, ... 29 268 87.7 b Municipal, ... 6 149 83.7 Local, ... 2 149 83.7 Total, a Government, ... 187 246 88.5 b Municipal, ... 60 189 86.8 Local, ... 25 205 88.9 Omedwars, ... 20 101 85.6 292 221 87.8 In Kumaon the locals do less work, and less well, than the Government men, but they work at the foot of the hills, while the Government vaccina- tors practise in Kumaon itself and can carry on work nearly all the year round. In Rohilkhund there is a very striking difference; the Municipal vaccinators do far less work, and do it less well, than the Government men. In Meerut, Municipal are inferior to Government vaccinators: the local men at Mozuffernuggur were specially unsuccessful (this will be noticed again further on), and the Tehree, like the Kumaon vaccinators, work in the hills all the year round. In Agra and Allahabad the Municipal have done less work, but have done it better than the Government men. In Jhansie the Municipal vaccinators have done very little work indeed, and the locals less. In Benares the figures are not given in the full detail that is re- quired, but the Municipal and local men together fell very far short of the work done by the Government vaccinators. 9. These facts are calculated to excite considerable surprise. It might have been supposed primâ facie that the town vaccinators not having to travel from village to village, but finding their subjects collected close to their hand, would have performed more operations than those who itine- a.( 5 ) rate through the Tehseel. It might also have been hoped that in the Municipalities where public opinion is sufficiently enlightened to support a vaccinator, it would have been enlightened enough to persuade the peo- ple generally to bring their young children to be protected from the scourge of small pox. In towns too the support and influence of officials, and the supervision of the Civil Surgeons might have been expected to produce a marked effect. On the other hand it is possible that with people in large masses, it is less easy to influence opinion, than by taking the rural villages in detail, where the residents are often found to be simple and open to conviction. It is possible too that the supervision of your Department may have been less zealous, the Native Superintendents not feeling the same responsibility as for the work of the Government vacci- nators, who are exclusively under them. 10. I am to request your most careful attention, and that of your Superintendents, to this question, and His Honor hopes that the subject will be fully enquired into during the next cold weather, and elucidated in your report. A copy of these remarks will also be forwarded to all Civil Surgeons and Presidents of Municipalities, who will, His Honor trusts, exercise a vigilant supervision over the operations of the Munici- pal Vaccinators. 11. Another remarkable feature in this table is the steady decrease in the number of vaccinations performed by each vaccinator as one looks down the list in paragraph 8, except Benares. The Rohilkhund tale of work is much larger than that of Meerut, Meerut stands higher than Agra, Agra than Allahabad, and Jhansie lowest of all. This has often been remarked on before, and partial explanations have been given, which can- not be called satisfactory. That Bundelkhund with its rude and sparse population should be most backward is natural enough. Equally natural is it that vaccination should be most popular in Rohilkhund, its first home in the plains. But the reasons why Benares, where vaccination contends with inoculation for popularity, and Meerut, should be higher than Agra,. and why Allahabad should stand lowest of all the older and more civilised Divisions, have yet to be sought out. 12. A third and novel feature in this table is the appearance of &quot;Omedwars,&quot; i. e. working candidates or apprentices. Their work is sepa- rately shewn in Rohilkhund only, and was never shewn there till this year. In Benares they are certainly employed (and are, it appears, paid for each successful operation they perform) ; but they probably are entertained every where. Their position should be clearly recorded, their pay stated, and their work separately shewn. You speak of them in one place as hav- ing been abolished, but in another passage you rightly say that a regular system of entertaining local apprentices has been approved by Government. Their entertainment seems at present to be a necessity, for only in this way can men be trained up to acquire the necessary skill as successful operators, and as far as possible every district should in time be supplied with a body of trained vaccinators, working in the places where they were born and are known, and where they prefer to remain.
( 6 ) Under one year. Over one year. Percentage. Under Over Kumaon ... ... 27,692 8,620 76.26 23.74 Rohilkhund, ... ... 25 991 58 236 30.86 69.14 Agra and Meerut, ... ... 31,276 65,370 32.37 67.63 Allahabad, ... ... 18,744 39,415 32.23 67.77 Benares, ... ... 4,560 39,264 10.41 89.59 13. Another point to which your attention should be drawn is the proportionate age at which vaccination is performed. Of the 3,19,168 primary operations of the year, only 34 per cent. were per- formed on children under 1 year old. In the previous year the percent- age had been 30. But it will be seen from the figures in the margin that the proportion varies much in different Divisions and circles. In Kumaon alone the vaccination of children naturally preponderates greatly, and this is the normal state to which every Division should reach, when pro- tection is so nearly complete, and confidence in the prophylactic so well established, as it is in Kumaon. In Benares, on the other hand, the pro- portion is vastly less than elsewhere, and efforts should be made to as- certain the reason why the operation is so seldom performed there on young children. 14. The Inspector General of Hospitals, in his report on the Luna- tic Asylums, Vaccination and Dispensaries for 1870, dwells on the valua- ble and important results that would flow from a &quot; vaccine census&quot; of Schools and Jails, that is, an inspection of the prisoners and scholars to see how many of them were protected by vaccination or by having had small-pox, and how many were unprotected. The Lieutenant Governor considers the suggestion one that might possibly lead to valuable results, and would desire you to enter into communication with the Inspector General of Jails and the Director of Public Instruction, in order to ascertain whether there would be any objection to such an in- spection, and whether the information could be readily and accurately recorded. By a repetition of it at intervals, and by a comparison of the results, a sound method of ascertaining the progress of vaccination in the Province might be secured, But, especially in the village schools, it would be necessary to avoid anything in the inspection that might occa- sion distrust or suspicion of our motives( 7 ) tendent who has at all met the Lieutenant Governor's wishes in this respect. 16. The Lieutenant Governor does not object to your proposal to record low caste Hindoos separately from higher castes, but in reference to this I am to draw your attention to letter No. 10-247, dated 12th June, 1872, from the Secretary to Government of India, Agriculture, Revenue and Commerce Department, and to request you to communicate with the Sanitary Commissioner in order to secure uniformity of classification. 17. Your attention is requested to the irregularity of the figures regarding secondary operations, and some explanation should be given concerning it. Dr. Pringle does not record a single one in his whole cir- cle, nor did he record one last year. In the other circles great discre- pancies exist. In Rohilkhund only 5 men out of 47 performed any; in Allahabad 24 out of 73; in Benares 4 out of 37. It seems more likely that there is a variation in the manner of recording these statistics, than that the conditions under which the operation is performed should be so exceptional. Month in which most operations were performed. Month in which greatest success was obtained. Kumaon, ... ... February. January. Rohilkhund, ... January. January. Agra and Meerut, ... January. December.. Allahabad and Jhansie, ... January. December, Benares, ... ... March. November. 18. The table in the margin shows the month in each circle in which the greatest num- ber of operations was performed,and the great- est measure of success obtained. Can any ex- planation be given of the causes of variation, especially in the case of Benares ? District. Tehseel. Number of operations per mensem. Budaon. Goonour, ... 750 Allahabad, Mejah, ... 441 Lullutpore, Mehronee, ... 318 Goruckpore, Pudrona, ... 458 Mirzapore, Robertsgunge, ... 670 Ghazeepore, Russera, ... 530 19. His Honor notices with commendation the zealous care which all the Superintendents have taken to test the vaccinators' returns, and to secure accurate statistics of work done. Some cases, however, are noticed in the margin, where the number of operations recorded seems suspicious, either for its absolute or for its relative greatness. In each of these cases the Tehseel is out of the way, and may not have been inspected by the Superintendent. In Budaon the average is 529, and if the Goonour vaccinator really exceeded it so greatly, securing also a percentage of success of 96.31, he worked excep- tionally well. In Allahabad the Mejah man apparently did nearly four times as much as the average of the district, which is 122. In Lullut- pore, while the vaccinators in the town and the Sudder Tehseel did 79 and 104 cases each, the Mebronee vaccinator, in the most out of the way part of the district, records 318. The same remarks apply to Rus- sera and Pudrona. In Mirzapore, while in the city and the thickly popu- lated northern parts the highest number of operations was 236 per men- sem, we are asked to believe that a vaccinator in the wild and thinly peopled parts around Robertsgunge vaccinated 670 people a month. Dr. Richard- son does indeed specially refer to his success, and accounts for it by say.
( 8 ) ing that the vaccinator is a wealthy zemindar, and was aided by his bro- ther ; but he does not report that he visited the Tehseel or personally inspected his work. 20. The work done by the Kumaon and Gurhwal Vaccination Depôts has been highly valuable, and the Lieutenant Governor concurs in your remarks on the purity and efficiency of the virus stored there, and distributed thence not only to the North Western Provinces, but to all parts of India. 21. The subject of the employment of vaccinators throughout the twelve-month has been much discussed during the year. Municipal vacci- tors are the servants of the Municipality, (under the general supervision of the Superintendent of the Circle) and are generally employed in the Dis- pensaries during the hot weather and rains. Government vaccinators have hitherto been allowed to go to their homes during the recess, and you represent that so long as they are not residents of the Districts where they work, the withdrawal of this permission would certainly be followed by their resignation. His Honor has accepted the force of this argument, but has directed you to do all in your power to train up operators from every district ; they working within their own districts would not require a holiday to visit their homes, but could be utilised all the year round in any work they are fit for. This is a better remedy than that of in- creasing the pay, as proposed by you in your 10th para. 22. The Lieutenant Governor is glad to read your testimony to the assistance rendered you by Magistrates and other District Officials in inspecting and testing the work done. The present orders are that the vaccinators' record of operations should be left with the Lumberdar of the village. You think they will be more accessible if left in the Tehseel and treated as a Government record. His Honor doubts if this would be a successful plan ; but the opinion of the Board of Revenue will be taken on the subject, and the most experienced District Officers consulted. 23. The failure of the attempt to entertain local vaccinators in Mozuffernuggur, paying them out of the town funds, is noticed with regret. It would probably have been better not to have restricted their operations to the towns themselves; if extended to the neighbourhood, they might have become more popular, and in that case the charge might have been shared between the town funds and those of your Department. 24. Dr. Richardson's remarks on the difficulties which attend our at- tempts to make inoculators give up their own craft and take to vaccination are sensible, and have been read by His Honor with approval. The more riskful remedy seems to an ignorant people the more effective; and the inoculator is looked on as a man who heals a difficult and dangerous disease. Possibly also the inoculator has an advantage over the vaccinator in being able to practise his craft in the hot season when small pox is most prevalent and most dreaded. But whatever the difficulties are, they should not discourage the officers of your Department from con- tinuing their efforts to convert this class of men, who may be as useful as they now are dangerous to society.
( 9 ) 25. I am also to draw attention to Dr. Richardson's remarks on the use to which he has put his box of medicines and instruments. If the field-hospital panniers he asks for are easily procurable, they should be supplied to all Superintendents. 26. The Lieutenant Governor observes that you have not adverted in. your report to the experiments made with animal vaccination. The information given by Drs. Richardson and Watson is not very conclusive; but as far as the experiments go, no absolute superiority over the ordi- nary lymph seems to be established; and there is a suspicion that the virus does not keep as well. The difficulty of the operation and the odium incurred by native operators, are additional weights in the adverse scale. A panic caused by any supposed outrage of the prejudices of the people might throw back our endeavours and materially injure the case. 27. His Honor is gratified to see the number of Native gentlemen and Officials who are reported to have done good service by assisting in the spread of vaccination, and authorises you to convey to each of them expressions of his approval. 28. In conclusion I am to express the Lieutenant Governor's satis- faction with the results recorded in this year's report. His Honor welcomes you back to a post you have so long and so honorably held, and commends the care and ability with which Dr. Watson discharged the duties of the office during your absence. The Superintendents, Drs. Pringle, Watson, Milne, and Richardson, have shewn their usual devotion to their duties, and are congratulated on the efficient state to which they have brought the Department. Improvement is visible in all branches of the work and though not rapid, is steady and sure. I have the honor to be SIR, Your most obedient Servant, C. A. ELLIOTT, Secretary to the Government, North Western Provinces. No.2524A. COPY forwarded to the Agent Lieutenant Governor, Rohilkhund, for his information and guidance, with reference to para. 6. No. 2525A. Copies forwarded to all Civil Surgeons and Presidents of Municipali- ties, for information and guidance, with reference to paras. 8, 9, and 10. No 2526A. Copy forwarded to the Secretary to the Board of Revenue, North Western Provinces, with the request that the Board will be good enough, after consulting the most experienced District Officers, to favor Govern- ment with their opinion on the subject discussed in para. 22. No. 2527-28A. Copy forwarded to the Director of Public Instruction, and Inspector General of Jails, North Western Provinces, for information, with refer- ence to para. 14.
( 10 ) (COPY.) No. 10-247. FROM THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, DEPT. OF AGRICULTURE REVENUE, AND COMMERCE, (Statistics.) TO THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT, NORTH WESTERN PROVINCES. Dated Simla, the 12th June, 1872 SIR, THE replies received to this office Circular No. 158SEASON OF 1872-73. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELCUND. By SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Superintendent-General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES' GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1873.
SEASON OF 1872-73. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELCUND. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Superintendent-General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES' GOVERNMENT PRESS, 1873.
SEASON OF 1872-73. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELCUND. No. 482 of 1873. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces, To A. COLVIN, ESQUIRE, Offg. Secretary to Government, N.-W. Provinces. DATED CAMP, KUMAON, THE 29TH APRIL, 1873. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit, for the information of His Honor the Lieutenant- Governor, the Returns of Vaccination in the North-Western Provinces for the year 1872-73. 1.( 2 ) Percentage of sex and age in primary cases. Male. Female. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Remarks. 50.6 49.4 22.8 77.2 Percentage of caste in primary cases. Christians. Mahomedans. Hindoos. All other castes. Remarks. .29 15.69 27.22 56.80 Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentages of success in primary cases performed by each class of vaccinators. No. Class of Vaccinators. Average monthly numbers. Monthly per- centage of success. Remarks. 225 Government Vaccinators. ... 274.2 88.2 84 Municipal ditto, ... 157.8 87.0 36 Local ditto, ... 172.1 85.4 17 Native Chiefs and Landlords, ... 110.6 85.6 Plains Vaccinators only. The total cost of the department was Rs. 94,217-11-2 ; and the cost per successful case was Rs. 0-4-6, being 6 pie less than in the previous year. 2.( 3 ) Proportion of population successfully vaccinated during the year relatively to the num- ber of births.( 4 ) The undermentioned officers and establishments have been regularly supplied with virus during the past season :( 5 ) Percentage of caste in primary cases. Christians. Mahomedans. * Hindoos. All other classes. Remarks. 00.19 20.96 10.98 67.87 Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentage of success in primary cases, performed by each class of vaccinator. Number. Class of Vaccinator. Average monthly number. Average monthly per cent. success. Remarks. 39 Government Vaccinators, ... 312.21 87.50 24 Municipal Ditto, ... 167.51 85.88 1 Local Ditto, ... 12.62 87.54 7.( 6 ) The Magistrate and Collector of Bijnour, Mr. Pasley, evinced much interest in inducing the people to accept vaccination. 8.( 7 ) 9.( 8 ) two school-masters of Booranah, in the Mozuffernuggur District, and of Kotah near Baghput. I hope these two latter will be suitably dealt with by their own immediate superiors. I beg to send, in original, Dr. Pringle's report of his operations in the hills, em- bracing the period between the 1st April and the 28th of October, the date on which he was relieved by Dr. Richardson. The supplies of lymph forwarded to Dr. Pringle through the Privy Council were, he states, excellent in quality. My own experience coincides as to the care now exhibited in the selection of the lymph, the sealing of the tubes, and the attention paid to the packing of them. Dr. Pringle deserves praise for the efficient measures he adopted for stamping out the endemic of small-pox started by inoculators in Teree, Gurhwal. I quite agree with Dr. Pringle in his observations about the complete immunity as to any chance of a subsequent attack of small-pox, supposed to be enjoyed by those who have been inoculated. The immunity is much overrated, for I have had numerous instances in Kumaon and Gurhwal of inoculated persons dying in subsequent years from an attack of the disease. The Teree Rajah of Gurhwal, I am glad to say, has entirely set his face against the practice of inoculation, and has promised to take measures to stop it. 10.( 9 ) Percentage of caste in primary cases. Christians. Mahomedans. Hindoos. All other classes. Remarks. 00.6 12.0 12.2 75.2 Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentage of success in pri- mary cases, performed by each class of vaccinator. No. Class of Vaccinator. Average monthly number. Percentage monthly success. Remarks. 64 Government Vaccinators, ... 172.0 82.7 13 Municipal ditto, ... 118.0 82.4 16 Local ditto, ... 163.2 82.7 11.( 10 ) Moulvee Kaim Allee, Talookdar, Sarai Kheta, Jounpore; Nawab Kyfayut-oolla, Tehseeldar, Karakut; Wully-oolla, Tehseeldar, Muchleeshuhur; Native Superintendents of Vaccination of Cawnpore, Futtehpore, Banda, Hameerpore, and Jaloun. The returns of vaccination from the Bundelkhund States have not yet been received. They will be submitted hereafter. 12. BENARES( 11 ) Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentage of success in primary cases, performed by each vaccinator. No. Class of Vaccinator. Average monthly number. Average monthly percentage success. Remarks, 36 Government Vaccinators, ... 225.8 87.86 8 Municipal Ditto. ... 113.6 86.03 2 Local Ditto. ... 103.8 78.65 10 Native chiefs and landlords do. 110.6 85.63 13.( 12 ) 14. Omedwars.( 13 ) had not been so carefully kept as in others ; so the return which I have received is a partial one, being for certain years between 1861 and 1872, and referring only to cer- tain jails; yet as far as it goes it is valuable. &quot;We have a record of 268,445 individuals. Of this number, 228,964 had had small-pox ; 20,480 cases were uncertain; 12,215 were unprotected; 4,233 had been inoculated; and 2,553 had been vaccinated. That is to say, in a total of 268,445 of the jail population, 85.29 per cent. had gone through an attack of small-pox; 156 had been inoculated; and only 0.95 per cent. vaccinated. Of the rest, 4.55 per cent. were unprotected, and 7.62 were doubtful cases.&quot; At first sight these figures seem curious, knowing that for years past we have been in the habit of vaccinating tens of thousands annually. But the solution is simple:( 14 ) 21. Municipal Vaccination.( 15 ) would have had their childrens' lives saved in spite of themselves. I cannot help thinking that if small-pox had the same personal terrors for the authorities that cholera has, that greater efforts would be made to stamp it out; and that we should hear less about the extreme sanctity of the voluntary principle. I am not myself in favour of compulsion in this country, for I know with what oppression it would be attended, surrounded as we are by knavery, ignorance, and dishonesty on every side. But I am in favour of every earnest effort being made short of actual compulsion to push on vaccination to the utmost. It is lamentable to think of the unnecessary waste of life that takes place annually. I append below a table of the mortality from small-pox in the North-Western Provinces for the last eight years. Four hundred and twenty- three thousand two hundred and sixty-one lives sacrificed, for, as far as small-pox was concerned, every one of these deaths was a preventible one. I hope a perusal of this table will open the eyes of the authorities to the great work that lies before them in endeavouring to stem this vast torrent of human misery. Return showing the deaths from small-pox in the North-Western Provinces during the years 1865 to 1872. 1865. 1866. 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. Grand Total. 104,395 66,312 39,715 29,983 90,770 23,564 38,449 30,073 423,261 33. Remodelling of the Vaccine Establishment.( 16 ) of them. ' The desirability of the remainder being admitted, they can stand over for future budgets. I also trust that year by year permission will be given to continue the practice of doubling the strength of the establishments in such zillahs as are supposed to be ripe for it. Much has within recent years been done in this direction with much benefit to the country; and a steady adherence to the same policy will ero long cover the land with a staff of vaccinators capable of dealing with a malady that now simply overwhelms us by its magnitude, possessing as we do so inadequate a force to grapple with it. There are other minor items required to put the depart- ment upon what I consider a sound footing; but they can wait until these more immediate wants are satisfied. It must be borne in mind that as the numbers of vac- cinators increase, in proportionate ratio will the cost of each case diminish, as the same amount of supervising agency, within a given area, will suffice. 24. Conclusion.( 17 ) attendant on the practice of inoculation, where all the necessary rules of quaran- tine were neglected, and the extensive and fatal outbreak of small-pox, which re- sulted from the inoculation under notice, fully confirms all that I then stated, viz., that if inoculation is permitted in the plains, some measure should be taken to enforce quarantine, and I have very little doubt that inoculation, carried on as it alone should be, if permitted at all, viz., with a large preventive staff, so to speak, would, with its necessary derangement of trade and intercourse, be found to be far more expensive than any system of vaccination at present practised in India, as far as I am aware; and to permit inoculation to be practised, as it was during this hot season in the district of Teraie Ghurwal is to allow a few interested men to earn a livelihood on the misery and horrors attendant on a severe outbreak of small-pox of a fatal type, where their supposed specifics and ceremonies are purchased by the ignorant and naturally terror-stricken villagers on terms which enable these inoculators to live in comfort for months, it may be years, to come; and I most earnestly hope that, through the kind assistance of Colo- nel Ramsay, C.B., the Agent for the Government, and the support which the present Rajah of Terree seems inclined to extend towards vaccination, as a substitute for ino- culation, that the scenes witnessed- during the past hot season may never re-occur in any portion of my division. I have myself seen a complete gap in the population of a very large village in Terree Ghurwal produced by an outbreak of small pox, which originated, I have little doubt, in much the same way as that described above; and when it is borne in mind how completely vaccination can stamp out even such an extensive out- break as was met with this year, coupled with the many obstacles which the disease has to overcome to enter these hills, as compared with the plains, I have no hesitation in stating that, if small pox were to enter my Himalayan District, it is impossible for it to spread unless assisted by inoculation. I may here mention what may not be generally known, viz, that the simple operation of inoculation does not invariably impart that immunity which it has the credit of doing ; an attack of spontaneous small-pox subsequently is far from uncommon among these cases ; nor need this be wondered at, since I have known of several cases where the operation has been performed with a preparation of powdered small-pox crusts, which, from age and minuteness of division, must have been almost inert, and all that consequently resulted was the irritation and subsequent ulcerating surface, where the crust preparation was applied. Many of these cases on going to the plains, as for instance selling Ganges water, as was the case last year, contract small- pox, and bring it to their village, whence inoculation spreads it far and near. In short, though inoculation when skilfully practised, is undoubtedly far superior to no preventive measures at all against small-pox, yet the necessary enforcement of quarantine, and its attendant drawbacks make it infinitely inferior to systematic vaccination; while the former, if properly carried out, should, as stated before, involve far greater outlay than any system of vaccination which has come under my notice in this country. Vaccine returns for the hot and rainy seasons. 4. As these have not yet been received in full, I cannot allude to them in detail, but I trust that what has been accomplished, not- withstanding the interested opposition of these here- ditary inoculators, will meet with the approval of the Government, and I cannot speak in too high terms of the Native Superintendent and his vaccinators, who have so gained the respect of the headmen of many of the villages in which they have worked that in some instances, in addition to the ordinary gratuities of food, &c., often willingly given to a native of their own country, as these men are, they have received pecuniary rewards from the headmen of the villages, small in amount no doubt, viz., ranging from three annas to a rupee, yet representing an amount of support to the present scheme of vaccination far beyond the pecuniary value of the gift; and were it not for these interested inoculators, the practice of inoculation I doubt not would soon die out; but, for some time to come, these inoculators will have to be watched, otherwise they will practise their profession secretely, and, from no quarantine being kept up, will perhaps be the originators of an out- break of small-pox similar to that under report. In conclusion, I have to offer my thanks v 5
( 18 ) to Colonel Ramsay, C.B., for his kind assistance, and to the present Rajah of Terree for his prompt action in the case of the inoculator who commenced the practice this year ; and I trust that the example shown to this class will deter others of his subjects from attempting the practice when the rajah most liberally continues the grant to vaccination which his father instituted some years ago. R. PRINGLE, M.D., SURGEON, Superintendent of Vaccine, Agra and Meerut Divisions. No. 51.( 19 ) BANDA. FUTTEHPORE. Banda, ... ... 175 Government, Korajahanabad, ... 36 Girwa, ... ... 92 Ditto, Kullianpore, ... 25 Badousa, ... ... 90 Ditto, Futtehpore, ... 23 Kirwee, ... ... 41 Ditto, Khaga. ... 24 Mow, ... ... 5 Ditto, Kukaroo ... 6 Babaroo, ... ... 25 Municipal, Kora ... 5 Kamasin, ... ... 115 Ditto, Futtehpore, ... 7 Pylanee, ... ... 25 126 Municipal, ... ... 31 599 CAWNPORE. JOUNPORE. Cawnpore, ... ... 62 Ditto at Bitoor, ... ... 236 Jounpore, ... ... 20 Sheorajpore, ... ... 256 Mundeaboon, ... ... 79 Ditto at Sheohe, ... ... 97 Kerakut, ... ... 72 Rasoolabad, ... ... 322 Muchleeshahur, ... ... 100 Ditto at Kuhjuree, ... ... 46 Unglee, ... ... 34 Billhour, ... ... 152 Municipal, ... ... 28 Ditto at Kukwun, ... ... 173 333 Bhogneepore, ... ... 86 Ditto at Moosanuggur, ... 111 Dehrapore, ... ... 107 Ditto at Secundra, ... ... 87 ORAIE. Sarh, ... ... 16 Ditto at Maharajpore, ... 291 Government, Oraie, ... 84 Akburpore, ... ... 142 Ditto, Attah, ... 91 Ditto at Gujnare, ... ... 48 Municipal, Oraie, ... 29 Ghatumpore, ... ... 9 Ditto, Calpee, ... 49 Ditto at Sajaitee, ... ... 11 253 Municipal, ... ... 24 Cantonment, ... ... 14 2,290 No unsuccessful or doubtful cases are entered in the above table. It will perhaps be noticed that I saw comparatively few cases by the municipal vaccinators. This is partly owing to the fact, that I found that in many cases the municipal vaccinators were inspected by the Civil Surgeons, so that it appeared to me right to give most of my time to the inspection of tehseel vaccination, where there was no other possible European superintendence. Even if the Civil Surgeon did not inspect municipal vaccination, there would be no reason, if the Native Superintendents be trustworthy, to suspect falsification of returns, as the towns which pay for municipal vaccinators are generally the head-quar- ters of the Native Superintendents, who have to come in every month to draw their own pay and that of the vaccinators working under them. The average amount of work varies greatly in different districts. This is no doubt principally owing to differences in the amount of energy, zeal, and tact in the various Native Superintendents and vaccinators. It is also partly owing to differences in the character of the population. Vaccination, for instance, generally succeeds well where there is any large proportion of Mahomedans among the rural population; and succeeds very badly in any place where the Bunneeah caste is the leading one. It also greatly depends on the amount of interest taken in vaccination by the magistrates of districts. As was noticed by Dr. Richardson in 1871, some magistrates take unnecessary pains to assure the people of their districts that vaccination is entirely voluntary. It is of course true that the present system of vaccination is a voluntary and not a com- pulsory one; but repeated assurances of the fact from magistrates of districts is apt to prove injurious, by leadin the people to think that the magistrates disapprove of vaccination.
( 20 ) With regard to municipal vaccination, I have to return my thanks to all the Civil Surgeons in the circle, and, above all, to the Civil Surgeon of Cawnpore, for the assist- ance I have received during the whole of the past season. 4. During the past year, I have inspected all the vaccinators but one in the Allahabad Division. Next year I will inspect the Jhansie Division in the beginning of the season; and, as this will certainly not occupy more than two months, I will be able to give the rest of the season to Allahabad. In 1865, when I was first appointed to this circle, there were only 40 vaccinators, and it was quite possible to see them all in the course of a season. Now there are 93, and I find it is no longer possible. In order to go round the circle, going from one tehseelee town to another, and inspect- ing only the head-quarters town or village of each vaccinator, the European Super- intendent has to make 174 marches, taking the regular marches at 12 or 13 miles each. But it is rarely the case that the European Superintendent finds the vaccin- ator working close to his head-quarters; so that in practise the number of marches is very much greater. Considering the very large number of vaccinators in this circle, the inspection would be much more thoroughly done if a Native Deputy Superintendent were sanc- tioned, as is done in other provinces. It would then be possible for the European Superintendent to inspect the Allaha- bad Division thoroughly one year, the Native Deputy taking Jhansie. Next year the European Superintendent would inspect Jhansie, the Deputy going to Allahabad. The children were always inspected at the doors of their own houses. The vac- cinator guided me to the house, where he had vaccinated a child, and the parents were asked to bring their child to the door. After inspecting the child's arm, and making a mark opposite its name, in the register, I passed on to the next house. It would save a European Superintendent much trouble if he could have the children collected in one place; but by adopting such a course he would make vaccination more unpopular. A voluntary system of vaccination like the present can only succeed by doing every- thing that can possibly be done to avoid giving trouble to the children vaccinated, or to their parents. In England, where vaccination is compulsory, the parents have often to take their children some miles to a vaccine station, but if such a thing were to be attempted in India, parents would refuse to have their children vaccinated. On one occcasion, some years ago, a Civil Surgeon, who has since retired from the service, actually ordered the vaccinator of the place to bring all the children he had vaccinated in the city to be inspected at his, the Civil Surgeon's, bungalow, in cantonments. As soon as this order became known to the people, vaccination came to a standstill. A vaccinator in India has quite enough to do to persuade parents to accept for their children the English remedy of vaccination. Its utility, as a protective agent against a future attack of small-pox, is, in their eyes, doubtful; and its present incon- veniences are certain. But if, in addition to the suffering of the child, the inflamed arm, and feverishness, there were to be added the trouble to themselves of carrying the child some miles for inspection, all doubt would be at an end, and vaccination would be unhesitatingly rejected. 5. In the month of February an epidemic of small-pox broke out in the city of Cawnpore. The Native Superintendent immediately ordered the two tehseel vaccinators to come into the city and assist the municipal and cantonment vaccinators, thus making, with the apprentice, five available men. Soon afterwards, the Magistrate sent a roobakar to the five tehseeldars of Akburpore, Nurwul, Ghatumpore, Sheorajpore, and Jajmow, ordering them to send the vaccinators of their pergunnahs into the city of Cawnpore. The Magistrate also sent me an English letter signed by the Assistant Magistrate, and dated 14th February, informing me of the order he had given to the
( 21 ) tehseeldars. Before receiving this letter, I saw a copy of the roobakar, and at once wrote a public letter to the Magistrate, begging him to allow one man at least to remain in each of the tehseels. I did this, because I knew that there was not enough work in the city of Cawnpore for so large a number of vaccinators. Besides this, the vaccinators called in could not take with them any additional stock of lymph. Vaccin- ation is a thing practically done from arm to arm, and all the children these men had vaccinated were of course left behind in the tehseels; so that much valuable lymph was allowed to go to waste. Another inconvenience, though one of much less moment, was, that the men could not inspect their work of the previous week; so that all their cases had to be entered in the column of &quot;unknown,&quot; as the men could not tell whe- ther they had been successful or not. When the vaccinators arrived in Cawnpore, the Civil Surgeon very kindly superintended the division of the city into circles, one of which was allotted to each vaccinator ; but, as far as I could learn, very little additional work was done ; as most of the Native population who were willing to be vaccinated had already had the operation performed by the resident vaccinators. Most of the leading Natives in Cawnpore belong to the Bunniah caste, and object to vaccination. I believe, for instance, that none of the municipal commissioners have ever allowed any of their children to be vaccinated. 6. The services of the resident vaccinators were applied for by the medical officers in charge of the European regiment and of the Artillery stationed in Cawnpore. On the 18th February, 300 men of the regiment were vaccinated by the Native Super- intendent and by the cantonment vaccinator of Cawnpore. Almost all the cases were successful. On subsequent days the men of the Artil- lery and the remaining men of the regiment were vaccinated ; but owing to the stock of lymph being exhausted, the vaccination was not satisfactory, and had to be done over again. It is by no means easy for the vaccination of a town to supply in a single day so large a quantity of fresh lymph as is required to vaccinate half a regiment; and it would be much more convenient if the medical officers in charge of regiments would allow 50 or 100 men to be done daily, until the whole regiment was protected. But during an epidemic they naturally enough object to delay, and wish the whole of their men to be done at once. 7. During the past cold season, the first district regularly inspected by me was Futtehpore. At the time of my visit the vesicle could hardly be said to be properly established, and it was of course impossible for the vaccinators to shew me so many cases as they could have done if I had visited them later in the season. The work of the tehseel vaccinators of Kullianpore and Futtehpore was, however, excellent in quality. On the other hand, the tehseel vaccinator of Kukreroo, was able to shew very few suc- cessful cases, though I remained nearly two days in his tehseel; and the work of the municipal vaccinator of Futtehpore was the worst I saw during the whole of my tour. The latter man has been dismissed, and a good man appointed in his place. The tehseel of Ghazeepore remained unvisited by me, as the old vaccinator had resigned his ap- pointment on the 1st of November, and his successor had not been able to establish the vesicle. This was the only tehseel in the Allahabad Division left unvisited by me, but it would have taken three or four days to have gone there ; and as the vaccinator had no children ready to shew me, I thought it unadvisable to lose so many days, more especially as the newly appointed vaccinator was an old and well-trained man, not in need of advice or instruction. Judging from the reports of the Native Superintendent, the work of the Ghazeepore vaccinator has since been good. 8. The next district inspected was that of Allahabad. In this district, vaccina- tion is in a more unsatisfactory state than it is in any other district in my circle. I saw really good work in only two tehseels, those of Munjhunpore and Phoolpore. The work in Surathoo was moderately good. In all the others, I found that the vaccinators v 6
( 22 ) were doing little or nothing. The cause of this, I am sorry to say, is not very evident. The vaccinators attributed it to the greater bigotry of the people. According to them, the prejudices of the people are more intense in this zillah than in any other district. It is, however, more probable that it is owing to the inferiority of the vaccinators themselves. The vaccinators in this district have repeatedly been changed, the old ones having been dismissed for inefficiency, or for sending in false returns, and new men have been entertained in their places. The only three vaccinators who remain of the old establishment are the vaccinators of Munjhunpore, Phoolpore, and Surathoo, and these are the only men who shew me anything like good work. While in Allaha- bad I saw several of the district authorities, and discussed with them the cause of the want of success in Allahabad, more particularly in the town itself. After seeing these officers, I sent in a report recommending that the pay of the municipal vaccinators should be raised, so that 1 might be able to entertain better men I believe that in the town of Allahabad vaccination will only be accepted from the hands of Brahmins ; and I have found it very difficult to get educated and respectable Brahmins to enter the Vaccine Department on the present scale of salaries. This difficulty is evidently greater in a town like Allahabad than it is in remote country districts. This city is at once the capital of the province, and it is, in the eyes of the Hindoos, a holy city ; and a great place of pilgrimage. An educated Brahmin, living in Allahabad, has there- fore numberless ways open to him of earning a livelihood. He may get service in one of the many government or mercantile offices ; or he may earn money by acting as a priest to the pilgrims who visit the city. I believe, therefore, that without an in- crease of pay to the municipal vaccinators, it is hopeless to expect such good work in the town of Allahabad, as may reasonably be expected from vaccinators who work in other places. Before finishing my account of this district, I ought to mention that the Joint Magistrates, Mr. Twigg and Mr. Knox, have taken much interest in vaccin- ation. Mr. Knox spoke on the subject to Naseerooddeen Ahmed, Talukdar, Abdalpore, one of the wealthiest zemindars in the district. In consequence of this, Naseerooddeen Ahmed sent for the vaccinator of Soraon, and had a large number of children on his estates vaccinated. 9. In the Jounpore district six new local vaccinators have been entertained, two for the Jounpore tehseel, and one for each of the other tehseels. This year these men have worked along with the old vaccinators as apprentices, not as vaccinators; and no separate account of their work has been kept. I found the state of vaccination in the Jounpore district somewhat better than in Allahabad. Three men, the tehseel vac- cinators of Kurakut, Muchleeshuhur, and Mundeahoon, show satisfactory work. While visiting the tehseel of Kurakut, I had an interview with about 60 or 70 of the leading men of the eastern part of the tehseel,( 23 ) 10. The zillah of Banda was next inspected, and I found it a great contrast to the districts I had previously visited, as in every tehseel but one vaccination was excellent. The solitary exception was the tehseel of Mow, which includes the large com- mercial town of Rajpore, the birth-place of the great Hindoo poet, Toolsee Dass. It is inhabited almost entirely by Bunnias, so that vaccination in Rajpore is not to be looked for for many years to come. The vaccinator had not attempted to vaccinate any one in Rajpore, and seemed to consider it a hopeless undertaking. With the other seven tehseels of the Banda district, I had every reason to be pleased. I marched, as usual, about 12 miles every morning, and gave the afternoon to the vaccinator in whose tehseel I happened to be. In almost every case the vaccinator was able to shew me 50 or 100 cases of successful vaccination, within a radius of 8 or 10 miles from my camp. In some cases this number was exceeded. Thus, the vaccinator of Kamasin, one of the best men in my circle, shewed me 115 successful cases in one day ; and he was labouring under peculiar disadvantage, as I passed through his tehseel by a different road from the one he expected me to take. I never went near the town of Kamasin, where most of his work had been done. Another man in this zillah, the vaccinator of pergunnah Banda, showed me 175 cases, but I passed through the whole length of his pergunnah, and was able to give him three afternoons; so that on the whole his work was inferior to that of the vaccinator of Kamasin. 11. The Humeerpore district is also a very good one. I was highly pleased with the work of the six local vaccinators, and with that of five out of the six Government vaccinators. On the whole, the best work I saw in this zillah was that of the Govern- ment vaccinator of Jalalpore, who showed me in the villages of Behunie, Kurehie, Bilganu, and Buswara no less than 117 successful cases; and of the Government vac- cinator of pergunnah Humeerpore, who showed me 19 cases in Humeerpore itself, and 52 cases in the village of Somairpore, about 12 miles from Humeerpore. In both cases I found that almost all the operations had been successful, and the places inspected were selected by myself and not chosen by the vaccinators. The Go- vernment vaccinator of Punwaree shewed me a larger number, 173 successful cases; but he had a great number of unsuccessful cases, and his work was almost all in Pun- waree itself, which he knew I was certain to visit. 12. In the zillah of Jaloun I was only able to inspect the work of four vaccinators; the tehseel vaccinators of Oraie and Attah, and the municipal vaccinators of Oraie and Calpee; of the four, the best work was that of the Government vaccinator of Oraie, who showed me 84 cases in a number of small villages near Ait, on the borders of the Jhansie district. The Civil Surgeon of Oraie has given me much assistance; and vac- cination is, on the whole, going on satisfactorily in the Jaloun district. 13. The Cawnpore district is by far the most important in my circle, as there are no less than 20 vaccinators employed in it, or as many as there are in the whole Jhansie commissionership. The Native Superintendent is decidedly the best officer I have under me, and the vaccinators are, on the whole, better than in any other dis- trict. I remained more than a month in the zillah, and inspected the work of every vac- cinator in it. After leaving Jaloun, the first place I visited was Bhogneepore tehseel; I selected four villages in the neighbourhood, and saw in them 77 cases, of which only one was a failure ; a ratio of success which could hardly be exceeded ; next day I marched 12 miles to Moosanugger, the headquarters of the other vaccinator of the tehseel, and saw in the neighbouring villages 124 cases, but of these 13 were failures, only 111 being successful( 24 ) I next inspected at the towns of Secundra and Mungulpore the work of the two vaccinators of tehseel Derapore, and found it moderately good. I then marched towards Rusoolabad, the headquarters of one of the vaccinators of the tehseel of the same name. I halted two days, and saw, within a radius of 10 or 12 miles, no less than 331 cases of vaccination, of which only nine were unsuccessful. This man's work was on the whole the best in the circle, as it was entirely village work. Rusoolabad itself is a small place, and there is no large town in the vaccin- ator's district; and scarcely even any large village, the largest I saw being the village of Barah Mow, about five miles from Rusoolabad, where there were 45 successful cases. In the tehseels of Sheorajpore and Bilhour, I found the work very good; but not worthy of special notice. In the tehseel of Jajmow (which includes the city of Cawnpore), one of the two tehseel vaccinators has his headquarters at the large town of Bitore. This man showed in Bitore itself 67 successful cases, and in various villages round he showed me 169 successful cases. Until this year no work had ever been done in the town of Bitore, which is well known as being a very bigoted Hindoo city ; so that the vaccinator deserved great credit. He laboured under this further disadvantage, that the day I arrived was the day of the festival of the Holee; and but for this, I believe, he would have been able to show many more cases. The other vaccinator of the tehseel showed me 62 cases in a number of small villages, at the opposite extremity of the pergunnah. In the tehseel of Nurwul, I saw by the vaccinator of the Maharajpore sub-divi- sion, 291 successful cases, and by the vaccinator of the Nurwul sub-division, 16 suc- cessful cases. The latter man was suffering from severe illness, and was unable to accom- pany me on my rounds. Of the 291 successful cases by the Maharajpore vaccinator, 47 were Brahmins, 15 Thakoors, and 13 Bunnias; a proportion of high-caste children, especially in the case of Brahmins, much above the average. 14. In conclusion, I have the honour to solicit you to ask Government to send letters of thanks to the following Native gentlemen, who have given me great assist- ance during the past season:( 25) Dated Benares, 11th April, 1873. From( 26 ) 8. The increase of work, with a less number of operators, I attribute to the gradually growing appreciation of its benefits amongst the masses, to the prevalence of small-pox in many of the districts, and by no means the least, to the zealous spirit which my predecessor, Dr. Richardson, infused into his subordinates. With a zeal bordering on enthusiasm, he vaccinated with his own hands a number larger than that of three-fourths of the vaccinators, in addition to conducting his inspection duties. 9. The advent of small-pox does not terrify the people, particularly Hindoos, into trying the prophylactic as much as one would anticipate. The scourge is looked upon as a manifestation of the anger of a goddess, to be mitigated by worship and offerings, and not by such &quot;carnal&quot; means as vaccination. A curious circumstance is, that in some parts of the country, however rich one may be, he must beg the required amount for the worship of the goddess of small-pox. That such is not always the case, the following, which occurred in the Goruckpore district, proves, and it also illustrates the disposition of the people towards vaccination when small-pox is prevalent. Two years ago a mahajun had one of his two children vaccinated; the other he believed at that time to be too young for the operation. On the following year small-pox broke out rather violently in his village ; he was advised not to offend the goddess by having his unprotected child vaccinated in her very presence, but when the child was taken ill he spared no expense in sacrifices and offerings to the priests, in order to propitiate the offended deity. The child, however, died, and the grieved father repaid his evil- advising Brahmins in a manner that showed but two palpably that his faith had received a, rude shock. 10. A prophylactic is not so much opposed to the scruples of the bigoted as is the idea of a remedy. I have several times been told &quot;when the goddess has removed her hand we will have our children vaccinated; &quot; and the marked immunity of those protected will doubtless force upon them the conviction of its necessity. In a village near Munsoorgunj, a man, who particularly distinguished himself in opposing vaccina- tion, lost three of his children within a month afterwards from small-pox. I made this poor man's loss the subject of a warning to the inhabitants of that village, which was productive of immediate good. 11. Mirzapore.( 27 ) The Native Superintendent, Kalka Pershad, is a trustworthy and hard-working man. His zeal brought on an attack of remittent fever, from which he narrowly escaped with life. He is a Brahmin by caste, and taught his wife to vaccinate and fill tubes with lymph, the latter no easy operation. 13. Benares.( 28 ) unsuitable. My experience of the malee class will be given in a future paragraph, only mentioning the fact here that they do less work, and in a lower social stratum than the other classes of vaccinators. 18. In connection with Goruckpore, I must favourably mention the name of See- sunker Lall, the Tehseeldar of Hatta. For the day of my arrival at Hatta he had previously summoned a meeting of the chief zemindars within a radius of 12 or 15 miles, to which upwards of 60 persons came. Very kindly and sensibly he explained to the meeting the object of vaccination, its success in other kingdoms, and the benefit it confers. He answered their questions and combated all the popular errors (some of them very absurd) that were held regarding it. I cannot too highly admire not only his interest in the cause, but the sensible and judicious manner in which he manifested it. Excepting Gunput Sahai, Tehseeldar of Captaingunj in Bustee, the interest of all the rest was merely nominal. I ought to have mentioned that Seesunker Lall formed those who volunteered to do so into a committee to assist in the spread of vaccination in the tehseel. 19. I have a very strong impression that subordinate officials are not aware of the importance that Government attaches to vaccination. If it were practicable to have monthly statements of the work done printed in the vernacular Gazette, it would not only stimulate these men to increased zeal, but assist materially in checking the falsification of returns. 20. The vaccinators of Pudrowna were withdrawn to Kussia. Pudrowna is in a state of chronic malaria, and it was considered more prudent to avoid it. Vaccination being as yet, so to speak, on its trial, the death of a child from whatever cause soon after being vaccinated could not fail of injuring the cause. 21. Bustee.( 29 ) a very urgent case, inoculate a child until (to use his own phrase) his &quot;mouth was full of teeth.&quot; It would be interesting to know whether the percentage is exceptionally small also in Jounpore, a district in which inoculation used to be practised. Excluding Azimgurh, I think the percentage of young children is a pretty fair index of the spread of vaccination in the districts recorded. 24. Re-vaccination.( 30 ) of rupees that Government spends on vaccination, and the incredible numbers of children vaccinated in every district except the one in which he happens at that moment to be. The spokesman does not forget his own importance, but doubles his pay, and is very much in the confidence of Government. The ignorant villagers believe all this : they listen to him with great respect, and call him &quot;baboo jee.&quot; If the zemindar is persuaded to have his children vaccinated, the assamees are simply ordered to have it done, and, though they do not volunteer, they never refuse. It must he confessed, moreover, that there is a certain amount of indirect pressure brought to bear upon the lower castes. When the zemindar is an absentee or opposed to vaccination, the assistance of the chowkeedar is called into requisition. He points out where the children have been concealed, and partly by coaxing and partly by threats, he induces the parents to have them vaccinated. It is never done by absolute violence, but if a vaccinator were only to operate on those voluntarily brought to him, his success would be very limited indeed. From this sketch of the modus operandi, it is evident how essential as elements of success are high caste, taste, and moral courage. In towns all that goes for nothing. The people know the vaccinator, his pay and limit of his powers, as well as he himself does. He has to argue with and convince every household, and, unhappily, not the men (who are generally away at some em- ployment), but the women, who are far more suspicious and ignorant than their husbands. Mere inspection duty is very annoying in towns. Every Superintendent knows he has to stand frequently for five minutes at the door before the women can be persuaded to bring their children even to be looked at. 29. Small-pox.( 31 ) 30. Inoculators.( 32 ) In this space are placed food and sweetmeats of various kinds in seven vessels of brass or earthenware. They could not explain why the number was always seven ; but the Jewish preference for the same number, as expressive of completeness, is signi- ficant. Over the gurra is thrown a reddish yellow cloth, which is covered with neem and mangoe leaves. Chaplets of flowers are suspended around it, and in front is placed a lamp over which ghee is gently poured( 33 ) of his pupils were vaccinated from his arm. I commended him to the notice of Baboo Siva Pershad, C.S.I., who deservedly promoted him a step, and wrote circulars to other schoolmasters in the circle to use their moral influence in favour of vaccination. From this I anticipate very good results. If some simple lessons in sanitation, and more particularly regarding vaccination, were taught in village school-books, we should in a few years have all the intelligence of the country on our side. In any case, I would have two learned tracts printed in Hindee containing the kind of reasoning suited to the rustic mind, and distributed broadcast over the country. There are at present in almost every tehseel, hundreds of villages where vaccination has never, or very faintly, been heard of. This would create enquiry, which of course would tend greatly towards the development of vaccination. The pamphlets that were published from your office have, to my own knowledge, done a great deal of good among the more highly educated Government officials; but a short and simple tract would be more suitable for schools and village zemindars. 39. In conclusion, I should like to record my gratitude to my immediate prede- cessors, Drs. Richardson and Milne, for having so kindly assisted me out of the difficul- ties that, as a beginner, I experienced. I trust the two tehseeldars I have mentioned will receive some expression of the favour of Government. I have, &c., JOHN MACGREGOR, Offg. Superintendent of Vaccination. No. 224, dated Camp, Dehra Doon, the 5th April, 1873. From( 34 ) 1st November. From this time until the 1st of April I was able to visit and inspect the work of 83 vaccinators and apprentices in both divisions of my circle. Within the past two years the establishment has increased to such an extent, that it is now beyond the physical ability of any one man to visit each individual during the vaccine season. 4. The returns show a considerable increase over the previous year, both in the numbers vaccinated and in the number of operations per month performed by each vaccin- ator. At the same time, there is only a very slight improvement in the percentage of successful cases. This last result is no more than might have been expected from the sudden increase to the establishment of 30 inexperienced vaccinators, and 12 appren- tices. The latter, however, should exercise no influence in comparison of the two sea- son's work, as they should be considered as the representatives of the oomedwars of former years. If the work of the old and new vaccinators of the same district is compared, an idea may be formed of the effect which the appointment of a large number of the latter exercises upon the returns. In the district of Saharunpore each of the four old and trained men vaccinated, on an average, during the past five months, 1,516 per- sons, with a percentage of 91.2 successful cases; whilst 13 new men and an apprentice vaccinated each only 1,296, with a percentage of 83.6 successful cases. 5. As usual, the diversity in the amount of work done by the several vaccinators is great. The two extremes occur in the same district. The Government vaccinator of the Shamlee tehseel of the Moozuffernuggur district is credited with 2,167 operations ; whilst the local vaccinator of the town of Kandlah can show only 312. As to the possibility of the former having done so much, I may state that in the town of Bannut I saw him vaccinate 86 children on the same day. Not only was he fortunate in having little or no opposition offered him by the people of his tehseel, but his services were even applied for through the Magistrate by some of the zemindars of Jelallabad. In Kandlah the vaccinator was employed for four months only. I myself began ope- rations in the town, and experienced no little difficulty in finding subjects. After seve- ral hours I succeeded in vaccinating only 13 children. With this as a beginning, the work proceeded, slowly improving until the end of the season. The difference in the attitude of the people with regard to vaccination, on the Saharunpore and Meerut sides of the Moozuffurnuggur district, struck me forcibly, and the returns are in accordance with my experience. Looking at the returns, it might appear that other vaccinators had done more work than the one posted to the Shamlee tehseel; but, as already explained, theman employed in the huzoor tehseel of each district has the numbers vaccinated by the apprentice incorporated with his own ; whilst the vaccinators of Dehra Doon and Tehree were at work, in some cases, for the whole of the 12 months of the year. The percentage of successful cases varies from 97.7 in the Mahabun tehseel of the Muttra district to 60.5 in Khandlah. I examined the vaccinator's work in seve- ral villages of the Mahabun tehseel, and found it excellent. In the case of Kandlah, the low ratio of success is just what might have been expected. Unless considerable numbers are vaccinated, suitable vesicles from which to obtain lymph are not always available, and its quality, as a consequence, deteriorates. It is also not easy, where the people are averse to vaccination, to get them to bring children of the best age for giving the best vesicle. The two most populous districts in the circle, Agra and Meerut, show the most unfavourable results as regards the numbers vaccinated by each vaccinator. As com- pared with last year, both districts have retrograded. In the case of Meerut, the small amount of work done by the Municipal vaccinators is a good deal to blame for the low- ness of the average. Whilst each Government vaccinator shows an average of 198 persons per month, each Municipal vaccinator can show only 120. But apart from this, vaccination is backward throughout the whole district. I cannot recollect a single instance in which any Native of influence gave the slightest assistance, or appeared to me to take the least interest in vaccination during the time I was engaged in inspect- ing the work of the 18 men employed in it. It would be too much to expect that in
( 35 ) so large a district, the European officers could have much spare time to devote to vaccin- ation. The Agra district remains in very much the same position with regard to vaccin- ation as last year. The tendency has not been to improve. Compared with the favour- able progress being made amongst a similar population in the adjoining districts of Muttra and Mynpoorie, this appears to indicate something defective in the vaccine establishment, and the only instances of gross misconduct on the part of my subordi- nates which came to my notice this season occurred in this district. In several out- of-the-way villages of the Furrah tehseel, I found many of the cases shown in the returns as successfully vaccinated to have been complete failures. Against the names of some of these villages in the daily register, I observe that the Native Superintendents had recorded that he had inspected the children and found them as described by the vaccin- ator. The fact turned out to be that the Native Superintendent had never seen them; but not expecting a visit from me, had entered in the register an account of imaginary inspections. This man is a native of the city of Agra, and, as I found, had spent too much of his time at his home. Himself a Mussulman, of no very respectable family, he never lost an opportunity of making complaints against the two or three Hindoo vaccinators under him, and endeavouring to replace them by men of his own creed and selection. Such a policy, amongst a population of which nine-tenths are Hindoos appeared to me altogether in the wrong direction, and I appointed in his stead a Brahmin, whom I knew to be an educated man of respectable family, and a good vaccinator. 6. The districts in which the most marked progress has taken place during the year are Moozuffernuggur, Boolundshuhur, and Etawah. In the first of these, with- out any increase to the vaccine establishment, the numbers vaccinated have nearly trebled. For some years vaccination has been popular in the Saharunpore district, and it is at once observable that this feeling is gradually making its way into the adjoining parts of Moozuffernuggur. But progress has not been altogether the consequence of extension from without. Whilst accompanying the municipal vaccinator of Moozuf- fernuggur through the town about the 1st of December, I found that the only persons being vaccinated were a few Chumars and sweepers in the suburbs. After an unsuccessful attempt to prevail upon some of the better classes to have their children brought, I explained the position of affairs to Mr. Williams, who undertook to see what could be done. From this time no further difficulty was experienced. Mr. Williams is well known to the people, and no sooner did he show them, by visiting the town with the vaccinator, that he took an interest in vaccination, then all classes readily came forward to assist. Subsequently, when on tour in the district, he similarly interested himself in vaccina- tion, and with similar results. In the Boolundshuhur district vaccination owes its success in great part to the interest taken in it by the Magistrate. It was not until he had impressed the municipalities of the four large towns in his district with a sense of their duty in regard to this matter that the Municipal vaccinators could obtain even a footing. On the occasion of my visit, I found that all of them had been driven into the villages, simply to enable them to keep up their supplies of lymph. Small-pox in an epidemic form prevailed over this district, and that it did not prove more fatal in the larger cities, I regard as entirely due to the assistance given to vaccination by the Magistrate. To the interest taken by all the district authorities in vaccination is due the advance which the Etawah district has made from being, in this respect, one of the most backward to being one of the most forward in the circle. I believe a report has been submitted to Government by the Secretary to the Municipal Committee, regard- ing the progress and success of vaccination this year in the town of Etawah. 7. Last year it was a source of surprise to Government that the Municipal vaccina- tors should have done so little. This surprise would not have been lessened had it been known that of those vaccinated by far the greater number did not belong to the muni- cipalities. In most cases, after the low caste quarters of a town have been disposed of, the Municipal vaccinator is obliged either to remain idle, or to begin working in the neighbouring villages. This season I did not permit any vaccinator to work outside
( 36 ) the bounds of the municipality, until I was satisfied that vaccination had been placed within the reach of all willing to accept of it, and that there was a danger, from the want of subjects to operate upon, of the supply of fresh lymph failing. I have now before me a return showing the amount of work done inside and outside each town by Municipal vaccinators. In this way only can anything like a correct estimate be formed of the support or opposition which vaccination meets with from the members of the municipal committees and other influential residents of the large towns. For instance, looking at the returns, the natural conclusion would be that the inhabitants of Hattrass entertained very enlightened views with regard to vaccination. They employ two vac- cinators, and there have been no fewer than 2,005 persons operated upon. But when it is known that of this number only 305 belong to the town, the matter wears a some- what different aspect. On the occasion of my visit to Hattrass it was with the greatest difficulty that the parents of the children who had been vaccinated could be got even to show them to me. The vaccinators are men of several years standing, and one of them, who has been known to them for the last seven years, is a special favourite with the people. I do not give this as an exceptional case. The seven vaccinators employed by the five municipalities of the Allygurh District vaccinated 6,474 persons; but of these only 1,872 belonged to municipal towns. In a very few places in which vaccination is really appreciated, such as Saharunpore and Etawah, the vaccinator has no difficulty. In the case of the latter all the vaccinated were residents of the town, and in the former all except 88. In both each man operated upon nearly 300 persons every month during the season. The acceptance of vaccination being voluntary, and municipal committees, it being presumed, representing the wishes of the majority of the residents of the towns, it is curious that funds should be voted for the payment of a vaccinator whose services so very few are willing to accept. In spite of such a practical proof that the people are anxious for the introduction of vaccination as the voting of the funds for its support, it is found much easier to get the villagers in the vicinity, who have given expression to no such anxiety, to bring their children to be vaccinated. The smaller amount of success attained by Municipal vaccinators is owing to want of attention or zeal on the part of the Vaccine Department; in fact, more is done to secure the co-operation of those in a position to be able to influence popular opinion in the towns than is possi- ble in the case of the villages. I have personally visited 25 of the municipal towns, and in the case of the larger cities, such as Agra and Meerut, have spent the greater part of several days endeavouring to forward vaccination. I confess it was from a sense of duty and not from choice, that I devoted so much of my time to these towns. In the villages it is rare to meet with anything but the utmost civility and even kind- ness : in the towns, insolence and studied disrespect are the rule. Of the ultimate effect which education may exercise upon the views of the people with regard to the necessity for having their children protected against small-pox there can be little doubt; but as yet it is a fact that, up to a certain standard, the higher the education the greater the difficulty experienced in getting them to accept of vaccination. So much is this the case, that during my tour I met in two places with the chief opposition from the village schoolmasters. At Booranah, in the Moozuffernuggur district, the Hindoo schoolmaster had taken much trouble to caution the inhabitants against having their children vaccinated, and when I went to see him at his house, he shut the door in my face and declined to come out. In the village of Katah, near Baghput, the Mussul- man teacher industriously circulated his belief that those vaccinated would die. He informed me that he knew of several cases in which death had immediately followed the operation. 8.The number of local vaccinators has more than doubled during the past year, and the average monthly number of persons operated upon by each has risen from 58 to 186. With the exception of one man appointed by the Agra cantonment com- mittee, all are employed in the Saharunpore and Moozuffernuggur districts. The appointment of a vaccinator for the cantonments of Meerut and Muttra was also recom-
( 37 ) mended, but not agreed to by the military authorities. In Agra, the vaccinator was much assisted by Dr. Godwin, the Staff Surgeon, and although inexperienced, did a fair amount of very good work. In his reply to Dr. Pringle, the Brigade-Major of Meerut informed him that there was &quot;no need whatever of a special Native vaccinator for can- tonments.&quot; As this was the decision arrived at by the &quot;Major-General Commanding, in consultation with the Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, I. F.,&quot; it must of course be right; but yet small-pox did not fail to appear in a fatal form within cantonments. The Meerut sudder bazaar contains a Native population of, I am told, about 16,000 persons ; but except that a Government vaccinator was employed in it under my direc- tions, when I had ascertained that small-pox was prevalent in the neighbouring city of Meerut, I am not aware that anything was done by the military authorities to pro- tect those by means of vaccination. 9. During the year 1872 small-pox did not prevail in an epidemic form in any district of this circle except Saharunpore. The total number of deaths recorded from this disease was 10,336, and of these upwards of one-half occurred in the single district of Saharunpore. Until the present season, I doubt if vaccination was sufficiently gene- ral in that district to greatly influence the progress of the epidemic. The total number of vaccinated last year was only 8,189 out of a population of more than three-quarters of a million ; this year the vaccine establishment has been more than trebled, and the numbers vaccinated have risen to 24,217. This is at the rate of one person of every 36 of the population, and were the whole of the people willing to accept of vaccination, it could now, with the present establishment, be offered to every individual in the district in need of it. In Dehra Doon the population was considered to be nearly as perfectly protected against outbreaks of small-pox as in Kumaon or Gurhwal; but I fear this is still far from being the case. During the past year no fewer than 51 deaths are recorded from this cause, and the disease still lingers in some of the villages. In the town of Dehra itself, I believe few, if any, remain unprotected ; a result mainly due to the exertions of the Civil Surgeon. The spread of tea-planting in the Doon, and the proximity of a large hill station, create an annual influx of numbers of coolies and workmen from other districts less protected by vaccination, which will continue to render the eradication of small-pox from the Doon no easy task. Comparing it with previous seasons, 1872 has not been remarkable in this circle for the special prevalence of small-pox; but the pre- sent year promises very differently. Already, during the first two months, half the death-rate of last year has been exceeded, and the months most favourable to the spread of the disease have not yet arrived. The districts of Boolundshuhur and Etah have suffered most, and in neither has vaccination reached a point greatly to influence the spread of small-pox. 10. Since the commencement of my tour I have met with cases of this disease in every district visited by me ; but the first opportunity I had of witnessing it in an epidemic form was on my arrival at Moozuffernuggur on the 1st of December, and as I made careful enquiry into the circumstances of this outbreak, I will briefly describe them. One of the vaccinators told me that in the village of Canoonee, about four miles to the westward of Moozuffernuggur, he had seen several children suffering from small-pox, but that only a few of the people would allow him to vaccinate those yet unaffected. Shortly after day-break on the 2nd I reached the village, and having found the putwaree and the three chowkeedars, made enquiry as to the number of persons lately attacked by small-pox, as well as the number of those who had died. The three chowkeedars agreed that about ten had been attacked and that one had died. One of the chowkeedars told me that he had reported the death at the Thanah. As in the course of less than an hour it struck me I had seen more than ten children in various stages of small-pox, I resolved to make a thorough inquiry at every house in the village. The result was, that instead of finding that ten children had been attacked and that one had died, I found that forty-one had been attacked and that eleven had died. The chowkeedars admitted the correctness of this, but said, what was quite true, that only one Jât had died, and that the others were v 10
( 38 ) Chumars. Several of the children seen by me were suffering from the disease in its worst form; but what the result was in these cases I did not afterwards learn. There appeared to be no attempt at separation of the affected from the unaffected: the former were everywhere met with being carried about the village. Except that the first per- son attacked was a Chumar, and this was some weeks ago, nothing as to the origin of the disease could be ascertained; but as in no instance had the small-pox scabs entirely fallen off at the time of my visit, I conclude that not more than a month had elapsed since the commencement of the outbreak. During the course of my enquiry, which proved very laborious and tedious, I prevailed upon the great majority, if not all, of the people with unprotected children to have those vaccinated. Before night, 138 had been operated upon, and as the population numbered only 2,195, it is probable that very few more remained. When the Native Superintendent revisited the village a fortnight after this, he reported that there had been no fresh cases of small-pox for ten days. I heard that the disease shortly after this appeared in a very virulent form in the neighbouring village of Burwallah; but although the vaccinator several times offered his services they were declined. In fact, although during the year I visited many towns and villages in which small-pox was fatally prevalent, it was not often that I could prevail upon the people to accept of vaccination for their children. It was painful to see numbers of helpless infants, almost beyond recognition as human creatures dying in mortal suffering of a disease the antidote of which I possessed, but in deference to the ignorant prejudices of the parents dared not apply. 11. Elaborate rules are given regarding the mode in which sporadic outbreaks of small-pox should be dealt with; but the wisdom of stopping such outbreak may well be questioned. If those measures were successful, whilst vaccination still fails to reach the bulk of the people, the result would be, that the unprotected would go on accumu- lating until, on the arrival of a year pregnant with the epidemic influence, the scenes described in countries visited for the first time by small-pox would be repeated. The slow annual mortality which now goes on is better than its concentration into a single year: the numbers attacked are not sufficiently great to prevent proper attention being paid to them, whilst perhaps the small-pox poison, being more lightly diffused, may be less fatal. In the last supposition, I have myself little belief. There is, however, little probability of any isolated attempts at stopping the spread of small-pox being anywhere long, or generally successful; and in those parts of the country where ino- culation is permitted, contagion will constantly be available for the attack and conse- quent protection against future attacks of small-pox, or death of the people, by this disease. 12. According to Mr. Marson, one of the greatest living authorities on small- pox, a damp and moist state of the air is favourable to the spread of the disease, and this he believes is the reason why, in England, the months of November and Decem- ber show the largest number of cases. As regards India, such a theory would be directly opposed to the facts. An examination of small-pox statistics will show that, commencing with October or November, when the disease is at its minimum, the mor- tality steadily increases with the heat and dryness of the weather, until it reaches its maximum in the month of May. On the setting in of the rainy season, a sudden dimi- nution is apparent, and this continues steadily until the minimum is again reached in October or November. Although from its being practised in the hot weather, inocu- lation may have some influence upon the spread of small-pox at this season, the same rule holds good where, as in this circle, inoculation is all but unknown. 13. In his report for last year, my predecessor was somewhat severe upon the people of the districts in which infanticide is more or less practised, with regard to their motives in declining to have their female children vaccinated. But it is a curious fact that in all the districts most notorious for the practice of infanticide, such as
( 39 ) Mynpoorie and Etawah, the number of girls greatly exceeds the number of boys vaccina- ted. In the returns for Mynpoorie, the girls are more numerous than the boys by a fifth, and in Etawah by a seventh. When this is taken in conjunction with the circum- stance that in these provinces the males exceed the females in number by more than a tenth, the proportion of the sexes vaccinated is still more remarkable. That the returns are correct I have no doubt. In some villages in the Allygurh district parti- cularly I was surprised to notice that almost every child brought for inspection or vac- cination was a female. The idea suggested by the refusal of these people to have their infant females vaccinated was, I presume, that they were so impressed with the life- saving properties of vaccination, as to make it an object with them to decline it for those they did not wish to live. The predominance of the females Vaccinated might, and I believe does, indicate an explanation less complimentary to the vaccine Depart- ment. It may be that the parents are still so suspicious of vaccination that they will not trust it for their boys; whilst they are satisfied to let their girls serve as the corpora- vilia upon which its effects can be tried. A glance at the returns will also show that in those districts in which the propor- tion of Mahomedans is high, the above proportions of the sexes is reversed. This no doubt arises from the jealousy with which the Mahomedans seclude their females even at a very tender age. Comparatively few Mussulmans being agriculturists, this is still more marked in the case of the cities. 14. On the whole, the behaviour of my establishment has been fairly good. Except in the case of the Agra district already mentioned, nothing like systematic misconduct has been met with; cases of dismissal have been very few, and it has only been when no other course was left open to me that I have felt obliged to adopt this extreme measure. Hasty action in this respect is much to be deplored in any depart- ment, but perhaps more so in this than in most others. Change of officers is naturally taken advatange of by interested subordinates to pay off old grudges, or promote their own interests at the expense of those who enjoyed the confidence of the previous incum- bent. If, as sometimes happens, the relieving officer is a man whose judgment is naturally feeble, or has not been strengthened by experience, a too willing ear is often given to tales which a little reflection and knowledge of the character of Native subor- dinates ought to lead him to regard with suspicion. Flattering himself with a belief in the superiority of his own sagacity, which reveals the incapacity or corruption to which his predecessor was so long blind, he begins to set the department in order by the indiscriminate dismissal of many of the most experienced servants it contains. It takes years to make a good vaccinator, and that this is no mere assertion must be plain from the comparison already made between the work of the old and new vaccinators in the Saharunpore district. 15. The substitution of apprentices for oomedwars has answered well in this circle. The latter were never under thorough control, and their selection was rarely made with sufficient care by the Native Superintendents. 16. For the first time the Municipal vaccinators of the Meerut district have been placed directly under the superintendence of this department. Two of the six were selected and appointed by the Superintendent of Vaccination. These differ in no respect from the ordinary Municipal vaccinators of other districts. The remaining four were selected by the municipal committees, and are called hakeem vaccinators. The idea is, that these men will be more useful during the recess ; and also as vaccinators more likely to have access to the families of the better classes. At first sight, and in theory, nothing could look more promising. The only fault is, that as with the scheme for educating the sons of hakeems as vaccinators, it entirely fails in practice. Of their value as medical practitioners, I have no very high estimate. I have seen enough of them to be convinced that they are, as a rule, utterly ignorant of the simplest principles of medical science, and, on the whole, perhaps as likely to do harm as good to their patients.
( 40 ) Whether their knowledge of medicine is worth the expenditure in extra pay given them, I leave others to judge; it is with their employment as vaccinators that I am chiefly concerned, and in enabling me to form a judgment of their value as such, I am not confined to opinions. Of the four hakeems, one did not vaccinate a single child during the season, and on my putting pressure on him through the magistrate he resigned when more than half the vaccine season was over. The second, employed in Bhagput, is a feeble old opium-eater, who did so little work, that I was obliged to send a man to assist him to maintain a supply of fresh lymph. The third has worked better in Shaderah; but I found on the occasion of my visit that he had engaged in quarrels with the people, and that vaccination had come to a complete stand-still. After re- establishing his lymph, I reported the state of affairs to the magistrate, who, on inquiry, found that the vaccinator was not to blame for his part in these quarrels. Yet the fact of his having been concerned in them showed him to be ill-suited for his appoint- ment. The last of the number was much the best of the whole. He received Rs. 40 per mensem, and for two months worked very fairly in Ghazeeabad. At the end of that time, the municipal committee, thinking it a waste of money to pay him so much for doing what could be as well done for less, reduced his salary. He regarded this in the light of a dismissal, and withdrew. The average monthly number vaccinated by each of these four men was only 106, or nearly a half less than the average for the rest of the Meerut district. I think, therefore, that as vaccinators, at all events, their employment has not been a success. I do not mean to say that there are not many very intelligent hakeems; but these are not likely to be enticed into the drudgery of public vaccination by such salaries as municipalities are prepared to offer them. The only men whose services can be secured are those who have failed in practice, and as a last resource are glad to earn a livelihood in any way. The very fact of their consenting to serve as vaccinators is a proof that they can be of little worth as hakeems. They are usually old men, accustomed to an easy-going life, and utterly unfit for the hard work and harder life which are the portion of the successful vaccinator. The consequence is, that municipalities at considerable additional expense, secure the services of men who, from their failure as hakeems, have given proof that they do not possess the skill to enable them to secure the confidence of the people as medical practitioners ; while from their age and previous habits of life, they are unfit for the duties of a vaccinator. 17. The lymph collected by Dr. Pringle in the hill districts has been remarkably active, and an excellent vesicle has been maintained up to the close of the vaccine season. As usual, applications have been received from numbers of medical officers over the North-Western and Central Provinces for supplies of lymph. These have been at once forwarded, and, as a rule, have been most favourably reported upon. 18. It is customary in the annual Report to mention the names of such Native gen- tlemen as have specially interested themselves in the cause of vaccination. It might be well to contrast with these such as have failed to take any interest in, or have even opposed, a measure which they know Government is endeavouring at great expense to induce its subjects to accept. In the town of Moozuffernuggur, the Secretary to the Committee, Nihal Chund, gave every assistance, and, as an example to others, had his own child vaccinated. In Jansutt, Honorary Magistrate Syed Mahomed Ali Khan had his own family vaccinated, and used his influence in his villages to persuade the peo- ple to follow his example. Ahmed Khan and Hussan Khan, members of the munici- pal commitee, Khoorjah ; Cazee Hisamûdin, member of the municipal committee, Secun- drabad ; Chunee Lall and Brij Lall, members of the Boolundshuhur municipal commit- tee, devoted much of their time to assisting the vaccinators. In the town of Jowalla- pore, in the Saharunpore district, Kifayut Oolah Khan, Superintendent of Choongee, did everything he could to help on vaccination. In contrast with the above, I might mention the names of Gowri Mull, a member of the municipal committee of Deobund, who shut his door in my face when I went to his house, and curtly declared from an upper window that he wished to have nothing to do with vaccination; and of Honorary
( 41 ) Magistrate Luchman Suroop, of Secundrabad, who, if he did not openly oppose vaccin- ation, certainly did nothing to aid its progress. From the Members of the Municipal Committee at Meerut, either individually or as a body, no assistance was received. Many other instances of lukewarmness or opposition occur to me; but as the mention of these is a somewhat new feature in a report, those given may suffice. 19. Some of the Civil Surgeons have taken much trouble to test the accuracy of the vaccine returns and to aid the municipal vaccinators. Amongst these I may men- tion Dr. Cleghorn at Etawah, Dr. Jackson at Allygurh, Dr. Ellis at Etah, and Dr. MacLean at Dehra. 20. I must not omit a good word for my writer. The amount of office work within the past three years has doubled, but his pay has remained the same. He is expected to possess a competent knowledge of English, Oordoo, and Nagree, to live in camp for nine months in the year, and to work generally from morning until night, for Rs. 25 per month. If his pay were raised to Rs. 40, I do not think the increase would be out of proportion to the increased work he has now to perform. I have, &c., J. RICHARDSON, SURGEON, Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination, Agra and Meerut Circles.
( 42 ) A.( 43 ) MAON AND ROHILKHUND CIRCLES. the Kumaon and Rohilkhund Circles, during the year 1872-73. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases, exclud- ing those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vacci- nated by each Vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Christian. Mahomedan. Hindoo. Other caste. Under 1 year. Above year. Successful. including those doubtful. Unknown. In primary. In secondary. 11 36 11,664 2,400 3,963 10,148 12,995 622 494 14,111 1,194 736 228 2,158 95.43 61.86 387.28 8 51 12,579 1,523 4,524 9,637 11,921 1,405 835 14,161 2,195 3,289 522 6,006 89.45 40.02 480.14 ... 692 485 616 403 1,390 1,549 140 104 1,793 249 296 31 576 91.11 45.68 236.8 ... 207 252 406 157 708 712 58 95 865 62 73 19 154 92.47 45.92 169.83 ... 333 200 197 117 613 679 48 13 730 189 46 10 245 93.30 80.42 195 2 4 1,250 418 205 1,469 1,535 91 48 1,674 52 51 7 110 94.40 50.48 297.33 ... 16 1,360 152 188 1,340 1,348 146 34 1,528 76 102 2 180 90.22 42.69 234.67 ... 100 3,363 1,314 1,627 3,150 4,110 342 325 4,777 352 1,203 216 1,771 9.232 22.63 436.4 4 1,258 363 1,663 684 2,604 2,863 204 221 3,288 293 191 103 587 93.24 60.53 258.2 25 2,697 31,516 8,689 11,868 31,059 37,702 3,056 2,169 42,927 4,662 5,987 1,138 11,787 92.50 43.77 379.83 ... 202 46 918 371 795 948 89 129 1,166 3 4 2 9 91.42 42.85 235. ... 200 87 1,120 59 1,348 777 313 317 1,407 6 1 ... 7 65.29 71.44 232.8 ... 245 67 1,845 350 1,807 1,954 142 61 2,157 ... ... ... ... 93.22 ... 431 ... 125 74 1,508 434 1,273 1,296 159 252 1,707 7 2 2 11 89.07 77.77 343.6 ... 335 237 1,607 362 1,817 1,867 202 110 2,179 ... 9 1 10 90.23 ... 437.8 ... 511 61 1,639 95 2,116 1,847 228 136 2,211 13 3 1 17 89.01 81.25 445.6 ... 183 57 962 635 567 969 194 39 1,202 ... ... ... ... 83.31 ... 240.4 ... 166 559 675 292 1,108 1,100 205 95 1,400 17 8 9 34 84.29 68.00 286.8 1 231 166 623 552 469 662 122 237 1,021 70 17 21 108 84.43 80.45 81 1 176 70 822 71 998 882 82 105 1,069 35 28 16 79 91.49 55.55 229.6 ... 77 50 544 141 530 500 95 76 671 6 5 4 15 84.03 54.54 137.2 25 160 39 353 247 330 505 43 29 577 15 31 3 49 92.14 32.60 125.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 2,611 1,513 12,616 3,609 13,158 13,307 1,874 1,586 16,767 172 108 59 339 94.47 61.42 244.57 ... 249 112 1,529 757 1,133 1,529 217 144 1,890 7 24 6 37 87.56 22.58 385.4 ... 157 532 1,520 286 1,923 1,832 188 189 2,209 6 34 4 44 90.69 15.00 450.6 ... 344 118 2,212 875 1,799 2,401 158 115 2,674 107 59 78 244 93.98 64.45 583.6 ... 111 148 1,518 306 1,471 1,540 115 122 1,777 14 16 7 37 93.05 46.06 362.8 ... 182 143 1,715 98 1,942 1,815 151 74 2,040 ... ... ... ... 92.82 ... 408 3 464 33 682 258 924 1,044 74 64 1,182 1 4 5 93.38 20.00 237.4 ... 29 35 1,219 211 1,072 1,074 87 122 1,283 ... 9 ... 9 92.5 ... 258.4 ... 35 1,497 561 971 1,394 84 64 1,532 ... ... ... ... 94.45 ... 306.4 ... 186 25 938 333 816 973 164 12 1,149 10 86 3 99 85.57 10.41 249.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1,722 1,181 12,30 3,680 12,051 13,602 1,238 896 15,736 145 232 98 475 91.65 38.72 360.24
( 44 ) A.( 45 ) MAON AND ROHILKHUND CIRCLES. the Kumaon and Rohilkhund Circles, during the year 1872-73.( 46 ) A.( 47 ) A.( 48 ) A.( 49 ) DEPARTMENT. the Agra and Meerut Circles during the year 1872-73. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases including those unknown. Average number of Persons vaccinated by each vaccina- tor per mensem. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Castes. Age. Results. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Other Castes. Under 1 year. Above 10 years. Successful. Unsuccessful, excluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary vac- cination. In Secondary vaccination. 34 1,361 342 1,488 731 2,494 2,921 192 112 3,225 ... 5 ... 5 939 ... 538.3 7 766 25 535 263 1,070 1,200 86 47 1,333 ... 3 ... 3 93.4 ... 222.6 ... 2,820 6 732 237 3,321 3,059 184 315 3,558 4 1 1 6 94.4 80.0 324.0 41 565 179 315 422 678 847 170 83 1,100 30 21 6 57 83.5 58.9 96.4 82 5,512 552 3,070 1,653 7,563 8,027 632 557 9,216 34 30 7 71 92.8 53.2 295.3 ... 258 1,234 3,866 1,140 4,218 4,744 422 192 5,398 ... ... ... ... 91.9 ... 535.8 ... 245 574 2,238 609 2,548 2,593 336 228 3,157 ... 1 ... 1 88.6 ... 315.7 12 114 791 1,843 768 1,992 2,260 293 207 2,760 ... ... ... ... 88.6 ... 276.0 ... 166 671 1,545 921 1,461 1,559 706 117 2,382 ... ... ... ... 68.9 ... 238.2 4 118 889 499 484 1,030 1,409 84 17 1,510 ... ... ... ... 94.4 ... 302.0 ... 168 471 588 470 757 855 346 26 1,227 ... ... ... 71.2 ... 245.4 ... 177 315 782 245 1,029 1,027 176 71 1,274 7 10 4 21 85.4 41.2 259.0 ... 100 628 568 341 955 1,157 83 56 1,296 ... ... ... ... 93.4 ... 259.2 ... 160 463 730 349 1,004 1,130 167 56 1,353 5 1 ... 6 87.2 83.4 271.8 ... 125 411 474 266 744 736 193 81 1,010 ... ... ... ... 79.3 ... 202.2 ... 109 252 565 205 721 654 133 139 926 1 ... ... 1 83.2 100.0 185.4 ... 73 175 773 311 710 737 233 51 1,021 ... ... ... ... 76.0 ... 204.2 ... 117 372 425 61 853 634 157 123 914 ... ... ... ... 80.2 ... 182.3 16 1,930 7,246 14,996 6,166 1,822 19,495 3,329 1,364 24,188 13 12 4 29 85.5 52.0 284.8 ... 382 348 1,240 654 1,316 1,373 343 254 1,970 3 3 1 7 80.1 50.0 394.0 ... 409 747 1,001 764 1,393 1,835 230 92 2,157 8 1 1 10 88.6 88.9 434.4 ... 107 235 306 282 366 449 148 51 648 ... ... 1 1 75.3 ... 129.8 ... 107 457 665 685 544 1,054 94 81 1,229 6 2 2 10 91.9 75.0 227.8 ... 216 250 576 314 728 872 59 111 1,042 52 35 49 136 93.7 59.8 235.6 ... 142 200 257 59 540 478 53 68 599 1 ... 2 3 90.1 100.0 120.4 ... 12 135 163 139 171 150 98 62 310 ... 2 ... 2 60.5 ... 62.4 ... 305 149 346 257 543 640 77 83 800 ... ... ... ... 89.3 ... 160.0 ... 76 433 290 345 454 611 140 48 799 ... ... ... ... 81.4 ... 159.8 ... 1,756 2,954 4,844 3,491 6,055 7,462 1,242 850 9,554 70 43 56 169 85.8 62.0 216.0 12 169 613 2,341 673 2,462 2,721 160 254 3,135 8 1 ... 9 94.5 88.9 313.5 ... 55 245 1,107 157 1,250 1,230 51 126 l,407 ... ... ... ... 96.1 ... 140.7 ... 64 137 1,547 307 1,441 1,453 79 216 1,748 ... ... ... ... 94.9 ... 174.8 ... 212 300 1,282 332 1,462 1,464 145 185 1,794 ... ... ... ... 91.0 ... 179.4 23 80 102 1,577 230 1,552 1,544 65 173 1,782 ... ... ... ... 95.6 ... 178.2 ... 101 320 1,643 579 1,485 1,797 133 134 2,064 ... ... ... ... 93.2 ... 193.0 2 137 644 673 411 1,045 1,308 45 103 1,456 3 ... ... 3 96.7 100.0 135.3 ... 156 129 209 20 474 357 85 52 494 ... ... ... ... 80.2 ... 98.8 ... 215 129 237 83 500 441 18 124 583 ... ... ... ... 96.1 ... 116.6 15 78 96 552 105 636 601 71 69 741 ... ... ... ... 89.5 ... 148.2 ... 80 114 158 100 252 298 35 19 352 ... ... ... ... 89.5 ... 70.4 54 1,347 2,829 11,326 2,997 12,559 13,214 887 1,455 15,556 11 1 ... 12 93.8 91.7 172.5 ... 228 162 1,340 39l 1,339 l,219 292 219 1,730 1 3 ... 4 80.7 25.0 346.0 ... 170 313 1,120 128 1,475 1,258 216 129 1,603 ... ... ... ... 92.7 ... 320.6 ... 111 60 1,272 827 616 1,308 71 64 1,443 ... ... ... ... 94.9 ... 288.8 ... 313 110 999 393 1,029 1,164 92 165 1,422 ... ... ... ... 92.7 ... 284.4 4 212 513 764 389 1,104 1,184 188 121 1,493 ... 3 ... 3 86.3 ... 299.2 ... 371 280 823 115 1,359 1,085 223 166 1,474 ... ... ... ... 83.7 ... 294.8 ... 119 406 716 234 1,007 877 118 246 1,241 ... ... ... ... 88.2 ... 248.2 ... 299 734 748 377 1,404 1,331 265 185 1,781 ... ... ... ... 83.4 ... 356.2 4 1,813 2,588 7,782 2,854 9,333 9,426 1,465 1,296 12,187 1 6 ... 7 86.7 14.3 304.8 8 287 145 1,259 505 1,194 1,383 222 94 1,699 3 ... ... 3 86.2 100.0 339.8 ... 138 279 1,148 666 899 1,449 51 65 1,565 1 1 1 3 96.6 50.0 313.6 ... 291 62 654 382 625 845 92 70 1,007 4 1 1 6 90.2 80.0 202.6 1 280 72 735 541 547 862 185 41 1,088 2 1 ... 3 82.4 66.7 218.2 ... 266 51 920 476 761 1,001 170 66 1,237 ... ... ... ... 85.5 ... 247.4 ... 126 55 779 294 666 790 82 88 960 3 2 1 6 90.6 60.0 193.2 14 227 209 1,049 375 1,124 1,227 162 110 1,499 82 4 2 88 88.4 95.4 158.2 ... 347 162 1,496 1,044 961 1,886 80 39 2,005 ... ... ... ... 96.0 ... 200.5 ... 88 69 708 261 604 672 104 89 865 3 1 1 5 86.6 75.0 174.0 ... 211 79 824 540 574 1,073 35 6 1,114 ... ... ... ... 96.9 ... 222.8 ... 87 112 699 375 523 751 83 64 898 ... ... ... ... 90.1 ... 179.6 23 2,348 1,295 10,271 5,459 8,478 11,939 1,266 732 13,937 98 10 6 114 90.5 90.8 216.5 97 9,636 8,456 35,272 13,936 39,525 44,545 5,140 3,776 53,461 43 25 9 77 89.7 78.0 289 82 3,645 5,540 11,840 6,046 15,061 17,229 2,288 1,590 21,107 125 39 13 177 88.8 76.3 202 ... 1,435 3,468 5,167 2,647 7,423 7,799 1,393 878 10,070 59 38 51 148 84.0 60.9 158 179 14,706 17,464 52,289 22,628 62,010 69,563 8,821 6,254 84,638 227 102 73 402 88.8 69.0 246 v 13
( 50 ) A.( 51 ) DEPARTMENT. Agra and Meerut Circles, during the year 1872-73.( 52 ) A.( 53 ) A.( 54 ) A.( 55 ) DEPARTMENT. Circles of Superintendence on the North-West Provinces during the year 1872-73. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases including those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Christian. Mussulman. Hindoo. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. In Primary vaccina- tion. Secondary vaccina- tion. ... 523 91 166 22 758 565 141 74 780 18 31 20 69 80 36 169 ... 256 280 476 16 996 843 166 3 1,012 ... ... ... ... 83 ... 202 ... 111 574 1,191 76 1,800 1,473 350 53 1,876 1 ... ... 1 80 100 375 ... 323 100 505 217 711 793 95 40 928 35 29 21 85 89 54 200 3 376 43 229 30 621 405 130 116 651 3 3 1 7 75 50 131 16 203 150 237 23 583 460 108 38 606 10 12 6 28 80 45 126 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 1,792 1,238 2,804 384 5,469 4,539 990 324 5,853 67 75 48 190 80.1 47.5 200.5 13 218 19 155 102 303 334 40 31 405 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 81 ... 216 30 147 74 319 233 119 41 393 3 6 ... 9 66 33 80 185 38 342 200 365 433 96 36 665 7 2 ... 9 81 77 114 ... 339 43 389 208 563 480 183 108 771 9 13 2 24 72 40 159 ... 141 8 232 97 284 263 47 71 381 6 8 3 17 84 42 79 ... 1 17 278 82 214 186 91 19 296 4 ... ... 4 67 100 60 ... 18 15 181 13 201 118 61 35 214 4 ... ... 4 65 100 43 ... 54 101 673 55 773 478 227 123 828 ... ... ... ... 67 ... 165 2 48 87 140 108 169 173 62 42 277 ... ... ... ... 73 ... 55 191 277 234 542 295 949 1,042 108 94 1,244 59 20 6 85 90 75 102 206 1,497 592 3,079 1,234 4,140 3,740 1,034 600 5,374 92 49 11 152 75.4 46.7 93.8 ... 225 83 1,258 165 1,401 1,274 172 120 1,566 3 1 1 5 87 75 314 ... 120 98 848 112 954 643 196 227 1,066 ... ... ... ... 76 ... 213 ... 97 38 444 142 437 331 144 104 579 ... ... ... ... 66 ... 115 ... 115 28 781 237 687 601 179 144 924 ... ... ... ... 77 ... 184 ... 60 110 786 213 743 600 190 166 956 ... ... ... ... 75 ... 191 ... 86 64 1,013 152 1,011 580 263 320 1,163 ... ... ... ... 68 ... 232 1 185 25 252 231 232 285 115 63 463 ... ... ... ... 71 ... 92 ... 69 16 389 91 376 247 97 130 474 ... ... ... ... 71 ... 94 1 957 462 5,771 1,350 5,841 4,561 1,356 1,274 7,191 3 1 1 5 74.2 9.3 179.3 ... 224 278 1,939 431 2,010 2,143 203 95 2,441 45 50 ... 95 91 47 248 ... 98 419 1,869 484 1,902 1,885 270 231 2,386 ... ... ... ... 87 ... 238 ... 186 353 2,054 629 1,964 2,062 394 137 2,593 ... ... ... ... 83 ... 259 ... 209 309 1,851 237 2,132 1,864 312 193 2,369 ... ... ... ... 85 ... 236 ... 223 226 1,975 334 2,090 1,944 229 251 2,424 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 242 3 120 284 1,647 243 1,811 1,636 249 169 2,054 ... ... ... ... 86 ... 205 2 114 582 2,290 668 2,320 2,522 223 243 2,988 ... ... ... ... 92 ... 298 ... 69 145 967 247 934 963 103 115 1,181 ... ... ... ... 90 ... 118 4 88 163 1,858 260 1,853 1,705 233 175 2,113 1 3 ... 4 87 25 211 55 379 59 853 664 682 1,065 116 165 1,346 125 100 ... 225 90 55 314 98 254 79 645 418 658 884 129 63 1,076 971 162 ... 1,133 87 85 440 162 1,964 2,897 17,948 4,615 18,356 18,673 2,461 1,837 22,971 1,142 315 ... 1,457 80.6 19.2 255.3 ... 39 90 565 263 431 580 70 44 694 ... ... ... ... 89 138 ... 63 117 666 216 630 568 141 137 846 4 2 2 8 80 66 170 ... 30 36 471 132 405 275 152 110 537 27 24 25 76 64 52 122 ... 20 27 282 184 145 194 82 53 329 ... 6 2 8 70 ... 67 ... 39 63 304 56 343 208 96 95 399 ... 1 ... 1 68 ... 80 ... 48 13 481 138 404 281 151 110 542 1 1 ... 2 75 50 108 ... 11 42 720 368 405 638 87 48 773 ... ... ... ... 88 ... 154 ... 32 101 742 166 709 611 123 141 875 5 ... ... 5 83 100 176 19 117 37 333 334 172 348 111 47 506 80 43 19 142 75 69 129 19 392 526 4,564 1,857 3,644 3,703 1,013 785 5,501 117 77 48 242 75.7 37.4 127
( 56 ) A.( 57 ) DEPARTMENT. Circles of Superintendence on the North-Western Provinces during the year 1872-73. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases including those unknown from the total. Avernge number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. CASTE AGE. RESULT. Christian. Mussulman. Hindoo. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. In primary vaccina- tion. Secondary vaccina- tion. 2 35 65 756 309 549 584 185 89 858 30 2 ... 32 75 93 178 ... 51 52 446 261 288 278 195 76 549 ... 1 ... 1 58 ... 110 ... 39 56 466 231 326 402 96 63 561 ... ... ... ... 80 ... 112 ... 43 47 518 172 436 574 28 6 608 ... ... ... ... 95 ... 121 ... 28 91 633 53 599 349 162 141 652 ... ... ... 68 ... 130 ... 33 139 435 159 448 388 100 119 607 1 ... ... 1 79 100 121 ... 28 144 764 334 602 686 149 101 936 1 1 ... 2 82 50 187 ... 99 83 724 579 327 795 86 25 906 2 ... ... 2 90 100 181 ... 73 74 736 280 603 560 228 95 883 ... ... ... ... 71 ... 176 ... 36 75 479 173 417 503 61 26 590 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 118 ... 315 89 695 119 980 774 181 144 1,099 ... ... ... ... 81 ... 219 ... 75 149 521 203 542 467 173 105 745 2 1 1 5 72 50 150 2 855 1,064 7,073 2,877 6,117 6,360 1,644 990 8,994 36 6 1 43 78.3 32.7 150.2 ... 31 68 287 121 265 267 48 71 386 18 9 15 42 82 66 85 ... 87 101 891 385 694 784 141 154 1,079 ... ... ... ... 84 ... 215 ... 74 109 750 93 840 647 189 97 933 ... ... ... ... 77 ... 186 ... 15 149 567 183 548 519 148 64 731 29 37 15 81 77 43 162 ... 27 78 887 444 548 837 75 80 992 6 ... 2 8 91 100 200 4 35 14 170 91 132 143 58 22 223 5 3 1 9 71 62 46 ... 193 34 397 68 556 386 179 59 624 ... ... ... ... 70 ... 124 ... 52 120 258 210 220 334 57 39 430 ... ... ... ... 71 ... 86 ... 2 62 196 72 208 214 44 22 280 2 1 ... 3 82 66 56 ... 11 23 222 16 240 213 35 8 256 16 5 7 28 85 76 56 2 5 34 158 49 150 181 17 1 199 18 2 1 21 91 90 44 6 532 812 4,783 1,732 4,401 4,525 991 617 6,133 94 57 41 192 80.0 45.7 123.6 3 69 97 1,008 260 917 580 255 342 1,177 13 7 31 51 69 65 122 ... 45 76 589 96 614 405 114 191 710 12 12 33 57 78 50 153 ... 30 96 482 259 349 489 53 66 608 ... ... ... ... 90 ... 121 ... 25 41 479 156 389 207 177 161 545 ... 1 ... 1 53 ... 109 ... 49 99 659 257 550 488 135 184 807 2 16 10 28 78 11 167 3 218 409 3,217 1,028 2,819 2,169 734 944 3,847 27 36 74 137 73.6 25.2 434.4 ... 17 72 1,382 749 722 1,318 151 2 1,471 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 294 1 16 155 563 171 564 526 153 56 735 1 ... ... 1 77 100 147 ... 2 58 375 393 42 388 21 26 435 2 ... ... 2 95 100 87 1 35 285 2,320 1,313 1,328 2,232 325 85 2,641 3 ... ... 3 87 66.6 176 419 8,242 8,285 51,559 16,390 52,115 50,502 10,548 7,455 68,505 1,581 616 224 2,421 82 71 163 W. WATSON, SURGEON, Supdt. of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Divisions.
( 58 ) A.( 59 ) A.( 60 ) A.( 61 ) DEPARTMENT. the Benares Circle during the years 1872-73. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. REVACCINATION. Percentage of suc- cessful cases, ex- cluding those un- known. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator per mensem. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Results. Male. Female. Christian. Musulman. Hindoo. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. unsuccessful, includ- ing those of doubt- ful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. In Primary Vaccin- ation. In Secondary Vaccin- ation. 884 619 ... 303 754 446 86 1,417 1,152 222 129 1,503 ... ... ... ... 83.8 ... 150.3 358 395 ... 112 453 186 54 697 592 118 41 751 ... ... ... ... 83.3 ... 150.2 848 629 18 595 540 324 87 1,390 1,128 240 109 1,477 6 3 ... 9 82.4 66.6 148.6 1,139 448 13 565 453 556 74 1,513 1,123 312 152 1,587 ... ... ... ... 78.2 ... 158.7 494 268 9 164 348 261 50 732 504 155 123 782 2 5 ... 7 76.4 28.5 157.3 140 85 ... 12 46 167 43 182 132 76 17 225 ... ... ... ... 63.4 ... 75. 3,861 2,464 40 1,751 2,594 1,940 394 5,931 4,631 1,123 571 6,325 8 8 ... 16 80.4 50.0 140.1 518 301 10 188 90 531 59 760 651 72 96 819 4 ... 1 5 90.0 100. 82.4 1,756 1,827 ... 137 329 3,117 363 3,220 3,161 218 204 3,583 10 5 ... 15 93.5 66.6 367 145 153 2 80 13 203 31 267 212 26 60 298 ... ... ... ... 89.0 ... 59. 463 218 12 208 93 363 53 628 556 53 72 681 9 2 ... 11 91.2 81.8 69.2 92 130 ... 144 46 33 18 204 185 13 24 222 3 2 ... 5 93.4 60. 113.5 71 44 ... 22 31 62 3 112 99 6 10 115 ... ... ... ... 94.2 ... 57.5 445 434 ... 791 29 59 20 859 761 52 66 879 .. .. ... ... 93.6 ... 293. 3,490 3,107 24 1,570 630 4,373 547 6,050 5,625 440 532 6,597 26 9 1 36 92.7 74.2 148.4 749 575 ... 82 425 817 61 1,263 1,073 194 57 1,324 12 7 ... 19 84.7 63.1 133.3 300 333 ... 159 87 387 14 619 583 35 15 633 10 1 ... 11 94.3 90.9 128.8 599 664 ... 716 230 317 116 1,147 1,071 192 ... 1,263 ... ... ... ... 84.7 ... 252.6 560 447 ... 122 105 780 132 875 971 18 18 1,007 ... ... ... ... 98.0 ... 201.4 813 793 ... 338 39 1,229 391 1,215 1,431 127 48 1,606 ... ... ... ... 91.8 ... 321.2 779 676 ... 1,011 61 383 120 1,335 1,350 56 49 1,455 ... ... ... ... 96.0 ... 291 290 214 23 278 87 116 36 468 399 63 42 504 29 14 63 106 86.4 67.4 122 425 359 ... 143 214 427 44 740 644 103 37 784 107 50 7 164 84.8 68.1 316 456 485 ... 384 118 439 66 875 829 111 1 941 ... ... ... ... 88.1 ... 188.2 293 225 ... 29 52 437 40 478 493 12 13 518 ... ... ... ... 97.6 ... 172 2,557 1,912 29 1,058 690 2,692 361 4,108 3,896 318 255 4,469 608 103 85 896 92.4 74.9 89.4 7,821 6,686 52 4,320 2,108 8,024 1,381 13,123 2,740 1,229 535 14,504 766 175 155 1,096 91.2 81.4 201.8 1,259 1,141 ... 269 541 1,590 543 1,857 2,115 156 129 2,400 49 ... ... 49 93.1 100. 244.9 320 286 ... 146 154 306 114 492 488 69 49 606 ... ... ... ... 87.6 ... 121.2 509 449 ... 264 202 492 251 707 754 119 85 958 ... ... ... ... 86.3 ... 191.6 253 173 ... 92 56 278 21 405 296 52 78 426 ... ... ... ... 85.0 ... 85.2 675 622 ... 373 138 786 261 1,036 1,042 108 147 1,297 ... ... ... 7 90.6 100. 260.8 841 787 ... 975 178 475 52 1,576 1,431 83 114 1,628 1 ... ... 1 94.5 100. 325.8 542 276 10 114 86 608 191 627 708 51 59 818 ... ... ... ... 83.2 ... 163.6 139 102 ... 108 86 47 36 205 196 35 10 241 3 5 ... 8 84.8 37.5 49.8 4,538 3,836 10 2,341 1,441 4,582 1,469 6,905 7,030 673 671 8,374 60 5 ... 65 91.2 92.3 187 1,236 752 1 494 157 1,336 214 1,774 1,252 431 305 l,988 7 5 1 13 74.3 58.3 100.2 1.210 1,016 ... 386 286 1,554 152 2,074 1,806 179 241 2,22t ... ... ... ... 90.9 ... 148.4 606 374 ... 155 101 724 59 921 705 101 174 980 2 ... ... 2 87.4 100. 98.2 900 692 ... 104 320 1,169 39 1,554 983 296 314 1,593 ... ... ... ... 76.8 ... 159. 445 656 ... 139 110 852 3 1,098 707 269 125 1,101 ... ... ... ... 65.7 ... 110. 825 769 ... 221 302 1,071 18 1,576 1,359 166 69 1,594 ... ... ... ... 89.1 ... 155.4 648 288 35 358 137 406 62 874 685 157 94 936 1 1 ... 2 81.3 50. 93.8 5,870 4,548 36 1,857 1,413 7,112 547 9,871 7,497 1,599 1,322 10,418 10 6 1 17 82.5 62.5 122. 779 518 ... 155 87 l,055 90 1,207 984 177 136 1,297 ... ... ... ... 84.7 ... 129.7 157 356 ... 61 62 390 24 489 466 36 11 513 ... ... ... ... 92.8 ... 102.6 370 326 ... 283 82 331 11 685 443 157 96 696 ... ... ... ... 73.8 ... 139.2 567 377 ... 126 457 361 28 916 707 134 103 944 ... ... ... ... 84.1 ... 188.8 431 365 ... 153 122 521 32 763 522 97 171 796 ... ... ... ... 84.3 ... 159.2 66 3 ... ... 6 91 ... 97 50 39 8 97 ... ... ... ... 56.1 ... 97. 2,370 1,973 ... 778 816 2,749 186 4,157 3,172 640 531 4,343 ... ... ... ... 83.5 ... 152.6 27,950 22,611 162 12,617 9,002 28,780 4,524 46,037 40,695 5,704 4,162 50,561 870 203 157 1,230 87.7 81.9 167.6 JOHN MACGREGOR. Offg. Superintendent of Vaccine, Benares Division. v 16
(62 ) A.VACCINATION IN THE BUNDELCUND NATIVE STATES, 1872-73. No. 509. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General, Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces, To C. A. ELLIOTT, ESQUIRE, Secretary to Government, N.- W. Provinces. DATED ALMORAH, THE 1ST JUNE, 1873. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward Dr. Watson's Annual Report on Vaccination in the Bundelchund States for 1872-73. 2. The amount of work done by each vaccinator is small in amount, being only 69 per mensem; but the quality is satisfactory, showing 84 per cent. successful. The increase in the number of Native Superintendents (from 3 to 9) is a step in the right direction. I trust that the rajahs may be induced in time to follow the system in vogue in these Provinces, for until that is done, vaccination can never be brought within the reach of the poor. I have, &c., F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General, Vaceination, N.-W. Provines. No. 61, Camp, Almorah, 18th May, 1873. From WILLIAM WATSON, ESQ., M.B., Supdt. of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Division. To ( 64 ) In fact, to borrow an illustration from England: the North-Western Provinces Government vaccinators correspond with the public vaccinators of London, and other large towns, while the Bundelcund vaccinators correspond with the private medical practitioners of England, who vaccinate their own patients. The whole establishment is, in a general way, superintended by the Superintend- ent of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Division. This circle of the North-Western Provinces borders on the territories of the princes of independent Bundelcund ; many of the states are surrounded by country belonging to the North-Western Provinces while the European Superintendent of Allahabad and Jhansie is inspecting the Zillahs of Lullutpore, Jhansie, and Humeerpore he requires to pass through portions of the territories of almost all the Native princes, so that he can inspect the vaccination done there without any additional trouble. This year, from unavoidable causes, I have been detained in the eatern, or Alla- habad part of my circle, and have not been able to visit the Zillahs of Jhansie and Lullutpore; nor have I been able to see any of the Native states, except the small one of Jignee. Fortunately for the interests of vaccination, General Daly, the Governor-General's Agent for Central India, made a tour this year through the Bundelcund States, and Dr. Harvey, who some years ago introduced vaccination into the Native States of Bhurtpore and Ulwur, was the officer in medical charge of his camp. Both General Daly and Dr. Harvey took the greatest interest in the Bundelcund vaccination, and Dr. Harvey wrote me an account of what he saw during the tour. The following passages are extracted from Dr. Harvey's letters to me :( 65 ) to take a more active interest in the work, while the number of vaccinations among the upper classes of the people will give confidence to the masses. The Native Superintend- ent, Rujjab Ali Khan, is a capital man, enthusiastic about his work, and very clever in pushing it. He seems to be on excellent terms with the authorities in all the states, and shows great tact and good sense in the way he deals with them.&quot; The extracts given above are taken from three letters of Dr. Harvey, written re- spectively on the 24th January, the 6th February, and the 26th February. In con- clusion, I have only to mention that I hope to be able to inspect all the Bundelcund States in the course of the ensuing vaccine season. Next year I will commence my tour in the Allahabad and Jhansie Circle by inspecting the Zillahs of Oraie, Jhansie, and Lul- lutpore, taking at the same time the Independent States, and leaving the Allahabad Division of my circle till the end of the season. I have no particular recommendations to make, as I believe that the present vaccine arrangements are most efficient. They were organized entirely by the Political Agent, Dr. Stratton. The expense to the various states is very small, and considering the expenditure, the work done is very satisfactory, with the solitary exception of the work done in the States of Ajighur and Jignee. I have, &c., W. WATSON, M. B., Supdt. of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Division, and Independent States of Bundelcund. v 17
( 66 ) A.ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT. No. 2192A. OF 1873. FROM THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, TO THE SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. DATED NYNEE TAL, THE 9TH SEPTEMBER, 1873. SIR, GENERAL. DEPARTMENT. I AM directed to acknowledge the receipt of your report on the operations of the Vaccination Department in the North-Western Provinces during the year 1872-73. The report, although dated 29th April, 1873, was not received in this office from the Press until the 24th June. 2. The year has been one of considerable progress. The number of persons vaccinated was 4,14,416 against 3,22,887 in 1871-72. This increase of 91,529, or 28 per cent., has been attained by a very large in- crease in the staff of operators. The proportion of successful cases to all operations, excluding those in which the result was unknown, was 87.03 against 87 8, which is a slight falling off; but in primary operations alone the proportion is 88.7 against 88.4 last year. The number of vaccinators of all classes has increased by 90, being now 362; but it was not to be expected that the amount of work done would increase at first in the same proportion. Accordingly, the average num- ber of operations performed by each vaccinator during the vaccine sea- son fell from 1,187, or 237.4, per mensem to 1,144 or 229 per mensem. As however the increase of establishment was chiefly in the lower ranks, the cost of each successful case fell from five annas to four annas six pie. 3. The subjoined table shows the numbers and results of primary and secondary operations in the different circles:( 2 ) Compared with the great increase in the number of primary operations, which were slightly more successful than last year, the increase in the re-vaccinations, accompanied with a very much lower percentage of success, is remarkable. Operations of this class are only common in Kumaon, that being the only Division in which vaccination is of suffi- ciently long standing for the children operated on to have grown up to an age requiring its repetition. But your explanation of the want of suc- cess, and of the fallaciousness (as you term it) of the returns, is not understood. The supervising officers should exercise too stringent a check to allow of the returns being largely falsified, whether this is done intentionally or (as you seem to imply) through ignorance. 4. The following table shows the extent of protection afforded in the different circles, the figures of population being those of the recent census, and secondary operations being excluded :( 3 ) Percentage of vaccinations under one year to 30 per mille of total popu- lation. 1st Circle, Kumaon and Rohilkhund, ... 17.6 2nd do. Agra and Meerut, ... ... 14.0 3rd do. Allahabad and Jhansie, ... 8.5 4th do. Benares, ... ... ... 1.8 For North-Western Provinces, ... 10.3 Taking the birth-rate at 30 per mille of the total population, the number of births during the year in the North Western Provinces would be about 923,064, while the number of infants under 1 year of age vaccinated was 95,528, or 10.3 per cent. on the probable number of births. His Honor will be glad if in your next report you would dwell more on this subject, stat- ing what the age is at which parents are most willing to have their children vaccinated; and what their objection is to having the operation performed at an early age when the protection is most required. In Benares, where the proportion of children vaccinated under one year is smallest, Dr. MacGregor explains that this may be due to the fact that inoculation as a rule is not performed on children under the age of one year. There may be some truth in this, but His Honor doubts if the figures as to age are at all reliable. In Kumaon it is noticed that while three-fourths of the operations of last year were said to be performed on yearling infants, only one-fourth are so returned this year. Violent variations like this must, unless explained, throw doubt on the statistics. 7. You have done well to quote the figures given in Dr. Walker's Jail Report, which, though not exhaustive, are accurate as far as they go ; and probably the Jail population corresponds pretty closely in this respect with the population of the Province at large. Dr. Walker found that 0.95 of his prisoners had been vaccinated; while the return given in para. 4 showed that the proportion to the whole population, even in this year of progress, was only 1.2. Besides them 1.57 had been inoculated and 85.29 per cent, of the prisoners had had small-pox. These figures afford a striking testimony to the terrible scourge which this disease is among the unprotected population. When 85 per cent. of the surviving popu- lation have passed through the ordeal, it may be conceived what multi- tudes must have fallen victims under it. 8. It has already been said that the agency of the Department was considerably increased during the year. The following table shows the details for each circle, the average amount of work performed, and the degree of success effected by the different classes of vaccinators during the year, as compared with the previous year :( 4 ) Division. Clas3 of vaccinators. Number of men. Number of opera- tions per mensem. Percentage of success. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73 Meerut, ... Government, ... ... 26 37 229 289 91 89.6 Municipal, ... 12 21 211 202 88.9 88.8 Local, ... ... 5 11 58 158 81.5 84.5 Local in Tehree, ... 4 4 444 340 92.6 92.1 Agra, ... Government, ... ... 35 35 187 240 90.3 93.0 Municipal, ... ... 13 16 167 177 93.6 93.0 Local, ... ... ... 1 ... 100 ... 90.8 Allahabad, ... Government, ... ... 43 52 182 175 80.8 82.9 Municipal, ... ... 6 7 161 133 82.4 82.6 Local, ... ... 6 14 161 112 81.7 82.2 Jhansie, ... Government, ... ... 12 12 137 162 79.7 79.9 Municipal, ... ... 3 5 83 102 88.1 80.9 Native Chiefs, ... ... 3 3 60 52 73.5 86.1 Benares, ... Government, ... ... 29 36 268 225 87.7 87.8 Municipal, ... ... 6 8 149 113 83.7 78.6 Local, ... ... 2 2 103 86.0 Native Chiefs and landlords, ... 10 ... 110 ... 85.6 Total, ... Government, ... ... 187 225 246 274 88.5 88.2 Municipal, ... ... 60 83 189 157 86.8 87 0 Local, ... ... 25 36 205 172 88.9 85 4 Native Chiefs and landlords, ... 17 ... 110 ... 85 6 The Government vaccinators are well ahead both in the average amount and in the quality of the work performed : this was noticed last year, and is attributable to their superior training. His Honor, however, does not doubt that the Municipal and local vaccinators will soon improve in experience and skill. District. No. of Govern- ment vaccinators. Total number vac- cinated. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73, Moradabad, ... 6 12 11.414 16,618 Bijnour, ... ... 5 10 8,552 14,928 Saharunpore, ... 4 8 6.824 13,658 Meerut, ... 6 12 5,862 11,939 Cawnpore, ... ... 9 18 13,076 20,648 Goruckpore, ... 6 14 8,608 9,497 Total, ... 36 74 54,336 87,288 9. The increase of 38 in the number of Government vaccinators is chiefly due to the correspondence which took place two years ago regard- ing the possibility of providing complete immunity from small-pox in cer- tain localities, so that the people might have before them absolute proof of the benefits of vaccination. It was resolved, as an experiment, to sup- ply certain selected districts with a sufficient number of operators to vac- cinate every child that is born ; and those districts were chosen in which vaccination had previ- ously been most popular and successful, or in which the people showed themselves most ready to co-operate by provid- ing funds for local vac- cinators. The table in the margin shows the re- sults of the year's work. So important a subject should not have been omitted in your report. The results have not altogether come up to expectation ; but in some cases the vaccinators were appointed late in the year, and in most cases they were new to the district, and even to the work. In Saharunpore and Meerut the number of operations kept pace
( 5 ) Tehseel. Number of vac- cinators. Number of oper- ations . 1871. 1872. 1871. 1872. Maharajgunj, ... ... 1 2 1,226 982 Pudrowna, ... ... 1 2 2,290 1,101 with the increase in the operators; in others, the increase was in a smaller proportion. In Goruck- pore alone the result is altogether unsatisfactory, and there it is noticed that in two tehseels the number of vaccinations performed by two men was absolutely less than by one man in the pre- ceding year. 10. The number of Municipal vaccinators has risen from 60 to 84, and there are now only 11 Municipalities which do not either wholly or in part keep up a vaccinator. The importance of this measure has been recognized by these Corporations in a way which deserves the thanks of the Lieutenant-Governor. The work done by the Municipal vaccinators, though good in quality, has been far less in quantity than that of the Government employes. This was remarked on by Government last year, and in your present report you attribute it mainly to two causes :( 6 ) and Benares each support one ; six are supported by private subscrip- tions in Jounpore, and one in Azimgurh ; the Rajah of Tehree keeps up four, the three Jagheerdars of the Jhansie Division one each, the Maha- rajah of Benares four, and other Native gentlemen of that Province sup- port six vaccinators on their estates. Many of these, however, were only entertained towards the close of the year ; and some (as the six at Joun- pore) were so inexperienced, that they were employed only as appren- tices working with the older vaccinators, and no separate record of their work was kept up. Hence the number of operations performed is small, and the percentage of success not high ; but His Honor confidently hopes to see an improvement next year. 13. In your para. 14 you state that you have prohibited the prac- tice of employing &quot; oomeclwars &quot; (or unpaid apprentices), except in special cases. This is contrary to the desire of Government, which is that this class of men should be encouraged and kept up (see para. 12 of the Review of last year's report), and as a matter of fact the prohibition does not seem to be enforced ; at least the Superintendent of the Benares Di- vision states that &quot; oomedwars &quot; are recognized in Ghazeepore, and that the result of their employment will be that this district will eventually have the best vaccinators in the circle. His Honor is doubtful of the wisdom of prohibiting the employment of this class of men, the work done by them being so much gain to the Department, and there being no apparent objection to their employment, provided always that the vaccinators under whom they work are made responsible for them. They should of course be carefully selected and kept well under control, but without some such system it will be hard to fill up the ranks of your vaccinators, and to supply the yearly increasing demand. So with regard to the employment of hakeems or native practitioners, it is our interest to look for good agents amongst this class, for they are as a rule more popular and better received than the regular operators of the Vac- cination Department. 14. These remarks apply in some measure also to the conversion and employment of men practising inoculation. His Honor considers that it is a matter of great importance as far as possible to procure the services of inoculators in the Vaccination Department. The results hitherto have not been encouraging, but efforts should not be relaxed, and it should not be forgotten that every inoculator employed in the Vaccination Department is so much instrumentality withdrawn from spreading the practice of inoculation, and therefore practically a gain to the cause of vaccination. 15. Para. 33.( 7 ) possible for a Superintendent to inspect thoroughly and check the work of every vaccinator, now that the number of these men is so much in- creased. His Honor notices with especial commendation the energy of Dr. Watson, but he only succeeded in visiting every vaccinator in the Allahabad Division, and had to leave the Jhansie Division for next year. 16. Regarding the salaries of the working establishment His Honor, as at present advised, is unable to see that the rates of pay are inadequate ; but in any case, if it is satisfactorily shown that increase is called for, the principle to be followed should be that of giving a small increment to the most deserving vaccinator, after periods (say of 5 years) of approved good service and satisfactory work, But proposals of this nature should be submitted separately from the Annual Report. 17. The action taken by the Magistrate of Cawnpore in orderiug the Tehseeldars of his district to send the vaccinators of their Pergun- nahs into the city of Cawnpore when small-pox broke out there in the month of February, was precipitate and not well judged. It in- jured the district by stopping the work there, and did no corresponding good to the city, as so many men could not be usefully employed. No intimation of this undue exercise of authority on the part of the Magis- trate was given to the Government which hears of it for the first time from this report. The Magistrate will be informed accordingly. 18. It has been observed that four Cantonments keep up vaccina- tors, but there are many that do not; and it is reported that the appoint- ment of a vaccinator for the Cantonments of Meerut and Muttra was negatived by the Military authorities, although recommended by the Superintendent. On this subject His Honor ventures to think that where there is a considerable population massed together within Cantonments, the duty of providing the means of vaccination is incumbent on the Cantonment Committee, and payment for this should be made out of Cantonment Funds. It is even more important in the case of bazars within Cantonments than elsewhere, as the health of the troops is directly endangered by the placing a large unprotected population in close proximity to them. The subject will be brought to the notice of the Military Department. 19. The results reported from the Bundelkhund Native States are encouraging, and the increase in the number of Native Superinten- dents from 3 to 9 is satisfactory. The success of vaccination within Native States so closely intermined with British Territory as are those in Bundelkhund, is an important though indirect benefit to our own districts ; and His Honor desires that the acknowledgments of Government may be communicated to General Daly, Dr. Stratton, and Dr. Harvey for the interest which they displayed. Dr. Watson's report, a copy of which, together with these remarks, will be forwarded to the Foreign Department of the Supreme Government, affords indications of steady and increasing improvement. 20. The closing statement which accompanies your report shows the expenditure of the year to have been Rs. 94,217-11-2 as against Rs. 82,317. last year, but no detailed comparison, of the figures of
( 8 ) the two years is given. In future it will be better, if instead of the separate table for each circle, in which you compare the allotment and expenditure of the year, a combined statement for the whole Department is sent, showing the actuals of the last year, and the allotment and expen- diture of the year reported on, under the several different heads of Superintendent-General, Superintendent, Deputy Superintendent, Native Superintendents, vaccinators, and apprentices. A form is appended, which may be adopted in future. 21. In conclusion, His Honor desires to thank you for your zealous and successful administration of the Department during the year, the importance of which Government is ever forward to recognize. The zealous and successful labors also of the Superintendents have been in every way deserving of praise. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, C. A. ELLIOTT, Secretary to Government, North- Western Provinces, No. 2193A. COPY, with extract para. 5 of Dr. Watson's report, forwarded to the Commissioner of the Allahabad Division, for communication of para. 17 to the Magistrate of Cawnpore.
( 9 ) Appointment. Numbers. Cost. Remarks. 1872-73. 1871-72. Actuals of 1872-73 Allotment of 1873-74. Expeuditure of 1873-74. Paid by Government. Superintendent-General, ... Superintendents, ... ... Deputy ditto, ... ... Native ditto, ... ... Vaccinators, ... Apprentices, ... ... Office Establishment of Superin- tendent-General. Ditto of Superintendent, ... Travelling Allowance, ... Contingencies, ... ... Postage,... ... ... Paid by Municipalities. Vaccinators, ... ... Paid by Local Funds. Vaccinators, ... ... Paid by Native Chiefs. Native Superintendents, ... Vaccinators, ... ...
SEASON OF 1873-74. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELKHUND. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F.PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES' GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1874.
SEASON OF 1873-74. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELKHUND. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F.PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: PRINTED AT THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES' GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1874.
SEASON OF 1873-74. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. No. 789 of 1874. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces, To C. A. ELLIOTT, ESQUIRE, Secretary to Government, N.-W. Provinces. DATED CAMP PAOREE, GURHWAL, THE 15TH MAY, 1874. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit, for the information of His Honor the Lieutenant- Governor, the Returns; of Vaccination in the North-Western Provinces for the year 1873-74. I regret the delay which has arisen, but it was owing to the non-receipt of Dr. Smith's returns, which did not reach me until nearly a month after the date fixed for their submission. 1.( 2 ) Proportion successfully vaccinated amongst children below one year of age as compared with the assumed number of births during the year.( 3 ) Total number vaccinated.( 4 ) Proportion in a hundred of Christians, Mahomedans, high caste Hindoos and low caste Hindoos in population of circle. Christians. Mahomedans. High caste Hindoos, Low caste Hindoos. Remarks. .20 7.57 56.01 36.20 4.( 5 ) was no falsification of returns,( 6 ) Percentage of sex and age in primary cases. Male. Female. Under one year. Over one year. Remarks. 49.87 50.12 30.15 69.84 Percentage of caste in primary cases. Christian. Mahomedans. High-caste Hindoos. Low-caste Hindoos. Remarks. 0.27 14.34 17.89 67.49 Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentage of success in primary cases performed by each class of vaccinator. No. Class of vaccinator. Average monthly number. Monthly percentage of success. Remarks. 72 Government vaccinators, ... 273 80.57 40 Municipal ditto, ... 187 88.67 17 Local ditto, ... 186 77.91 4 Native chiefs' and landlords' ditto, ... 267 92.06 Work in the hills. Proportion in a hundred of Christians, Mahomedans, high-caste Hindoos and low-caste Hindoos in population of circle. Christians. Mahomedans. High-caste Hindoos. Low-caste Hindoos. 0.10 14.83 22.96 62.19 7.( 7 ) doubling of the establishments of those zillahs having been sanctioned from November 1st, 1874. The Shabjehanpore zillah is now the only one in the Rohilkhund Division with a single vaccinator for each tuhseel. I propose that this zillah may be doubled from November 1st, 1875; Rohilkhund will then enjoy two vaccinators to every tuhseel( 8 ) Percentage of caste in primary cases. Christians. Mahome- dous. High-caste Hindoos. Low-caste Hindoos. Remarka. .26 21.87 11.02 66.72 Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentage of success in primary cases performed by each class of vaccinator. No. Class of vaccinator. Average monthly number. Monthly per- centage of success. Remarks 40 Government vaccinators, ... ... 345.54 87.19 23 Municipal ditto, ... ... 196.06 84.80 1 Local vaccinator, ... ... 133.4 88.96 Proportion in a hundred of Christians, Mahomedans, high-caste Hindoos, and low-caste Hindoos in population of circle. Christiana. Mahomedans. High-caste Hindoos. Low-caste Hindoos. Remarks. .042 22.63 14.60 62.71 9. General Remarks on the Agra and Meerut Circle.( 9 ) Etah, Mr. Low of Etawah, Mr. Simson of Agra, Mr. Williams of Moozuffernuggur, and Mr. Ross of Dehra, as examples that might be followed with advantage by their Civilian brethren. The undermentioned European and native gentlemen are mentioned by Dr. Richardson as having been conspicuous in their assistance to the cause of vaci- nation :( 10 ) Percentage of caste in primary cases. Christians. Mahomedans. High-caste Hindoos. Low-caste Hindoos. Remarks. 0.32 12.13 12.89 74.64 Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentage of success in pri- mary cases performed by each class of vaccinator No. Class of vaccinator. Average monthly number. Monthly per- centage of success. Remarks. 64 Government vaccinators, ... 203.8 82.8 14 Municipal ditto, ... 160.9 83.0 14 Local ditto, ... 178.0 80.3 3 Native chief's and landlords' ditto, 82.5 75.6 Proportion in a hundred of Christians, Mahomedans, high-caste Hindoos, and low-caste Hindoos in population of circle. Christians. Mahomedans. High-caste Hindoos. Low-caste Hindoos. Remarks. 0.07 8.66 25.38 65.88 11.(11 ) tion ; for such assistance is not so common that it can afford to be disregarded. The zillahs of Cawnpore, Futtehpore, Humeerpore and Jounpore show a greater readiness to accept vaccination than the other zillahs of the circle; Jhansie occupies the lowest position of all. It is curious to observe the differences prevailing in this respect, and it is often difficult of explanation. Sometimes it is clearly due to the native super- intendent not being a man of tact and energy, but often it arises from the fact of the people not having taken to vaccination by reason of their leading men not showing the way;( 12 ) Percentage of sex and age in primary cases. Male. Female. Under one year. Over one year. Remarks. 56.6 44.3 8.39 91.60 Percentage of caste in primary cases. Christians. Mahomedans. High caste Hindoos. Low caste Hindoos. Remarks. 0.34 25.14 15.65 58.85 Comparative number of all vaccinations per mensem, with percentage of success in primary cases performed by each class of vaccinator. No. Class of vaccinator. Average monthly number. Monthly percentage of success. Remarks, 42 Government vaccinators, ... 201.34 84.84 12 Municipal ditto, ... 133.42 85.27 5 Local ditto, ... 125.19 83.80 10 Native chiefs and landlords ditto, ... 117.42 86.28 Proportion in a hundred of Christians, Mahomedans, high caste Hindoos, and low caste Hindoos in population of circle. Christians. Mahomedans. High caste Hindoos. Low caste Hindoos. Remarks. 0.03 10.88 21.81 67.26 13.( 13 ) 14.( 14 ) effective ; and to do this, it must be properly paid. These and other matters affecting the welfare of the department, and consequently the welfare of the community, will be explained and discussed in person. 16.( 15 ) and that is, that vaccination within cantonments be made compulsory, otherwise we decline to hold ourselves responsible for the issues. The freedom of the citizen need not here be brought forward as a barrier to all good government, for the option will still remain to him of transferring himself to some other locality, where he can revel in his own pustules and fling his contagion about with perfect impartiality. 18. - AGES OF CHILDREN VACCINATED. In para. 6 of the reply from Government to my annual report of last year occurs the following remark : - &quot; In Kumaon it is noticed that ,while three-fourths of the opera- tions of last year were said to be performed on yearling infants, only one-fourth are so returned this year. Violent variations like this must, unless explained, throw doubt on statistics.&quot; The explanation is, that strict orders were issued to all the vaccinators to overhaul all the children of every village visited, and to vaccinate every one not showing clear marks of previous vaccination, the habit evidently having been to enquire mainly after the infants only, assuming too readily that the bigger children had been protected in previous visits. It was owing to my observing that many of the full-grown children had escaped vaccination that this order was issued. It is impossible in each report to explain every item in returns which are measured by the yard, nor is it possible to calculate beforehand what points will be selected for remark. All that I attempt to do is to place before the Government broad general facts and principles, feeling that all honest work will be acknowledged, and that criticism will be more directed to finding out the good that has been done than to the discovery of trivial omissions. Everywhere, in both hills and plains, parents have an objection to giving up their very young infants to be operated upon by the vaccinators; they are full of superstitions as to bringing them outside the house or into the presence of a stranger. These superstitions are not the peculiar possession of black people, for I have known many white persons just as foolish ; they are the common property of all the uneducated of every clime, and are chiefly rampant where the priest most flourishes. There is a strange similarity in the three upper circles as to the number of those under one year of age submitted to the vaccinator, viz., about 25 per cent.. to be explained, I fancy, upon the same law that the same number of letters are posted every year with the addresses wanting. In the Benares Circle there are exceptional causes in operation to account for the extreme paucity of cases of those under one year of age submitted to vaccination. These causes were correctly explained by Dr. Macgregor in his last year's report. 19.( 16 ) season, and can therefore speak from personal experience. The returns show a total vaccinated of 28,454, of whom 23,222 were successful; the average number of opera- tions were only 88 per mensem by each vaccinator, but the average percentage of success is stated to be 86.0. Dr. Watson does not place much reliance upon this latter figure, as the vaccinators are generally untrained, and not therefore sufficiently skilled to pronounce upon this point with any certainty. The Deputy Superintendent, Rujjub Ally Khan, is a man well fitted for his post, and I should be glad to see his pay raised to a point commensurate with his position and worth. Dr. Watson gives all the time he is able to spare from his own circle to the supervision of these States ; and much of the success and progress, which in the face of many adverse circumstances have been considerable, is due to the tact that officer has shown in his correspondence and interviews with the rajahs. 20.( 17 ) No. 71, dated Camp Lobha, Gurhwal, the 30th April, 1874. From( 18 ) day I saw 41 at Kishorgunge, and on the 29th I saw 28 cases at Rajgurh, making a total for the Chutterpore State of 127. I then entered the Punna State, and saw at Mundla nine cases, and at Punna itself 156; making a total for the Punna State of 165 successful cases. In the Ajygurh State I saw 19 cases, but none of them could pro- perly be called successful. On the 26th February I went from Banda to Purai, in the Gowrehar State, to visit the Rajah, and saw 30 successful cases. 7. From the result of my observations, I believe that vaccination is very success- ful in the States of Orcha, Duttia, Punna, Churkaree, Bijawur, Chutterpore, Sumpter and Gowrehar, in fact in all the important States except Ajygurh. In the smaller States it has not hitherto prospered so well. 8. The vaccination in Bundelkhund, as I have mentioned in previous reports, has been entirely organized by the Political Agent, Dr. Stratton. As the final arrangements were not made until last year, it would hardly be fair to expect everything to be in such perfect working order as in districts where vaccination has been known and practised for the last 20 years ; but the arrangements made by the Political Agent are so excel- lent, that I believe that in a very few years the vaccination in the Bundelkhund States will be quite equal in every respect to that performed in British territory. 9. Before concluding this report, I have to bring to your notice the zeal, tact and energy with which the native superintendent, Rujjub Alli Khan, has always dis- charged his duties. I have, &c., W. WATSON, M.D., Supdt. of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Division. Camp Benares, the 13th April, 1874. From( 19 ) A respectable native, if possible a Brahmin, would have much more influence amongst the people of Benares (city) than any European, and he would understand better, if a resident of the city, how to work through the intricate streets and lanes. It would seem to me that some pressure (and it need not be heavy) ought to be brought to bear on all chowkeedars and putwarrees to compel them to have their children vaccinated ; and once this was done, the villagers would soon follow suit. In some districts, Ghazeepore for instance, there seems to be little or no prejudice against vaccination, and I should not be surprised to find in a very few years that the entire population (city excepted) was protected. I supposed at one time that a vaccinator working in his own district would be more likely to succeed, owing.to his knowledge of place and people than a stranger; I supposed, too, that any smart intelligent man might almost at once, and without any great previous training, be made a good vaccinator. My late tour has shown me that I was wrong in both these opinions. The greatest amount of work and the best work has almost invariably been done by old vaccinators from the hills or Rohilkhund. One hill Brahmin at Hatta, in the Goruckpore District, is positively worshipped by the villagers, and he can do exactly as he pleases with them. It would be unfair, however, not to mention that he has received the greatest possible assistance from the tuhseeldar, Lalla Sheosunker Lall. Benares.( 20 ) Here an increase of 1923. Ghazeepore.( 21 ) three males amongst them, he was rather taken aback; but tried to excuse himself by manifest and transparent equivocations. The work in the city was, as usual, inferior in every way to that in the district. At Ghosee I found small-pox prevalent: the vaccinators were in a distant part of the tuhseel, and the inoculators took advantage of their absence to set to work; the result was a bad epidemic of small-pox, and many deaths. I at once ordered the Nugra vaccinator to send over his apprentice, and 1 recalled the vaccinator to Ghosee. On passing through some of the villages where small-pox was prevalent, I was implored to send vaccinators as quickly as possible, and the people were much pleased on hearing that I had already ordered men up. At Nugra, Mahadeo Pershad's work was good: out of 129 cases that I examined, 120 were successful. At Mahomedabad, Gunesh Dutt, a brahmin, had done excellent work. Ram Lall, also a brahmm, showed me the best work I had seen in the division, at Nizamabad. It was no surprise to me to find on enquiry that he was an old vaccinator from Rohil- khund; he formerly lived at Kasheepore, but he has married and settled down at Azim- gurh. He is by far the best man in the district, and deserves reward. The Nugra and Mahomedabad men alone, amongst the others, deserve favourable mention. Goruckpore.( 22 ) nothing but hang in or about Bustee, and did little or no work: both have been dis- missed, and the vaccinator will very probably be tried for extorting money from the people, which he is said to have done by insisting on vaccinating the children unless paid by their parents to let them off. It was quite a relief, after such a scene of laziness and false entries as was exhibited at Bustee, to cross the river into the Captaingunge tuhseel, and inspect the work of Girdharree Singh,( 23 ) 3. Sex of primary cases.( 24 ) 16. General remarks on above, and on all other matters relating to the circle.( 25 ) 2. The total number vaccinated was 159,553, and of these 131,110 were success- ful. Compared with last year, this shows an increase of 4,178 vaccinated, and of 1,317 successful cases. The increase is more than accounted for by the increased number of vaccinators. 3. The number of males and females vaccinated was nearly the same; the latter exceeding the former by only 403. Last year the males were slightly in excess. Although in the total results the approximation of these numbers is close, yet when the large towns are compared with the rural districts, striking differences are manifest. In the municipal towns, the proportions of those vaccinated were 100 males to 89 females. For the country, these proportions were reversed, there being only 95 males for every 100 females. In conjunction with this, it will be seen from the returns that whilst Mahomedans constituted about one-sixth of the whole number vaccinated in municipal towns, they constituted only about one-ninth in the country. This is only what might have been expected from the known tendency of Mahomedans to congregate in towns. Whether the comparatively smaller number of females vaccinated in cities be a consequence of the larger proportion of Mahomedans found in cities as compared with the country, I am unable to say ; but it has struck me that both the higher Hin- doo castes, as well as the Mussulmans, of the cities, are more averse to having their girls brought to be vaccinated than those of the country. It may be that the proportion of the sexes vaccinated in the cities is normal. Such would certainly be the case were the results of the census to be relied upon. From the published returns, the number of males in these provinces'is shown to be largely in excess of the number of females, and this agrees with the proportions of the sexes vaccinated in cities. Similarly, accept- ing the census as correct, the proportion of girls to boys vaccinated in the country would be abnormally great. Amongst the rural population of all the districts, except Dehra Doon and the Tehree State, the number of girls is considerably in excess of the number of boys vaccinated, and in some districts, such as Allygurh and Mynpoory, very greatly so. That the returns are correct can admit of no question ; the nominal, registers are left in each village visited by a vaccinator, and their accuracy can be tested by any one. Next year I shall ascertain from these registers the exact proportion. of the sexes vaccinated according to caste. 4. The percentage according to population of the different castes vaccinated was ( 26 ) 6. The percentage of successful cases in primary vaccinations fell from 90.9 to 88.9, and of secondary vaccinations from 72.1 to 63.4. The latter may be left out of consideration. My own belief is, that in secondary vaccinations a genuine vesicle is even more rarely established than the returns show. If such is not the case, the pri- mary vaccination must have been very indifferent. That there should have been a falling-off in the percentage of successful cases in primary vaccinations is unsatis- factory and disappointing. Apart from the skill of the operators, all the elements of success were present to an unusual extent: the lymph sent from the hills was active and good, the season was specially cool and suitable for vaccine operations, and the number of very young children in greater proportion than last year. The cause of failure is apparent from a glance at the returns : it was plainly the consequence of the sud- den addition to the establishment of a large number of inexperienced vaccinators. Of the 17 local vaccinators, all are comparatively new hands, and the average percent- age of successful operations performed by them out of 15,807 cases, amounted only to 77.8. Excluding these, the percentage of success would be almost the same as for the previous season. Last year, likewise, there was a large proportion of inexperienced men employed in the Seharunpore and Meerut Districts ; but I was able, to a certain extent, by personal superintendence and assistance, to keep their work up to a fair standard of excellence. With one exception, all the local vaccinators belong to the Meerut Division, and as I was for the greater part of this season employed in the inspection of the Agra Division, it was impossible for me directly to influence the quality of their work. Next year, greater experience on the part of the vaccinators, com- bined with the more efficient supervision which the appointment of a deputy superin- tendent will secure, cannot fail to produce an impovement in the quality of the vaccina- tion,( 27 ) of vaccinators has been increased and the number of vaccinated nearly doubled. In the Etah District vaccination is still very backward. The native superintendent is a well-moaning man but wanting in energy, and not held in sufficient awe by his subordinates. It will be necessary to replace him by a more suitable man. On the occasion of my visit to Kassgunge, in November, I was informed by a member of the municipal committee that upwards of 1,100 children had died in that town of small-pox during the preceding season ; yet so little anxious were the people to prevent a recurrence of this fearful mortality by having their families protected by vaccina- tion, that I found the vaccinator scarcely able to get a vesicle established. With the assistance of Mr. Hobart, who kindly accompainied me, I succeeded in giving the vaccinator a good start ; but on my departure from the district the number of opera- tions began to decline, and at the end of the season were for the whole of Etah fewer than last year by upwards of 700. With a more efficient native superintendent, and with the interest which the Magistrate, Mr. Harkness, takes in vaccination, I feel sure next season will show an altered state of things. In the districts of Muttra, Etawah, and Mynpoory, the mortality from small-pox was comparatively low. In all of these vaccination is on a good footing : the numbers operated on are great, and the percent- age of success is high. Without laying too much stress upon this fact, the satisfactory position of vaccination in these three districts, coinciding with diminished small-pox mortality, may be regarded as a hopeful sign. The returns for the first three months of the current year do not show a high rate of mortality from small-pox. In fact, the epidemic just over must have almost exhausted the subjects liable to be attacked, by killing off a portion and protecting the survivors against future attacks. During the present and ensuing two years, the children born will partly be vaccinated, and partly be attacked by small-pox; whilst a third portion, unprotected in either way, will go on accumulating until another epidemic similar to that just experienced sweeps over the country. An examination of the statistics of this disease shows that as it culminates during each season to its maximum during the hottest months, so likewise it recurs with tolerable regularity in a more markedly epidemic form every fourth year. During my tour of inspection I have met with a good many cases of small-pox in the villages in which the vaccinators were at work. This is what might be expected. Finding from experience that when the people get some- what frightened by the deaths which are occuring from this disease they are more open to persuasion, the vaccinators, on hearing of an outbreak in a village within their tuhseels, generally set to work there or in the vicinity. It thus occasionally happens that a child already infected with small-pox contagion is operated upon, and the vaccine vesicle is seen to accompany the small-pox eruption. A good deal is made of such occurrences by the anti-vaccination section of a village. In the Muttra District, near Birsanah, I was informed rather triumphantly by the people of a village, that in spite of my vaccination Seetla would not be denied, and that they could show me a child suffering from small-pox which had only a short time previously been vaccinated. Often some objection is raised to my seeing a child labouring under small-pox ; but in this instance it was at once brought to me, the mother holding over it a branch of the neem tree, sacred to Seetla. The vaccine vesicle was well formed, and had evidently obtained precedence of the small-pox,( 28 ) Mahomedans of the Meerut and Moozuffernuggur Districts ; whilst in the part of the Muttra District on the right bank of the Jumna, Mahomedan vaccinators would probably not be tolerated. In the Agra District likewise, Mussulman vaccinators have not been successful. Excluding the hill country and the Doon, in which there are no Mahomedan vaccinators, and which, from the great difference in climate, could not be fairly compared with the other districts, I find from the returns that, whilst each of the 29-Hindoo vaccinators on an average operated upon 1,037 persons, with a percentage of 92.7 successful cases, each of the 96 Mahomedan vaccinators operated upon 1,172 persons, with a percentage of 87.4 successful cases. From this it would appear that the Mahomedan is justly credited with greater energy, but that whilst the Hindoo does less work he does it greatly better. 10. Astonishing differences will be observed between the progress being made in contiguous districts. Agra is partly surrounded by Muttra, Mynpoory, and Etawah, but in all of these three, vaccination flourishes ; whilst in Agra it not only makes no progress, but even tends to retrograde. In the Etawah District, six vaccinators accomplish nearly as much work as 15 amongst a similar population in the Agra District. In Etawah, without increase to the vaccine establishment, the numbers vaccinated have within three years nearly trebled,( 29 ) not previously been a success. It is in the present instance being conducted by the Civil Surgeon, Dr. Reid, and is certain to receive at his hands a most careful and patient trial. In the Meerut District, municipal vaccination has at length been brought upon the same footing as in the other districts. Formerly the appointment of vacci- nators rested with the committees, and with them hakeems on high salaries were popu- lar. These men were but indifferent vaccinators ; but as they satisfied their patrons, little effectual objection could be made by this department. Last season, some of the municipalities reduced the salaries of their hakeems, and as a consequence one or two resigned. Men were selected by the Magistrate to replace these, and to fill the appoint- ments at Haupper and Pilkooah, but various excuses were given by all of them for failing to be present at the commencement of the working season. After a month had been lost, vaccinators were, at the request of the Magistrate, furnished by this department. Although inexperienced, these latter, unlike the hakeems, were young men and capable of work. The result has been that in four months they have done more work than their predecessors did in five, and at little more than half the cost. Whilst encamped near one large municipal town, I had an opportunity of witness- ing the warm interest which native officials and members of municipalities take in the cause of education as compared with vaccination. Shortly after my arrival a circle inspector of schools appeared on the ground. The number of well-dressed natives who jostled each other to obtain the honour of an interview with this official would, to any one but my slighted self, have been most gratifying to behold. Children in their holiday costume, with books and slates, swarmed in the streets, and the town was, for the time being, given over to education. With my vaccinator I endeavoured to do a little work in the back-streets and lanes,( 30 ) from small-pox, the same is not the case with the great pox, or syphilis. In every village visited by me within a few marches of Mussoorie or Chukrata, I had many appli- cants for relief from this disease. By those who know the dirty habits of those hill- men and women, an idea may be formed of the probable effect of their inoculation with syphilis. Many of those affected traced the origin of their misfortunes to the time they were employed on the works at Chukrata. Of course, little could be done for the relief of a disease requiring prolonged treatment for its permanent eradication; and I failed to convince the sufferers that it would be worth their while to visit the dispensa- ries at Dehra or Mussoorie. In the villages beyond this, nearer the snows, the people appeared to be singularly free from venereal affections. Tehree is badly off in the matter of dispensaries: in fact, I do not know that any institution of the sort exists in the State. Such of the people as know the benefits of medical treatment visit Dehra Mussoorie or Srinuggur, if they can afford the expense of a long journey over a very difficult country. Many, it is certain, suffer and die of diseases which medical skill could alleviate or remove. During the year the inoculators have been unusually quiescent, and I was beginning to believe that the measures adopted by Dr. Pringle for the suppression of their craft had been finally successful. Lately however I have had intelligence to the contrary. One man is said to have been at work near the town of Tehree itself. He has been reported to the authorities of the Tehree State, and will no doubt be suitably dealt with. I may notice here a remark made by the Sanitary Commissioner in his last annual report. He thinks the term &quot;teeka&quot; applied to vaccination is an unfortunate one, and that it must have been suggested by an enemy. It is a pity he did not explain why it should be considered so objectionable. I was always under the belief that the term &quot;teekait&quot; was applied to inoculators for centuries before vaccination was ever heard of, and that &quot;teeka&quot; was simply the old native term, used with refer- ence to vaccination in the same way as it had formerly been with regard to inoculation. If this be correct, it would, at first sight at least, seem to be rather fortunate than otherwise that the old name should so readily be adopted for the new and yet suspected substitute. However this may be, it is certain that the use of any term having reference to the sacred cow, such as that suggested by the Sanitary Commissioner, would not even now be prudent in many parts of the country; whilst before the people had become familiar with vaccination, it would not have been without serious risk. The suggestion made by the Sanitary Commissioner is by no means a new one( 31 ) in vaccination, Of these, I would specially mention Girdharee Lall, tuhseeldar of Ferozabad. Ahmed Khan and Hussain Khan, members of Khoorjah Municipality, continue to aid their vaccinator. Even Honorary Magistrate Luchmun Saroop, of Secundrabad, has this year been as active in his efforts to aid vaccination as he was formerly conspicuous for his luke-warmness. To some of the Civil Surgeons I am much indebted for the trouble taken by them in assisting the municipal vaccinators, and in inspecting their work. In Mynpoory, Dr. Jackson; in Furruckabad, Dr. Reid ; and in Dehra Doon, Dr. MacLaren may be specially mentioned. I have, &c., J. RICHARDSON, M.B., SURGEON-MAJOR, Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination, Agra and Meerut Circle.
( 32 ) A.( 33 ) MAON AND ROHIKHUND CIRCLES. the Kumaon and Rohilkhund Circles, during the year 1873-74. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases, exclud- ing those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Christians. Maliomedans. High Caste Hin- doos. Low Caste Hin- doos. Under 1 year. Over 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. In primary. In secondary. 112 101 9,824 2,952 2,794 10,195 12,402 341 246 12,989 1,436 4,303 900 6,639 97.32 25.02 467. 6 16 8,657 1,731 2,746 7,664 9,485 602 323 10,410 2,068 6,112 1,297 9,477 94.03 25.28 473. ... 704 876 872 869 1,583 2,179 132 141 2,452 332 638 92 1,062 94.28 34.22 351. ... 84 503 489 274 802 940 89 47 1,076 121 666 21 808 91.35 15.37 269. ... 255 269 151 141 534 629 20 26 675 85 17 13 115 96.91 83.33 158. ... ... 1,301 371 326 1,346 1,523 93 56 1,672 74 350 43 467 94.24 17.45 305. ... ... 1,362 232 181 1,413 1,397 119 78 1,594 198 541 230 969 92.15 26.79 366. 3 69 2,739 1,053 1,536 2,328 3,476 187 201 3,864 939 1,907 418 3,264 94.89 32.99 396. ... 977 1,525 1,178 772 2,908 3,144 259 277 3,680 340 334 138 812 92.38 50.44 299. 34 62 1,249 496 582 1,259 1,815 19 7 1,841 164 458 14 636 98.96 26.36 353. 155 2,268 28,305 9,525 10,221 30,032 36,990 1,861 1,402 40,253 5,757 15,326 3,166 24,249 95.20 27.30 368. ... 796 175 1,937 933 1,973 2,528 277 103 2,908 9 31 ... 40 90.12 22.50 294. ... 596 368 1,916 1,034 1,846 2,165 424 291 2,880 14 48 11 73 83.62 22.58 295. ... 477 413 1,840 583 2,147 2,299 278 153 2,730 43 35 20 98 89.21 55.12 282. ... 578 281 2,660 879 2,640 3,042 315 162 3,519 15 4 2 21 90.61 78.94 354. 3 697 480 1,775 867 2,088 2,648 228 79 2,955 17 6 3 26 92.07 73.91 298. 1,025 486 1,236 771 1,976 2,444 192 111 2,747 61 21 5 87 92.71 74.39 283. 65 477 180 674 573 773 1,115 103 128 1,346 90 231 33 354 91.54 28.03 170. ... 83 75 639 376 421 572 176 49 797 14 15 2 31 76.47 48.27 165. 1 565 69 403 413 625 795 172 71 1,038 27 53 4 84 82.21 33.75 224. ... 191 372 717 229 1,051 1,128 82 70 1,280 60 51 14 125 93.22 54.05 281. 5 459 26 299 300 489 694 41 54 789 98 9 1 48 94.42 80.85 167. 74 5,944 2,875 14,096 6,960 16,029 19,430 2,288 1,271 22,989 388 504 95 987 89.46 43.49 266. ... 814 698 1,907 1,213 2,206 2,787 384 248 3,419 24 58 19 101 87.88 29.26 352. ... 630 469 1,495 936 1,658 2,013 354 227 2,594 6 44 17 67 85.04 12.00 266. ... 956 218 1,608 616 2,164 2,244 339 199 2,782 42 114 19 175 86.87 26.92 295. ... 594 172 1,512 716 1,562 1,626 369 283 2,278 69 133 78 280 81.50 34.15 255. ... 767 111 2,035 775 2,138 2,104 345 464 2,913 104 192 118 414 85.91 35.13 332. 1 266 259 491 273 744 760 139 118 1,017 12 25 2 39 84.53 32.43 211. ... 548 104 373 477 548 863 63 99 1,095 5 3 2 10 93.19 62.50 207. ... 287 26 346 176 483 501 117 41 65.9 ... ... ... ... 81.06 ... 131. 2 292 57 662 557 456 879 79 55 1,013 13 8 4 25 91.75 61.90 207. ... 382 90 486 218 742 832 93 35 960 5 7 1 13 89.94 41.66 194 3 5,536 2,204 10,917 5,959 12,701 14,609 2,282 1,769 18,660 280 584 260 1,124 86.48 32.40 263 9v
( 34 ) A.( 35 ) MAON AND ROHILKHUND CIRCLES. the Kumaon and Rohilkhund Circles, during the year 1873-74. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases, exclud- ing those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vacci- nated by each Vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Christians. Mahomedans. High Caste Hin- doos. Low Caste Hin- doos. Under 1 year. Over 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. In primary. In secondary. ... 396 61 1,028 440 1,045 1,246 86 153 1,485 8 6 2 16 93.54 57.14 300. ... 144 39 1,088 95 1,176 710 304 257 1,271 74 62 46 182 70.01 54.41 290. ... 745 74 1,897 463 2,253 2,494 141 81 2,716 ... ... ... ... 94.64 ... 543. ... 667 54 1,930 159 2,492 2,120 390 141 2,651 82 55 15 152 84.46 59.84 560. ... 313 345 1,065 205 1,518 1,289 343 91 1,723 98 73 18 189 78.90 57.30 382. ... 121 101 1,577 245 1,554 1,304 221 274 1,799 ... 1 ... 1 85 50 ... 360. ... 437 158 1,630 395 1,830 1,452 467 306 2,225 21 18 18 57 75.66 53.84 456. ... 114 112 1,614 195 1,645 1,467 216 157 1,840 13 2 1 16 87.16 86.66 371. ... 211 66 980 442 815 943 160 154 1,257 4 25 11 40 85.49 13.79 259. ... 465 228 501 470 724 764 251 179 1,194 34 103 23 160 75.27 24.81 270. 1 320 33 1,229 349 1,234 1,262 139 182 1,583 2 1 5 8 90.07 66.66 318. ... 83 54 845 165 817 701 182 99 982 15 4 ... 19 79.38 78.94 200. 56 158 45 329 256 332 500 62 26 588 15 56 8 79 88.96 21.12 133. 57 4,174 1,370 15,713 3,879 17,435 16,252 2,962 2,100 21,314 366 406 147 919 85.58 47.40 296.44 ... 220 233 2,087 752 1,788 2,246 180 114 2,540 47 37 24 108 92.57 55.95 529. ... 225 327 2,189 1,066 1,675 2,276 323 142 2,741 14 10 2 26 87.56 58.33 553. ... 215 185 1,387 158 1,629 1,487 173 127 1,787 15 19 6 40 89.57 44.11 305. ... 116 217 1,350 652 1,031 1,429 129 125 1,683 ... ... ... ... 91.72 ... 336. ... 304 196 2,055 904 1,651 2,023 321 211 2,555 69 66 19 154 86.30 51.11 541. 11 454 49 887 338 1,063 1,231 146 24 1,401 2 ... ... 2 89.39 100.0 280. ... 75 108 1,187 440 930 1,230 77 63 1,370 63 15 9 87 94.10 80.76 291. ... 246 107 1,217 519 1,051 1,290 198 82 1,570 24 12 4 40 86.69 66.66 322. 11 1,855 1,422 12,359 4,829 10,818 13,212 1,547 888 15,647 234 159 64 457 89.51 59.54 402.6 ... 44 323 912 255 1,024 986 217 76 1,279 16 3 ... 19 81.95 84.21 259. ... 42 359 1,577 361 1,617 1,686 159 133 1.978 6 11 ... 17 91.38 35.29 399. 1 168 226 1,076 208 1,263 1,255 176 40 1,471 ... ... ... ... 87.70 ... 294. ... 154 741 1,042 147 1,790 1,433 377 127 1,937 9 46 2 57 79.17 16.36 398. 88 1,150 110 1,009 541 1,816 1,640 356 361 2,357 86 103 35 224 82.18 45.50 172. ... 390 122 329 135 706 652 146 43 841 26 21 9 56 81.70 55.31 179. 89 1,948 1,881 5,945 1,647 8,216 7,652 1,431 780 9,868 143 184 46 373 84.24 43.73 255. 9 234 19,457 9,752 59,030 23,274 65,199 71,155 10,510 6,808 88,473 1,411 1,837 612 3,86 87.13 43.44 288.54 389 21,725 38,057 68,555 33,495 96,231 108,145 12,371 8,210 128,726 7,168 17,163 3,778 28,109 84.75 29.46 F. PEARSON, SURGEON-MAJOR, Superintendent-General, Vaccination, N.-W. P.
( 36 ) A.( 37 ) A.( 38 ) A.( 39 ) DEPARTMENT. the Agra and Meerut Circle during the year 1873-74. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases, exclud- ing those un- known from the total. Average number of persons vaccinat- ed by each vaccinator per mensem. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. In primary vacci- nation. In secondary vacci- nation. Christians. Mahomedans. High castes of Hindoos. Low caste of Hindoos. Under 1 year. Over 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. 28 297 310 1,125 828 932 1,580 93 87 1,760 ... ... ... ... 94.5 ... 352.0 ... 30 428 487 292 653 839 63 43 945 1 4 ... 5 93.1 20.0 190.0 1 28 2,552 1,487 786 3,282 3,649 238 181 4,068 60 34 14 108 93.9 64.0 348.0 35 117 86 384 253 369 504 78 40 622 8 20 5 33 86.6 28.6 120.0 ... 31 63 180 71 193 178 46 40 264 3 4 1 8 69.5 42.9 15 112 60 246 182 251 362 57 14 433 47 26 7 80 88.8 63.9 79 834 3,270 3,909 2,412 5,680 7,112 575 405 8,092 119 88 27 234 92.6 57.5 244.8 ... 1,014 296 3,391 773 3,928 4,092 428 181 4,701 ... ... ... ... 90.6 ... 470.1 ... 866 282 2,017 580 2,585 2,613 327 225 3,165 1 3 1 5 88.9 25.0 316.5 13 1,031 162 1,975 1,693 2,088 2,555 345 181 3,181 3 2 ... 5 88.5 60.0 318.6 ... 406 284 1,618 666 1,642 1,790 390 128 2,308 ... ... ... ... 82.2 ... 230.8 37 548 30 597 616 596 1,091 92 29 1,212 ... ... ... ... 92.3 ... 242.4 ... 569 401 297 643 624 1,032 184 51 1,267 ... ... ... ... 84.9 ... 253.2 ... 386 62 554 187 815 792 143 67 1,002 ... ... ... ... 84.6 ... 200.4 ... 39 209 601 199 650 780 33 36 849 ... ... ... ... 96.0 ... 169.8 ... 469 70 594 243 890 846 193 94 1,133 ... ... ... ... 81.5 ... 226.6 ... 690 182 596 368 1,100 1,219 167 82 1,468 1 1 ... 2 88.0 50.0 294.0 ... 281 61 521 227 636 663 112 88 863 ... ... ... ... 85.6 ... 172.6 ... 340 141 588 320 749 748 167 154 1,069 ... ... ... ... 81.8 ... 213.8 ... 156 73 576 168 637 446 281 58 805 ... ... ... ... 62.4 ... 161.0 ... 543 88 434 59 1,006 585 356 124 1,065 ... ... ... ... 62.2 ... 213.0 50 7,338 2,341 14,359 6,142 17,946 19,372 3,218 1,498 24,088 5 6 1 12 85.8 41.7 267.7 ... 554 457 1,340 1,015 1,336 1,672 398 281 2,351 5 8 3 16 80.8 38.5 473.4 ... 227 388 1,109 808 916 1,352 277 95 1,724 1 1 ... 2 83.0 50.0 345.2 ... 393 405 616 542 872 1,159 176 79 1,414 10 6 ... 16 86.9 62.5 286.0 ... 410 50 826 706 580 1,134 81 71 1,286 12 5 3 20 93.4 70.6 261.2 ... 281 126 263 276 394 437 141 92 670 1 1 ... 2 75.6 50.0 134.4 ... 139 213 549 277 624 595 158 148 901 4 ... 1 5 79.1 100.0 181.2 ... 375 48 289 276 438 513 136 63 7 12 4 3 1 8 79.1 57.2 144.0 ... 396 267 360 383 640 696 160 167 1,023 1 2 ... 3 81.4 33.4 205.2 ... 113 36 481 171 459 410 172 48 630 ... 2 1 3 70.5 ... 126.6 ... 2,888 1,990 5,833 4,452 6,259 7,968 1,699 1,044 10,711 38 28 9 75 82.5 57.6 239.7 34 636 190 2,974 880 2,954 3.469 119 246 3,834 ... ... ... ... 96.7 ... 385.4 ... 280 119 1,258 224 1,433 1,463 46 148 1,657 ... ... ... ... 97.0 ... 165.7 ... 179 63 1,250 199 1,293 1,092 179 221 1,492 ... ... ... ... 86.0 ... 149.2 ... 350 166 2,446 733 2,229 2,717 122 123 2,962 ... ... ... ... 95.8 ... 296.2 2 454 173 2,805 340 3,094 3,112 98 224 3,434 ... ... ... ... 97.0 ... 345.4 ... 283 240 1,398 221 1,700 1,526 198 197 1,921 ... ... ... ... 88.6 ... 192.1 3 336 228 1,111 488 1,195 1,548 38 97 1,683 ... ... ... ... 97.7 ... 168.3 8 180 248 491 262 665 776 50 101 927 ... ... ... ... 94.0 ... 231.7 3 137 72 461 78 600 553 30 95 678 ... ... ... ... 94.9 ... 69.5 ... 133 209 154 14 482 425 41 30 496 ... ... ... ... 91.3 ... 99.2 ... 162 175 245 247 335 507 53 22 582 ... ... ... ... 90.0 ... 116.4 1 186 71 148 60 346 333 34 39 406 ... ... ... ... 90.8 ... 101.5 ... 88 119 487 91 603 648 28 18 694 ... ... ... ... 95.9 ... 173.5 61 3,551 1,926 15,228 3,837 16,929 18,169 1,036 1,561 20,766 ... ... ... ... 94.7 ... 207.6
( 40 ) A.( 41 ) DEPARTMENT. Agra and Meerut Circle during the year 1873-74.( 42 ) A.( 43 ) DEPARTMENT: the Agra and Meerut Circle during the year 1873-74.( 44 ) A.( 45 ) STATEMENT No. III.( 46 ) A.( 47 ) DEPARTMENT. Circle of Superintendence in the North-Western Provinces during the year 1873-74. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. B. C. D. Result Caste. Age. Result. A. B. C. D. Christians. Mahomedans. Hindoos. Other Castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. In primary vacci- nation. In secondary vac- cination. ... 84 314 232 19 611 453 139 38 630 2 3 1 6 76 40 127 ... 171 397 590 25 1,133 933 206 19 1,158 ... ... ... ... 81 ... 232 ... 137 464 825 88 1,338 1,147 260 19 1,426 1 ... ... 1 81 100 285 ... 130 536 1,095 158 1,603 1,586 65 80 1,761 1 ... ... 1 94 100 352 ... 527 115 196 57 781 581 179 78 838 ... 6 4 10 76 ... 169 7 561 136 328 33 999 779 210 43 1,032 4 22 ... 26 78 15 211 4 420 315 389 58 1,070 758 268 102 1,128 ... 3 ... 3 73 ... 113 ... 27 475 400 91 811 670 227 5 902 ... ... ... ... 74 ... 180 ... 71 415 547 34 999 858 143 32 1,033 1 1 ... 2 85 50 207 ... 200 116 269 38 547 473 65 47 585 53 50 3 106 87 51 138 ... 473 8 159 6 634 345 153 142 640 29 24 54 107 68 56 149 11 2,801 3,291 5,030 607 10,526 8,583 1,945 605 11,133 91 109 62 262 81 45 189 ... 780 18 108 198 708 589 209 108 906 1 ... ... 1 73 100 181 1 170 40 285 91 405 321 99 76 496 136 40 96 272 76 77 153 2 265 46 330 205 438 463 121 59 643 ... ... ... ... 78 ... 128 ... 284 24 366 324 350 455 133 86 674 2 3 4 9 77 40 136 ... 141 16 280 43 394 314 93 30 437 17 3 ... 20 77 85 91 ... 18 25 675 134 584 513 69 136 718 ... ... 2 2 88 ... 144 1 58 12 270 24 317 243 40 58 341 ... ... ... ... 84 ... 68 ... 176 203 1,771 399 1,751 1,445 435 270 2,150 ... ... ... ... 76 ... 430 1 116 41 445 270 333 486 83 34 603 3 ... 2 5 85 100 121 194 335 149 1,238 666 1,250 1,523 219 174 1,916 284 61 21 366 87 82 114 199 2,343 574 5,768 2,354 6,530 6,352 1,501 1,031 8,884 443 107 125 675 80 80 146 1 218 93 939 300 951 844 239 168 1,251 ... ... ... ... 77 ... 250 ... 102 94 830 212 814 718 118 190 1.026 ... ... ... ... 85 ... 205 ... 325 21 295 134 507 413 111 117 641 ... ... ... ... 78 ... 128 ... 180 13 950 354 789 779 152 212 1,143 ... ... ... ... 83 ... 228 ... 50 58 935 89 954 610 237 196 1,043 ... ... ... ... 72 ... 208 ... 144 336 2,106 370 2,216 1,683 548 355 2,586 ... ... ... ... 75 ... 525 1 289 60 841 449 742 836 244 111 1,191 ... ... ... ... 77 ... 238 ... 113 68 575 134 622 505 138 113 756 ... ... ... ... 78 ... 151 2 1,421 743 7,471 2,042 7,595 6,388 1,787 1,462 9,637 ... ... ... ... 78 ... 240 ... 131 172 1,529 250 1,582 1,588 196 48 1,832 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 183 ... 79 312 2,079 661 1,809 1,975 321 174 2,470 ... ... ... ... 86 ... 247 ... 117 473 2,237 599 2,228 2,046 562 219 2,827 ... ... ... ... 78 ... 282 ... 169 156 1,718 223 1.820 1,0468 337 243 2,043 ... ... ... ... 81 ... 204 ... 236 167 2,344 325 2,442 2,322 252 193 2,767 ... ... ... ... 86 ... 276 ... 167 167 2,694 356 2,672 2,521 282 225 3,028 ... ... ... ... 89 ... 302 ... 105 289 1,814 628 1,580 1,956 168 84 2,208 ... ... ... ... 92 ... 220 ... 139 382 2,042 422 2,141 1,945 298 320 2,563 ... ... ... ... 86 ... 256 13 101 158 2,362 634 2,000 2,099 288 247 2,634 ... ... ... ... 87 ... 263 13 379 93 1,623 1,143 965 1,624 301 183 2,108 50 20 ... 70 84 71 217 10 289 72 736 555 552 830 180 97 1,107 203 32 ... 235 82 86 268 36 1,912 2,461 21,178 5,796 19,791 20,369 3,185 2,033 25,587 253 52 ... 305 86 83 246 ... 63 118 561 244 498 462 156 124 742 ... ... ... ... 74 ... 148 ... 52 142 791 211 774 721 102 162 985 6 1 6 13 87 85 199 ... 28 85 597 110 550 341 184 135 660 5 4 7 16 64 55 135 2 25 17 466 258 252 310 109 91 510 ... ... ... ... 73 ... 102 1 20 39 495 218 337 292 168 95 555 ... 9 3 12 63 ... 113 ... 51 33 645 160 569 405 150 174 729 3 ... 3 6 72 100 147 ... 54 124 999 480 697 965 121 91 1,177 2 1 1 4 88 66 236 ... 14 79 827 187 738 568 118 234 920 ... ... ... ... 82 ... 184 17 160 102 577 444 412 617 148 91 856 178 59 39 276 80 75 226 20 467 689 5,968 2,312 4,822 4,681 1,256 1,197 7,134 194 74 59 327 78 75 165
( 48 ) A.( 49 ) DEPARTMENT. Circle of Superintendence in the North- Western Provinces during the year 1873-74. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. B. C. D. Result. Caste. Age. Result. A. B. C. D. Christians. Mahomedans. Hindoos. Other Castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful and Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and Doubtful. Unknown. Total. In Primary vacci- nation. In secondary vac- cination. 2 28 72 882 257 727 630 245 109 984 4 ... ... 4 72 100 197 ... 23 82 497 190 412 328 141 133 602 ... ... ... ... 69 ... 120 ... 24 162 570 247 509 563 131 62 756 ... ... ... ... 81 ... 151 1 143 225 967 659 677 1,066 157 113 1,336 4 ... ... 4 87 100 268 ... 192 123 586 307 594 755 106 40 901 ... ... ... ... 87 ... 180 ... 39 174 741 242 712 657 171 126 954 2 2 ... 4 79 50 191 ... 33 75 770 252 626 529 199 150 878 ... ... ... ... 72 ... 175 ... 104 64 679 449 398 597 93 157 847 ... ... ... ... 86 ... 169 ... 73 122 945 327 813 825 201 114 1,140 ... ... ... ... 80 ... 228 ... 38 207 1,142 75 1,312 1,167 87 133 1,387 ... ... ... ... 93 ... 277 ... 137 148 555 222 618 618 134 88 840 ... ... ... ... 82 ... 168 ... 59 90 613 122 640 488 190 84 762 3 ... 1 4 72 100 153 3 893 1,544 8,947 3,349 8,038 8,223 1,855 1,309 11,387 13 2 1 16 81 86 190 ... 74 308 1,087 267 1,202 934 343 192 1,469 ... ... ... ... 73 ... 293 ... 91 153 1,076 501 819 1,082 54 184 1,320 ... ... ... ... 95 ... 264 ... 46 93 644 129 654 499 158 126 783 ... ... ... ... 75 ... 156 ... 12 173 532 223 494 579 96 42 717 7 1 2 10 85 87 145 ... 50 209 1,202 542 919 1,315 73 73 1,461 ... ... ... ... 94 ... 290 3 53 30 346 177 255 366 39 27 432 5 ... 2 7 90 100 87 ... 187 97 469 206 547 535 160 58 753 ... ... ... ... 76 ... 150 ... 104 113 410 240 387 496 74 57 627 ... ... ... ... 87 ... 125 ... 18 61 371 65 385 312 103 35 450 ... ... ... ... 77 ... 90 ... 4 29 392 60 365 317 87 21 425 ... ... ... ... 78 ... 85 ... 16 62 285 11 352 247 92 24 363 ... ... ... ... 72 ... 72 3 655 1,328 6,814 2,421 6,379 6,682 1,279 839 8,800 12 1 4 17 83 92 160 14 68 82 770 272 662 560 170 204 934 24 23 30 77 76 51 100 ... 19 78 678 244 531 505 118 152 775 ... ... 14 14 81 ... 157 ... 14 46 346 85 321 281 55 70 406 ... ... ... ... 83 ... 81 ... 16 51 345 53 359 213 76 123 412 ... ... ... ... 73 ... 82 ... 54 91 621 215 551 467 102 197 766 ... 1 ... 1 82 ... 153 14 171 348 2,760 869 2,424 2,026 521 746 3,293 24 24 44 92 79 50 112 ... 13 68 419 111 389 326 70 104 500 2 1 ... 3 82 66 100 ... 40 279 990 317 992 870 255 184 1,309 2 1 ... 3 77 66 262 ... 10 72 628 419 291 635 58 17 710 68 5 59 132 91 93 168 ... 63 419 2,037 847 1,672 1,831 383 305 2,519 72 7 59 138 82 91 177 288 10,726 11,397 65,963 20,597 67,777 65,135 13,712 9,527 88,374 1,102 370 354 1,832 82.60 74.5 189 W. WATSON, M. D., Supdt. of Vaccination, Allahabad and Jhansie Division. 13 V
( 50 ) A.( 51 ) A.( 52 ) A.( 53 ) DEPARTMENT. Benares Circle, during the year 1873-74. 9. 10. 11. 12. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of suc- cessful cases, ex- cluding those un- known. Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Sex. Caste. Age. Results. Results. Male. Female. Christians. Mussulmans. Hindoos. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. In primary vaccina- tion. In secondary vaccination. 717 512 10 272 391 556 69 1,160 948 119 162 1,229 ... ... 5 5 88 8 ... 247.4 592 493 ... 81 235 769 59 1,026 817 198 70 1,0185 ... ... ... ... 80.4 ... 217. 1,442 983 35 839 328 1,223 297 2,128 1,682 413 330 2,425 17 16 3 36 80.2 51.5 123.1 685 488 43 328 110 692 66 1,107 809 206 158 1,173 6 5 5 16 79.7 54 6 118.9 346 227 15 107 78 373 75 498 413 94 66 573 3 1 1 5 81.5 75 115.3 346 109 1 18 10 426 4 451 226 116 113 455 ... ... ... ... 66.0 ... 91. 4,128 2,812 104 1,645 1,152 4,039 570 6,370 4.895 1,146 899 6.940 2 6 22 14 62 81.0 54.8 140.2 489 218 3 190 135 379 47 660 553 96 58 707 16 8 8 32 85.2 06.6 147.4 1.316 1,196 ... 74 247 2,191 99 2,413 1,478 225 782 2,512 14 7 3 24 85.4 66.6 507.1 56S 444 .. 45 90 877 75 937 792 103 117 1,012 ... ... ... ... 88 3 ... 202.2 608 182 15 257 127 391 42 748 661 64 65 790 22 5 6 33 91.1 81.4 82.3 196 159 4 84 51 216 34 321 268 62 25 355 1 ... ... 1 81 2 100.0 70.6 254 256 ... 151 31 328 29 481 417 63 30 510 2 ... ... 2 86.8 100.0 102.2 220 217 ... 165 ... 272 11 426 367 6l 9 437 ... ... ... ... 85.7 ... 87.2 356 308 ... 287 98 279 174 490 621 33 10 664 ... ... ... ... 94.9 ... 132.4 4,007 2,980 22 1,253 779 4,933 511 6,476 5,157 734 1,096 6,987 55 20 17 92 87.5 73.3 157.14 1,182 1,071 18 591 575 1,069 67 2,186 1,685 434 134 2,253 3 ... ... 3 79.5 100.0 225.6 815 795 ... 116 101 1,393 19 1,591 1,349 209 52 1,610 1 ... ... 1 86.5 100.0 161.1 1,254 1,330 ... 1,036 519 1,029 134 2,450 2,199 342 433 2,584 ... ... ... ... 86.2 ... 258.4 800 921 ... 165 42 1,514 391 1,330 1,637 53 31 1,721 1 ... ... 1 96 2 100.0 172.2 911 850 ... 414 222 1,125 281 1,480 1,486 143 132 1,761 5 2 7 14 91.2 71.3 177.5 1,229 917 2 699 238 1,207 150 1,996 1,846 215 85 2,146 ... ... ... ... 89.5 ... 214.6 398 251 ... 332 44 273 23 626 470 84 95 649 144 67 260 471 84.8 68.2 224. 293 279 ... 215 22 335 34 538 546 12 14 572 ... ... ... ... 97.8 ... 114.2 281 325 ... 16 77 513 ... 606 518 72 18 606 ... ... ... ... 87.7 ... 121.l 532 431 2 123 118 650 58 905 838 58 67 963 ... ... ... ... 93.5 ... 192.3 248 225 ... 98 54 321 104 369 403 42 23 473 ... ... 90 6 ... 94.3 269 105 ... 93 20 261 76 298 274 40 60 374 708 224 389 1,321 87.3 75.9 169.5 8,212 7,500 22 3,898 2,102 9,690 1,337 14,375 13,254 1,704 754 15,712 862 293 656 1,811 88.6 74.6 184.43 1,248 1,068 8 1,338 268 702 446 1,870 2,063 133 120 2,316 ... ... ... 93 9 ... 463.1 395 333 ... 247 185 296 37 691 637 56 35 728 ... ... ... ... 91 9 ... 145.3 692 572 ... 168 504 592 187 1,077 940 172 152 1,264 11 3 1 15 84 5 78.8 255.4 312 214 ... 126 149 251 16 510 404 54 68 526 ... ... ... ... 88.2 ... 105 1 775 570 ... 631 124 590 225 1,120 991 167 187 1,345 12 2 5 19 85.5 85.7 272.4 878 620 ... 686 417 395 48 1,450 1,429 43 26 1,498 ... ... ... ... 97.0 ... 299.3 742 458 5 224 425 546 361 839 1,084 56 60 1,200 ... ... ... ... 95 0 ... 240.0 275 155 ... 127 110 193 55 375 301 45 84 430 ... ... ... ... 86.9 ... 86 625 468 ... 657 189 247 65 1,028 1,019 67 7 1,093 6 6 ... 12 93.8 50 221 275 167 ... 200 77 165 96 346 318 68 56 442 ... ... ... ... 82.3 ... 88.2 311 235 ... 177 57 312 36 510 427 61 58 546 2 1 ... 3 87.5 66 2 109.4 6,528 4,860 13 4,581 2,505 4,289 1,572 9,816 9,613 922 853 11,388 31 12 6 49 91.2 72.4 207.52 555 581 4 305 130 1,097 147 10,389 802 414 320 1,536 171 97 25 293 65.9 63.8 123.14 1,081 941 ... 399 371 1,252 131 1,891 1,656 170 196 222 ... ... ... ... 90 6 ... 134.12 434 371 ... 107 40 658 27 778 562 128 115 805 ... 1 ... 1 81.4 ... 80.6 996 705 ... 66 182 1,453 12 1,689 957 341 403 1,701 ... ... ... ... 73.7 ... 170.1 623 512 ... 306 125 709 2 1,138 802 253 85 1,140 ... ... ... .. 76.0 ... 114. 871 943 ... 304 563 947 142 1,672 1,526 192 96 1,814 ... ... 1 1 88.8 ... 181.5 504 292 26 212 67 491 36 760 436 223 137 796 ... 2 ... 2 66.1 ... 79.8 5,469 4,345 30 1,699 1,478 6,607 497 18,317 6,741 1,721 1,352 9,814 171 100 26 297 79.6 63 126.31 373 278 2 79 52 518 13 638 405 124 122 651 ... ... ... ... 76.5 ... 130.1 189 271 ... 60 77 322 24 435 381 41 37 459 ... ... ... ... 90 2 ... 91.4 419 374 ... 183 148 462 22 771 581 121 91 793 ... ... ... ... 82.7 ... 158 3 752 460 ... 171 215 826 24 1,168 906 184 122 1,212 ... ... ... ... 83.0 ... 242.2 347 368 ... 160 79 476 27 688 464 126 125 715 ... ... ... ... 78.6 ... 143. 352 305 ... 181 76 400 27 630 356 182 119 657 ... ... ... 66.1 ... 131.2 2,431 2,056 2 834 647 3,004 157 4,330 3,093 878 516 4,487 ... ... ... ... 77.8 ... 116.7 30,775 24,553 193 13,910 8,663 32,562 4,644 50,684 42,753 7,105 5,470 55,328 1,145 447 719 2,311 85.7 71.9 167.0 H. S. SMITH, Offg. Supdt. of Vaccination, Benares Division. 14 V
( 54 ) A.( 55 ) A.( 56 ) A.ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT. No. 2135A. OF 1874. FROM THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, To THE SUPDT.-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. DATED NAINI TAL, THE 8TH SEPTEMBER, 1874. SIR, GENERAL DEPARTMENT. I AM directed to acknowledge the receipt of your report on the operations of the Vaccination Department for 1873-74, and to communi- cate the following remarks and orders thereon. Form of report. 2. It seems to the Lieutenant-Governor that the form of your re- port might be changed with advantage. At present, after some introductory remarks, you discuss the figures of Kumaun and Rohilkhand (which you yourself superintend), and then those of the other circles; the separate reports for those circles are then printed in full, and followed by the appendices. The Government has thus the same results presented circle by circle, first by you, secondly by the Superintendents in their reports, and thirdly in the tabular state- ments. It is desirable that you should give to the Government a general view of the working of the Department as compared with previous years and other Provinces. For circle details it will be enough if you prefix or add such remarks as you think necessary to the Superintendents' reports. These reports need not be printed in full; all irrelevant and unnecessary matter should be cut out. Some officers go into petty details, which it may be proper for the Superintendent-General to know, but which it is unnecessary to lay before the Government. Others again are too apt to make their reports vehicles for promulgating their views on things in general. Appendices. 3. It would also be well to amalgamate the appendices showing the circle details, one circle after another, in each of the first three statements. The Lieutenant-Governor is perfectly in accord with the views which you hold as to the advisability of curtailing unnecessary returns. You were told in para. 20 of the orders on last year's report not to continue the separate financial statements for each circle, but to give one amalgamated statement for the Provinces. You have given this statement, though not quite in the prescribed form, the figures of the Budget not being filled in; but you have also added the separate statement (No. III.) for each circle, and this is not necessary. It is only necessary to give the details, circle by circle, of the expen- diture defrayed by Government.
( 2 ) Strength of establishment. 4. The following table shows the strength of the establishment during the year :( 3 ) The very small percentage of increase in Agra and Meerut, and the very large one in Allahabad and Jhansi, in which there has been almost no increase of establishment, are worthy of notice. Work done by each vac- cinator . 8. The average number of operations performed by each vaccina- tor per mensem, as shewn by the figures in State- ment I., is as follows :( 4 ) Importance of these nu- merical returns. Kumaun, ... 467 Garhwal, ... 473 Baheri, ... 542 Pilibhit, ... 560 Faridpur, ... 456 Badaon, ... 529 Bisauli, ... 553 Saheswan, ... 541 Saharanpar, ... 470 Muzaffarnagar, ... 473 Mainpuri, ... 606 Etawah, ... 619 Meja, ... 430 Kora, ... 525 Robertsganj, ... 507 Azimgarh, ... 463 12. It would no doubt be unwise to attach too much importance to the numerical returns of circles or districts, or to ground praise or blame exclusively upon them. There are many other things to be taken into account besides the mere number of operations performed. In some parts of the province, as for instance in Jhansi and Lalatpur, the population is sparser and the dis- tances to be travelled longer than in other parts; in some districts( 5 ) circles, except Kumaun and Benares, more females were vaccinated than males ; this year, besides these two circles, there is a small excess of males in Allahabad and Jhansi. The difference in Benares is greatest, as there were more than 6,000 more males than females vaccinated there. From the customs of the country, one would have supposed that more male children would be vaccinated than female, unless indeed where the people are more willing to try the experiment on girls than boys from valuing them less ; but it is chiefly in the backward and prejudiced circle of Benares that there is an excess of males. Children under one year. 16, The percentage of vaccination of children under one year stands thus :( 6 ) only a small fraction of the total population, and the figures regarding it are not sufficient data on which to form any general conclusion. At the very utmost, the proportion of the total vaccinated can hardly come to more than 5 per cent. of the population. Birth-rate. 19. You give the proportion of population successfully vaccinated relatively to the number of births as 38.68, being an increase of 2.58 per cent. over last year. These proportions need not be further discussed here, and the subject is only noticed in order to point out to you, that the birth-rate you assume, 30 per thousand, is certainly too low. The last half-yearly infanticide re- turns, which extend over a considerable population, and are believed to be very fairly correct, give an annual birth-rate of 38.4 per thou- sand, and all the returns and information before Government point to a birth-rate more like 40 than 30 per thousand. I am to invite your attention to Mr. W. C. Plowden's remarks in Vol. I of the last Census Report on the high birth-rate accompanied by a very large mortality, which characterises the Province. In future, for the purpose of showing the operations of your Department, you should assume the birth-rate at 40 per thousand. Deaths by small-pox. 20. Your report is compiled by the official year 1873-74, and that of the Sanitary Commissioner by the calendar year ; but this makes no great difference as respects deaths from small-pox, as the period during which small-pox was most preva- lent, viz., March to June, 1873, falls within both years. The prevalence of this epidemic was the principal feature of the health of the year; the number of deaths from this cause being 3.15 per thousand, against 0.97 in 1872. The Sanitary Commissioner bears testimony to the good which has been done, but the only Province where it can confidently be asserted that vaccination has as yet sensibly affected small-pox mortality, is Kumaun, where an amount of success has been obtained which the Lieutenant-Governor believes has not been exceeded in any country in the world. Rohilkhand is spoken of by Mr. Planck as &quot;unprotected,&quot; (that is, as compared with Kumaun); but this and the other Vaccination Reports show that, after Kumaun, that Division is more effectually pro- tected than any other. And this being so, if any confirmation is needed of the statement that vaccination has not yet, as a rule, affected the gene- ral death-rate from small-pox, it will apparently be found in the fact, (if indeed our statistics may be trusted,) that in no part of these Provinces in the past nine years have the ravages of this disease been more severe than in Rohilkhand. The worst districts during the past year are :( 7 ) It will thus be seen that in the seven districts in which the deaths have been above five per thousand, three are in Rohilkhand. Expenditure. 21. The expenditure statement given by you in your para. 20 has already been incidentally noticed, but it remains to compare it with the accounts furnished by the Account Department, forwarded by you in your letter No. 793, dated 2nd June, 1874. The Accountant-General's accounts only show what is spent by Government, and do not cover Municipal or local expenditure. As regards the Government expenditure, the figures stand thus:( 8 ) Provinces, the results obtained in which are more fairly comparable with our own :( 9 ) of Government. The condition that vaccination must be made compul- sory has already been disapproved by this Government. If indeed can- tonments only included the military bazars, inhabited by camp followers and trades-people dependent on the soldiery for custom, there might be something to urge in favor of the proposal. But as things are, canton- ment boundaries frequently include thousands of people entirely uncon- nected with the military, and to make vaccination compulsory on all these would be opposed to the principles of the British Government. If the mere asking a boy in a school if he was vaccinated or not was held to be dangerous, as being likely to drive children from the schools, this mea- sure would certainly be fraught with much greater risk. It would give rise to exaggerated rumours, and might have the effect of depopulating cantonments. 27. In conclusion, I am to convey the Lieutenant-Governor's thanks to you and to your officers for your labours in the past year, and his acknowledgments of the assistance rendered by the official and non- official gentlemen whose names are mentioned in the report. The time that must elapse before the enormous population of these Provinces can be effectually protected against small-pox must be long, but there is no department of the administration in which more real and more valuable progress has been made than in this. Although the remarkable results which have been obtained in the Hill Districts of Kumaun and Garhwal have doubtless been arrived at under far more favourable con- ditions than those which exist in the plains, those results are full of en- couragement. Sir John Strachey well remembers the terrible epide- mics of small-pox by which, before you commenced your work some twenty years ago, these districts were constantly ravaged ; and the pre- judices and suspicions of the people in regard to vaccination were then as strong as they now are in any other part of these Provinces. It may now be said, without exaggeration, and with certainty, that owing to your exertions small-pox in Kumaun and Garhwál has been extirpated as an epidemic disease. The people have learned by experience the value of vaccination, and their prejudices against it have almost disappeared. There is no reason why with time and perseverance similar results should not be obtained throughout these Provinces. Sir John Strachey has long watched your operations with interest, and he now desires, as Lieutenant-Governor of these Provinces, to thank you on the part of the Government for the excellent services which you have rendered to the country. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, C. A. ELLIOTT, Secretary to Government, North- Western Provinces.
SEASON OF 1874-75. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELKHAND. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1875.
SEASON OF 1874-75. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELKHAND. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1875.
SEASON OF 1874-75. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. No. 18 OF 1875. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces, To A. COLVIN, ESQUIRE, Offg. Secretary to Government, N.-W. Provinces. DATED ALMORA, THE 17TH MAT, 1875. Sir, I have the honour to submit, for the information of His Honor the Lieutenant- Governor, the Returns of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces, for the year 1874-75. 1.( 2 ) Native Superintendents. I am disposed to think that such as have risen from the ranks will not be found to have the independence, influence, and position necessary to the ends in view. In order to command implicit obedience of subordinates, and to gain the co- operation of natives of rank, good birth, good caste, and good manners are essential. It is to natives of this stamp that we must look for pushing on vaccination and making it really acceptable to the people. They can exercise an influence over, and gain an access to, the feelings of the people, which it is hopeless for a European to expect for himself; and I trust to be able to introduce into the department, as time goes on, a greater amount of native agency of this character, for upon it the future of vaccination, in my opinion, very greatly depends. The cost of supervision forms a disagreeably large percentage of the total expenditure, but it cannot be avoided as long as native human nature continues what it is. There are now 401 vaccinators, 35 apprentices, and 5 tube-fillers on the establishment. The sense of moral obligation entertained by these 441 persons is not of such a nature that they can be trusted out of sight for any length of time ; unless therefore vaccination is to be a sham, we must be prepared to pay heavily to ensure the reality. 3. Twenty-two of the 35 districts of the North-Western Provinces have now two vaccinators attached to each tahsil. The remaining thirteen districts will be doubled gradually within the next two or three years. When this is accomplished, the North- Western Provinces will have a body of vaccinators which will admit of each village and town being visited every second or third year. This will not even then be much to boast of: yet when one looks back over the last twenty years, and compares the present with the past, it must be admitted that the Government has, amongst all its many other claims, not been insensible to those of the Vaccine Department, Sixteen vaccinatorships( 3 ) E.( 4 ) 9. In the five years ending 1869 the deaths from small-pox in the North-Western Provinces were 3311,175 ; in the five years ending 1874 the number was 282,426. How far the difference (48,749) is owing to vaccination I am not prepared to say ; but I think the Vaccine Department may put in its claim to a share of the lives saved. K.( 5 ) This total, divided over 368,820 cases of successful vaccination, makes the cost of each case Re. 0-4-8. 14. The following table shows the cost and results of vaccination in the North- Western Provinces for 1874-75, compared with those obtained in other provinces in 1873-1874:( 6 ) and discomfiture, for I had flattered myself that such a thing as an outbreak was impossible anywhere in the hills. From enquiry on the spot it was found that a comparatively large number of persons had been attacked, chiefly adults, and that some had died, but it was also found that these had never been vaccinated ; the fact being that the time of year (hot and rainy seasons) generally selected by the vac- cinator for his visits (Dasoli having a cool climate from its high elevation) was the very time when many of the villagers were absent either on trading journeys or tend- ing their flocks elsewhere, and thus they had escaped the vaccinator's services. There were large numbers of both adults and children who had been protected, yet mixing freely amongst those ill and dying from small-pox, remained themselves uninfected. The villagers stated that none of those who had been vaccinated took the disease; certainly none died, for I went carefully over the village vaccine records and ascer- tained this fact for myself. 16. Assuming the births at 40 in 1,000, the number born in the Kumaun and Garh- wal Hills should be 29,744. During the past season there have been 30,583 cases of successful primary vaccination, thus fully meeting the births of the year; and in addition 37,130 re-vaocinations have been performed amongst adults and children over one year of age. The people of these hills are now as well protected as it is possible to pro- tect ; and if any of them suffer from small-pox, it is entirely through their own carelessness and neglect, for the opportunity of protection is constantly within their reach. 17. The amount of vaccine virus distributed during the past season from the and Garhwal Hills has been( 7 ) Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Sherkot, ... ... 50 0 0 92 0 0 One vaccinator. Seohara, ... ... 42 0 0 Afzalgarh, ... ... 42 0 0 92 0 0 One ditto. Rehar, ... ... 25 0 0 Kasampur, ... ... 25 0 0 Mandawar, ... ... 40 0 0 92 0 0 One ditto. Kiratpur, ... ... 52 0 0 This strikes me as such an excellent method of meeting the vaccination wants of the district, that I hope His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor will approve of the system being generally extended throughout the North-Western Provinces. It is only by such means that we can hope to have a really sufficient staff of vaccinators to meet the requirements of the country. I think that the principle might be paid down that the Government is prepared to supply the supervising agency and two vaccinators to every tahsil, but that all establishment required in excess of this must be paid for by the people themselves. Speaking generally, four vaccinators in each tahsil division would admit of every village being visited annually, and nothing less than this can meet actual requirements. 19. The Deputy Superintendent makes mention in his report of the great interest taken in vaccination by Mr. Moore, the Magistrate of Bareilly, and Mr. Lambe, the Joint Magistrate of Pilibhit. The Civil authorities of the Bijnor district have for years past been particularly earnest in their advocacy of vaccination, and set an example worthy of general adoption. AGRA AND MEERUT CIRCLE. 20. There were 133,381cases of successful primary vaccination in this circle during the season. Assuming the birth addition to have been 400,723, 29.62 per cent. of this addition has been overtaken. There has not been any advance in this circle during the season, and not to advance is, in my opinion, an unsatisfactory condition of affairs. Dr. Pringle's tour this season was not so extended as I could have wished. There were circumstances which interfered with it. I attach so much importance to each vacci- nator annually receiving a full inspection from either his Superintendent or Deputy Superintendents, that every thing else should, as far as is possible, be made to yield to that set purpose. The vaccine virus for this circle and also for the Benares circle is supplied by the vaccine establishments in the Tehri Raja's country. Dr. Pringle in his report mentions that it was particularly fresh and active this season, having been collected chiefly in the months of September and October, Having the Raja's country at our disposal for this purpose is a great boon : in fact, without it we should be reduced to sore straits to meet all the demands which come upon us in such force during the first week or so of the working season. Dr. Pringle speaks in high terms of Mr. Ross, the Superintendent of Dehra Dun, for the active interest he takes in vac- cination. It appears that last year there was only one death from small-pox in the Dun; and from careful inspection by Dr. Pringle of the villages in the Dun, he believes the people to have been so well protected that there is little fear of any epide- mic of small-pox being ever able to spread. Tulsi Ram, the Native Superintendent of the Dun, is mentioned as an intelligent, hardworking man, to whom praise is due. ALLAHABAD AND JHANSI CIRCLE. 21. There were 53,114 cases of successful primary vaccination in this circle during the past season. Assuming the birth addition to have been 256,155, the percentage on this addition was 16.60. I regret to observe that there has been a falling off in this circle both of the total numbers vaccinated and in the percentage of success. I hope that this is but a temporary decline, owing to the change of Superintendents during the
( 8 ) working season. Dr. Watson having taken leave to England from November 15th to the middle of February, Dr. Ruttledge, a stranger to the locality, people, and work, offici- ated for him. Making all due allowances, however, for this change of Superintendents, I am of opinion that the establishments are not under such strict discipline as they ought to be, and I have directed Dr. Watson's attention to this subject. I trust that he will make his Deputy. Superintendent and Native Superintendents feel the responsibility of their positions, and give them to understand that they are not in the service of any particular Superintendent, but that they are the servants of the Government. 22. Dr. Watson complains of the very backward state of vaccination in the Allahabad and Fatehpur zilas, and attributes this unsatisfactory state of affairs greatly to the absence of interest in the subject of the Magistrate and Collector of those districts; their want of sympathy having its effects upon all within their influence. Dr. Watson speaks very highly of Colonel Davidson's active assistance in Jalaun, where a consi- derable increase in the numbers vaccinated has taken place. He also mentions with approval, as having rendered great aid, the undermentioned native gentlemen:( 9 ) 25. Dr. Richardson, in mentioning the names of those who have specially helped on vaccination, writes : &quot; Mr. Lumsden, Magistrate of Gorakhpur, and each one of his officers have in every respect anticipated the wishes of Government as expressed in Circular No. 4 A. of 1875. Sheo Shankar Lal, Tahsildar of Hata, has, I believe, been specially recommended to Government for the steady assistance he has for years rendered to the cause of vaccination. No one better deserves some special mark of favour. Scarcely less active in his efforts to help us has been Bisheshar Daial Pande, Tahsildar of Gorakhpur. Throughout the three districts of Basti, Gorakhpur, and Azamgarh the Tahsildars have in nearly every instance more or less assisted the vaccinator employed in their tahsils. In the Ghazipur district it is sufficient to state that Mr. Oldham continues to take the same interest in vaccination as in former years. A glance at the returns will show that this district occupies the foremost place as regards the quantity and quality of vaccination combined. In the cities of Benares and Mirzapur vaccination is still backward. Of the Civil Surgeons who have taken interest in vaccination I would more particularly men- tion Drs. Prentis, Sullivan, Jameson, and Hooper.&quot; With reference to the new Deputy Superintendent, Dr. Richardson writes : &quot; My Deputy Superintendent will in future be of the greatest use. A better selection for the post than Pandit Bishan Dat could not have been made.&quot; CONCLUSION. 26. The circular issued by His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor on 13th February, 1875, was too late to be of any appreciable effect this season, but I anticipate great results from it in all future time. I regard it as the Magna Charta of the Vaccine Department, and feel that I cannot do better than here repeat its contents, for they cannot be made known too widely :( 10 ) No. 19. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, Supdt.-General of Vaccination, N.-W. Provinces, TO SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, N.-W. P. DATED ALMORA, THE 15TH MAT, 1875. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the returns of vaccination of the Indepen- dent States of Bundelkhand for the year 1874-75. The average number of cases vaccinated by each vaccinator during the season is 411 only, and the percentage of success 85.2. The amount effected is not much, but results must not be criticised too closely, as the system of payment of vaccinators is peculiar, and does not tend to elicit any great zeal in the performance of their duties. Dr. Watson, however, reports that the native princes generally are favourable to vaccination, and states that &quot; last year the Maharaja of Bijawar was vaccinated him- self. This year, during the tour of the Governor-General's Agent for Central India, in the Bundelkhand part of his Agency, the following influential chiefs had their children vaccinated:( 11 ) A.( 12 ) A.( 13 ) DEPARTMENT. in the North-Western Provinces during the year 1874-75. 10. 11. 12. 13. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION Percentage of successful cases, exclud- ing those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinat- ed by each vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Christians. Muhammadans. High Caste Hin- dus. Low Caste Hin- dus. Under 1 year. Over 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In primary. In secondary. 6 12 9,019 2,822 3,371 8,488 11,107 450 302 11,859 712 10,091 1,066 11,869 96.10 6.59 564 6 16 10,976 2,187 2,559 10,626 10,875 1,461 849 13,185 2,217 11,829 2,393 16,439 88.15 15.78 705 ... 752 1,012 1,364 1,034 2,094 2,548 267 313 3,128 122 726 251 1,099 90.51 14.38 422 2 249 472 365 221 867 875 83 130 1,088 163 337 97 597 91.33 32.60 240 ... 300 179 127 203 403 532 37 37 606 60 11 48 119 93.49 84.50 145 ... 7 1,383 382 376 1,396 1,571 105 96 1,772 82 837 148 1,067 93.73 8.92 405 ... 9 1,257 365 234 1,397 1,500 62 69 1,631 221 2,619 465 3,305 96.03 7.78 705 3 60 2,233 1,154 1,581 1,869 2,942 213 295 3,456 626 2,217 565 3,408 93.24 22.01 381 ... 891 758 1,369 921 2,097 2,466 234 318 3,018 177 706 236 1,119 91.33 20.04 275 184 336 736 404 374 1,286 1,650 7 3 1,660 49 321 85 455 99.57 13.24 302 201 2,632 28,025 10,539 10,874 30,523 36,066 2,919 2,412 41,397 4,429 29,694 5,354 39,477 92.51 12.97 461 ... 645 192 2,152 936 2,053 2,567 291 131 2,989 ... ... ... ... 89.71 ... 298.9 ... 484 99 2,158 1,120 1,621 2,273 323 145 2,741 5 84 12 101 87.55 5.61 284.2 1 535 717 1,408 698 1,963 2,254 244 163 2,661 5 1 ... 6 90.23 83.33 266.7 1 531 490 2,739 1,264 2,497 3,351 272 138 3,761 8 5 2 15 92.49 61.53 377.6 3 715 372 1,938 776 2,252 2,620 275 133 3,028 4 ... ... 4 90.50 100 303.2 ... 684 678 1,340 952 1,750 2,518 139 45 2,702 143 40 15 198 94.62 78.19 290 20 600 155 677 656 796 1,259 86 107 1,452 57 292 45 394 93.60 16.33 184.6 3 103 56 13S 245 556 558 151 92 801 25 22 20 67 78.70 53.19 17.36 4 513 45 376 524 414 787 133 18 938 15 37 52 85.55 28.84 198.0 ... 209 521 605 322 1,013 1,214 74 47 1,335 106 47 19 172 94.26 69.28 301.4 4 544 30 206 319 465 704 44 36 784 26 10 1 37 94.13 72.22 16.42 36 5,563 3,355 14,238 7,812 15,380 20,105 2,032 1,055 23,192 394 538 114 1,046 90.82 42.27 269.31 ... 940 841 1,928 1,475 2,264 3,024 381 334 3,739 40 28 6 74 88.83 58.82 381.3 3 622 526 1,450 1,111 1,490 2,211 251 129 2,601 11 75 20 106 89.80 12.79 270.7 ... 964 160 1,417 811 1,730 2,187 181 173 2,541 27 72 42 141 92.27 27.27 268.2 ... 831 233 1,064 561 1,567 1,649 247 232 2,128 36 182 47 265 86.97 16.51 239.3 ... 745 324 2,281 805 2,545 2,678 319 353 3,350 78 147 73 298 89.42 34.66 364.8 3 324 157 392 286 590 679 109 88 876 19 10 2 31 86.16 65.51 181.4 ... 543 208 319 521 549 949 56 65 1,070 11 24 ... 35 94.42 31.42 221.0 ... 292 100 447 243 596 661 131 47 839 16 1 6 4 26 83.45 72.72 173.0 ... 276 91 441 172 636 664 93 51 808 8 15 1 24 87.71 34.78 166.4 ... 288 108 706 566 536 954 86 62 1,102 22 11 7 40 91.73 66.66 228.4 ... 744 255 668 459 1,208 1,522 69 76 1,667 ... ... ... ... 95.66 ... 333.4 6 6,569 3,003 11,143 7,010 13,711 17,178 1,923 1,620 20,721 268 570 202 1,040 89.93 31.98 272.1 ... 613 145 1,670 543 1,885 1,987 165 276 2,428 9 14 10 38 92.33 39.13 246.1 ... 409 140 1,875 439 1,985 1,599 461 364 2,424 90 71 70 231 77.62 55.90 265.5 ... 944 63 3,094 527 3,574 3,811 183 107 4,101 13 3 1 1 17 95.66 81.25 411.8 ... 942 64 2,544 512 3,038 2,972 317 261 3,550 61 36 10 107 90.76 62.88 365.7 ... 714 146 2,266 632 2,494 2,241 585 300 3,126 63 57 13 133 79.29 52.50 325.9 ... 159 212 2,717 581 2,507 2,447 353 283 3,088 3 4 1 8 90.36 42.85 309.6 ... 380 244 2,305 707 2,222 2,305 451 173 2,929 14 19 5 38 83.63 42.36 296.7 1 318 183 2,160 752 1,910 2,193 308 161 2,662 59 109 25 193 87.33 35.11 285.6 ... 94 62 3,161 127 3,190 2,302 301 214 3,317 ... ... 1 1 90.29 ... 331.8 6 308 143 468 519 406 663 173 89 925 30 83 27 140 79.30 26.63 71.0 ... 274 82 656 230 783 805 107 101 1.013 6 3 2 11 88.26 66.66 204.8 ... 129 56 815 281 719 828 109 63 1,000 2 1 1 4 88.36 66.66 200.8 61 113 50 292 282 234 447 43 26 516 27 58 1 86 91.22 31.88 120.4 69 5,397 1,590 24,023 6,132 24,947 25,100 3,556 2,423 31,079 377 458 167 1,002 87.59 45.1 267.34 4v
( 14 ) A( 15 ) DEPARTM E NT. the North-Western Provinces during the year 1874-75.( 16 ) A.( 17 ) DEPARTMENT. the North- Western Provinces during the year 1874-75.( 18) A.( 19 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces during the year 1874-75. ( 20 ) A.( 21 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces during the year 1874-75.( 22 ) A .( 23 ) DEPARTMENT. the North- Western Provinces during the year 1874-75.( 24 ) A.( 25 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces during the year 1874-75.( 26 ) A.( 27 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces during the year 1874-75.( 28 ) A.( 29 ) AGRA AND MEERUT. April, 1874, ... ... ( 30 ) A( 31 ) A.( 32 ) A.( 33 ) A.( 34 ) A.ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT. No. 389A. of 1875. FROM THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. TO THE SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. DATED NAINI TAL., THE 16TH AUGUST, 1875. SIR, DEPARTMENT. I am directed by His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor to acknow- ledge the receipt of your letters Nos. 18 and 19, dated the 17th and 15th May, 1875, submitting the Vaccination Returns and Report of the North- Western Provinces and Native States of Bundelkhand for the year 1874-75. 2. Reduction of report and appendices.( 2 ) tertained in the Allahabad-Jhansi Circle, but it is absolutely necessary to explain such causes of discrepancy between the appendices and the text, of which many instances may be found in this as in previous reports. You state in paragraph 27 that you have adhered to your own figures, as you do not admit the accuracy of the alterations formerly made in this office. With reference to this remark, it may be noted that this office has no means, and never has had any, of checking your figures. All that has been done is to point out contradictory statements, such as that referred to in the commencement of this paragraph, and to apply to your figures the principles of multiplication and division. 4. Increase in number of operations.( 3 ) From this it will be seen that in Rohilkhand and Allahabad-Jhansi the number has somewhat decreased. In Meerut-Agra it has remained stationary, while in Benares and Kumaun it has increased : in the latter circle very largely, which is owing to the great increase in the number of secondary operations there. 7. Average number of operations performed by different classes of vaccinators.( 4 ) averages per man, but the averages per place. If you think it well to show the averages for the different towns, there can be no objection to your doing so ; but they should be shown separately and not entered in a column professing to show average work per vaccinator. I am also to request that in future Superintendents should state precisely the number of vaccinators personally inspected by them during the season, and the numerical result in each case of their scrutiny. 9. Highest and lowest districts.( 5 ) 13 Percentage of successful primary operations to number of births, calculated at 4 per cent. in each district.( 6 ) place at your disposal next year, with their proposals for distribution; It will be generally found convenient that two towns should club together to support a vaccinator in common. And the example of the Bijnor dis- trict shows what can be done by arrangements in this direction. 17. Inoculators and inoculation.( 7 ) 21. Thanks of Government to Superintendent-General.( 8 ) Circles. Districts. Population. Births at 4 per cent. of population. Successful primary vaccination. Percentage. KUMAUN AND GARHWAL. Kumaun, Garhwal, and Tarai. 929,260 37,170 36,066 97.02 ROHIL- KHAND. Moradabad ... 1,122,437 44,897 20,105 44.7 Bijnor ... 737,153 29,486 17,178 58.2 Bareilly ... 1,507,139 60,285 25,100 41.6 Budaun ... 934,348 37,373 15,599 41.7 Shahjahanpur ... 949,579 37,983 9,025 23.7 AGRA AND MEERUT. Dehra Dun ... 116,981 4,679 4,699 100.4 Saharunpur ... 880,663 35,226 19,838 56.3 Muzaffarnagar ... 704,800 28,192 10,596 37.5 Meerut ... 1,271,454 50,858 13,674 26.8 Bulandshahr ... 936,733 37,469 12,412 33.1 Aligarh ... 1,057,939 42,317 12,619 29.8 Muttra ... 892,542 35,701 10,590 29.6 Agra ... 1,097,425 43,897 13,002 29.6 Etah ... 700,688 28,027 6,219 22.1 Mainpuri ... 753,971 30,158 8,065 26.7 Etawah ... 671,247 26,849 7,845 29.2 Farukhabad ... 919,091 36,763 5,812 15.7 ALLAHABAD AND JHANSI. Jaunpur ... 1,025,961 41,038 5,300 12.9 Fatehpur ... 663,877 26,555 4,537 17.08 Allahabad ... 1,396,241 55,849 5,554 9.9 Cawnpore ... 1,156,055 46,242 15,674 33.8 Banda ... 697,684 27,907 3,906 13.9 Hamirpur ... 529,137 21,165 4,388 20.7 Jalaun ... 404,447 16,177 10,920 67.5 Jhansi ... 317,826 12,713 1,894 14.8 Lalitpur ... 212,061 8,482 941 11.09 BENARES. Benares ... 794,039 31,761 6,166 19.3 Mirzapur ... 1,015,826 40,633 5,788 14.2 Ghazipur ... 1,345,570 53,822 13,363 24.8 Azamgarh ... 1,531,482 61,259 8,792 14.3 Gorakhpur ... 2,019,361 80,774 11,355 14.05 Basti ... 1,473,029 58,921 4,815 8.1
SEASON OF 1875-7 6. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELKHAND, BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD; NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1876.
SEASON-OF 1875-76. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND NATIVE STATES OF BUNDELKHAND. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1876.
SEASON OF 1875-76. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. No. 175 of 1876. FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, To THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. CAMP GARHWAL, THE 1ST MAY, 1876. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit, for the information of His Honor the Lieute- nant-Governor, the Returns of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces, for the year 1875-76. 1.( 2 ) number was 1,170. This slight falling off is chiefly attributable to the 52 new vac- cinators who are unable during their first year to work up to the standard of the old and experienced vaccinators. The average amount of work accomplished in the different circles varies considerably. The Kumaun division stands highest with an average of 482 cases per vaccinator per mensem; then follows Rohilkhand with 261; next in order stands the Agra and Meerut circle with 209; Benares, 193, and. Allahabad and Jhansi closes the list with 171. These differences are what might be expected. Vaccination is accepted most freely where it has been longest known. The people, apparently, have to pass through three stages upon the introduction of vaccination, the first, that of terror where the mothers hide their children in the fields on the approach of the vaccinator; the second, that of apathy or mild dislike; the third that of a belief in its efficacy. Kumaun perhaps may be said to have arrived at the 3rd stage; Rohilkhand as passing into it; and the other three circles as still in the 2nd stage. I think the 1st stage has been finally left behind everywhere. When reviewing the work of the circles, generally, the total averages must be the tests, but within each circle the most extraordinary differences exist; in some tahsils the local average will stand as high as 630, whereas the general average will be only 193. The same thing is apparent in a small group of neighbouring villages all under the same vaccinator, and can only in most instances be accounted for by the contrariness of human nature. Of the above grand Total of 5,29,207 vaccinations, 4,86,377 were primary, and 42,830 secondary. Almost the whole of these last were performed in Kumaun. In all the other circles primary vaccination is still too backward, to make it necessary to think of re-vaccination. C.( 3 ) I may here state that this percentage of success in primary vaccination accords very accurately with the results as tested by the Superintendents and Deputy Super- intendents, their reports of 19,265 cases seen by themselves, showing the average to be 91.30. G.( 4 ) L.( 5 ) This total, divided over 409,517 cases of successful vaccination, makes the cost of each case Rs. 0-4-7, one pie less than last year. I don't think the cost will pro- bably for many years to come fall much below four annas; for to ensure really trust- worthy vaccination and reliable returns, the supervising agency must be both large and expensive. P.( 6 ) The above return shows that every vaccinator has been inspected in the Kumaun, Rohilkhand divisions, and in the Allahabad circles, once during the season by either the Superintendent or Deputy Superintendent. In the Benares circle each vaccinator (81 in number) has been inspected by the Superintendent himself, and 71 of these have again been inspected by the Deputy Superintendent. In the Agra and Meerut circle only 115 out of 150 vaccinators have been inspect- ed by the Superintendent and Deputy Superintendent. Dr. Pringle, unfortunately, was laid up for some time with fever at Bulandshahr, which prevented his doing more. 2.( 7 ) 3. ( 8 ) when the authorities exhibit to the natives their interest in vaccination ; and believ- ing it to be by far the most important sanitary proceeding capable of being carried out in this country aided it by every legitimate means in their power. What has been done in the Meerut Cantonment is capable of being done in every cantonment in India ; and, since the Indian Penal Code and sanitation are the basis of this set of rules, I do not see why similar results should not be met with in every municipality in my divisions. I am glad to say that on my representing the matter to the various magistrates in my divisions and forwarding a copy of the rules, some of them have taken the subject up most warmly, and I trust next year municipal and local vacci- nation will show better results for the annual grant to vaccination made from their funds.&quot; &quot;All the civil officers in my circle with the exception of one whom I need not name, have as usual rendered me more or less assistance, and if I do not name them all in- dividually, it is not because their help is not worth alluding to, but because in the course of my tour I have not been brought into such close contact with them as with those I have named; they are all anxious about the correctness of the village returns, and that is a very important point gained.&quot; &quot;To Messrs. Jenkinson, Sladen, Turner, Wigram, Colvin, and Simson my best thanks are due, and to Drs. Maclaren, Jones, Eteson, and Willcocks.&quot; &quot;The present Superintendent of the Dún, Mr. Barstow, is as anxious as his pre- decessor Mr. Ross, to retain for the Dehra Dún the unique position it enjoys as regards exemption from small-pox. I trust, however, I may be permitted to request that some special mark of approval may be conveyed to the Cantonment Committee of Meerut, for having solved the problem as regards the best mode of carrying on vaccina- tion in India, and particularly to Dr. Manners Smith and Major Plowden. It might seem almost out of place, my taking the liberty of alluding thus to the valuable help of Dr. Manners Smith, an officer so much my senior, but I felt confident, that when he threw the weight of his experience and position into the scale in favour of vac- cination, it would outweigh all obstacle as it has done, and that the energy and zeal of Major Plowden, as lately shown in the outbreak of cholera at Meerut last year, would soon strike out some plan by which the Meerut Cantonment, with its population of 25,000 would be spared an outbreak of small-pox, like that which seems at present to defy all legislative and sanitary measures at Bombay. The fact of their having been upwards of 2,500 unprotected cases in the Meerut Cantonment, shows what fuel was ready to hand in the event of small-pox appearing, as it generally does in the hot weather, when vaccination cannot be carried on in the Doab. I can- not close this report without recording my regret at the untimely death of the late Mr. Pollen, Assistant Magistrate of Bulandshahr, in him vaccination, wherever he might have been appointed, has lost one of its best friends.&quot; &quot;I trust the Government will also convey to the Rajah of Tehri some expres- sion of their approval not only for the continuance of his grant to vaccination, but also for the assistance he has always been ready to give to vaccination, and for the complete suppression of inoculation in his territory, which is entirely due to his strong orders on the subject.&quot; &quot;The tahsíldars, in every tahsíl through which I passed have visited me if near my camp, and given me good opportunities of enlisting their help.&quot; Extract from the Proceedings of the Meerut Cantonment Committee, dated 7th Decem- ber, 1875. IT was resolved that the Cantonment Magistrate should forthwith give intimation throughout the whole of the bazars and cantonments generally as follows :( 9 ) 2. The services of the vaccinator are available for all residents in cantonments without a fee or gratuity of any kind whatever. 3. In the event of small-pox appearing in any family in cantonments, and its presence is found to be due to the neglect of vaccination when it was brought to their very doors, that family will be moved into temporary huts and isolated in localities selected by the Committee, where they will remain till pronounced free from infection and all expenses attendant on this system of isolation must be borne by the families themselves. Among the higher classes of Natives.* 4. Among the upper class of Natives and their families the system * adopted in cholera epidemics for isolation and treatment, and approved of by His Excellency the Commander-in- Chief referred to in the correspondence quoted in this report, will be applicable. Notice to officers and residents to permit vaccinator's entry to their com- pounds to vaccinate servants, &c. 5. The Cantonment Magistrate to give a written notice to the special vaccinator as follows :( 10 ) the circles. Nobody can work harder than Dr. Watson himself, the Superintendent, for he spares himself no labour. But I am of opinion that he errs somewhat in leniency towards his establishments, not exacting from them, by means of fines, the amount of work he has a right to expect : this remark more especially applies to the native superintendents who ought to be made to feel their responsibilities more thoroughly. Dr. Watson writes :( 11 ) The following Officers of Government have more specially assisted our progress : Mr. Plowden, Mr. Oldham, and Mr. Lumsden, Drs. Verchere, Hooper, and Sul- livan ; but more particularly the last. Pandit Chirunji Lal, Tahsíldar of Chandauli, Lala Shiu Shankar Lal, Tahsíldar of Deoria, Pandit Shankar Daiyal Panday, Tahsíldar of Bansgaon, Munshi Abdul Ghafur, Tahsíldar of Parana, Lala Sarup Narain, Tahsíldar of Khalilabad, Munshi Shiu Ram, Tahsíldar of Kaptainganj, Muhammad Khalil, Tahsíldar of Azamgarh. In the Nagra Tahsíl, Sahibdad Khan, Head Constable, Sikandarpur Thanah, did much to assist the vaccinators by explaining the object of vaccination to the village chauki- dars, and encouraging them to submit their own children to be operated upon. Similar assistance was received from Imdad Ulla Khan, Court Inspector, Azam- garh. I must not omit to mention the aid given by Mr. Peppé throughout his estate in the Basti district. It was owing to this, that the vaccinators employed in the Bansi Tahsil were able to show such favourable results. The members of the Municipal Committee, Mirzapur, have for the first time be- stirred themselves in the work of vaccination, and with their assistance it is hoped, Mirzapur will next year cease to show the smallest number of operations per vac- cinator in the Benares Division. In the Mirzapur District Babu Shiu Bakhsh Singh, zemindar, Gopiganj, deserves mention for the interest he took in vaccination through- out his estate. My Deputy Superintendent continues to give me entire satisfaction.. 7.( 12 ) A.( 13 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76. 10. 11. 12. 13. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Percentage of suc- cessful cases ex- cluding those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vac- cinated by each vaccinator per mensem. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Result. Result. Christians. Muhammadans. High caste Hin- dus. Low caste Hin- dus. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. In primary vac- cination. In secondary vaccination. 4 71 8,026 2,746 2,487 8,360 10,052 406 389 10,847 1,446 14,483 1,661 17,590 96.11 09.07 677. 2 80 20,153 3,636 3,109 20,762 22,712 517 642 23,871 1,000 5,856 573 7,469 97.77 14.50 746. ... 740 1,314 1,269 1,162 2,161 2,927 195 201 3,323 64 734 65 863 93.75 08.02 418. 11 75 301 733 288 832 896 100 124 1,120 247 617 113 975 89.95 28.58 299. 12 16 646 179 321 532 835 7 11 853 68 168 38 274 99.16 28.81 187. 282 131 129 232 310 458 61 23 542 62 56 43 161 88.24 52.54 140. ... ... 1,046 336 352 1,080 1,259 94 79 1,432 170 2,910 418 3,501 93.05 05.50 705. ... 4 2,486 427 273 2,644 2,833 39 45 2,917 117 671 40 828 98.64 14.84 535. 5 81 1,944 955 1,824 1,161 2,678 135 172 2,985 336 2,106 560 3,002 95.25 13.75 332. ... 1,070 467 1,436 738 2,235 2,524 138 311 2,973 111 733 237 1,081 90.81 13.15 270. 86 257 275 297 234 681 700 9 206 915 18 188 161 367 86.73 08.73 183. 120 2,676 36,789 12,193 11,020 40,158 47,874 1,701 2,203 51,778 3,639 28,508 3,907 36,114 96.56 11.29 482. ... 817 187 2,016 988 2,032 2,685 204 131 3,020 ... ... ... ... 92.93 .00 302.0 ... 649 79 1,754 1,222 1,260 2,090 252 141 2,482 9 56 8 73 89.23 13.84 255.5 ... 623 961 1,056 621 2,019 2,302 169 169 2,641 15 2 12 48 92.10 41.66 268.8 ... 530 498 2,274 1,146 2,156 2,866 246 190 3,302 7 6 4 17 92.00 53.84 331.9 4 817 390 1,844 939 2,116 2,709 214 132 3,055 3 ... ... 3 92.67 100.00 305.8 ... 802 478 1,105 820 1,565 2,219 189 27 2,385 221 3 17 269 94.10 87.69 265.4 28 449 118 704 732 567 1,098 70 131 1,299 138 36 51 550 94.00 27.65 184.9 1 72 87 664 207 617 597 129 98 824 29 13 11 52 82.23 69.04 175.4 3 405 23 283 456 258 586 114 14 714 11 23 ... 36 83.76 30.55 150.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 499 12 277 402 390 703 52 37 792 14 9 ... 23 93.11 00.86 163.0 40 5,663 2,833 11,977 7,533 12,980 17,855 1,589 1,059 20,513 447 527 103 1,072 91.82 45.13 253.9 ... 712 731 1,825 1,494 1,774 2,756 247 265 3,268 47 59 33 139 91.77 44.33 340.7 1 614 647 1,396 1,222 1,436 2,369 196 93 2,658 14 61 14 92 92.35 17.94 275.0 ... 1,037 174 1,423 968 l,665 2,159 235 249 2,631 26 16 10 52 90.14 61.90 268.6 ... 660 432 1,139 787 1,444 1,798 197 236 2,231 8 141 55 204 90.12 5.36 243.5 ... 789 251 2,055 727 2,368 2,600 234 261 3,095 84 153 74 311 91.74 35.41 340.6 1 249 262 436 266 682 769 105 74 948 4 14 18 87.98 22.22 193.20 ... 495 327 348 550 620 1,029 54 87 1,170 18 31 11 60 90.01 36.73 246.00 ... 319 32 450 248 553 592 130 79 801 9 5 9 23 81.99 64.28 164.80 1 478 108 512 614 485 969 70 60 1,099 8 10 1 19 93.36 44.14 223.60 1 220 67 460 203 545 499 135 114 748 16 ... 1 17 78.70 100.00 153.00 ... 525 236 491 541 711 1,190 38 24 1,252 6 3 2 11 96.90 66.06 252.60 ... 197 189 413 356 443 728 39 32 799 32 10 7 49 94.91 76.19 169.50 ... 497 338 522 506 851 1,252 67 38 1,357 ... ... ... ... 94.92 ... 271.40 ... 337 129 423 214 680 679 117 98 894 1 15. 5 21 85.30 6.25 183.00 4 7,129 3,923 11,898 8,696 14,258 19,380 1,864 1,710 22,954 273 521 222 1,016 91.22 33.12 252.3 4v
( 14 ) A.( 15 ) DEPARTMENT the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76( 16 ) A.( 17 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76( 18 ) A.( 19 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76( 20 ) A.( 21 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76( 22 ) A.( 23 ) DEPARTMENT. he North-Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76( 24 ) A.( 25 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76( 26 ) A.( 27 ) DEPARTMENT. North- Western Provinces, during the year 1875-76( 28 ) A.( 29 ) AGRA AND MEERUT. April, 1875 ... ... All districts ... ... 59 30 24 5 59 ... ... ... ... 55.5 ... May ( 30 ) A.( 31 ) A.( 32 ) A.( 33 ) A.ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT No. 468A. OF 1876. FROM THE OFFG, SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT. NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES, To THE SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. DATED NAINI TAL, THE 12TH JULY, 1876. SIR I AM directed by His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor to ac- knowledge the receipt of your letter No. 175, dated 1st May, 1876, for- warding the returns of vaccination for the year 1875-76. 2. Delay in printing report.( 2 ) strange that the percentage of success of this class should be highest of all. The reason may partly be, as you say, the prohibition, of which the Lieutenant-Governor has now heard for the first time, against municipal vaccinators working outside municipal limits. On this subject His Honor quite concurs in the views expressed by you, and will issue such orders as may be required on receipt of the further communication which you promise. 6. Meerut Cantonment.SEASON OF 1876-77. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, N.-W. PROVINCES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1877.
SEASON OF 1876-77. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. BY SURGEON-MAJOR F. PEARSON, SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, N.-W. PROVINCES, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1877.
SEASON OF 1876-77. RETURNS OF VACCINATION FOR THE NORTH-WESTERN PEOVINCES. No. 327 OF 1877. FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH, To THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH. DATED CAMP, GARHWAL, THE 1ST MAY, 1877. SIR, I HAVE the honour to submit, for the information of His Honour the Lieute- nant-Governor, the returns of vaccination, North-Western Provinces, for the year 1876-77. 1.( 2 ) 486,377 were primary and 42,830 secondary. In 1876-77 the number of vaccina- tors was 517, and the number of persons vaccinated was 624,769, being an increase of 95,562. Of the above grand total of 624,769 vaccinations, 589,686 were primary and 35,083 secondary, Almost the whole of the secondary vaccinations were per- formed in the Kumaun division ; for it is in this province only (excepting Dehra Dún) where the birth-rate has been more than overtaken, and consequently where consideration can be given to re-vaccination. C.( 3 ) present strength to enable them to overtake the birth-rate (1,231,248). When the people are anxious to get vaccination a less strength would suffice; but, under the present circumstances of having to hunt up the cases, 300 per mensem is as much as can be expected. H.( 4 ) Provinces against vaccination ; being accepted as it is so equally by all classes in their comparative proportions in the entire population. N.( 5 ) The low-caste Hindús belong almost entirely to the inoculator máli class. Q.( 6 ) Government. The undermentioned gentlemen have been conspicuous for their interest in vaccination: ( 7 ) both show an increase over the previous season. At the end of the season, Dr. Richardson, the Superintendent, left on two years' furlough to England. During his absence the duties of superintendence will be conducted by Dr. Watson, in addition to his own duties of Superintendent of the Allahabad and Jhánsi circles. Dr. Watson will have the assistance of the Deputy Superintendent, Pandit Bishan Dat, in the supervision of this populous circle. Dr. Richardson speaks highly of the capabilities and efficiency of this officer. In the departure of Dr. Richardson the Vaccination Department has lost one of the best superintendents that it has ever had. In everything that he undertook he was thorough, and exercised great tact in all his dealings with both the officials and the people of his circle. I hope he may return to his post. The present arrangements have been made solely with reference to financial considerations. Dr. Richardson makes special mention of the interest taken in vaccination by the undermentioned gentlemen : ( 8 ) A.( 9 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77.( 10 ) A.( 11 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, (During the year 1876-77.( 12 ) A. (13 ) DEPARTMENT. the North- Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77.( 14 ) A.( 15 ) DEPARTMENT. North-Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77( 16 ) A.( 17 ) DEPARTMENT. the North- Western Provinces during the year 1876-77.( 18 ) A.( 19 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77.( 20 ) A.( 21 ) DEPARTMENT. the North- Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77( 22 ) A.( 23 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77.( 24 ) A.( 25 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77.( 26 ) A.( 27 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77.( 28 ) A.( 29 ) DEPARTMENT. the North-Western Provinces, during the year 1876-77.( 30 ) A.( 31 ) AGRA AND MEERUT April, 1876 ... ... All Districts ... ... 302 268 21 18 302 ... ... ... ... 98.7 ... May, ( 32 ) A.( 33 ) A.( 34 ) A.( 35 ) A.( 36 ) A.( 37 ) A.( 38 ) P.ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT. No. 398A. OF 1877. FROM THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDH, TO THE SUPDT.-GENERAL OF VACCINATION, N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDH. DATED NAINI TAL, THE 27TH JUNE, 1877. SIR, EDICAL DEPARTMENT. I AM directed to acknowledge your letter No. 327, dated 1st May last, submitting the Report on Vaccination work in the North-West- ern Provinces for the year 1876-77, and in reply to communicate the following remarks and orders thereon. 2. It is observed that the number of vaccinators of all kinds (Go- vernment, municipal, local and native) employed in the year was greater by 64 than in 1875-76, the chief increase being from 44 to 90 paid from local funds ; and further that every tahsíl in the North-Western Provinces has now two Government vaccinators, save in nine districts where (for reasons not stated) the number is below the mark. Al- though the finances of the province are not such as to justify any sudden increase of establishment merely to secure uniformity of establish- ment, I am to say that His Honor trusts you will be able, by a judicious exercise of economy, to secure an efficient body of vaccinators in every district and sub-division of the North-Western Provinces. 3. With regard to your request for more aid from municipalities and towns under Act XX. of 1856, I am to say that it must be borne in mind that these bodies have already numerous calls to meet, and that many are barely able to bring their present expenditure within the limits of their incomes. It rests with you, however, to report in what localities you think action would be expedient : enquiry as to ways and means can then be made by Government. 4. The operations of the two last years may be summarized as under:( 2 ) a wider field to work in: but their monthly percentage of success is slightly below that of the municipal and local operators. This deficiency, which you do not explain, is no doubt mainly attributable to the fact that as each of the Government vaccinators shows from 70 to 90 more cases per mensem, the duty is at times somewhat perfunctorily and hastily performed. 6. The cost per successful case stands thus for the last three years :