MANUAL OF VACCINATION, UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH.
MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH By Major J. CHAYTOR-WHITE, I.M.S., M.D., D.P.H., (Camb.), Sanitary Commissioner, United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ALLAHABAD: Printed at the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh Government Press 1903. PRICE 12 annas (1s,)
Errata to the Manual of Vaccination, United Provinces. Reference as to page, &c. ForCONTENTS. PART I. Paragraph. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... The object of vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Cow-pox in the cow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 Discovery of vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Spread of vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 Incidence with regard to sex, age, and race . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 Protective power of cow-pox and revaccination . . . . . . . 6 Objections which have been urged against vaccination . . . . . . 7 Conclusions reached by the Royal Commission on Vaccination . . . . 8 Inoculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Means pursued by Government for conferring vaccination upon its subjects in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. Staff employed and spheres of employment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Duties of the vaccinator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Duties of the Assistant Superintendent of Vaccination .... 12 Duties of the Deputy Sanitary Commissioners and District Superintendents of Vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Duties of Deputy Sanitary Commissioners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13(a) Duties of the District Superintendent of vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13(b) Vaccination Season . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 PART II. Pratice of vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... Instruments required for vaccination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Mode of operating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Description of a regular vaccine vesicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Vaccine virusMANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. PART I. INTRODUCTION. THE following pages have been compiled with a twofold object: firstly, to serve as a manual for the use of the vaccine establishments in these Provinces ; and, secondly, to instruct the general public as to the nature of vaccination and the methods used by Government to bring its benefits within the reach of all free of cost.
MANUAL OF VACCINATION. The object of Vaccination. 1. The object of vaccination, it is well known, is to give immunity from small-pox. So marvellous a change has it produced within the last half century, that there are many now to whom small-pox is only a name, and who, having never seen this loathsome disease or realized its baneful results, can with difficulty understand the urgent necessity of vaccination. It is impossible in words to convey adequately to those persons the full extent of the mischief which small-pox works among the unprotected, but it may be said that nearly half of the unvaccinated, who are attacked, die, and of those who survive the larger proportion are disfigured for life or maimed by the loss of one or both eyes, or crippled by injuries to their joints. Very few unvaccinated people are naturally immune to small-pox, which is one of the most highly contagious diseases known, and spares neither childhood, youth nor age. Cow-pox in the cow. 2. Cow-pox (vaccinia) is modified small-pox (variola), i.e. it is small-pox modified by passage through the cow. Jenner believed this, and it was long disputed; but Ceely and Badcock inoculated cows with small-pox virus in 1840 and produced pustules at the seat of inoculation (true cow-pox). In- oculation with the contents of these pustules successfully protected cows from cow-pox and human beings from small-pox. In the report of the Royal Vaccination Commission (1896) this point was extensively gone into, and the conclusion arrived at was, that the body of the cow has the power to convert small-pox matter into vaccine lymph (see final report of the Royal Com- mission on Vaccination, dated September 18th, 1896). Cows only and not oxen, are subject to cow-pox, and the original contagion was derived from human beings, the subjects of small-pox, in the process of milking. Cow-pox never occurs spontaneously in man and is communicable to the latter by inoculation of its own specific virus. Vaccinia, therefore, is true variola modified by &quot; cultivation &quot; in the cow, and is the first, and hitherto the most successful, example of the method of protection from specific diseases by previous inoculation with an attenuated virus. Discovery of Vaccination. 3. The practice of vaccination2 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE incapable afterwards of contracting small-pox. The process of inserting the lymph from arm to arm, or from calf to arm, is called vaccination, and if the resulting vesicle rises properly, the person is said to have been successfully vaccinated, or to have had modified cow-pox (vaccinia). As mentioned above, vaccinia is small-pox deprived of its virulence by transmission through the cow. So thoroughly and with such industry did Jenner follow out his discovery that in the year 1801 he writes: &quot; Upwards of 6,000 persons have been inoculated with the virus of cow-pox, and the far greater part of them has since been inoculated with that of small-pox and exposed to its infection in every rational way that could be devised, but without effect.&quot; From this time onwards the spread of the practice of vaccination was rapid, and wherever it spread the prevalence of small-pox decreased. At the present day, in most civilized countries, vaccination is enforced by law and small-pox is rarely seen. Thus Germany, with a population of six hundred lakhs, shows less than a dozen deaths from small-pox in a year. For this remarkable discovery and its subsequent application, Parliament voted Jenner a lakh of rupees;but no money reward can adequately recompense a man who conferred such an inestimable benefit on suffering humanity. Spread of vaccination. 4. The fame of this discovery soon became known throughout the whole civilized world, and before many years were over, vaccination was almost universally practised by all classes of people. As a consequence, where for- merly thousands used to be carried off annually by small-pox, now the disease is comparatively rare. So very safe in its application and so generally successful in its object was vaccination, that its performance was soon recognised as a necessity, and compulsory vaccination was introduced into all civilized countries. Vaccination does not, and Jenner did not pretend that it would, protect absolutely from small-pox. Even an attack of small-pox by ordinary con- tagion does not absolutely protect. But vaccination does ordinarily protect, and an attack of small-pox does generally render the individual insusceptible to a second attack. During an epidemic at Sheffield in England in 1887, it was found that of children under five years of age who were unvaccinated, no less than 1 in 10 caught small-pox, while among the vaccinated only 1 in 200 contracted it. If the mortality from the disease is considered, the results are even more convincing. During the same epidemic at Sheffield, it was found that no less than 37 died in every 100 among those who were unvacci- nated, while only 1 in 100 died in those that were vaccinated. These are matters of general knowledge, and have been verified again and again all over the world. Incidence with regard to sex, age, and race. 5. It has been noted, and statistics have confirmed the fact, that the mortality from small-pox is greater among males than females, and among dark races than fair. In pre-vaccination times, as MacVail has shown from the Kilmarnock registers, 90 per cent. of the deaths were at ages below five, the actual maximum being at the second year. For the above reasons it is, therefore, very necessary for the people of this country to have their children vaccinated, and preferably during the first year of their life. Very few children are insusceptible to vaccinationUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 3 limited, and that sooner or later the degree of protection in a vaccinated person becomes diminished. But the bulk of experience incontestable proves, that a person even once vaccinated, usually escapes small-pox or only takes it very mildly. The degree of protection is directly pro- portionate to the number or size of the marks. From this we learn two facts4 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE deadly disease known as rabies in the dog or hydrophobia in man, can, by being passed through a succession of monkeys, be made harmless to dogs. As stated in paragraph 2, cow-pox in the cow was in all probability first produced by the cow being milked by a human being suffering from small- pox, the virus being thus accidentally introduced into the udder or teats of the cow. Healthy milkers whose hands became infected from contact with the teats of such a cow, could then carry the virus to other cows. Another objection urged against vaccination is that it is dangerous to life. The Royal Commission on vaccination calculated that in not more than 1 in 14,000 vaccinations was serious illness produced, and that of such cases more than half were preventible. That is to say the danger of vaccination is much less than the danger of giving an anæsthetic such as chloroform. A small-pox epidemic among 1,400 unvaccinated people would produce probably more than 700 deaths. The risk from vaccination is therefore so small that it can hardly be counted as a valid argument, against its use. It has also been said that such diseases as syphilis, tubercle, and leprosy are transmitted by vaccination. It is known that syphilis can be so trans- mitted, though not easily. There is as yet no proof that tubercle or leprosy has ever been so transmitted. Such transmission cannot occur when lymph is taken from healthy children of healthy stock, and is of course impossible when calf lymph is used. Conclusions reached by the Royal Commission on Vaccination. (Report of 18th September 1896.) 8. The following conclusions are the results of some seven years of investigation, carried out by unbiased men of great intelligence and with exceptional opportunity for obtaining evidence. They say: UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 5 four places, it is more effectual than when introduced into one or two places only ; and that if the vaccination marks are of an area of half a square inch, they indicate a better state of protection than if their area be below this. Inoculation. 9. In England, for nearly a century previous to the discovery of vaccination, inoculation of the virus from selected mild cases of small-pox was used as a means of lessening the severity of the disease. The matter was taken from the &quot; pock&quot; or eruption of an existing case and inserted in the arm of a healthy person, usually a child. The result was an attack of small-pox, often mild but not infrequently fatal, and always dangerous to others, in that such cases spread infection, and infection from a mild case can produce the most severe and fatal form of small-pox. The fact that such a practice was in use before vaccination was known, shows how greatly dreaded small-pox was by the unprotected people of those days. They were content to accept the risk of a serious, sometimes fatal, illness, to escape the greater risk of naturally communicated small-pox which spared few and killed nearly half its victims. Inoculation has now rightly been made illegal in all civilized countries, owing to the danger both to the inoculated and those brought in contact with them, and also to the fact that vaccination has proved equally efficient and infinitely safer as a means of protection. Means pursued by Government for conferring Vaccination upon its subjects in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. Staff Employed and Spheres of Employment. 10. In the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh the supervising staff con- sists of two Deputy Sanitary, Commissioners, 48 Civil Surgeons,and 49 Assistant Superintendents, and the average number of operators (vaccinators is 899. The Provinces have been divided into two circles6 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE (iv) He will call upon the village headman and the village chaukidár for any necessary help in collecting the children for vaccination. (v) At the time of vaccination he will enter in three forms or registers, the names and parents' names, age, and sex, &c., of all persons vaccinatedUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 7 (xvii) Vaccinators are required to sell quinine issued from the Aligarh Jail, and to remit the sale proceeds to their District Superin- tendent for transmission to the Superintendent, District Jail, Aligarh. The following instructions should be observed carefully:8 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE that vaccinator till such time as the work proceeds properly and will arrange, if necessary, for a fresh supply of lymph from some other portion of his district. (iv) He will inspect the instruments of every vaccinator in his district from time to time and satisfy himself that they are clean and in good order. (v) He will satisfy himself that the vaccinators are able to recognise those communicable diseases which they are likely to meet with in the course of their work. (vi) One of his most important duties is to explain to the people the nature and object of vaccination and to persuade them to accept it. (vii) He will also see that the vaccinators are courteous in manner and kind in conduct towards the people, and that they are guilty of no irregularities. (viii) He will keep a diary showing the places where he inspected vaccination work with the dates, &c. (ix) He will send to the District Superintendent on the 7th, 14th, 21st, and last day of each month a return (Vaccination Form No. 7) showing the work he has done. (x) He will forward to the District Superintendent, after perusal and countersignature, the returns forwarded to him by the vaccinators. (xi) On the 15th of each month he will forward to the District Superintendent his monthly return (Vaccination Form No. 3). (xii) The Assistant Superintendent will not communicate with the Civil authorities of the district directly, but through the District Superintendent. (xiii) He will forward to the District Superintendent all communica- tions, petitions, &c., sent through him by the vaccinators, and will attach to such communications any remarks which he may consider necessary for the information of the District Superintendent. (xiv) The Assistant Superintendent will, while on duty, wear uniform and belt. (xv) He will not include the inspections made with the District Superintendent of Vaccination or Deputy Sanitary Commissioner in his returns. (xvi) He will consult chaukidár's books to see the number of births during past year and if the vaccinator has done sufficient operations. (xvii) He will report on nature of vesicleUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 9 unsatisfactory. They will also inspect the books and returns of the Assist- ant Superintendents, advising the District Superintendent in which parts of his district vaccination work appears to be languid, and reporting as to the results of their inspections, percentage of success, state of arms and vesicle, &c. They will endeavour to inspect as many districts in their circles as possible during their winter tours, directing most attention to those districts10 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE authorities, and engaged in any extra work without the sanction of the District Superintendent. (xi) They will require their Assistant Superintendents to visit each circle and check by personal inspection the work of each vaccinator to the greatest extent practicable. (xii) Transfers of vaccinators from one district to another will be made by the Sanitary Commissioner, in communication with the authorities concerned. Vaccination Season. 14. The vaccination season extends from 1st October to 31st March, but in the plains of these Provinces, it is only possible to conduct operations successfully for about five months. Operations are, however, performed on the appearance of epidemic small-pox during the hot season, in which case lymph is supplied from the hills by the Deputy Sanitary Commissioners. To meet all emergencies, lymph is constantly kept alive in the colder climtae of the Himálayan districts throughout the yearUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 11 PART II. PRACTICE OF VACCINATION. Instruments required for Vaccination. 15. (a) Scarifiers.12 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE Description of a Regular Vaccine Vesicle. 17. The first sign of infection commonly appears on the third day: a small red spot, rather elevated, may be seen at the place where the puncture was made. On the fourth day this is increased in size, on the fifth day it has become a small vesicle containing clear fluid. The vesicle goes on increas- ing in size till the eighth day, when it appears like a pearl (if the skin isfair), circular in form, with its margins elevated and its centre well depressed. From the centre, bands radiate to the circumference, separating the vesicle into partitions, each filled with a clear fluid. On the eighth day a slight blush of redness is to be seen around the vesicle (this is called areola), which begins to be extensive on the ninth day, and to decline about the tenth or eleventh. At this period the vesicle begins to dry, the first sign of which is a brown spot in the centre; in proportion as this brown spot increases the surrounding areola decreases, until at length nothing remains but a circular scab of a dark brown colour approaching to black. It often retains the depression in the centre, which characterizes the vesicle before exsiccation takes place. The crust falls off about the twenty-first day, and leaves a depression behind usually visible throughout life: this, if carefully examined, will be seen to be circular, somewhat depressed, foveated or sometimes radiated. Vaccine Virus:UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 13 (vii) &quot;The possibility of inoculation of syphilis is eliminated, as the calf is not subject to this disease. (viii) &quot; The necessity for collecting children together, with the attendant risk of infectious diseases, or of transporting a calf from place to place, is obviated, while the danger of late erysipelas in the child is minimized by reason of there being no necessity to open the mature vesicles for the purpose of obtaining lymph. (ix) &quot; The bacteriological purity and chemical activity of large quanti- ties of the lymph can be readily tested prior to distribution. (x) &quot; By reason of the possibility of keeping large stock of glycerinated lymph on hand for considerable periods of time without appreciable deterio- ration, any sudden demand, such as is likely to arise on an outbreak of epidemic small-pox, can be promptly met. (xi) &quot;The expense of producing glycerinated lymph is proportionally small, since the amount obtainable from each calf is enormously increased.&quot; Lymph. 19. (a) Humanized.14 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE (b) Mode of filling them.UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 15 portion of paste enough to fill in all the scratches and never return portions once removed. Take the paste thus removed on the spatula end of the scarifier, and dab it on the incisions. While doing this, stretch the adjacent skin so as to make the scratches gape for the reception of the paste. This is very important for ensuring success. If this paste has not filled in all the incisions properly, rub or rather guide it in with the rounded end of the paste-measure. Punctures, although not recommended, may be successfully employed if preferred by the vaccinator, if the simple precaution be taken of seeing that into each puncture a portion of paste really enters. Admixture of lymph with lanoline appears to be peculiarly well adapted to India, and it probably preserves the virus in tropical countries better than gly- cerine. Certain irregular results of vaccination. 23. (i) Irregular vesicle.16 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE U. P. OF AGRA AND OUDH. as late as the beginning of dentition (six months). If small-pox be prevalent, children should be vaccinated within three days of birth. In India, vaccina- tion should never be delayed beyond the first year of life. When Children should not be vaccinated. 25. When a child is very weak and ill-nourished, or suffering from any acute skin disease, from severe diarrhAPPENDICES.
MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE U. P. OF AGRA AND OUDH. 19 APPENDIX I. Vaccination of the calf.* (a) A calf of suitable age (three to six months) having been placed in quarantine for a week and its health having been ascertained to be satis- factory, it is transferred to the vaccine establishment. Such a calf having been strapped to a large tilting table, the lower part of the abdomen, as far. forward as the umbilicus, is carefully shaved. This shaved area is washed, first, with a solution of carbolic acid, and afterwards with water recently sterilized by boiling. The calf is then vaccinated with glycerinated calf lymph, previously ascertained by use of the method of plate cultivation, to be free from extraneous organism. With a sharp scalpel, dipped from time to time in the glycerinated lymph, parallel linear incisions are made, which penetrate the epidermis and open up rete Malpighii, if possible without drawing blood. The incisions are usually made about four inches long and half an inch apart. As they are made, additional glycerinated lymph is run in along the whole length of the line by means of some blunt sterilized instrument such as a small bone spatula. It is desirable to inoculate the incision immediately it is made, otherwise the lips of the wound are apt to swell and to close the opening. Collection of vaccine material. (b) After five days (120 hours) the vaccinated surface of the calf's abdomen is thoroughly washed with soap and warm water gently rubbed over it by the clean hands of the operator; then it is cleansed with water recently sterilized by boiling. The site of such incision should at this stage (120 hours) present one long continuous vesicle. The skin having been put firmly on the stretch, the vesicles and their contents are removed with a sterilized Volkman's spoon, each line being thus treated in turn and scraped once only, care being taken that the edge of the spoon does not touch the neighbouring lines. In this way the vesicular pulp is removed without admixture of blood. The total vesicle pulp obtained by the above procedure is received into a weighed sterilized bottle. A calf vaccinated in the manner described should yield 18 to 24 grammes of vaccine lymph pulp. Glycerination of the vaccine material. (c) The bottle containing the above lymph is taken to the laboratory and the exact weight of the material ascertained. The pulp is next trans- ferred to a sterilized mortar and rubbed up with a sterilized pestle. The mortar is covered, so that the handle of the pestle only projects above the cover. It is important that the pulp be finely rubbed up before any glycerine is added, though if the material should be dry, as sometimes happens a few drops of sterilized distilled water may be added in the process of rubbing. To this triturated lymph pulp there is now added six times its weight of a sterilized mixture of 50 per cent. pure glycerine in distilled water. The addition is made little by little, thus producing eventually a fine and intimate emulsion. At this stage a loop-full of the emulsion is withdrawn with a sterilized platinum needle and agar-agar plates are established. *Extract from Appendix B-6 of the Report of the Medical Officer to the Local Govern- ment Board (British) for 1897-98.
20 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE The storage of the emulsien. (d) The emulsion, as soon as it is complete, is transferred by means of a sterilized pipette to small sterilized test tubes, each capable of holding three or 4c.c. Each tube is completely filled, so that very little air is in contact with the emulsion. It is plugged with a sterilized cork, sealed with melted paraffin, which has been rendered aseptic with carbolic acid, and placed in a dark, cool, cupboard. It can be shown subsequently, if agar-agar plates are established from the emulsion, that the number of colonies diminish week by week in the several plate cultures, till almost invariably at the end of a month the plates show no colonies at all. Storage in capillary tubes. (e) When it has been ascertained that a given stored emulsion affords no growth in ordinary culture media, it is, if required for use in vaccination, drawn up into sterilized capillary tubes. These tubes are sealed in a gas flame or spirit lamp flame and are stored in the cool chamber until distributed. Great care is required in the sealing of the tubes in order to prevent any over- heating of the contained emulsion. It has been a matter of experience, and this is in accordance with that of other observers, that glycerinated lymph tends to lose its proper efficacy sooner when stored in capillary tubes than when retained in the other tubes into which it is the practice, in the first instance, to place it. From some recent experiments upon this point there is reason to think that deterioration in capillary tubes of glycerinated lymph may result from undue contact of the tube with the gas flame in the act of sealing, and that it can be obviated by taking greater precautions in the sealing of these tubes. APPENDIX II. Rules for vaccinating calves in the district. (i) A healthy cow or buffalo calf that has been weaned (three to six months old) is selected. The animal should be under observation for a week previous to operation, and if there be any actual illness or suspicion thereof, the animal should be rejected. (ii) The selected animal should be thrown on some clean straw, and after tying its legs to prevent struggling, the lower part of the abdomen is shaved and thoroughly cleansed with soap and water, afterwards with water that has been sterilized by boiling. The hands and nails of the operator should be well cleaned before operating, and nobody who has not done so should be allowed to touch the belly of the calf. (iii) The needle or lancet is then sterilized by keeping its point held for some minutes in boiling water, and with the instrument, parallel linear incisions are made in the skin of the animal, sufficiently deep but without drawing blood. The incisions should not be too close together: about an inch apart vertically and horizontally. (iv) As the incisions are made glycerinated calf or human lymph from capillary tubes is run into the incisions and is well rubbed in with a sterilized vaccine point or end of a vaccine needle. Each incision should receive the vaccine lymph as made, as otherwise the edges of the wounds are apt to swell and close up. (v) The calf should then be loosened and picketed in a clean stall and instructions given as to its feeding. A native-made collar should be placed on its neck to prevent licking of the operated part.
UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 21 (vi) On the fifth day the calf is visited, and on casting on straw the vesicles will be found developed. The abdomen of the calf and the hands of the operator are again well washed and the instruments required steril- ized. The skin of the part is put on the stretch and the vesicles and their pulp removed by the spatula provided for the purpose. If it is only required to fill points or tubes this can be accomplished with readiness. (vii) As is usually done elsewhere, the children of the village are vaccinated direct from the calf as it lies on the straw. Later the calf is brought on to another village for use or for the purpose of vaccinating a fresh calf. Afterwards the animal is returned to its original owner in perfect health and quite uninjured. APPENDIX III. Rules for the guidance and maintenance of bovine lymph depots in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. Vaccination of the call. (a) i. Where possible a veterinary examination of calves before operation is desirable. ii. If there be any actual illness or suspicion thereof, or if the calf be malformed, the animal must be rejected. iii. If during or after operation, or during the process of extracting lymph, the calf shows signs of illness, the calf and lymph taken therefrom should be rejected. iv. The inoculation-room, stalls, byres, and surroundings are to be kept clean and free from all dirt and litter. v. The calves are to be stalled in well-ventilated byres, and fed regularly under the superintendence of the officer in charge. A book is to be kept up in which the officer in charge will sign his name daily and note the hours of attendance. vi. No calf will be inoculated until it has been fed in the depôt for a week. A calf three to six months old is the most suitable for operation. vii. Before proceeding to operate, or before extracting lymph from the calf, the careful and systematic cleansing of the parts must be first effected. viii. The calf having been strapped to the table the lower part of the abdomen, as far forward as the umbilicus, is carefully shaved. This shaved area is washed first with soap and water, then with a solution of carbolic acid (1 in 20), and afterwards with water sterilized by boiling. ix. Before operating the operator must cleanse his hands and nails, and no person who has not done so should be allowed to touch the area of operation or operation instruments. x. The calf vaccinating needle or lancet should be perfectly clean, and should be held point down in boiling water for a few minutes before operating. xi. With the operating instrument parallel linear incisions are made sufficiently deep to penetrate the epidermis without drawing blood. The incisions are usually two to three inches long and half to one inch apart. As they are made, glycerinated calf lymph is run into the incisions. It is desirable to inoculate the incisions immediately they are made, as the lips of the wounds are apt to swell up and close the openings. xii. After each inoculation operation, or after taking lymph from the calf, all utensils, tables, instruments, glass point holders, &c., must be
22 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE thoroughly cleansed in boiling water before extracting lymph ; the Volkman's spoon spatula and ivory points also must be sterilized. It is advisable to place a native-made bamboo collar on the neck of the calf to prevent its licking itself. Collection of Vaccine material. (b) i. After five days the calf is again placed on the table, and the vac- cinated surface of the abdomen is thoroughly washed with soap and water, and then cleansed with sterilized water. No antiseptic should he used. Any crusts are picked off by a sterilized forceps. The vesicles should be healthy and well developed. ii. If vaccine points are to be used they should be taken out of the boiling water, allowed to cool and then filled. When charged they should be placed on glass rods to dry. Tubes may be filled at the same time. Glycerination of vaccine material. (c) If it is desired to glycerinate the lymph, the skin is placed on stretch and the vesicle and contents removed by a sterilized and Volkman's spoon and transferred to a sterilized bottle of known weight, each line being treated in turn and scraped once only. No blood should be allowed to mix with the lymph. The pulp in the bottle is now weighed and then transferred to a sterilized mortar, and rubbed up with a sterilized pestle. Unless very dry, no glycerine is added until the rubbing up is completed. To the triturated pulp is now added little by little, five or six times its weight of a sterilized mixture of 50 per cent. pure glycerine in distilled water. From this are filled the capillary tubes and points. If no scales and weights are handy, an approximate amount of the glycerine solution may be used, as it is not necessary to be very exact as to the dilution of the vaccine. REFERENCES. (i) Final Report of the Royal Commission on Vaccination, dated 18th September 1896 (Eyre and Spotlisivoode). (ii) &quot;Natural and Casual Cow-pox&quot; (Crookshank). (iii )&quot; Vaccination, Hygiene, and Public Health&quot; (Whitelegge). (iv) Report on the preparation and storage of glycerinated calf lymph. (British Medical Journal, August 21st, 1897.) (v) Milroy Lectures on the Natural History of Vaccinia, by Monkton Copeman. (British Medical Journal, 14th May 1898.) (vi) Reports of Medical Officer of the Privy Council. PROVINCIAL ACTS AND CIRCULARS. (i) No. 1905G ,from Superintendent, Government Press, United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, to Sanitary Commissioner, United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, dated Allahabad, 14th July 1893. Schedule of Vaccination forms in use in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. (ii) Resolution No. 412/ V-267 BUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 23 Abstract of the notes for the guidance of the Assistant Superintendents of Vaccination. (i) During the vaccination season your duties are to move continually about your district examining the work of the vaccinators and satisfying yourself that the work is progressing. (ii) You are held responsible for the veracity and correctness of the vaccinators' diaries and returns. (iii) In the event of the work of any vaccinator not being satis- factory, as for instance if the lymph be of bad quality24 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE Abstract of the notes for the guidance of the vaccinators. (i) Vaccinators are to keep their points and needles clean and free from dust and dirt. They should always, for this reason, be kept in the wooden box provided for the purpose. (ii) Lymph should be taken from infantsUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 25 loose sleeves to their coats, and inform them that they should not apply anything whatever to the vesicle but to leave it undisturbed to run its course. (xxi) Do not vaccinate children whose faces are pitted with small-pox marks, or children who are suffering from illness. (xxii) Each vaccinator should perform not less than 2,000 operations in the season. Rewards will be given and promotion accorded for good work. J. CHAYTOR-WHITE, M.D., D.P.H., (CAMB.), MAJOR, I.M.S., Sanitary Commissioner, U. P. of Agra and Oudh. 4
FORMS.
UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 29 VACCINATION FORM No. 1. Initial signature of District Superintendent or Deputy Sanitary Commissioner. Number of vaccination. Date of vaccination. Name of village or mohalla. Name of the person vacci- nated with that of father. Caste. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Name of person with whom Register No. 5 is left. Signature of the Assistant Superintendent of Vacci- nation. Sex. Results. Age of suc- cessful case. Sex. Result. Christians. Muhammadans. Hindus. Other classes. Male. Female. Successful. Unsuccessful. Absent. Under one year. One and under six years. Six years and upwards. Male. Female. Successful. Unsuccessful. Absent.
30 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE. VACCINATION FORM No. 2. Weekly abstract of totals of the Vaccination Register for the month ofUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH 31 VACCINATION FORM No. 3. Statement showing vaccinations performed in the district during the month of32 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE VACCINATION FORM No. 5. List of persons vaccinated in village or mohallaUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 33 VACCINATION FORM No. 6. Weekly statement showing villages and towns in which new vaccinations were performed during the last week. Name of tahsíl34 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE VACCINATION FORM No. 7. Statement showing inspections made by the Assistant Superintendent of Vaccination ofUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 35 VACCINATION FORM No. 8. Statement showing the amount of work performed, with names of villages or mohallas of36 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE VACCINATION FORM No. 14. Return of vaccination in theUNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 37 VACCINATION FORM No. 18. Register showing the vaccination work inspected by Assistant Superintendent of Vaccination. Name of mohalla or village. Date of inspection. Name of vaccinator. Result of inspection. Number of wrong entries (i.e. unsuccessful cases recorded as successful or revaccinations entered as primary, &c.) detect- ed, with number and date in the roznámcha. Number of fictitious entries (i.e. names once entered, re- peated or names of persons not vaccinated recorded &c.) detec- ted, with number and date in the roznamcha. Action taken by the District Superintendent of Vaccination. Remarks. Number of vacci- nations up to date of inspection. Primary vaccination. Revaccination. Conduct of the vaccin- ator. Condition of vesicle, lymph and instruments. Current year. Previous year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Absent. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Absent. Total.
38 MANUAL OF VACCINATION FOR THE SANITARY FORM No. 9. Chaukidár's Register of Births. No. Date of birth. Father's name and caste. Sex. Signature of Muharrir with date. Chaukidár's Register of Deaths. No. Date. Name of deceased. Sex. Age. Disease or cause. Name and caste of father or head of house. Signature of Muharrir with date.
UNITED PROVINCES OF AGRA AND OUDH. 39 SANITARY FORM No. 42. Statement showing the omissions in the Birth and Death Registers examined during the month of_______190 , by the_______ Tahsíl, thána and village. Date of visit. Name of chaukidár. Births. Death. Remarks. Total number of birth entries tested. Number of omissions. Total number of death entries tested. Number of omissions. Date of birth. Name of child. Sex. Father's name. Caste. Date of death. Name of deceased. Sex. Age. Caste. Disease or cause. Name of father or head of house. Place Signature. Date Designation
Addenda and Corrigenda to the Vaccina- tion Manual. (First list of corrections.) 1. No. 1. Page 5, para. 10. (a) Substitute &quot; 50&quot; for &quot;49&quot; in second line and &quot; 913 &quot; for &quot; 899 &quot; in third line. G. Os. Nos. 78/IX- E.B. 31-3, dated the 15th January 1906, 138/XVI-31, dated the 19th March 1908 and 194/ XVI-9, dated the 24th March 1910. (b) Delete the words &quot; and Tehri Garhwal &quot; from the sixth line. (c) For the sentence &quot; There is a separate Assistant Superintendent of Vaccination for the Tehri State &quot; substitute the following:( 2 ) 5. No. 5. G.O.No. 142/XVI- 939-B, dated the 1st June 1907, Page 7, rule XVII (i). Insert &quot;one scarifier&quot; after the words &quot;provided with.&quot; 6. No. 6. Page 9, para. 13 (b). Delete rule (ii) and renumber the succeeding rules as rules (ii), (iii), &c. 7. No. 7. G. G. O. (Home Department / Muni- cipalities) No. 190- 202, dated the 27th November 1906, and G. O. No. 419/X-1- 2, dated the 4th February 1907. Page 9, para. 13 (b), present rule VII. 8. Substitute &quot; of vaccinators &quot; for &quot;as enrolled' Govern- ment servants &quot; in the second line and &quot;a&quot; for &quot; an enrolled&quot; in the last line of this rule. No. 8. Government noti- fication No. 968/IX- 21, dated the 9th July 1907 (rule 5, page 73 of District Board Manual). Page 9, para. 13(b). Delete present rule VIII and renumber succeeding rules as VIII, IX, &c. 9. No.9. Page 10, para. 14. (a) Substitute &quot;in which case lymph should be obtained from the Medical Officer in charge, Government Bovine Lymyh Dépôt, Patwa Dangar, via Jeolikote &quot; for the words &quot;in which case lymph................ Commissioners&quot; occurr- ing in the second sentence. (b) Delete the third sentence. (c) Substitute fullstop for comma in the fourth sen- tence and delete the words &quot; and a supply of lymph is continuously kept up.&quot; 10. No. 10. G.O.No.142/XVI( 3 ) 11. No. 11. Page 13, rule 19 (b). Insert, &quot; including the United Provinces&quot; between &quot; Provinces &quot; and &quot; in India &quot; in the second sentence. 12. No. 12. Page 24, rule (1). G. Os. Nos. 142/ XVI( 4 ) No. 15. 15. Insert the following as footnotes to form no. 1 printed on page 129: