REPORT ON VACCINATION FOR THE PROVINCE OF OUDH, 1872. LUCKNOW :No. 2657. FROM THE OFFG. SECY. TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, OUDH. To THE SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION, OUDH. Dated Lucknow, the 29th May 1873. SIR, GENL. DEPT. I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter No. 1305, dated 21st instant, modifying the remark made in the 1st para. of your Vaccination Report for 1872-73, regarding the procedure said to have been adopted by District Officers during the preceding year to compel persons to be vaccinated. 2. In reply, I am directed to observe that you had hardly returned to your post from furlough before you requested that the system which had been introduced at the instance of your locum tenens might be discon- tinued, and your request was complied with. 3. During the year, under review, vaccine operations diminished by one half; and you ascribed this to the fact that, in the previous year, district officers acted tyrannically and illegally by arming vaccinators with parwánáhs ; and, in some cases, giving them a revenue peon to compel the people to subject their children to vaccination. 4. On being called on to name the officer or officers who had done this thing, you say that it may be presumed that this was the course of procedure. 5. The Chief Commissioner altogether objects to this presumption on your part that your brother officers had acted in the way you describe, in order to account for the short comings apparent in the Department under your control. 6. Moreover, as a matter of fact, Sir George Couper, can see little difference between the parwánáh which you &quot; presume&quot; the Vaccinator was armed with during the previous year; and the certificate with which you yourself armed your Vaccinators. A village Head-man in all probability would be unable to discriminate between the two. 7. The Chief Commissioner considers that the falling off in the numbers vaccinated during the past year demonstrates that the measures adopted during the previous year were successful as far as mere numbers were concerned. The objection to them was that the Vaccinators could not remain long enough in one spot to watch the result of their operation
( 2 ) and obtain fresh supplies of lymph. And it was thought that, with regard to these considerations, efficiency might have been sacrificed to numbers. And it is so far satisfactory, indeed the only satisfactory feature in this report, that what has been done this year appears to have been done well. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, H. J. SPARKS, Offg. Secy. to the Chief Commissioner, Oudh.
Report on Vaccination in Oudh during the season 1872-73. Following the order of the prescribed Tabular Statements appended I proceed to remark on. No. I. Amount of work done. Mode of procedure 1871-72. This statement, column 5, shows that, with a staff of Vaccinators one less, the number of vaccinations fell off from 37,255 to 19,170. The only explanation I can give of this is that in the previous season the number of operations was either exaggerated or many of them were done under compulsion, and there is ground for suspicion that the decrease may be in part due to both causes. The system was as follows in 1871-72. Three Vaccinators were sent to each district, one of whom marched about with the Settlement Officer's camp and the other with that of the Deputy Commissioner. In neither case could the peripatetic Vaccinator ascertain the result of his work properly, nor could the Native Superintendent, whose business it is to do so, check the quantity recorded. Under these circumstances of course the Vaccinator would take the most favorable view he could imagine possible in recording his work. Besides &quot; parwá- náhs&quot; were granted to Vaccinators by the District Officers, by whom they were also commended through Tahsíldárs and other people of local influ- ence to the Head men of villages, and the usual procedure may be presumed to have been as follows. The Vaccinator, armed with his &quot; parwánáh&quot; and frequently having a revenue peon to support him, would go to the Head- man of a village and present his credentials ; whereupon the Head-man would, if a loyal subject, order out all the children especially those of the Pasís, on whom, amid some degree of indignation on the part of the mo- thers, the operation would be duly performed. There is no doubt that a great deal can be done among some classes of the people who are accustom- ed to submit to do what they are ordered, without much resistance or mur- mur ; and some think that the good end in the case of vaccination amply justifies this method. I would myself incline to this opinion, if the whole of the people could be protected in this way, but as that is impossible with the means at present or likely to be at our disposal, I take a different view of the expediency of that mode of procedure. Vaccination. Object of present system. Vaccination, as at present conducted, is, in my view, merely a step towards one of two alternatives eventually. It aims either at educating the people to take to it voluntarily, as a thing the value of which they will learn to appreciate, or at so familiarising them with it, whether the majority like it or not, as to prepare the way for general legislation on the subject, as soon as that may be expedient. Now of these two objects the first would be the best, if possible; and an attempt to accomplish it would, should it fail, in no way interfere with the second. Therefore, the work done should be entirely voluntary, and not only without force but, if
( 2 ) possible, at the request, or at least with the concurrence of the parents. Every one, who understands the people of Hindustan, knows well how little can be done in this way on account of the strong prejudice against any innovation, and more particularly against some of the conditions of the process of vaccination itself, which appear so repulsive even to educa- ted people, that only a knowledge of its safety and its value would induce them to submit their children to it. I believe that almost all the vacci- nation done this year was voluntary, as the Vaccinators had nothing to depend on but their personal influence and industry, and, from my point of view, half the number of cases so done are of more value than double the number done the other way. Procedure, 1872-73. Quality of work. Quantity. 2. The system pursued was as follows. Three Vaccinators, the most skilled, and those having the most knowledge of the localities, were sent to each district with instructions to work within a radius of five miles around the civil station; so as to ensure that their work could be frequently inspected by the Civil Surgeon and others. Each was granted a certificate, containing a careful descriptive roll of himself, stating that he was an authorized Vaccinator, and requesting any Government Officer, or other person interested in vaccination, to make a note in the Vaccinator's book, whenever he took an opportunity of showing his work. Additional Vaccinators were posted to the cities ;( 3 ) obstacle to successful vaccination. At a later age, children playing about, break the vesicles and sore places are apt to follow, especially with the dust and heat towards the end of the season, in consequence of which the people get alarmed and disgusted with the proceeding. Quality by Percentage of success Col. 11. 5. The percentage of success, 81, is not extremely good, but is fair and tolerably uniform throughout. There appears to be some misunder- standing about secondary vaccination, which I take to be revaccination of a person once successfully done. In that sense the ratio of success here given, 53 per cent., is too high, as the operation generally fails ; and, if not an entire failure, the result is in most cases spurious. But except in the Bharaich district the number of revaccinations was very small. There a number of Goorka recruits were vaccinated, presumably after small pox. Caste. 6. The ratio of vaccination relative to the numbers of the several creeds in the population is nearly double among Mahomedans compared with Hindus. Mahomedans are less superstitious but at the same time less amenable to persuasion than Hindus; and vaccination makes very poor progress in the Mahomedan city of Lucknow, where after five seasons the work should have made an impression which is not yet apparent. Statement No.II., month- ly rates of progress. 7. The numbers vaccinated gradually increased each month to a maximum in January and February. There is generally some delay caused in the progress of work, until a free supply of the material has been cultivated. More could be done if the season were to commence on the 1st instead of 15th October. Ratios of success by months. The percentage of successful results, which is one test of the quality of the vaccination, was nearly equal from November to February, but greatest in the last named month. Statement No. III. Muni- cipal vaccination. 8. The extent to which the value of vaccination is practically appre- ciated by the better-educated and more liberal-minded of the people may be judged by the amount of contributions, from municipal or private sources, towards keeping up the staff of Vaccinators. No Vaccinators are thus supported in Oudh. The. number (25) entered in last year's state- ment as paid for from other sources were really paid for by the State, only from Local as distinguished from Provincial funds. They were not municipal Vaccinators or paid for by native landowners, and in the season under review, were transferred to the regular establishment. Statement No IV. cost of each successful case, Col. 9. 9. In respect of cost, relative to the quantity of vaccination done, the season under review bears comparison unfavorably with the two imme- diately preceding, for reasons already explained. With the same esta- blishment, the number of operations recorded being only half, the cost of each of course becomes double. Each operation successfully performed cost a little more than 8 annas compared with rather less than 4 in the pre- ceding season. Establishment. 10. In the prospect that vaccination may, with the progress of education and the decay of superstition, advance on its own merits, much depends on a careful selection of the establishment by whom work of so
( 4 ) delicate a nature has to be performed. In addition to respectability, tact and sufficient education to keep a record of his work, manual dexterity, judgment in the selection of the material with which he works and of the subjects upon whom he operates, and industry, are necessary to make a successful Vaccinator; a combination of good qualities not easily found. Sudden increase in 1871-72. 11. When a large increase to the establishment was made at the beginning of the season 1871 72, many men were appointed who had not passed through the probationary grade of Assistant; and some of these have not turned out well. Since the commencement of the season under review five Vaccinators and one Assistant have been dismissed. One for vaccinating people's children in their absence and without their consent, and the remainder for general incapacity exhibited in the very small amount of work done by them. Native Superintendents. 12. There has, for two seasons, been one Native Superintendent to each division whose chief duties have been to see that the quality of the vaccination done was up to the mark, by careful selection of virus; and that the quantity of work done was truthfully recorded. In both respects they have done their duty during the past season satisfactorily. The quality of the vesicle seen by me was everywhere good, and there is no reason to suppose that a false quantity of work has been taken credit for. Deputy Superintendent. 13. The Deputy Superintendent, Sub-Assistant Surgeon Parbutty Churn Ghose, remained in charge of the establishment at work and in training at Lucknow. The best Vaccinators were sent out into the dis- tricts, the quantity of work done at Lucknow has been very small, and much difficulty has been found in getting competent men to fill vacancies in the probationary grade in which there are now three vacancies. 14. I resumed charge of the office on return from Furlough at the end of the vaccinating season of 1871-72. G. S. SUTHERLAND, M. D., Superintendent of Vaccination, Oudh.
A.A.A.A.B.Statistics of Life. Return of vaccine operations in the Province of Oudh during the year 1872-73. Name of District. Number of operators. Persons treated. Cost of operations du- ring the year. Total number of success- ful operations record- ed to date. Remarks. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding those doubtful and &quot; unknown.&quot; Total. Rs. As. P. Lucknow, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 2,418 796 3,214 ... 23,169 Bára Banki, ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 789 188 977 ... 4,351 Unáo, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 925 274 1,199 ... 2,618 Sítápur, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 1,862 650 2,512 ... 5,759 Hardui,... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1,812 205 2,017 ... 3,605 Kheri, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 855 368 1,223 ... 3,130 Faizabad, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 1,239 487 1,726 ... 5,562 Gonda, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 386 215 601 ... 2,200 Bharaich, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1,059 512 1,571 ... 4,803 Rái Barelí,... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 1,823 445 2,268 ... 5,232 Sultánpur, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 922 210 1,132 ... 4,178 Pratábgarh, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 486 244 730 ... 1,759 Total, ... 54 14,576 4,594 19,170 7,476 11 4 66,366 G. S. SUTHERLAND M. D., Superintendent of Vaccination, Oudh.
