REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEARS 1856-57. Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA 1858
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEARS 1856-57. Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1858.
INDEX TO THE REPORT ON VACCINATION FOR 1856 AND 1857. PAGE Introductory observations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 General Results of Vaccination in 1856 and 1857 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Vaccination under Superintendents of Divisions .. .. .. .. .. 6 Presidency Division .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 Concan do .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 Northern Deccan do .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12 Southern Deccan do .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14 Western Guzerat do .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17 Eastern Guzerat do .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28 Sind do .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 29 Kattywar do .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31 Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others .. .. .. .. .. 34 PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Tanna .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35 Alibaugh .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37 Bandora Dispensary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37 POONA DIVISION. Poona .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38 Ahmednuggur .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39 Sattara .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40 Dhoolia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41 Nassick .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 43 Mahableshwur .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 44, 75 Report of the Superintending Surgeon .. .. .. .. .. 44 NORTHERN DIVISION. Ahmedabad .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 46 Kaira .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47 Surat .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47 Broach .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48
iv INDEX. PAGE NORTHERN DIVISION (continued). Bhooj .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50 Rajcote .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51 Report of the Superintending Surgeon .. .. .. .. .. 51 SOUTHERN DIVISION. Belgaum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 52 Dharwar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53 Sholapore.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 54 Kolapore .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 55 Rutnagherry .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57 Vingorla .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 58 Report of the Superintending Surgeon .. .. .. .. .. 58 SIND DIVISION. Kurrachee .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60 Ditto Jail .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60 Ditto Dispensary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 63 Hydrabad.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 61 Shikarpore .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 62 Other Stations in Sind .. .. .. .. .. .. 64,65 Aden .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66 Bushire .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 67 VACCINATION UNDER NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. Southern Deccan Division .. .. .. .. .. .. 68 Western Guzerat .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 70 Eastern Guzerat .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 72 Northern Deccan.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 73 Southern Deccan.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 73 Kattywar Circle .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75 Miscellaneous Remarks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 76 Analysis of Tables in Appendix No. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 83 APPENDIC No. 1.REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, 1856 AND 1857. No. 2427 OF 1858. From the DIRECTOR GENERAL MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To the SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,2 it is unnecessary therefore again to refer; but the means employed may be briefly stated as follows :3 and about fifty (50) under the Native Chiefs' agency. From amongst this large number of one hundred and ninety (190) persons, many changes must necessarily have occurred during two years, owing to dismissals, deaths &c., and much variety of character and of aptitude for the discharge of their duties must have been observed. Changes during the two years. Class of Native Vaccina- tors, and how it may be improved. Vaccinators are employ- ed on other duties. On leave incompetent Substitutes allowed. 8. In 1856 there was only one (1) death amongst the Establishment reported, but eight (8) Vaccinators were dis- charged the Service at their own request, and eight (8) also were dismissed on account of misbehaviour. In 1857 there were eleven (11) Vaccinators discharged, one (1) resigned, and two (2) deaths occurred. In the selection of candidates to supply their places, every care is taken by the Superintendents and by the confirming authority to obtain efficient men; nevertheless, there is reason to fear, that the small remuneration and want of pensions tend to introduce a class of persons not highly trustworthy, nor perhaps best fitted for the duties. The remedy for this state of things it is difficult to suggest; but probably if candidates were selected at an earlier age than at present4 Transfer of Guicowar's Vaccinators. 10. During the year 1856 two Vaccinators, who were upon the rolls of the Baroda Residency Hospital, were received back again on the Superintendent's Establishment North-west Division of Guzerat, an arrangement previ- ously submitted to and sanctioned by Government. Increased Charges. 11. The only increase to the allowances of the Establishment in 1856 was at Aden, where the pay of the Station Vaccinators was raised from Rupees nine (9) to Rupees fifteen (15) a month. Travelling allowances at the rate of three (3) annas per diem were also granted to the Native Vaccinators em- ployed in Sind. Some Vaccinators taught to prescribe, &c. 12. At the instance of the Political Agent, Rewa Kanta, some of the Native Vaccinators were instructed, during the monsoon of 1856, in treating simple cases of fever, &c. at the Baroda Residency Hospital5 ed, however, that in 1857 vaccination under Superintendents was again increased by sixteen thousand one hundred and thirty-three (16,133). Decrease where chiefly- observed. 17. Upon referring to Table 1 the decrease in 1856 is seen to per- vade all the Divisions, except the Southern Deccan and Eastern Guzerat, in the latter of which there was an actual increase of about three thousand (3,000). In 1857, whilst there was a falling off in all the other Divisions, there is a remarkable and gratifying increase of twenty-five thousand two hundred and twenty-six (25,226) in Sind. The diminution in Western Guzerat of seven thousand seven hundred and ten (7,710) is doubtless due to the Establishment of the Kattywar Circle, and its separation from Guzerat. Although numbers less, yet per centage of success greater. 18. Many reasons are assigned by the Superintendents for the diminished numbers, yet the decrease is not altogether satisfactorily accounted for in either year, although there can be no doubt, that in 1855 an unusual large number of recorded vaccinations took place; still, if the ratio per cent. of successful cases is examined, it will be found to have increased each year as the total number diminished, thus in 1855 it was 89.5, in 1856 90.6, and in 1857 91.6. Numbers vaccinated in 1856 and 1857. 19. By Table No. 4 it will be seen that the total number vaccinated under this Presidency during the year 1856 was two hundred and forty-seven thousand six hundred and twenty-nine (247,629), and of these one hundred and fifty- eight thousand two hundred and thirty-five (158,235) were performed under the Superintendents, fifty-three thousand six hundred and sixty- three (53,663) by the Native Chiefs' agency, and thirty-five thousand seven hundred and thirty-one (35,731) by Vaccinators under Civil Sur- geons. In 1857 the total number vaccinated was two hundred and forty- six thousand six hundred and nineteen (246,619), of these one hundred and seventy-four thousand three hundred and sixty-eight (174,368) vaccinations were performed by Superintendents, forty-four thousand and thirteen (44,013) by Native Chiefs' agency, and twenty-two thousand two hundred and thirty-eight (22,238) by Civil Surgeons. Proportion of Sexes. 20. The proportion of each sex varied thus: the highest proportion of males over females occurred under the Native Chiefs' agency (92 per cent. in 1856, and 91 per cent. in 1857), next under Divisional Superintendents (84.2 per cent. in 1856, and about 80 per cent. in 1857), and lastly under Civil Surgeons (73 per cent. in 1856, and 75 per cent. in 1857), the average of all the Divisions being about 84 per cent. in 1856, and 81 per cent. in 1857.
6 Castes of the vaccinated. 21. The great bulk of those vaccinated (as of the population gene- rally) was Hindoos, next Mussulmans, then Christians, Parsees, and other castes, except in Sind, where a large Mussulman population exists. Ratio of successful cases. 22. The ratio per cent. of successful cases on the average was about 90.6 in 1856, and 91.6 in 1857, the lowest being under the Native Chiefs, about 87 and 88, and the highest in Divisional Vaccinators 91.3 and 93.1. The Reports of the several Superintendents of Divisions will now be examined. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Superintendent.7 urging the adoption of Dr. Peet's plan of establishing stations in various parts of the Island under the charge of a distinct Superintendent, as there is too much reason to doubt the accuracy of the returns of persons successfully vaccinated at their own houses. This scheme, if carried out, seems to afford the best prospect of securing trustworthy Returns.&quot; Regarding 1857 the Superintendent states his opinion that 8 With respect to the year 1856, the Superintendent states:9 they not receiving any remuneration or pay from Government. Regarding the inclination and wishes of the people on the subject of vaccination, I can confidently state, that, throughout the Rutnagherry Collectorate, (the one which I have been principally engaged in inspecting,) the ryots (with the exception of the Brahmin class) are as desirous of receiving vaccination as Government is of promoting it. Throughout every Talooka, one universal opinion was expressed to me by the Natives,10 tion to extend their feelings of disapproval to the surrounding villages. It is no uncommon occurrence to meet with an insolated Brahmin village without a single child vaccinated, yet the children of the villages in the immediate neighbourhood are all secured from Small-pox. In this matter the Brahmins evidently wish to learn their experience from the results to be observed in others, and prefer for a time rather to watch the experiment practised on others, than be experimentalized upon themselves. I have, therefore, never attempted to force or intrude the Vaccinators into Brahmin villages, but have aimed at teaching them the benefits of vaccination from what they themselves may observe. For this reason I have sent the Vacci- nators to villages in the neighbourhood of Brahmin ones, and have always impressed them with the knowledge that the Vaccinators are prepared to give their services in vaccinating their children when they themselves desire it. &quot; The conduct of the Vaccinators generally, has, during the past eight months, been satis- factory. Amongst a body of Natives left so much to themselves, and of necessity with such, little supervision, it is rather a matter of surprise that the work is performed so honestly and carefully. In only one instance did I detect falsification of the nominal returns, and the offender I recommended to be degraded, believing this mode of punishment would be a surer means of deterring the others from practising similar deceptions than dismissal from the Service.&quot; Statement showing what proportion the number of persons vaccinated in each District bears to the total population. Total Population. No. Vaccinated.* Per cent. Rutnagherry Collectorate .......... 665,238 21,829 3.28 Tanna Coollectorate .............. 815,849 10,426 1.27 Of the year 1857 the Superintendent reports:11 death has ensued as the result of their inoculation. Not unfrequently have the Natives in the Tanna Collectorate expressed their surprise at not seeing the children, on whom vaccination has been performed, covered with Small-pox pustules, and until assured that such was not necessary to ensure the preservation of their children from the disease, they looked upon the operation as a failure. In this matter great care has been taken to explain to the villagers, that the appear- ance of healthy pustules on the arm is sufficient protection to their children from the disease of Small-pox. &quot; From the Tables* the great difference which exists in the age of the children vaccinated will be observed of children above one year the total number vaccinated was twenty-eight thousand and sixty-seven (28,067), whilst of those below one year the number amounted to five thousand six hundred and eighty-nine (5,689), showing a difference in favour of the former of twenty-two thousand three hundred and seventy-eight (22,378). The only reason which can be assigned for this marked difference is, that Natives generally object to have their chil- dren vaccinated until they are passed twelve months old. Gradually I believe this feeling will give way, for I have frequently shown them children of a few months old who have been vacci- nated without any harm or bad result following. &quot; The result of the past year's work, and success of the operations are, I consider, very satis- factory. A more satisfactory result than 95 per cent. of success could hardly be looked for, and judging from the last three months' inspection of the work of the Assistant Vaccinators, I am satisfied that the reports forwarded by them are, on the whole, correct. &quot; The disease of Small-pox has not prevailed as an epidemic in this Division throughout the past year. From time to time reports have been forwarded of the disease having appeared in different villages in the districts ; measures were always at once taken to prevent its increase as far as possible, and the children of the surrounding villages, where the disease prevailed, were speedily vaccinated. The total number of deaths from Small-pox reported to me to have occurred throughout the Division was one hundred and nineteen (119), but I am inclined to believe that this number is much underrated, and that many more deaths not reported to me must have occurred. The greatest number of deaths from this disease occurred in the month of May12 &quot; My tour of inspection commenced at the latter end of October. From that time until the end of December, the Bassein, Bhewndy, Cullian and Kolween Talookas have been visited, and the work of Vaccinators examined. The nominal returns were in every case found to be correct, and the lymph was healthy and in abundance. &quot; The conduct of the Assistant Vaccinators has on the whole been satisfactory during the year. One Assistant Vaccinator received his discharge on account of refusing to proceed to the Mahim Talooka; another Vaccinator was dismissed the Service for falsifying his Return. I beg to acknowledge the assistance which has always most readily been afforded by the Civil and Police Authorities in both the Tanna and Rutnagherry Collectorates.&quot; NORTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. Superintendent.13 The following observations are offered simply in explanation of the Annual Return, and are educed from the office records of the year. &quot;It will be observed that the total number vaccinated during the year is twenty thousand five hundred and sixty-three (20,563), and that compared with the previous year there exists a deficit in the number of vaccinated amounting two thousand and fifty-one (2,051). This deficit may fairly be attributed to the dismissals that have taken place14 Small-pox becomes less prevalent by the gradual introduction of vaccination,15 confined to one officer, cannot come up to its requirements, and it has consequently happened that advantage has been taken of this by some of the Vaccinators, and several cases have occurred of fabricated Returns. &quot;Though stating the small amount of superintendence able to be given, to be a cause of the evils of imperfect vaccination and false Returns, still there cannot be any doubt, that the lax manner in which the Regulations (paras. 26 and 27 of Section VIII.), have been hitherto administered, has likewise been a cause, as from the Vaccinators not obtaining assistance on occasions, and the indifference of the authorities (required to give this assistance), in performing the very moderate overlooking also required of them, the Vaccinator either temporarily thrown out of work, or careless from the carelessness of others, resorts to fraud to fill up the Returns which are expected from him. &quot; Were the Regulations of 1853,16 missed at the end of 1856, and of course men unused to the work had to be entertained to fill these vacancies. Throughout the year the average strength has been only sixteen and three-quarters (16¾) instead of eighteen (18). &quot;The Returns show that of the total number vaccinated 52.1 per cent. were males, and 47.9 per cent. were females, giving a small increase in the proportion of females, as compared with 1856, when it was as 46.7 to 53.2. The numbers under one year of age are in the pro- portion of 26.4 per cent., while those in 1856 were 25.9 per cent., showing an increase in 1857 of 0.47 per cent. I have made a point of trying to persuade both village authorities, Vacci- nators, and the people themselves, of the advantage of submitting children to vaccination at an early age, and I hope that every year will see their fears on this subject diminished. In the result of operations the year 1857 shows, as far as Returns and confirmation reports can be trusted, a decided improvement over 1856, the successful cases being 95.3 per cent. against 92.2 per cent. I have not attempted to show the proportion of vaccinations to population, as the data afforded by the census of 1851 would not at this time give any reliable result. &quot;The condition of the lymph and vesicles appears to be good throughout the Division. In only one case have I had any occasion to doubt its efficacy, and that was in the hands of a very inattentive operator. It was immediately replaced from a neighbouring Vaccinator. Small-pox has prevailed more or less at different times in all the Collectorates, and in the Talookas. It was epidemic in Hindee (Sholapoor) in January and February, but not very severe in character. In Bedee and Pursgurh (Belgaum) in February and March. The deaths amounted to 20 per cent. In Modebhal (Sholapoor), in April, twenty-seven (27) cases and seven (7) deaths were reported ; in Hooblee (Dharwar), in September, there were two hundred and nine (209) cases, and fourteen (14) deaths ; in Padshahpoor (Belgaum), in Septem- ber, forty-two (42) cases and thirteen (13) deaths; and in Punderpoor (Sattara), in the same month, sixteen (16) cases and five (5) deaths. In several cases Small-pox has been reported by the local authorities in places where no Vaccinator was stationed, and immediate steps have been taken to vaccinate all the children requiring it, by sending the nearest operator to the locality as a temporary measure. In some cases the presence of Small-pox caused an immediate increase in the number of vaccinations; and I have no doubt, that were the Vaccinators and village authorities to use such occasions zealously, a considerable increase would, in every case, be the result. I have no reason to suppose that inoculation has at all obstructed the progress of vaccination. In one or two cases the prevalence of cholera has interfered. &quot;In consequence of the unsettled state of the country, the tour of inspection did not com- mence until the middle of November. It was my object to see those Vaccinators whose work had been longest unvisited, or had not been seen at all by my predecessors. Leaving Sattara, I proceeded to Koregaum, and thence to Khoondul, a town belonging to the Oundh Jagheer, thence to Tasgaum (Belgaum Collectorate), a very large and important town. In the surround- ing villages I found vaccination very well received; but among the numerous Brahmin popu- lation of the town itself, there was much opposition; and where they had allowed their children to be vaccinated, they frequently refused to allow lymph to be taken from them, or to bring them for inspection. From Tasgaum I proceeded to Sanglee, Meeraj, Mharsal and Kagwar. None of these Jagheers had ever before been visited; and the Chiefs having objected to the Superintendent having any direct authority over the Vaccinators entertained by them, it seemed not unlikely that some jealousy of my presence might be shown. This, however, was by no means the case. I was every where received with marked attention,17 Jagheerdars to entertain a Vaccinator; but from the divided state of their Jagheer, not one of the four brothers took any particular interest on the subject, and but little progress was made. Now, however, the three younger brothers have determined to entertain another Vaccinator for their share of the Jagheer, and greater success may be hoped for. In the Kolapoor States I have visited the Vaccinators at Eechul Karinjee, Kagab, and Gurh Ingluz, and I have found that in most instances vaccination is well received, and proper assistance is given by the anthorities. The greatest opposition is offered by Lingaets, but to this rule there is a marked exception in the Gurh Ingluz Petah, where they are very numerous, and frequently fill the offices of Patells, Koolkurnies &c.,18 Western Division, Guzerat. The Western Division of Guzerat* comprises the Government terri- tory under the Collector of Ahmedabad, and the Native States under the Political Agents in Kattywar, the Mahee Kanta, and the Political Superintendent Palhunpore. Situation and Extent. It lies between the 20° and 25° of N. latitude, and 69° and 74° of E. longitude ; the general direction from the northmost point of the Poseena Talooka in the Mahee Kanta to the southern promontory of the Kattywar penin- sula (near Dieu) would be SS. Westerly, and the length of the Divi- sion measured thus would be about three hundred (300) miles. Its breadth varies much, taken from the east of the Mahee Kanta districts, due west to the extremity of those of Santulpore, under the Palhunpore Agency, the distance would be about one hundred and sixty (160) miles. Again from the mouth of the Saburmuttee river, or a point a little to the south of it on the coast, a line stretching to the extreme west of Kattywar, near Dwarka, would measure two hundred and ten (210) miles, but other parts are much more narrow, as for instance the isthmus between the mouth of the Saburmuttee river and Bajjana on the Runn, and the southern parts of Kattywar. In round numbers then, the Division may be said to be three hundred (300) miles in length, and one hundred and fifty (150) in breadth. Boundaries. Its boundaries may be stated to be, on the north the Rajpootana States of Marwar (or Jodhpore), Serohee, and. Meywar; on the east the Dongurpore districts (under the Political Agent in Meywar), the Kaira Collectorate, Cambay territory, and Gulf of Cambay ; on the south, the Indian ocean, where it washes the coast of Kattywar; and on the west, the Gulf and Runn of Cutch. Districts excepted. Within this area are considerable districts belonging to Baroda, the superintendence of vaccination in which has within the past year been made over to the Residency Surgeon there, who is to carry it on by Vaccinators paid by the Durbar. These districts contain the large towns of Puttun, Kurree, and Beesulnuggur, and considerable ones of Burnuggur, Keyra- lees, Sidhpoor, Meysanuer, Beejapoor and Kullole, with the surround- ing villages and country lying to the west of the Saburmuttee, and Dehegaum, town and purgunna, to the eastward of that river; their population is very dense, and from the way in which their villages are * For this interesting sketch of the districts in charge of the Superintendent of Vaccination &quot;Western Division of Guzerat, the Director General is indebted to Dr. Lord, who transmitted it under date 5th March 1857 to the late Medical Board.
19 in many places intermingled with those of the neighbouring districts, the withdrawal of the superintendence of vaccination in them from the officer in charge of that duty in this Division, can scarcely be considered advantageous, in a measure which, to be effectual, should be carried out as a whole. This admixture of districts obliges the Superin- tendent often to travel through and across this portion of country, so it is included in the area of the Division, estimating its extent roughly. Area. Exclusive of this, the districts under the Superintendent of Vaccination in this Division comprise an area of20 Area and Population. Jeytulpore, Dhundooka, Purantej and Gogo,21 amount of their work to appear in a less favourable proportion to the extent of their charges, than might have been the case had there been no interference with their operations. Kattywar. (b) The districts under the Political Agent in Kattywar form the largest portion of the charge of the Superinten- dent of Vaccination in Western Guzerat. Area and Population. Proportion of Popula- tion to Area. Their area is estimated at not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square miles, and the population computed (for no correct census has ever been taken) at from nearly a million and a half to close in two million souls,22 Mahee Kanta. (c) The districts under the control of the Political Agent in the Mahee Kanta constitute the NE. portion of this Division. The sub-divisions or Zillahs are six in number, covering an estimated area of four thousand (4,000) square miles. Area and Population. The population in Major Whitelock's Report for 1853 was stated then to be three hundred and eleven thousand and forty-six (311,046) souls, which would give about seventy-seven (77) to the square mile. Vaccination. To meet the requirements of these districts, the Chiefs have entered to an arrangement for paying five Vaccinators, and a sixth will, it is hoped, soon be provided, as the Political Agent says some of the Chiefs have already agreed for their portion of the expense, and the remainder will probably ere long do likewise. Proportion of Persons Vaccinated. The Returns for the past year show eight thousand seven hundred and ninety (8,790) persons to have been vacci- nated in the Mahee Kanta, which would give a proportion of 2.8 per cent. to the whole population. Palhunpore Districts. (d) Lying to the westward of the Daunta portion of the Mahee Kanta, and extending to the eastern border of the Runn of Cutch, are the districts in charge of the Political Superintendent at Palhunpore, which form the North-western portion of this Division. These are eleven (11) in number, under Mussalman, Rajpoot, and Koolee Chieftains. Area and Population. Proportion of Popula- tion to Area. Their greatest length is about one hundred miles, breadth the same, with an area of six thousand and forty-one (6,041) square miles, containing nine hundred and thirty- four (934) towns and villages. The population is about one-tenth (1/10th) Mussalman, the rest Hindoo; and according to the last census numbers three hundred and sixty-five thousand three hundred and sixty-two (365,362) souls, which would give only about sixty (60) inhabit- ants to the square mile. A considerable portion of the country to the northward is hilly, covered with jungle, and almost destitute of inhabitants. In these districts vaccination is carried on by five (5) men, paid from local resources, and succeeds well. To these the services of a Government Vaccinator in and about Deesa have lately been added, as from the large European population of that station, it appeared desirable that a fresh supply of good lymph should be always within easy reach of the hospitals there.
23 Proportion of Persons Vaccinated. In the past year eleven thousand two hundred and thirty-six (11,236) inhabitants were vaccinated in these districts, which would give a proportion to the whole population of 3.0 per cent., an amount only exceeded in the Govern- ment districts of this Division. General Proportions of Population to Area, and Number of Persons Vacci- nated in other Districts. For the other districts the figures would stand thus: total area four- teen thousand four hundred and seventy-eight (14,478) square miles ; total population one mil- lion two hundred and thirty-seven thousand nine hundred and sixty-five (1,237,965) souls ; average population per square mile eighty-five (85) ; total number vaccinated in 1856 thirty-eight thousand four hundred and twenty-seven (38,427) inhabitants; proportion per cent. of vaccination to population 3.0. Cause of probable de- crease of latter proportion. It may, with regard to the last item, be observed, that as vaccination has for a considerable time been carried on in most parts of these districts, the proportion has probably in many instances decreased, the labours of the Vaccinators being in such cases most likely confined to children who have been born since their last visit, and not extended, as was not unfrequently the case formerly, to several members in each family. Dr. Lord, in his Annual Report for 1856, says :24 Political Superintendent, Palhunpore; after which I crossed the Burmas river to Deesa and Palhunpore, at both of which places I inspected work; and then passing eastward re-entered the Mahee Kanta at the Daunta Talooka, passed through this, and across the high hills that separate it from Hurrun and Posseena, the extreme north of the Vaccinator's Division. From Delwarra I moved to Kotra on the confines of Meywar. From this I travelled south, keeping chiefly the direction of the Saburmuttee river, visiting Lamseea, Bhanpoor, Gandah, Manwarra, &c. to Oondenee, from whence I turned eastward to Edur, and again northwards, from that up the valley of the Huttemittee river, which I followed till close to the high hills, behind Paul and Pole; returning from thence I visited Moonditta, Mhow, and Bhelora, when, as it was the commencement of June, and some threatening of rain among the hills, I returned viâ Chun- dernee, Ahmednuggur Paruntej, and Sadra to Ahmedabad Cantonment.&quot; &quot;In the villages around this and the city of Ahmedabad, I was almost daily employed, during the next three months, and as soon as the waters had at all subsided, I marched, at the close of the third week in August, to Jeytulpore, around which place and beyond Lallee and the Kharree river to the bounds of the Kaira Collectorate I inspected vaccination then being carried on there, examined the Registers and children formerly operated on. I, however, could not travel far or fast, a great portion of the roads being under water, so after a short tour I returned to Ahmedabad. &quot;Towards the close of October I moved into the Duskrohee (Ahmedabad) and Sanund districts, and early in November I passed on through Sanund to the southern part of the Veerumgaum Purgunna. I then visited Veerungaum itself, travelled a couple of marches north of it, and then turned south, coming close along the border of the Nule viâ Sholapoor, Vikreea, Darnalli &c. to Gangur, in the Dholka districts; from thence I visited Dholka, and passing on by Kole and Huddulla, pitched near Dhundooka. Having inspected the work round there, I passed on to Dholera, and thence turned west by Akroo and Soondryanee to Raun- poor. Here I left the Government territories, entering the Kattywar Districts at Pullyad, and passing through them I inspected vaccination at Jhasdeen, Gowndul, Jaitpoor and Joonaghur, from which place I marched viâ Ratyana to join the Political Agent's Camp at Porebundur. Here the Rana keeps up a Vaccinator, with whom and the Assistant who accompanies me I worked while at that place, and afterwards at Amrapoor, where I marched with Colonel Lang, when I received orders to proceed to Rajcote and assume charge of the Civil duties there. &quot;This (for the present at all events) has interrupted my tour, which I proposed continuing round the south, and then through the eastern parts of Kattywar, including the Gogo Purgunna, and so working my way back again, should it have been necessary for me to return to Ahmedabad, at the close of the travelling season. &quot;In these tours I have visited and inspected the work (both recent, and some of that done in the preceding two years,) of fifteen (15) Government and thirteen (13) Native Chiefs' Vaccinators, and though there were occasional exceptions, the state of their lymph, correct- ness of Returns, as verified by personal inquiry, general character and demeanour of the men, and their zeal and industry in performing their work (often under considerable difficulties) appeared to me very satisfactory. &quot;I shall now, reviewing the correspondence of the past year, briefly notice the subjects therein adverted to, and which from time to time seemed to demand attention in conducting my duties. &quot;In January I received from Dr. Bow, in medical charge at Kherwarra, intimation of an outbreak of Small-pox among the Bheel villages along the Meywar frontiers. To endeavour to arrest its spread towards Guzerat, and afford, so far as the limited means at my disposal would permit, opportunities of vaccination to the inhabitants of the afflicted districts, I de- tached three Vaccinators in employ of the Mahee Kanta Chiefs to the boundary at different points, which arrangement, with matters of detail, I communicated to Sir Henry Lawrence, the Governor General's Agent in Rajpootana, for which I received that officer's thanks. A
25 copy of the correspondence having been forwarded through the Superintending Surgeon, I need not further advert to the subject here, than to say, I moved myself, as soon as other engagements would permit, with an Assistant Vaccinator towards the Meywar boundary, but the Small-pox had ceased, and I regret to say that among the Bheels we failed in obtaining any subjects for vaccination. While noticing this, I may add that a later attempt made by the Political Agent in the Mahee Kanta with the assistance of the Rao of Paul, who exerted himself much in the matter, has also been unsuccessful. The Bheels, as with me at Poleena, threatening to desert their villages and fly to the hills sooner than bring their children for vaccination. They are, however, a very simple-minded people, and could once their prejudice be got over, I have no doubt they would freely accept vaccination. &quot;In February, as the delay in the former month in collecting the Returns &c. required for completing the Annual Reports brought the matter strongly to my notice, I made an attempt, with the consent of the Superintending Surgeon, to introduce a few simple rules as to the framing and forwarding Monthly Returns &c, which I hoped would accelerate their reaching me; but owing, as it appeared to me, to my object not having been explained to the Political Agent, when forwarding from the Superintending Surgeon's office my request for the acknow- ledgment on the outside of documents of the date on which received for transmission by the Village Authorities, I have never been able to get this done, and the consequence often is vexatious delay and inability on my part to decide how caused. &quot;In March, having finished my tour through the Palhunpoor Districts, I submitted, through the Superintending Surgeon, a little sketch of the origin and progress of vaccination in that part of the Division, for which I was honored with the thanks of the Medical Board.* &quot;In April I received, through the Superintending Surgeon, copy of a letter from the Resident at Baroda, saying that the superintendence of vaccination in H. H. the Guicowar's districts was no portion of my duty, on which point I applied for instructions from the Medical Board. &quot;In May, and with reference to former correspondence, commenced a correspondence with the Political Agent in Kattywar, on the subject of the pay and control of Vaccinators in the employ of Native Chiefs in that Province, which led to a reference of the question to Govern- ment, whose decision has not yet been received.26 the number of times he had been to each, and number of children vaccinated, which would give a fair idea of his industry and the proportion of vaccination in his district. &quot;I may however observe, that so far as individual usefulness is concerned, and proportionate reduction of the expense of vaccination, these charges are scarcely extensive enough, so I am still of opinion that twelve (12) Vaccinators would be sufficient to meet their ordinary require- ments, and the remaining three (3) might with more advantage be employed in the Central Districts of Kattywar, or elsewhere in Native States in this Division. &quot;In reporting the results of operations by men under the Superintendent of Vaccination in this Division, it has been usual to divide them into the Government and Native Chiefs' Establishments.* &quot;The Government Establishment of Vaccinators consists of twenty-three (23) individuals of different ranks, in which there are at present no vacancies. In the past year one Assistant Vaccinator was discharged at his own request, one Assistant and one Apprentice were discharged to make room for two Vaccinators who had been lent to the Guicowar, and two Assistant Vaccinators were dismissed for misconduct, the vacancies have been filled, and the Establishment is now at its full strength as sanctioned. &quot;The returns of work for this Establishment show thirty-six thousand five hundred and sixty-seven (36,567) persons to have been vaccinated by its means in the year 1856; this number exceeds the average of the last five years by over six thousand (6,000) ; but it is less than the amount of work done in the preceding twelve months by eight thousand five hundred and eighty-nine (8,589) operations. &quot;This I quite expected, and the causes of it may be satisfactorily explained as follows:27 Native Chiefs under these Agencies28 local calls of duty, my presence has been constantly required in Kattywar, allowing no time to be devoted to a tour in the Guzerat districts, or personal inspection of vaccination in them; the remaining duty was however conducted, as far as was in my power, by correspondence till near the close of the year, when a successor was appointed to be Superintendent of the Division, for whom, in obedience to orders to that effect, I despatched the office on the 15th December to the care of the Superintending Surgeon at Ahmedabad. EASTERN GUZERAT. Superintendent.29 &quot; The Native officials do not render hearty assistance in the work: complaints under this head come in almost monthly, more specially from the Broach and Surat Collectorates. With reference to the Vaccinators themselves I can say but little from personal experience : those that I have seen are well acquainted with their work ; but as before alluded to, carelessness attaches to the Returns of three or four of them. A marked difference occurs in the comparative num- bers vaccinated by each, which is due in a great measure to the populousness of their respective spheres of labour. In the Oolpar and Koorsud districts, the Vaccinators have to contend with the prejudices of an unwilling people, which, from my own knowledge of the fact, must interfere with larger and more satisfactory numerical results. This conclusion is reached on contrasting the work of two Vaccinators, one of whom furnishes a total of two thousand nine hundred and seventy-eight (2,978) operations, the other a total only of nine hundred and forty-one (941), or a difference of two thousand and thirty-seven (2,037). No changes have taken place in the Vaccination Establishment during the year. &quot; The reports touching the quality of the lymph have been favourable. The virus in the cases coming under personal observation, producing the characteristic vesicle. Small-pox, fatal in most cases, occurred sporadically in one or two of the villages I visited. On inquiry, I found that in one of these the children had been vaccinated with doubtful or rather unsuccessful result: the disease was confluent. Inoculation seems to have died out in the Eastern Division Guzerat, at least I have not met with any cases, nor have any been reported. The percentage of success- ful vaccination may be fixed at eighty-seven. The main obstacle to the spread of vaccination lies in the ignorance and prejudices of the people. The personal presence, however, of the Superintendent, is the best argument in dealing with these; for the villagers brought their children readily when they learned that a European had come amongst them, who formerly held back when the Vaccinator appeared. Had not the exigencies of the Service recalled me from the districts, I should have been able to furnish a more satisfactory report than the one now submitted. I trust, however, and believe that the circumstances which render it brief of necessity, do not affect the statistical correctness thereof. SIND DIVISION. Superintendent.30 Owing to the change in the office of Superintendent, there was no Report forwarded for the year 1856. Mr. Martin, in his Report for 1857, states as follows:31 and tact, and the hearty co-operation of the Civil Executive Officers, Kardars, Tuppudars, &c. is nearly all that is required on the part of the people; no serious or general obstruction has been met with except in the district of Jacobabad, and in this district some little way has been made during the past year. &quot; The past year being my first year of office as Superintendent of Vaccination, my attention was at first directed to inquiring into the general feeling of the people as to vaccination, and . the extent to which vaccination had been carried out. As to the feeling of the people, the result of inquiry is on the whole favourable; even where the operation was introduced for the first time, very little difficulty had to be encountered. The real difficulty in Sind is the enor- mous size of the Province to be worked over by fifteen Vaccinators. The plan of keeping one Vaccinator in each district has certainly failed; inspection cannot be sufficiently frequent, and without it very little good is effected. I have adopted the plan of concentrating the Establishment, so that several individuals are inspected during each month, and all are under the influence of the Superintendent. I am happy to be able to say that no complaints of the conduct of Vaccinators has ever been made to me.&quot; KATTYWAR DIVISION. Superintendent.32 year. On the 1st July operations were commenced, and separate Returns &c. have been kept. The aggregate results of the six months are now, at the close of the official year, submitted. Between the time of the receipt of the Resolution of Government in March, and its sanction by the Govenment of India, I had endeavoured, during a visit to the Political Agent's camp in May and June, through his influence, favourably to dispose to the measure the Karbaries (or Agents) from the most influential Chiefs in the province then collected there; and by a Committee elected from amongst themselves, was drawn up a Government document, setting forth the terms on which they thought Vaccinators on the Native Chiefs' Establishment should be entertained &c. In this perhaps some slight modifications might be deemed desirable, (which may hereafter be obtained,) but as the expressed wishes of Govern- ment were ' that the Chiefs should be left as much as practicable to select their own Vaccina- nators,' and 'make their own arrangements,' it seemed evidently the best course to acquiesce at once in the terms proposed by their Agents, (which in general appeared satisfactory, and likely to aid in accomplishing the object desired,) and so endeavour to secure, as far as possi- ble, the good will of these towards the furtherance of the undertaking. &quot; Subsequent to the receipt of the sanction of the Supreme Government, I applied through the Superintending Surgeon to the Medical Board for a separate Establishment of Government Vaccinators, to be detached from the North-western Division of Guzerat, for duty in the Kattywar Circle, which, after some correspondence, was arranged and notified in Government Orders of the 13th October last. These men, counting eight (8) district Vaccinators, with sixteen (16) more in employ of Native Chiefs, constituted the establishment in Kattywar at the close of the past year. Many of them are hardly yet settled in their districts, and Returns from some extend but to a few weeks or months, while from others no reports of operations have yet been received. In some localities people are indifferent or averse to the operation; in others their wants have yet to be met by the entertainment and education of Vaccinators. The whole scheme is still in its infancy; much care has been expended in bring- ing it so far. It remains to be seen whether it will work well, and grow into a healthy and useful institution, or (when the impetus which it has at present received has ceased to in- fluence it) dwindle down to its former meagre proportions33 1857 No. of Vaccinators. No. Vaccinated. Government. Native Chiefs. Total. 1st Half-year ............ 7 9 16 10,975 2nd Half-year ............. 8 16 24 8,411 Annual Total...... 19,386 Of these by Government Establishment ............................... 8,794 34 service a Vaccinator who had been displaced by the Gondul people employing a man of their own. From Jaitpoor we passed on to Dhorajee, a wealthy and populous town, where the people promise to keep up a Vaccinator, but have not yet completed arrangements for doing so. From Dhorajee we went to Buntlee and Joonaghur, under which Durbar three Vaccinators are employed, but they do not appear to get on very well with the people, so I have not dis- couraged an attempt on the part of the Karbarees to employ men from their own country, which, however, they have not yet accomplished. From Joonaghur Buntlee we went to Mang- role, a considerable town on the sea coast with a small Talooka attached, the Chief of which however has hardly sufficient means to keep up a Vaccinator exclusively for his own villages. From Mangrole we marched by Nuveebunder to Porebunder, where the Rana wished a man of his own, whom I had trained, to be exchanged for a Guzerat man who had been for some years with him. This was arranged before leaving Porebunder, and at the close of the year we had marched by Rawul and Rumbalia and reached Noanuggur two days before the date to which this Report extends. In this tour and to the present time I have accompanied Colonel Lang's Camp, and to his influence and exertions must be attributed the degree of support which the Chiefs at present seem disposed to extend to vaccination. As his plans will proba- bly ere long take him in another direction; I then intend by myself to make a tour of inspec- tion among the Vaccinators already established, and hope by the close of the travelling season to have visited most of those in the Northern and Eastern Districts, and so make altogether a tolerably extensive circuit throughout my charge. VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. 23.In the Appendix there are two tables, numbered 2, following each other,35 operated on one thousand three hundred and thirty-eight (1,338) in- dividuals only, and hence the average payment is raised to Rupees ten, annas twelve, and pie one (10-12-1) per hundred. The rate per cent. of successful cases to total number vaccinated was in 1856 91.0, and in 1857 89.0. In 1856 there were twenty thousand six hundred and eighty-eight (20,688) males and fifteen thousand and forty-three (15,043) females vaccinated, in the proportion of about five (5) of the former to three and a half (3½) of the latter sex. In 1857 the number of males was sixteen thousand and eleven (16,011), and of females twelve thousand two hundred and twenty-seven (12,227)j in the proportion of four (4) of the former to three (3) of the latter sex. With respect to &quot;caste,&quot; Hindoos in both years predominated. In 1856 about 60 per cent. of the total number, and in 1857 about 70 per cent. In 1857 there were about seven thousand (7000) more vaccinations performed above, than under, one year of age. 25. The several stations in the Appendix are arranged according to Superintending Surgeons' Divisions, and in that order they will be now examined. UNDER THE SUPERINTENDING SURGEON PRESIDENCY DIVISION AND INDIAN NAVY. Tanna.36 hundred and ninety (390) persons have been vaccinated, of whom a very large proportion, three hundred and seventy (370) or 94.8 per cent. have been successful cases. This is an increase of one hundred and twelve (112) over the preceding twelve (12) months. Still it must be admitted that among a population of about twelve thousand (12,000) souls, the number is lamentably Small, and far short of what might be accomplished could the preju- dices against vaccination so persistently displayed by the bulk of the inhabitants be lessened or overcome. It may be remarked, however, that a year seldom passes over Tanna without a visitation of Small-pox,37 Alibaugh.38 1856.39 1857.40 the inhabitants of the city and through the station of Ahmednuggur, vaccination has also been performed by the Hospital Establishments of the Civil Jail and Police Hospitals, at the Civil Dispensary, and at the Branch Dispensary of the Police Hospital. &quot; The following table shows the result of last year's vaccination by the different Establish- ments under the Civil Surgeon:41 &quot;During the past twelve months one thousand six hundred and sixty-one (1,661) children have been vaccinated: of these one thousand four hundred and sixty-seven (1,467) were successful cases, twenty-three (23) failed, and one hundred and seventy-one (171) children were not seen after the operation. From a statement showing the comparative difference of the numbers vaccinated last year with that of the preceding,* a decrease of one thousand four hundred and seventy-three (1,473) operations is exhibited, the reason of this deficit is probably the prevalence of cholera during the monsoon months; for it has been found that on the out break of this epidemic, vaccination is always carried on with great difficulty, through fear and prejudice of the adult population. The town and neighbourhood have been quite free from Small-pox during the period under review.&quot; 1857.42 1856.43 Nassick.44 Mahableshwur.45 respectively. The decrease in the vaccinations by the Establishment of the Northern Deccan Division is attributed, and no doubt justly, by the Superintendent, to the circumstance of the number of Vaccinators having been for part of the year reduced from dismissal and resigna- tions.* The falling off in the station of Sattara is considered by the Civil Surgeon to have been chiefly due to the circumstance of one of the Vaccinators of the Southern Division pre- sent with the Hoozoor, having vaccinated in villages adjoining Sattara usually visited by the Station Vaccinator; but partly also to the disturbed state of the district. The decrease at Nassick may also be attributed to the disturbed state of the country. The vaccinations at Ahmednuggur show a satisfactory and progressive increase. The number of males vaccinated exceed the females by six hundred and seventy-five (675). The vaccinated above one year exceed those under one year by nine hundred and fifty-three (953), that is, the total vaccinations above one year amount to three thousand six hundred and fifty-three (3,653), whereas those under one year are two thousand seven hundred and forty (2,740). But in the Superintendent's Returns, p. 13,t the vaccinated under one year are only three thousand six hundred and fifty-one (3,651), whilst those above one year are sixteen thousand nine hundred and twelve (16,912). This is a startling fact, and convincingly proves that notwithstanding the efforts of half a century this prophylactic has not in truth secured an appreciable hold on the affections of the people. The percentages of successful vaccinations is 85.5, of unsuccessful and doubtful ones (which for all practical purposes may be classed together) 14.5. I presume that a portion of the doubtful and unsuccessful cases are vaccinated again, and again entered in the Returns. If so, &quot;the total number vaccinated&quot; expresses an excess over the total individuals, i. e. mem- bers of a community vaccinated. To my mind there seems no gain in this cumbrous system, and that the simple and straightforward course would be to enter as vaccinated only those on whom the operation has been undoubtedly successful. It can be of no interest or im- portance to any one to know the number of arms that a Vaccinator has pricked. The question of importance is, what number of members of a community have received the benefits of this prophylactic. The quality of the lymph has been favorably reported on throughout the Division. Few Returns of Small-pox have been made to the Superintendent. A few cases occurred in the city of Poona at the beginning of the year, and Small-pox was in that district (Dhoolia) during the rains. The Reports generally show that there has not been much Small-pox in the Division during the past year. No inoculation with Small-pox reported; and no particular obstruction offered to vaccination.&quot; &quot; The necessity of improving the condition and prospects of the Native Vaccinators cannot, I apprehend, admit of doubt. To understand thoroughly the conditions necessary to insure true vaccinations requires considerable intelligence. Steadily to enforce the observance of these conditions requires patience, energy, perseverance and integrity. To expect these qualities from men on the scanty allowance allotted to Native Vaccinators, and without prospect of pension when unfit for service, is to expect what is not consonant with human nature. The inference which I have always drawn from these facts, and which I have already published, is that of vaccinations recorded as successful, a considerable proportion have probably no title to be so regarded. That, with an agency such as much of that which is at present employed, to suppose that an effort is being made at all, commensurate with the vast importance of the object, is nothing short of a great and most unfortunate delusion. * Vide Superintendent's Report Northern Deccan Division p. 13 ante. 46 UNDER THE SUPERINTENDING SURGEON NORTHERN DIVISION. Ahmedabad47 Kaira.48 1856.49 females, and nine hundred and twenty-two (922) males; of these again eight hundred and seven (807) have been children under one year old, and seven hundred and twenty-eight (728) have been above that age. Compared with the previous year, the numbers have increased some- what, the twelve months of 1856 showing at the time a total of one thousand four hundred and forty-seven (1,447) operations, making a difference in favor of last year of eighty-eight (88). This increase has been occasioned by the larger number of female children having been vaccinated in the year 1857, showing an increase of seventy-seven (77) females over the numbers of the previous year, leaving only eleven (11) males to make up the difference between the two years. It is not easy to say whether this difference between the two sexes has any determinate bearing upon the question of male and female births amongst the population generally, or whether it arises from accidental alternations and changes found to occur amongst communities of living beings, as well as in the organic and inorganic worlds. Probably both causes have been in operation, and the fluctuating state of the community in and around Broach, especially at certain seasons has, this year, by a fortuitous assemblage of circumstances, produced this result. In the first part of the year the numbers diminished in some of these months considerably, especially in the months of March and May. There being in the first mentioned month a falling off of one half the number of the corresponding period of the preceding year, whilst from the beginning of July till the end of December, a steady increase over the last six months of 1856 was observable. The cause of this disparity in numbers appears to be that the cotton season of 1857 was much later than ordinary seasons, at which periods large bodies of labourers with their children, from the districts, seek the town to obtain employment in cotton cleaning; but on their arrival this year, it was found the Village Vaccinators had been already amongst the majority of them, and consequently there were fewer children to operate upon in Broach. There is an average influx at such times of persons from the different Zillahs amounting to four thousand (4,000) men and women. Thus, had the cotton season of 1857 been favorable, a larger number than the present would have been shown in the Returns. The successful cases of vaccination have amounted to 94.9 per cent. The lymph remains good, and the condition of the vesicles is every way desirable. Some cases of Small-pox have appeared throughout the year in the town, but the people do not desire medical interference, and it is only by accident a know- ledge of the fact is attained. No inoculation is practised in Broach, so far as I am acquainted, and I have made special inquiries upon this point. From what therefore has been said, vaccination in Broach progresses favorably in spite of the objections raised by Brahmins and Parsees, from whom more enlightened views might not unreasonably be expected. Another difficulty is also met with amongst the towns-people, that whilst generally speaking, they are willing enough to submit their children for vaccination when solicited, they strongly object to the vaccine matter being removed, in consequence of which they secret their children, and it is not without some trouble occasionally they are ferreted out from their hiding places, when the parents then acquiesce in our arrangements. The district people on the other hand offer no objections whatever. &quot; To overcome this prejudice on the part of the towns-people must be left to the progress of time and to the repeated assurances of Vaccinators and their Establishments, that the transmissions of the virus from their offspring to other children will cause the former no harm, for by a strange perversity of reasoning they anticipate no evil to their own child from the vaccine matter of another, but at once conjure up visions of loss of caste, disease and death, when they are desired to allow it to be transmitted from their charges, to another being similar to themselves. Of such blind folly time alone must be the eradicator. 7v
50 Bhooj.51 Rajkote.52 UNDER THE SUPERINTENDING SURGEON SOUTHERN DIVISION. Belgaum.53 Dharwar.54 latter period it has not been heard of in this neighbourhood. The children of the poorer classes suffered most severely from the epidemic. Inoculation is not resorted to in this part of the country.&quot; Sholapore55 &quot; Those of the male sex who have been operated on have exceeded the number of females by more than two-fold56 Superintending Surgeon. I am happy to be enabled to report that, having been successful in proving the guilt of these parties, they met with severe and well merited punishment. These punishments at my suggestion have been published throughout the whole country, and I feel confident the happiest effects may be anticipated. I append a map* of my area of vaccination, showing its size, villages, populations, &c. On the several borders my Assistant meets the Vaccinators of several districts, and working in concert with them the whole of the ground is supposed to be visited. It is my pleasing duty to add that Small-pox has prevailed to a very slight extent in our villages during the past season, and I attribute this principally to the check, which has been given to the practice of inoculation and to the support given by Political Authorities to vaccination.&quot; 1857.57 Rulnagherry.58 Vingorla.59 the third, that the lymph became deteriorated for some three months in 1856, the seeming contradiction disappears. &quot; It is then to the Returns of the Superintendent of Vaccination* that we must look for the falling off in the numbers vaccinated, and in them we must seek for an explanation of the diminished benefits of the prophylactic, and the impediments which have come in the way of its extension. &quot;Giving due weight to the fact60 in strength, and ultimately to be altogether overcome. I would, however, observe, that much would seem to rest with the Political and Civil Authorities, for I believe, it may fairly be inferred from the Returns that in the districts where their countenance and support have been best afforded, the practice of vaccination have been most successful. &quot; As will be perceived from the report of the Civil Surgeon, Kolapore,* the race of inoculators is not altogether extinct; but, so far as is known, their practice, if any, has become very limited. &quot; The several reports show that, although of rather a mild type, Small-pox prevailed epide- mically last year, and I regret to say that it does so again now.&quot; UNDER THE SUPERINTENDING SURGEON SIND DIVISION. Kurrachee.61 &quot; In 1856 the total number vaccinated was six hundred and twenty-eight (628), and in 1857 it was six hundred and fifty-one (651). There was a considerable diminution in the number of males vaccinated last year, while the females are much increased. I am at a loss to what to ascribe this variation. It has not been dependent on any peculiar measures adopted with regard to the children, nor do I think it has been caused by any increased liberality on the part of the people themselves. The figures show greater success during the year now ended. We had five hundred and eighty-four (584) successful cases, while in 1856 the numbers were five hundred and sixty-seven.(567). The lymph, so far as I have seen it, during the past year, has been on the whole good, and I myself have vaccinated successfully many English children with lymph taken from Natives. In very many instances I have had occasion to remark that lymph taken from a very poor and imperfect-looking vesicle in a Native child has pro- duced a great deal, both of local and constitutional, irritation in the English child. I have little doubt that the distinctive peculiarity of constitution in the two fully explains this cir- cumstance. There have not been many cases of Small-pox during the past year, but some of them among children have been fatal in the town. I have heard of no cases of Small-pox among English people. &quot; I have never heard of inoculation being practised by the people, and the great obstruction to vaccination is the prejudices of the people themselves. Kurrachee Jail. 1857.62 1856.63 Kurrachee Dispensary.64 received. The tables are therefore simply given of vaccination for five years and average :65 Mahomed Khan's Tanda. Table of Vaccination for five years and average :66 Aden.67 Bushire.68 VACCINATION UNDER NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. 26. Upon reference to Table No. 3 in the Appendix, it will be seen, that in 1856 the total number vaccinated amounted to fifty-three thousand six hundred and sixty-three (53,663), an increase of about eight thou- sand and five hundred (8,500) over the year 1855. In 1857, it will be observed, that the number was forty-four thousand and thirteen (44,013), being a diminution of about nine thousand and six hundred (9,600) from 1856, chiefly in the Southern Division and in Guzerat. In 1856 there was a steady increase in each Division, the continuance of which perhaps could not be expected during the year 1857. A greater falling off may not. be unreasonably anticipated during the present year. 27. The average of successful vaccinations for the year 1856 was about 88.0 per cent. In 1857 it reached only a little more than 87.0 per cent. In the Native States of the Southern Division the highest average prevails. The sexes operated upon during the two years are pretty equally balanced, and a remarkable uniformity runs throughout all the Divisions. The Hindoos, as to numbers, far outstrip all other castes. With regard to &quot;age,&quot; it appears that there were only thirteen thou- sand six hundred and thirty (13,630) children under one year of age vaccinated, whilst there were upwards of thirty thousand (30,000) above that age69 Table of Vaccination for five years and average SOUTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. 1853. 1854. 1855. 1856. 1857. Average. Total Number Vaccinated. 6,299 5,765 7,604 9,806 8,723 7,639 SEX Males . . . . . . 3,957 3,569 4,126 5,263 4,621 4,307 Females . . . . 2,342 2,196 3,478 4,543 4,102 3,332 CASTE . . Hindoos . . . . . 5,776 5,122 7,274 9,438 8,109 7,144 Mussalmans . . 241 574 328 360 349 370 Christians . . . . .. .. 2 8 .. 2 Parsees . . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Castes . . . 282 69 .. .. 265 123 AGE . . . . Under one year. .. .. .. .. 2,155 .. Above one year. .. .. .. .. 6,568 .. RESULT . . Successful . . . . 5,093 4,783 6,481 8,842 8,121 6,664 Unsuccessful . . 264 218 256 154 213 221 Doubtful . . . . 942 764 867 810 389 754 Percentage of Success . . . . 80.8 82.9 85.2 90.1 93.1 86.4 1856.70 addition to one already in their employ. This number may be again diminished in 1858, as the Chief of Kajwar died in October last, and his Jagheer lapsed to the Government, but for the present the Vaccinator is ordered to continue in his duties. &quot; I regret to say, that notwithstanding the increase in the number of operations, there is a very considerable decrease in the amount of work performed. The numbers being in 1856 nine thousand eight hundred and six (9,806), in 1857 eight thousand seven hundred and twenty-three (8,723,) showing a decrease of one thousand and eighty-three (1,083.) The number of successful cases does not, however, exhibit a proportional diminution. Correcting those of 1856, by deducting four hundred and forty-six for false Returns, the numbers will be for 1856 eight thousand three hundred and ninety-six (8,396), and for 1857 eight thou- sand one hundred and twenty-one, (8,121), decrease two hundred and seventy-five (275.) The first two of the causes before referred to,* might have been expected to operate equally on the Jagheerdar and Government Establishments; but they should have been more than counteracted by the increased number of operations, and by the fact, that, in those places,where vaccina- tion had been only lately commenced in 1856, another year had elapsed, in which to overcome the prejudices of the people. Of eleven (11) Vaccinators employed in 1856, six (6) have during the past year returned diminished numbers, and the increase shown by the other five is, with one exception, very trifling. The Vaccinator at Kajul (Kolapore), whose work in 1856 was very good, was dismissed in February 1857 on account of his quarrelsome disposition; but his successor is doing very well. The Returns of Ramookund Josee (Bowrah Jagheer, Kolapore,) are the largest made by any Vaccinator in either Establishment, and there is reason to believe that they are trustworthy ; the decrease in his number last year is mainly to be attributed to sickness. Ramanoozooloo Soobrow (Garh Julny, Kolapore State,) returns large numbers, and his work, as verified by myself, is excellent. Of the total number vaccinated 53.1 per cent. were males, and 47.0 per cent. females, in 1856 there were 52.9 per cent. males and 46.3 per cent. females71 Table of Vaccination for five years and average :72 EASTERN GUZERAT DIVISION. 31. The Native States in which Vaccinators are employed under the Superintendent Eastern Division of Guzerat, are those in the Rewa Kanta and Rajpeepla districts73 NORTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. 32. The Native State at &quot; Peint&quot; entertains one Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon at Nassick. Table of Vaccination for four years and average :74 Table of Vaccination for five years and average:75 He adds respecting the year 1857:76 MISCELLANEOUS REMARKS. 36. The Director-General has now brought to a conclusion the sketch of vaccination proceedings in 1856 and 1857, commenced at page. 4 ante ; but before closing the Report, he is desirous of recording some circumstances which have occurred during these two years, and then of submitting a brief analysis of the tables in Appendix No. 2 relating to the years 1853 to 1857. Increase of Pay to Vac- cinators in Sind. 37. With reference to para. 11 p. 4 of the present Report, it should be added that the Government of India, by letter No. 1549, of 28th November 1856, confirmed the sanction of this Government to the grant of travelling batta of three annas per diem to each member of the Subordinate Vaccination Estab- lishment under the Superintendent of Vaccination in Sind, and to the allowance of Rs. 100 hitherto granted for the conveyance of children with lymph from village to village being fixed at Rs. 150 for the future. Dr. Broughton's paper on Vaccination before al- luded to at p. 42. 38. In August 1856 Mr. Broughton, Civil Surgeon, Kolapore, sub- mitted to the late Medical Board a Tract on Vaccination and Small-pox, drawn up in concise and familiar terms, and well adapted for transla- tion into the Vernacular languages. Under Government Resolution No. 3301, of 14th November 1856, the paper was translated into Hindoo- stanee, Murathee, Guzerathee, and Canarese, by the Oriental Translator to Government, and into Sindee by a Sindian Moonshee, and between twelve and thirteen thousand copies freely distributed amongst all classes of the community. Mr. Broughton's paper was subsequently brought to the notice of the Honorable Court of Directors, who express- ed themselves, in October 1857, as &quot;very desirous that all available means should be taken to ensure the appreciation of the benefits con- ferred by vaccination by the dissemination amongst the people of information on the subject in a popular form.&quot; Indirect aids to Vacci- nation. 39. In para. 104 p. 24 of the Vaccination Report for 1855, the late Medical Board suggested that some indirect means of compulsory vaccination might perhaps be advisable, such as by making it essential that all persons seeking Government employment, and all children admitted into Government schools, should have been previously vaccinated. The subject was referred by the Government of India for the considera- tion of the Honorable Court of Directors, who, in para, No. 66, of their
77 Despatch No. 123, of December 1856, state, that &quot; they do not think that any authoritative rule on the subject should be promulgated,&quot; and concur in the opinion of the Government of India &quot;in the inexpediency of passing any rule for rendering vaccination an indispensable condi- tion of obtaining Government employment.&quot; Compulsory Vaccina- tion in Sind. 40. With reference to the 33rd para. p. 12 of the Medical Board's Report on Vaccination in 1855, regarding the forcible vaccination of adults in Sind by the late Superintendent, the Honorable Court of Directors, by their Despatch No. 53, of 6th October 1857, express themselves as follows :78 be conciliated in the measures taken by our officers, either for the pre- vention of inoculation, or for the spread of vaccination. We trust that while no doubt is suffered to exist as to the wishes of your Government, and while due support is given to the Vaccinators, it will be borne in mind that measures of a compulsory character are not permitted, for the purpose of extending the practice of vaccination.&quot; Suppression of Inocula- tion by legal Enactments. 42. In August 1856 the late Medical Board brought to the notice of Government that inoculation was practised in the Concan (see p. 8 ante), and that the checks upon it seemed to be ineffectual so long as the Law confers no authority to enforce its suppression. In September 1856 Government applied to the Remembrancer of Legal Affairs for his opinion as to &quot;how far the present state of the law will justify inter- ference to put a stop to the barbarous practice of inoculation through- out the Mofussil.&quot; In April 1857 Government, by letter No. 875, informed the late Medical Board that &quot;the practice of inoculation is not prohibited by law in India, and that the Right Honorable the Governor in Council is unable to authorise the adoption of any forcible measures by the local authorities with the view of suppressing it, and that so late as 1853 the Government of India deemed a prohibitory enactment inexpedient.&quot; Quality of Lymph em- ployed in July 1857. 43. In para. 67 of Honorable Court's Despatch No. 123, of December 1856, to the Government of India, it is stated :79 rated from the employment of vaccine matter of the ninth and tenth days, but had been renewed by fresh lymph from neighbouring Vacci- nators ; and in Sind, where a Vaccinator was using imperfect lymph, but which had been replaced by excellent matter. The present condi- tion and date of last renewal were as follows:80 45. This Report should embrace the following points, and in the order given:81 were vaccinated for the second time,82 children under one year, and one hundred and twenty-three thousand four hundred and fifty (123,450) above one year, being an excess of seventy-two thousand five hundred and thirty-two (72,532) of the latter, i. e. in the proportion of about twenty-nine (29) under one year, and seventy-one (71) above that age in every one hundred (100) individuals. In the Civil Surgeons' Establishments there were out of a total of twenty-eight thousand two hundred and thirty-eight (28,238) operations, ten thousand six hundred and seven (10,607) under one year, and seventeen thousand six hundred and thirty-one (17,631) above one year, the excess of the latter being only seven thousand and twenty-four, (7,024), and the proportion out of every hundred being thirty-seven (37) under one year, and sixty-three (63) above that age. In the Native Chiefs' Agency, out of a total of forty-four thousand and thirteen (44,013) vaccinations, thirteen thousand six hundred and thirty (13,630) were in infants below one year, and thirty thousand three hundred and eighty- three (30,383) in persons above, being an excess of the latter of sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty-three (16,753), showing that amongst one hundred (100) individuals operated upon, thirty (30) only were under one year, and seventy (70) above that age. Notwithstanding the above remarkable facts, it will be seen that in two of the Superin- tendents' Divisions (Presidency and Western Guzerat), and at the following Stations (Bandora, Nassick, Dhoolia, Broach, Kurrachee, Hydrabad, Shikarpore, Roree, and Bushire), the vaccinations performed upon children under one year old were absolutely in excess of those above that age. Presumed causes of Vacci- nation being performed at different Ages. 50. It is difficult to trace the true causes of these differences, and it is impossible to say whether at the Presidency, in Western Guzerat, and at the other places just mentioned, the people are or are not more alive to the value of infant over adult vaccination, than at other places, or whether there may not be accidental circumstances attending the registra- tions of ages during the first year of its introduction, which may not be met with afterwards. The inference drawn by the Acting Superintend- ing Surgeon, Poona, (Dr. Morehead,)at p. 45 ante, which is recorded also in somewhat similar terms in other reports, that the excess of adult over infant vaccination &quot;proves that notwithstanding the efforts of half a century, this prophylactic has not secured an appreciable hold on the affections of the people,&quot; may be correct; but as it is impossible to be certain without some further information that the greater part of those vaccinated above one year were not really children under two83 majority of Native parents object to the operation of vaccination being performed on their children. 51. The distinction of &quot;infants,&quot; &quot;children,&quot; and &quot;adults&quot; might, perhaps, hereafter be advantageously introduced into the tables ; but for some time to come the present arrangement should be allowed to continue. Pensions for the Super- annuated. 52. There is scarcely a Superintendent during the two years now passed under review, who has not recommended that superannuated Native Vaccinators should receive a small pension, and there is some reason to fear that aged men84 Table No. 2A. Vaccination under Civil Surgeons, &c.85 the total number vaccinated each year from 1853 to 1857, arranged according to sex, age, caste, and result, with averages. In this table it will be observed that the largest number of vaccinations are in 1856, and the smallest number in 1853. The average appears to be about thirty-eight thousand six hundred and fifty-four (38,654 per annum. The distribution into caste shows the average per centum to be86 twenty-seven (19,327) by the agency of Native Chiefs, and one hundred and eighty-three thousand three hundred and twenty-six (183,326) by Civil Surgeons and others. With respect to the ratio of success which has attended these operations, that under Superintendents and Civil Surgeons, for five years is nearly 90 per cent., whilst under the Establishment of Chiefs it is about 86 per cent. I have the honour to be Sir, Your most obedient Servant, B. P. ROOKE, M.D., Director-General, Medical Department. Bombay, Director-General's Office, 9th October 1858. No. 2756 OF 1858. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. To THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. SIR,87 appoint their own substitutes is tolerated, to the prejudice of the public service. These are both abuses which the Superintendents should, in the opinion of His Lordship in Council, be directed at once to remedy. 4. Government observe with regret, that, notwithstanding the con- tinued zealous efforts of the officers of the Department to extend the practice of Vaccination throughout the country, there is not only no increase of the numbers vaccinated, but the general result shows a retrogression, both in 1856 and 1857, from the numbers vaccinated in 1855; in the former year the falling off is twelve thousand one hundred and thirty-seven (12,137), in the latter no less than thirteen thousand one hundred and forty-seven (13,147). This shows, in the absence of any special explanation, that Vaccination does not advance in popular favour with the Natives of this country. Sind, however, pre- sents a striking contrast in this respect, the increase in that province has been upwards of twenty-five thousand (25,000), as this increase is included in the general results, the falling off in the older provinces of this Presidency assumes very serious proportions for the year 1857, and must be set down, as compared with the year 1855, at not much under forty thousand (40,000). His Lordship in Council trusts, that this may prove to be only a temporary retrogression, and that future expe- rience may tend to dissipate the doubts to which it is calculated to give rise, as to the voluntary adoption at some future period of Vaccination by the Natives of this country as a general practice. 5. In conclusion, I am desired to request, that printed copies of the Vaccination Report for 1856 and 1857 be distributed as usual for general information, and a sufficient number of copies (sixty) furnished to Government for transmission to the Home Authorities. I have the honour to be, &c. H. YOUNG, Chief Secretary to Government. Bombay Castle, 12th November 1858.
APPENDIX. a
TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Divisional Vaccination, showing the Number and Names of the Divisions, and their compared with those of last Year ; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Operations performed by each Vaccinator ; the Pay of Vaccinators ; and the Number. DIVISIONS. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS, Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1855. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1856. 1 PRESIDENCY . . . . .. Asst. Surg. G. R. Ballingall . . 10 7,183 8,494 .. 1,311 4,355 2,828 2 KONKAN . . . . . . No. 1 (For 1856-57). SUPERINTENDENTS. Superintendents ; the Number of Vaccinators employed ; the Total Vaccinations performed, and Age and Result ; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated ; the Average Number of Average Cost of every Hundred Persons Vaccinated, for the Years 1856 and 1857. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Pay of Native Vacci- nators. Average Cost of every 100 Persons Vacci- nated, exclusive of the Superintends' Pay & Allowances. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Rs. Rs. a. p. 4,972 1,042 1,049 120 .. .. .. 6,424 .. 759 89.4 718 1,608 22 6 2 32,111 817 820 31 19 .. .. 32,255 686 857 95.4 1,877 2,784 8 3 9 21,920 689 5 .. .. .. .. 21,674 177 763 95.8 1,256 2,784 12 4 11 14,613 1,610 39 .. .. .. .. 15,005 640 617 92.2 903 2,784 17 1 10 33,709 2,858 .. .. .. .. .. 32,131 1,421 3,015 87.8 1,590 3,504 9 9 3 23,663 2,552 .. 45 .. .. .. 22,854 1,902 1,504 87.0 1,544 2,640 10 0 10 3,678 11,830 29 14 .. .. .. 14,226 325 1,000 91.4 1,037 2,352 15 1 11 134,666 21,398 1,942 210 19 .. .. 144,569 5,151 8,515 91.3 1,329 18,456 11 10 7 4,094 1,028 868 173 584 4,044 2,703 5,809 301 637 86.0 675 1,608 23 13 3 32,297 1,078 356 .. 25 5,689 28,067 32,287 711 758 95.6 1,875 2,784 8 3 11 18,717 690 9 .. 1,147 3,651 16,912 19,512 187 864 94.7 1,142 2,784 13 8 7 13,845 1,333 56 .. 298 3,991 11,541 14,809 446 277 95.3 863 2,784 17 14 8 24,493 2,679 .. .. 1,685 15,143 13,714 25,871 871 2,115 89.6 1,374 3,308 11 7 4 20,978 3,272 .. 28 1,285 4,759 20,804 22,322 1,444 1,797 87.3 1,504 2,640 10 5 2 7,895 32,751 17 ..7 107 12,863 27,914 39,642 421 714 97.2 2,718 2,352 5 12 3 2,025 492 .. .. 56 778 1,795 2,150 203 220 83.5 321 196 7 9 10 124,344 43,323 1,306 208 5,187 50,918 123,450 162,402 4,584 7,382 93.1 1,465 18,456 10 9 4 from the Establishment of Western Guzerat were transferred to the Kattywar Circle.
TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. SUPERINTENDING SUR- GEONS' DIVISIONS. CIVIL STATION. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1855. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna ................................... 1 390 278 112 .... 203 187 Alibangh ............................. .. 45 5 40 .... 24 21 Bandora Dispensary ........... .. 309 41 268 .... 150 159 Total .... 1 744 324 420 .... 377 367 2 POONA ....................... Poona ................................... 1 1,681 1,594 87 .... 950 731 Ahmednuggur ....................... 1 1,052 947 105 .... 616 436 Sattara .................................. 1 1,661 3,134 .. 1,473 914 747 Dhoolia ................................ 1 989 1,510 .. 521 519 470 Nassick ................................ 1 1,461 1,390 71 .... 795 666 Mahableshwur ..................... .. 118 66 52 .... 67 51 Total.. 5 6,962 8,641 .. 1,679 3,861 3,101 3 NORTHERN ................... Ahmedabad ......................... 1 2,712 3,208 . 496 1,463 1,249 Kaira ................................... 1 843 684 159 .... 508 335 Rajkote ............................... 1 1,752 2,486 .. 734 935 817 Surat ................................... 1 1,175 1,070 105 .... 620 555 Broach ................................. 1 1,447 1,534 .. 87 911 536 Bhooj Dispensary ................ .. 6,186 7,345 .. 1,159 3,626 2,560 Total.. 5 14,115 16,327 .. 2,212 8,063 6,052 4 SOUTHERN ........... Belgaum ............................. 1 606 667 .. 61 349 257 Dharwar ............................. 1 1,444 1,815 1 371 850 594 Sholapore .......................... 1 1,066 1,088 .. 22 634 431 Kolapore ........................... 1 2,820 2,438 382 .... 1,418 1,402 Rutnagherry ........................ 1 870 862 8 .... 484 386 Vingorla ............................ .. 167 102 65 .... 99 68 Total.. 5 6,973 6,972 1 .... 3,835 3,138 5 SIND ....................... Kurrachee ............................ 1 628 1,123 .. 495 400 228 Hyderabad .......................... 1 2,353 2,078 275 .... 1,735 618 Shikarpoor ......................... 1 1,547 964 583 .... 806 741 Kurrachee Dispensary .... .. .... 112 .. .... .. .... Larkhana ..................... .. .... 133 .. .... .. .... Jerruck ............................. .. 17 119 .. 102 2 15 Meerpoor ..................... .. 45 239 .. 194 26 19 Mahomed Khan's Tanda .. .. 125 .. .. .... 71 54 Khittee ............................... .. .... 64 .. .... .. .... Tarosha ............................... .. 36 .. .. .... 25 11 Halla ................................ .. 88 .. .. .... 57 31 Roree .................................. .. 197 .. .. .... 94 103 Total.. 3 5,036 4,834 202 .... 3,216 1,820 6 ADEN ................................ Aden ............................... 1 1,786 825 961 .... 1,277 509 7 PERSIAN GULF .... Bushire ............................. .. 115 382 .. 267 59 56 Grand Total.. 20 35,731 38,305 .. 2,574 20,688 15,043
No. 2 (For 1856). CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. 1, for the Year 1856. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Number of persons Vac- cinated by each Vac- cinator. Pay of Native Vacci- nators per Annum. Average Cost of every 100 Persons Vaccinated, exclusive of Medical Officers' Pay and Al- lowances. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Rs. Rs. a. p. 228 53 95 7 7 .. .. 370 18 2 94.8 390 108 27 11 1 15 .. 3 .. 27 .. .. 42 3 .. 93.3 .. .. .... 29 8 237 4 31 .. .. 272 9 28 88.0 .. .. .... 272 61 335 11 65 .. .. 684 30 30 91.9 390 108 27 11 1 1,373 155 136 16 1 .. .. 1,435 49 197 85.3 1,681 216 12 13 7 832 188 32 .. .... .. .. 1,033 3 16 98.0 1,052 108 10 4 3 1,542 110 5 1 3 .. .. 1,467 23 171 88.3 1,661 216 13 0 1 860 113 12 .. 4 .. .. 931 .. 58 94.1 989 144 14 8 11 1,408 46 7 .. .... .. .. 1,062 72 327 72.6 1,461 108 7 6 3 67 23 27 1 .... .. .. 78 30 10 66.1 .. .. .... 6,082 635 219 18 8 .. .. 6,006 177 779 86.2 1,369 792 11 9 1 2,353 335 21 3 .... .. .. 2,502 123 87 92.2 2,712 288 10 9 10 733 108 1 1 .... .. .. 819 2 22 97.1 843 108 12 12 11 1,331 395 26 .. .... .. .. 1,612 57 83 92.0 1,752 108 6 2 7 862 258 9 46 .... .. .. 1,040 124 11 88.5 1,175 216 18 6 1 997 423 .. 27 .... .. .. 1,300 67 80 89.4 1,447 108 7 7 5 2,951 3,235 .. .. .... .. .. 5,830 6 350 94.2 .. .. .... 9,227 4,754 57 77 .... .. .. 13,103 379 633 92.8 1,586 828 10 7 1 399 129 78 .. .... .. .. 568 22 16 93.7 606 108 17 13 1 1,275 159 10 .. .... .. .. 1,238 114 92 85.7 1,444 108 7 7 8 691 375 .. .. .... .. .. 838 74 154 78.6 1,066 108 10 2 1 2,778 41 1 .. .... .. .. 2,648 41 131 93.9 2,820 216 7 10 6 813 53 4 .. .... .. .. 633 67 170 72.7 870 108 12 6 7 92 44 31 .. .... .. .. 166 .. 1 99.4 .. .. .... 6,048 801 124 .. .... .. .. 6,091 318 564 87.3 1,361 648 9 8 4 267 313 31 8 9 .. .. 589 4 35 93.7 628 108 17 3 1 665 1,683 5 .. .... .. .. 2,243 108 2 95.3 2,353 108 4 9 5 984 554 7 .. 2 .. .. 1,510 37 .... 97.6 1,547 108 6 15 8 .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .... .. 17 .. .. .... .. .. 17 .. .... 100.0 .. .. .... 18 27 .. .. .... .. .. 14 31 .... 31.1 .. .. .... 44 81 .. .. .... .. .. 121 .. 4 96.8 .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .... 17 19 .. .. .... .. .. 12 24 .... 33.3 .. .. .... 23 65 .. .. .... .. .. 88 .. .... 100.0 .. .. .... 117 73 .. .. 7 .. .. 195 2 .... 98.9 .. .. .... 2,135 2,832 43 8 18 .. .. 4,789 206 41 95.6 1,509 324 7 2 5 125 1,606 51 .. 4 .. .. 1,786 .. .... 100.0 1,786 108 6 0 9 .. 106 5 .. 4 .. .. 69 46 .... 60.0 .. .. .... 23,889 10,795 834 114 99 .. .. 32,528 1,156 2,047 91.0 1,414 2,808 9 14 10
TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. SUPERINTENDING SUR- GEONS' DIVISIONS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1850. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna ................................... 1 254 390 .. 136 137 117 Alibaugh .............................. .. 69 45 24 .... 33 36 Bandora Dispensary ...... .. 76 309 .. 233 51 25 Total.. 1 399 744 .. 345 221 178 2 POONA .............. Poona ................................ 1 1,692 1,681 11 .... 992 700 Ahmednuggur ................. 1 1,112 1,052 60 .... 661 451 Sattara ................................ 1 1,233 1,661 .. 428 648 585 Dhoolia ............................ 1 924 989 .. 65 474 450 Nassick ...................... 1 1,432 1,461 .. 29 759 673 Mahableshwur ................... .. .... 118 .. .... .. .... Total.. 5 6,393 6,962 .. 569 3,534 2,859 3 NORTHERN ........ Ahmedabad ......................... 1 2,782 2,712 70 .... 1,451 1,331 Kaira ................................... 1 1,448 843 605 .... 916 532 Rajkote ................................ 1 524 1,752 .. 1,228 264 260 Surat ................................... 1 1,894 1,175 719 .... 1,012 882 Broach ............................... 1 1,535 1,447 88 .... 922 613 Bhooj Dispensary ........ .. 38 6,186 .. 6,148 23 15 Total.. 5 8,221 14,115 .. 5,894 4,588 3,633 4 SOUTHERN ................ Belgaum ............................... 1 527 606 .. 79 314 213 Dharwar ............................... 1 1,643 1,444 199 .... 924 719 Sholapore ............................ 1 1,588 1,066 522 .... 1,073 515 Kolapore .............................. 1 3,197 2,820 377 .... 1,614 1,583 Rutnagherry ......................... 1 971 870 101 .... 507 464 Vingorla .............................. .. 202 167 35 .... 127 75 Total.. 5 8,128 6,973 1,155 .... 4,559 3,569 5 SIND ................. Kurrachee ........................ 1 651 628 23 .... 368 283 Hyderabad ........................ 1 1,526 530 996 .... 914 612 Shikarpoor ........................ 1 933 1,547 .. 614 455 478 Kurrachee Dispensary .... .. 17 .. 17 .... 6 11 Ditto Jail ....................... .. 74 .. 74 .... 72 2 Jerruck ................................. .. 261 17 244 .... 116 145 Meerpoor ............................ .. 31 45 .. 14 16 15 Roree .................................... .. 269 197 72 .... 157 112 Mahomed Khan's Tanda .. .. 10 125 .. 115 5 5 Hyderabad Civil ............. .. 173 1,823 .. 1,650 167 6 Halla .................................... .. 14 88 .. 74 10 4 Taroosha ................ .. 42 36 6 .... 18 24 Total.. 3 4,001 5,036 .. 1,066 2,304 1,697 6 ADEN ................................. Aden ................................ 1 901 1,786 .. 885 714 187 7 PERSIAN GULF ............... Bushire .............................. .. 195 115 80 .... 91 104 Grand Total.. 20 28,238 35,731 .. 7,493 16,011 12,227
No. 2 (For 1857). CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. 1, for the Year 1857. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Number of Persons Vac- cinated by each Vac- cinator. Pay of Native Vacci- nators per Annum. Average Cost of every 100 Persons Vaccinated, exclusive of Medical Officers' Pay and Al- lowances. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Rs. Rs. a. p. 177 29 30 8 10 60 194 240 14 .... 94.8 254 108 42 8 3 43 7 1 .. 18 23 46 55 5 9 79.7 .. .. .... 20 1 47 3 5 42 34 70 3 3 92.1 .. .. .... 240 37 78 11 33 125 274 365 22 12 91.4 254 108 42 8 3 1,305 145 222 18 2 529 1,163 1,424 70 198 84.1 1,692 216 12 12 3 917 166 28 1 .... 93 1,019 1,093 5 14 98.2 1,112 108 9 11 4 1,140 75 10 1 7 560 673 1,069 29 135 866 1,233 216 17 8 3 795 122 6 1 .... 659 265 867 1 56 93.8 924 144 15 9 4 1,279 42 3 .. 108 899 533 1,015 60 357 70.8 1,432 108 7 8 8 .. .. .. .. .... .. .... .. .. .... .. .. .. .... 5,436 550 269 21 117 2,740 3,653 5,468 165 760 85.5 1,278 792 12 6 2 2,353 418 7 4 .... 1,292 1,490 2,607 89 86 93.7 2,782 288 10 5 7 802 207 3 .. 436 483 965 1,267 177 4 87.5 1,448 108 7 7 4 433 91 .. .. .... 195 329 469 27 28 89.5 524 108 20 9 9 1,335 480 9 64 6 596 1,298 1,647 204 43 86.9 1,894 216 11 6 5 1,053 456 2 24 .... 807 728 1,372 71 92 89.3 1,535 108 7 0 6 30 8 .. .. .... 5 33 28 5 5 73.7 .. .. .. 6,006 1,660 21 92 442 3,378 4,843 7,390 573 258 90.0 1,637 828 10 1 10 430 66 31 .. .... 193 334 479 48 .... 90.8 527 108 20 7 10 1,389 248 6 .. .... 377 1,266 1,500 77 66 91.2 1,643 108 6 3 1 1,322 262 4 .. .... 260 1,328 1,387 .. 201 87.3 1,588 108 6 12 9 3,124 73 .. .. .... 825 2,372 2,823 101 273 88.3 3,197 216 6 12 1 735 234 2 .. .... 164 807 863 57 51 88.8 971 108 11 1 11 163 36 3 .. .... 80 122 201 .. 1 99.5 .. .. .... 7,163 919 46 .. .... 1,899 6,229 7,253 283 592 89.2 1,585 648 7 15 6 312 273 59 4 3 498 153 584 39 28 89.7 651 108 16 9 5 632 887 6 1 .... 797 729 1,313 129 84 86.0 1,526 108 7 1 2 608 320 5 .. .... 771 162 932 1 .... 99.8 933 108 11 9 2 3 2 .. .. 12 9 8 4 13 .... 23.5 .. .. .... 5 68 1 .. .... 1 73 25 47 2 33.7 .. .. .... 33 228 .. .. .... 39 222 259 2 .... 99.2 .. .. .... .. 31 .. .. .... 2 29 27 2 2 87.0 .. .. .... 138 127 2 .. 2 154 115 268 .. 1 99.6 .. .. .... 9 1 .. .. .... 5 5 10 .. .... 100.0 .. .. .... 41 131 .. 1 .... .. 173 162 11 .... 93.6 .. .. .... 3 11 .. .. .... 5 9 14 .. .... 100.0 .. .. .... 28 14 .. .. .... 10 32 29 13 .... 69.0 .. .. .... 1,812 2,093 73 6 17 2,291 1,710 3,627 257 117 91.3 1,037 324 10 6 8 55 80 40 3 723 41 860 901 .. .... 100.0 901 180 19 15 7 .. 177 18 .. .... 133 62 144 51 .... 73.8 .. .. .... 20,712 5,516 545 133 1,332 10,607 17,631 25,148 1,351 1,739 89.0 1,338 2,880 10 12 1
TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination through the agency of the Native Chiefs, arranged according to the of Pay of Vaccinators and Cost of Number. DIVISIONS. STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vaccina- ted. Compared with last Year. 1855. Increase. Decrease. 1856. 1 SOUTHERN DIVISION.. Kolapore, &c. .... Asst. Surgeon Johnstone .. 12 9,806 7,604 2,202 .... 2 WESTERN GUZERAT... Mahee Kanta .... No. 3 (For 1856-57). NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. Divisions of Vaccination, and showing Details as in Tables Nos. 1 and 2, with the exception Vaccination, for the Years 1856 and 1857. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vac- cinated. Number of Persons Vac- cinated by each Vac- cinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 5,263 4,543 9,438 360 8 .. .... .. .... 8,842 154 810 90.1 817 15,436 14,716 27,620 2,532 .. .. .... .. .... 26,340 911 2,901 87.3 3,015 3,726 3,016 6,244 496 .. 2 .... .. .... 5,945 429 368 88.1 843 169 156 325 .. .. .. .... .. .... 247 33 45 76.0 325 3,271 3,367 6,460 91 87 .. .... .. .... 5,919 436 283 89.1 6,638 27,865 25,798 50,087 3,479 95 2 .... .. .... 47,293 1,963 4,407 88.1 1,677 4,621 4,102 8,109 349 .. .. 265 2,155 6,568 8,121 213 389 93.1 513 8,065 7,224 12,625 1,264 .. .. 1,400 6,286 9,003 13,565 548 1,176 88.7 1,529 4,057 3,699 6,978 686 2 16 74 1,799 5,957 6,326 691 739 81.5 646 138 167 305 .. .. .. .... 37 268 253 17 35 83.0 305 3,072 3,029 5,844 142 116 .. .... 811 5,291 5,000 664 438 81.9 6,102 3,036 2,802 5,170 619 .. .. 49 2,542 3,296 5,164 247 427 88.4 365 22,990 21,023 39,031 3,060 118 16 1,788 13,630 30,383 38,429 2,380 3,204 87.3 772 b
TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1855. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1856. No. 1, Vaccination under Superintendents ............. 158,235 176,389 .... 18,154 85,850 72,385 No. 2, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ............. 35,731 38,305 .... 2,574 20,688 15,043 No. 3, Ditto by the Native Chiefs' agency ......... 53,663 45,072 8,591 .... 27,865 25,798 Total.. 247,629 259,766 .... 12,137 134,403 113,226 1857. 1856. No. 1, Vaccination under Superintendents ............. 174,368 158,235 16,133 .. 96,989 77,379 No. 2, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ............. 22,238 35,731 .. 7,493 16,011 12,227 No. 3, Ditto by the Native Chiefs' agency ......... 44,013 53,663 .. 9,650 22,990 21,023 Total.. 246,619 247,629 .. 1,010 135,990 110,629
No. 4. FOR THE YEARS 1856-57. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 134,666 21,398 1,942 210 19 .... .... 144,569 5,151 8,515 91.3 23,889 10,795 834 114 99 .... .... 32,528 1,156 2,047 91.0 50,087 3,479 95 2 .... .... .... 47,293 1,963 4,407 88.1 208,642 35,672 2,871 326 118 .... .... 224,390 8,270 14,969 90.6 124,344 43,323 1,306 208 5,187 50,918 123,450 162,402 4,584 7,382 93.1 20,712 5,516 545 133 1,332 10,607 17,631 25,148 1,351 1,739 89.0 39,031 3,060 118 16 1,788 13,630 30,383 38,429 2,380 3,204 87.3 184,087 51,899 1,969 357 8,307 75,155 171,464 225,979 8,315 12,325 91.6
TABLE SMALL- Table showing the Admissions and Deaths from Small-pox amongst European and Native Troops, with the Percentage of Deaths to Strength DIVISIONS. EUROPEAN TROOPS. NATIVE TROOPS. Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. 1856. PRESIDENCY DIVISION .... 673 .. 2 2 .. .. 2 .. .. 4,165 .. 6 6 3 1 2 0.02 16.6 POONA No. 5 (For 1856-57). Pox. Prisoners in Jails, Civil Hospitals, and Dispensaries, in each Division of the Bombay Presidency, and to Treated; for the Years 1856 and 1857. PRISONERS IN JAILS. CIVIL HOSPITALS. DISPENSARIES. Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Streangth. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. 929 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Unknown and variable. 1 30 31 15 16 .. .. 51.6 Unknown and variable. .. 7 7 7 .. .. .. .. 1,278 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 3 3 2 1 .. .. 33.3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 858 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,282 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 3 1 1 1 .. 33.3 1,390 .. 2 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 2 3 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 155 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 46 50 17 33 .. .. 66.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5,892 .. 3 3 3 .. .. .. .. 5 80 85 35 50 .. .. 58.8 1 12 13 11 1 1 .. 7.6 973 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Unknown and variable. .. 21 21 11 9 1 .. 42.8 Unknown and variable. .. 2 2 2 .. .. .. .. 1,325 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 929 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,282 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 4 .. .. .. .. 1 5 6 6 .. .. .. .. 1,235 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 152 .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 0.6 100.0 .. 62 62 37 20 5 .. 32.2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5,896 .. 2 2 1 1 .. 0.02 50.0 .. 89 89 54 29 6 .. 32.5 1 8 9 9 .. .. .. ..
APPENDIX No. 2. c
TABLES RESPECTING VACCINATION IN THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY, FOR FIVE YEARS, FROM 1853 TO 1857. TABLE No. 1 A. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated by Superintendents, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, with Percentage of Success, for the Years 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, and 1857, with an Average of Vaccination for Five Years. YEARS. Total Number Vac- cinated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Suc- cess. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1853 .................... 114,589 63,953 50,636 93,704 13,295 1,597 356 5,637 .. .. 97,354 9,905 7,330 85.5 1854.................... 169,231 95,239 73,992 135,732 28,776 959 205 3,559 .. .. 149,347 7,446 12,438 88.6 1855.................... 176,389 96,670 79,719 149,006 25,591 1,409 348 35 .. .. 159,332 5,308 11,749 90.3 1856.................... 158,235 85,850 72,385 134,666 21,398 1,942 210 19 .. .. 144,569 5,151 8,515 91.3 1857.................... 174,368 96,989 77,379 124,344 43,323 1,306 208 5,187 50,918 123,450 162,402 4,584 7,382 93.1 Total.... 792,812 438,701 354,111 637,452 132,383 7,213 1,327 14,437 .. .. 713,004 32,394 47,414 448.8 Average of 5 Years ......... 158,562 87,740 70,822 127,490 26,477 1,443 265 2,887 .. .. 142,601 6,478 9,483 89.9
TABLE No. 1 B. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated in each Superintendent's Division, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, with Percentage of Success, for the Years 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, and 1857, with an Average of Five Years Vaccination in each Division. DIVISION. Years. Total Number Vaccinated SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussalmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Caste. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. PRESIDENCY ................ 1853.. 7,562 4,554 3,008 4,661 1,136 1,044 243 478 .. .. 6,601 175 786 87.2 1854.. 6,909 4,162 2,747 4,504 1,045 689 201 470 .. .. 5,865 251 793 84.8 1855.. 8,494 5,210 3,284 5,504 1,617 1,171 202 .. .. .. 7,532 123 839 88.6 1856.. 7,183 4,355 2,828 4,972 1,042 1,049 120 .. .. .. 6,424 .. 759 89.4 1857.. 6,747 4,169 2,578 4,094 1,028 868 173 584 4,044 2,703 5,809 301 637 86.0 Average of 5 Years.... 7,379 4,490 2,889 4,747 1,174 964 188 306 .. .. 6,446 170 763 87.2 CONCAN ...................... 1853.. 32,380 16,783 15,597 28,054 1,020 416 84 2,806 .. .. 29,357 2,155 868 90.6 1854.. 33,452 17,134 16,318 31,785 610 90 .. 967 .. .. 30,973 1,646 833 92.5 1855.. 35,955 18,547 17,408 34,583 1,125 170 43 34 .. .. 33,852 1,040 1,063 94.1 1856.. 33,798 17,389 16,409 32,111 817 820 31 19 .. .. 32,255 686 857 95.4 1857.. 33,756 17,346 16,410 32,297 1,078 356 .. 25 5,689 28,067 32,287 711 758 95.6 Average of 5 Years.... 33,868 17,440 16,428 31,766 930 370 32 770 .. .. 31,745 1,247 876 93.6 NORTHERN DECCAN ........ 1853.. 21,108 11,090 10,018 18,935 957 7 .. 1,209 .. .. 18,600 2,063 445 88.1 1854.. 24,024 12,768 11,256 21,888 1,137 25 .. 974 .. .. 22,607 348 1,069 94.1 1855.. 26,490 14,100 12,390 25,236 1,247 7 .. .. .. .. 25,206 163 1,121 95.1 1856.. 22,614 12,040 10,574 21,920 689 5 .. .. .. .. 21,674 177 763 95.8 1857.. 20,563 10,549 10,014 18,717 690 9 .. 1,147 3,651 16,912 19,512 187 864 94.7 Average of 5 Years.... 22,959 12,109 10,850 21,339 944 10 .. 666 .. .. 21,519 588 852 93.6
DIVISION. Years. Total Number Vaccinated SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussalmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. SOUTHERN DECCAN ....... 1853.. 2,741 1,618 1,123 2,351 337 53 .. .. .. .. 2,540 143 58 92.6 1854.. 23,205 13,762 9,443 20,984 1,929 114 .. 178 .. .. 21,348 473 1,384 92.0 1855.. 16,208 9,123 7,085 14,354 1,831 19 4 .. .. .. 14,724 439 1,045 90.8 1856.. 16,262 8,656 7,606 14,613 1,610 39 .. .. .. .. 15,005 640 617 92.2 1857.. 15,532 8,090 7,442 13,845 1,333 56 .. 298 3,991 11,541 14,809 446 277 95.3 Average of 5 Years .... 14,789 8,249 6,540 13,229 1,408 56 1 95 .. .. 13,685 428 676 92.6 WESTERN GUZERAT ........ 1853.. 28,129 16,344 11,785 24,157 2,828 .. .. 1,144 .. .. 21,354 2,802 3,973 75.8 1854.. 38,295 20,855 17,440 34,546 3,403 .. .. 346 .. .. 29,848 2,477 5,970 77.9 1855.. 45,156 24,263 20,893 41,396 3,760 .. .. .. .. .. 38,524 1,915 4,717 85.3 1856.. 36,567 19,373 17,194 33,709 2,858 .. .. .. .. .. 32,131 1,421 3,015 87.8 1857.. 28,857 15,270 13,587 24,493 2,679 .. .. 1,685 15,143 13,714 25,871 871 2,115 89.6 Average of 5 Years.... 35,401 19,221 16,180 31,660 3,106 .. .. 635 .. .. 29,546 1,897 3,958 83.3 EASTERN GUZERAT ......... 1853.. 16,052 9,293 6,759 14,130 1,902 .. 20 .. .. .. 13,073 2,195 784 81.4 1854.. 19,889 11,713 8,176 16,610 2,644 8 3 624 .. .. 16,941 1,768 1,180 85.1 1855.. 23,277 13,252 10,025 20,865 2,308 5 99 .. .. .. 20,427 1,311 1,539 87.7 1856.. 26,260 14,772 11,488 23,663 2,552 .. 45 .. .. .. 22,854 1,902 1,504 87.0 1857.. 25,563 14,586 10,977 20,978 3,272 .. 28 1,285 4,759 20,804 22,322 1,444 1,797 87.3 Average of 5 Years.... 22,208 12,723 9,485 19,249 2,535 3 39 382 .. .. 19,123 1,724 1,361 85.7 SIND .......................... 1853.. 6,617 4,271 2,346 1,416 5,115 77 9 .. .. .. 5,829 372 416 88.0 1854.. 23,457 14,845 8,612 5,415 18,008 83 1 .. .. .. 21,765 483 1,209 92.7 1855.. 20,809 12,175 8,634 7,068 13,703 37 .. 1 .. .. 19,067 317 1,425 91.6 1856.. 15,551 9,265 6,286 3,678 11,830 29 14 .. .. .. 14,226 325 1,000 91.4 1857.. 40,777 25,577 15,200 7,895 32,751 17 7 107 12,863 27,914 39,642 421 714 97.2 Average of 5 Years.... 21,442 13,226 8,216 5,094 16,281 39 6 22 .. .. 20,106 383 953 92.2 KATTYWAR CIRCLE ....... 1857.. 2,573 1,402 1,171 2,025 492 .. .. 56 778 1,795 2,150 203 220 83.5 Total .................. 792,812 438,701 354,111 637,452 132,383 7,213 1,327 14,437 .. .. 713,004 32,394 47,414 448.8
TABLE No. 2 A. VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated by Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, with Percentage of Success, for the Years 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, and 1857, with an Average of Vaccination for Five Years. YEARS. Total Number Vac- cinated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Suc- cess. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successsful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1853 ............ 46,341 26,379 19,962 39,149 6,621 371 74 126 .. .. 40,714 3,201 2,426 87.8 1854 ............ 34,523 19,847 14,676 24,531 9,277 446 94 175 .. .. 30,863 1,588 2,072 89.6 1855 ............ 38,305 21,949 16,356 28,730 8,806 561 183 25 .. .. 34,999 1,184 2,122 91.3 1856 ............ 35,851 20,762 15,089 23,927 10,877 834 114 99 .. .. 32,608 1,195 2,048 91.0 1857 ............ 28,306 16,048 12,258 20,732 5,557 545 133 1,339 10,632 17,674 25,172 1,391 1,743 89.0 Total.... 183,326 104,985 78,341 137,069 41,138 2,757 598 1,764 .. .. 164,356 8,559 10,411 448.7 Average of 5 years .......... 36,665 20,997 15,468 27,414 8,227 551 119 354 .. .. 32,871 1,712 2,082 89.7
TABLE VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated at each Station by Civil Surgeons and for the years 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, and 1857, with DIVISIONS AND STATIONS. Years. Total Number Vaccina- ted. SEX. Males. Females. PRESIDENCY DIVISION.. Tanna .................... 1853.. 57 29 28 1854.. 191 127 64 1855.. 278 150 128 1856.. 390 203 187 l857.. 254 137 117 Average of 5 years.... 234 129 105 Alibaugh ................. 1853.. 112 64 48 1854.. 34 19 15 1855.. 5 2 3 1856.. 45 24 21 1857.. 69 33 36 Average of 5 years.... 53 28 25 Bandora ................... 1853.. 5 4 1 1854.. 35 27 8 1855.. 41 24 17 1856.. 309 150 159 1857.. 76 51 25 Average of 5 years .... 93 51 42 POONA DIVISION ...... Poona ................... 1853.. 1,166 646 520 1854.. 1,438 820 618 1855.. 1,594 890 704 1856.. 1,681 950 731 1857.. 1,692 992 700 Average of 5 years.... 1,514 859 655 Sattara ................. 1853.. 4,848 2,697 2,151 1854.. 3,341 1,907 1,434 1855.. 3,134 1,713 1,421 1856.. 1,661 914 747 1857.. 1,233 648 585 Average of 5 years.... 2,843 1,576 1,267 Ahmednuggur ......... 1853.. 287 168 119 1854.. 830 476 354 1855.. 947 554 393 1856.. 1,052 616 436 1857.. 1,112 661 451 Average of 5 years .... 846 495 351
No. 2 B. SURGEONS AND OTHERS. others, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, with Percentage of Success, an Average of Five Years Vaccination at each Station. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 30 4 7 15 1 .. .. 30 6 21 52.6 147 7 17 17 3 .. .. 120 39 32 62.8 198 51 18 11 .. .. .. 206 60 12 74.1 228 53 95 7 7 .. .. 370 18 2 94.8 177 29 30 8 10 60 194 240 14 .. 94.8 156 29 33 12 4 .. .. 193 27 14 75.8 89 10 4 .. 9 .. .. 84 11 17 75.0 23 3 3 1 4 .. .. 25 8 1 73.5 .. 5 .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. 100.0 15 .. 3 .. 27 .. .. 42 3 .. 93.3 43 7 1 .. 18 23 46 55 5 9 79.7 34 5 2 1/5 12 .. .. 42 5 6 84.3 1 .. 2 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 3 40.0 24 2 7 2 .. .. .. 30 .. 5 85.7 15 1 24 1 .. .. .. 28 .. 13 68.2 29 8 237 4 31 .. .. 272 9 28 88.0 20 1 47 3 5 42 34 70 3 3 92.1 18 2 63 3 7 .. .. 80 2 11 74.8 916 139 104 .. 7 .. .. 894 94 178 76.6 1,109 167 143 9 10 .. .. 1,182 67 189 82.2 1,328 121 131 13 1 .. .. 1,307 62 225 82.0 1,373 155 136 16 1 .. .. 1,435 49 197 85.3 1,305 145 222 18 2 529 1,163 1,424 70 198 84.1 1,206 146 147 11 4 .. .. 1,249 68 197 82.0 4,622 136 4 .. 86 .. .. 3,839 237 772 79.1 3,122 160 12 1 46 .. .. 3,078 18 245 92.1 2,929 106 8 91 .. .. .. 2,867 .. 267 91.4 1,542 110 5 1 3 .. .. 1,467 23 171 88.3 1,140 75 10 1 7 560 673 1,069 29 135 86.6 2,671 117 8 19 28 .. .. 2,464 61 318 87.5 204 46 24 .. 13 .. .. 237 40 10 82.5 615 167 45 .. 3 .. .. 750 59 21 90.3 754 168 24 1 .. .. .. 913 16 18 96.4 832 188 32 .. .. .. .. 1,033 3 16 98.0 917 166 28 1 .. 93 1,019 1,093 5 14 98.2 665 147 31 2/5 3 .. .. 805 25 16 93.1
DIVISIONS AND STATIONS. Years. Total Number Vaccina- ted. SEX. Males. Females. POONA DIVISION ...... Nassick ............... 1853.. 452 224 228 1854.. 1,255 607 648 1855.. 1,390 822 568 1856.. 1,461 795 666 1857.. 1,432 759 673 Average of 5 years.... 1,198 641 557 Dhoolia ............... 1853 .. 222 125 97 1854.. 681 352 329 1855.. 1,510 775 735 1856.. 989 519 470 1857.. 924 474 450 Average of 5 years...... 865 449 416 Mahableshwar ............ 1853.. 35 19 16 1854.. 175 114 61 1855.. 66 35 31 1856.. 118 67 51 1857.. .. .. .. Average of 5 years.... 79 47 32 NORTHERN DIVISION . . Ahmedabad ............ 1853.. 3,004 1,793 1,211 1854.. 3,117 1,704 1,413 1855.. 3,208 1,636 1,572 1856.. 2,712 1,463 1,249 1857.. 2,782 1,451 1,331 Average of 5 years.... 2,965 1,609 1,356 Kaira ..................... 1853.. 400 227 173 1854.. 949 500 449 1855.. 684 380 304 1856.. 843 508 335 1857.. 1,448 916 532 Average of 5 years.... 865 506 359 Rajcote ........... 1853.. 6,365 3,614 2,751 1854.. 2,503 1,376 1,127 1855.. 2,486 1,363 1,123 1856.. 1,752 935 817 1857.. 524 264 260 Average of 5 years.... 2,726 1,510 1,216 Surat ............... 1853.. 1,390 742 648 1854.. 1,194 648 546 1855.. 1,070 583 487 1856.. 1,175 620 555 1857.. 1,894 1,012 882 Average of 5 years.... 1,345 721 624 Broach ................ 1853.. 887 546 341 1854.. 1,273 798 475 1855.. 1,534 921 613 1856.. 1,447 911 536 1857.. 1,535 922 613 Average of 5 years.... 1,335 819 516
CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Hiudoos. Mussul- mans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful Unsucces. ful. Doubtful. 433 14 5 .. .. .. .. 253 131 68 55.9 1,193 45 17 .. .. .. .. 966 46 243 769 1,347 37 6 .. .. .. 1,091 33 266 78.4 1,408 46 7 .. .. 1,062 72 327 72.6 1,279 42 3 .. 108 899 533 1,015 60 357 70.8 1,132 37 8 .. 21 .. .. 878 68 252 70.9 208 7 7 .. .. .. .. 106 58 58 47.7 613 60 8 .. .. .. .. 608 46 27 89.3 1,330 174 6 .. .. .. .. 1,449 6 55 95.9 860 113 12 .. 4 .. .. 931 .. 58 94.1 795 122 6 1 .. 659 265 867 1 56 93.8 761 95 8 1/5 1 .. .. 792 22 51 84.2 23 10 1 .. 1 .. .. 16 19 .. 45.7 154 12 9 .. .. .. .. 143 10 22 81.7 40 7 18 1 .. .. .. 59 4 3 89.4 67 23 27 1 .. .. .. 78 30 10 66.1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57 10 11 .. .. .. .. 59 11 9 56.6 2,647 332 18 7 .. .. .. 2,424 362 218 80.6 2,839 252 20 3 3 .. .. 2,695 253 169 86.4 2,781 413 12 2 .. .. .. 2,935 171 102 91.4 2,353 335 21 3 .. .. .. 2,502 123 87 92.2 2,353 418 7 4 .. 1,292 1,490 2,607 89 86 93.7 2,594 350 16 4 1 .. .. 8,633 200 132 88.9 346 54 .. .. .. .. .. 360 16 24 90.0 839 109 1 .. .. .. .. 894 21 34 94.2 604 77 2 1 .. .. .. 654 12 18 95.1 733 108 1 1 .. .. .. 819 2 22 97.1 802 207 3 .. 436 483 965 1,267 177 4 87.5 665 111 1 1 87 .. .. 799 46 20 92.8 4,609 1,746 7 3 .. .. .. 5,880 245 240 92.3 1,940 562 1 .. .. .. .. 2,358 43 102 94.2 1,886 589 10 1 .. .. .. 2,313 67 106 93.0 1,331 395 26 .. .. .. .. 1,612 57 83 92.0 433 91 .. .. .. 195 329 469 27 28 89.5 2,040 676 9 1 .. .. .. 2,526 88 112 92.2 1,075 292 2 21 .. .. .. 1,181 209 .. 85.0 879 284 6 25 .. .. .. 1,085 105 4 90.8 819 227 4 20 .. .. .. 978 86 6 91.4 862 258 9 46 .. .. .. 1,040 124 11 88.5 1,335 480 9 64 6 596 1,298 1,647 204 43 86.9 994 309 6 35 1 .. .. 1,186 146 13 88.5 689 167 7 24 .. .. .. 773 95 19 87.1 918 321 .. 34 .. .. .. 1,090 90 93 85.5 1,139 370 .. 25 .. .. .. 1,412 60 62 92.0 997 423 .. 27 .. .. .. 1,300 67 80 89.4 1,053 456 2 24 .. 807 728 1,372 71 92 89.3 959 347 2 27 .. .. .. 1,189 77 69 88.7 d
DIVISIONS AND STATIONS. Years. Total Number Vaccinat- ed. SEX. Males. Females. NORTHERN DIVISION.... Bhooj ............. 1853.. 61 38 23 1854.. 218 116 102 1855.. 7,345 4,137 3,208 1856.. 6,186 3,626 2,560 1857.. 38 23 15 Average of 5 years ..... 2,769 1,588 1,181 SOUTHERN DIVISION..... Belgaum .............. 1853.. 7,410 4,403 3,007 1854.. 1,322 707 615 1855.. 667 373 294 1856.. 606 349 257 1857.. 527 314 213 Average of 5 years.... 2,106 1,229 877 Dharwar ............... 1853.. 11,082 6,420 4,662 1854.. 2,470 1,355 1,115 1855.. 1,815 1,125 690 1856.. 1,444 850 594 1857.. 1,643 924 719 Average of 5 years.... 3,691 2,135 1,556 Sholapoor ........... 1853.. 884 528 356 1854.. 813 529 284 1855.. 1,088 768 320 1856.. 1,066 635 431 1857.. 1,588 1,073 515 Average of 5 years.... 1,088 706 381 Kolapoor ............ 1853.. 5,683 2,972 2,711 1854.. 3,548 1,833 1,715 1855.. 2,438 1,307 1,131 1856.. 2,820 1,418 1,402 1857.. 3,197 1,614 1,583 Average of 5 years.... 3,537 1,829 1,708 Rutnagherry......... 1853.. 316 169 147 1854 .. 455 265 190 1855.. 862 472 390 1856.. 870 484 386 1857.. 971 507 464 Average of 5 years.... 695 380 315 Vingorla ............. 1853.. 167 86 81 1854.. 243 152 91 1855 . 102 54 48 1856.. 167 99 68 1857.. 202 127 75 Average of 5 years... 176 103 73 SIND DIVISION ..... Kurrachee .......... 1853.. 308 171 137 1854.. 1,105 764 341 1855.. 1,123 722 401 1856 .. 628 400 228 1857 .. 651 368 283 Average of 5 years. 763 485 278
CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Percentage of Success. Hindoos. Mussul- mans. Christians Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful Unsuc- cessful. Doubtful. 22 39 .. .. .. .. .. 25 35 1 41.0 95 122 1 .. .. .. .. 194 22 2 89.0 5,227 2,118 .. .. .. .. .. 7,046 .. 299 95.8 2,951 3,235 .. .. .. .. .. 5,830 6 350 94.2 30 8 .. .. .. 5 33 28 5 5 73.8 1,665 1,104 1/5 .. .. .. .. 2,624 14 131 78.8 6,342 913 155 .. .. .. .. 6,708 639 63 90.5 795 421 74 .. 32 .. .. 1,280 34 8 96.8 482 63 120 2 .. .. .. 617 33 17 92 5 399 129 78 .. .. .. .. 568 22 16 93.7 430 66 31 .. .. 193 334 479 48 .. 90.8 1,690 318 92 2/5 6 .. .. 1,930 155 21 92.8 9,763 1,317 2 .. .. .. .. 10,417 476 189 94.0 2,047 417 5 1 .. .. .. 2,368 33 69 95.8 1,650 156 8 1 .. .. .. 1,613 110 92 88.8 1,275 159 10 .. .. .. .. 1,238 114 92 85.7 1,389 248 6 .. .. 377 1,266 1,500 77 66 91.2 3,225 460 6 .. .. .. .. 3,427 162 102 91.1 620 261 3 .. .. .. .. 741 41 102 83.8 618 195 .. .. .. .. .. 675 .. 138 83.0 770 305 6 7 .. .. .. 908 2 178 83.4 691 375 .. .. .. .. .. 838 74 154 78.6 1,322 262 4 .. .. 260 1,328 1,387 .. 201 87.3 804 281 2 1 .. .. .. 910 23 155 83.2 5,378 297 7 .. 1 .. .. 4,994 304 385 87.8 3,454 85 9 .. .. .. .. 3,297 50 201 92.9 2,350 84 4 .. .. .. .. 2,228 49 161 91.3 2,778 41 1 .. .. .. 2,648 41 131 93.9 3,124 73 .. .. .. 825 2,372 2,823 101 273 88.3 3,417 116 4 .. 1/5 .. .. 3,198 109 230 90.8 307 8 1 .. .. .. .. 255 58 3 80.6 418 36 1 .. .. .. .. 447 8 .. 98.2 832 14 16 .. .. .. .. 801 61 .. 92.9 813 53 4 .. .. .. .. 633 67 170 72.7 735 234 2 .. .. 164 807 863 57 51 88.8 621 69 5 .. .. .. .. 600 50 45 86.6 159 8 .. .. .. .. .. 158 2 7 94.6 171 40 26 .. .. .. .. 243 .. .. 100.0 67 13 22 .. .. .. .. 102 .. .. 100.0 92 44 31 .. .. .. .. 166 .. 1 99.4 163 36 3 .. .. 80 122 201 .. 1 99.5 131 29 16 .. .. .. .. 174 2/5 2 98.7 84 219 3 2 .. .. .. 286 22 .. 92.8 132 954 17 .. 2 .. .. 898 158 49 81.2 499 523 94 6 1 .. .. 983 70 70 87.5 267 313 31 8 9 .. .. 589 4 35 93.7 312 273 59 4 3 498 153 584 39 28 89.7 259 456 42 3 3 .. .. 668 59 36 89.0
DIVISIONS AND STATIONS. Years. Total Number Vaccinated. SEX. Males. Females. SIND DIVISION........ Hydrabad ............ 1853.. 493 285 208 1854.. 2,202 1,399 803 1855.. 2,078 1,330 748 1856.. 2,353 1,735 618 1857.. 1,526 914 612 Average of 5 years.... 1,730 1,132 598 Shikarpoor .......... 1853.. 25 15 10 1854.. 1,918 1,176 742 1855.. 964 582 382 1856.. 1,547 806 741 1857.. 933 455 478 Average of 5 years.... 1,077 607 470 Kurrachee Dispensary.. 1853.. 104 66 38 1854.. 482 320 162 1855.. 112 66 46 1856.. 120 74 46 1857.. 85 43 42 Average of 5 years.... 181 114 67 Kurrachee Jail Establish- ment ............... 1857.. 74 72 2 Hydrabad Civil H. Estab- lishment .......... 1857.. 173 167 6 Meerpore ........... 1853.. 120 68 52 1854.. 1,463 857 606 1855.. 239 130 109 1856.. 45 26 19 1857.. 31 16 15 Average of 5 years.... 379 219 160 Mahomed Khan's Tanda. 1853.. 13 9 4 1854.. 13 13 .. 1855.. .. .. .. 1856.. 125 71 54 1857.. 10 5 5 Average of 5 years..... 32 19 13 Jerruck .............. 1853.. 6 2 4 1854.. 77 48 29 1855.. 119 72 47 1856.. 17 2 15 1857.. 261 116 145 Average of 5 years.... 96 48 48 Larkhana .......... 1853.. 344 208 136 1854.. 12 11 1 1855.. 135 89 46 1856. .. .. .. 1857. .. .. .. Average of 5 years.... 98 62 36
CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Hindoos. Mussal- mans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful Unsuc- cessful. Doubtful. 216 274 3 .. .. .. .. 483 10 .. 97.9 934 1,268 .. .. .. .. .. 1,961 134 107 89.0 844 1,231 3 .. .. .. .. 1,937 73 68 93.2 665 1,683 5 .. .. .. .. 2,243 108 2 95.3 632 887 6 1 .. 797 729 1,313 129 84 86.0 658 1,069 3 1/5 .. .. .. 1,587 91 52 92.3 .. 25 .. .. .. .. .. 25 .. .. 100.0 507 1,401 7 .. 3 .. .. 1,725 146 47 89.9 611 350 1 .. 2 .. .. 838 111 15 86.9 984 554 7 .. 2 .. .. 1,510 37 .. 97.6 608 320 5 .. .. 771 162 932 1 .. 99.8 542 530 4 .. 1 .. .. 1,006 59 12 94.8 93 11 .. .. .. .. .. 97 3 4 93.3 256 222 3 1 .. .. .. 438 24 20 90.8 7 99 6 .. .. .. .. 99 6 7 88.3 38 82 .. .. .. .. .. 80 39 1 66.6 23 43 .. .. 19 34 51 28 53 4 32.9 83 92 2 1/5 4 .. .. 149 25 7 74.4 5 68 1 .. .. 1 73 25 47 2 33.7 41 131 .. 1 .. .. 173 162 11 .. 93.6 33 87 .. .. .. .. .. 88 17 15 73.3 622 841 .. .. .. .. .. 1,091 131 241 74.5 75 164 .. .. .. .. .. 185 14 40 77.4 18 27 .. .. .. .. .. 14 31 .. 31.1 .. 31 .. .. .. 2 29 27 2 2 87.0 149 230 .. .. .. .. .. 281 39 59 68.6 1 12 .. .. .. .. .. 9 .. 4 69.2 .. 13 .. .. .. .. .. 10 .. 3 77.0 44 81 .. .. .. .. .. 121 .. 4 96.8 9 1 .. .. .. 5 5 10 .. .. 100.0 11 21 .. .. .. .. .. 30 .. 2 68.6 5 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 5 1 .. 83.3 23 54 .. .. .. .. .. 77 .. .. 100.0 48 71 .. .. .. .. .. 89 30 .. 74.7 .. 17 .. .. .. .. .. 17 .. .. 100.0 33 228 .. .. .. 39 222 259 2 .. 99.2 22 74 1/5 .. .. .. .. 89 7 .. 91.4 234 110 .. .. .. .. .. 256 63 25 74.4 .. 12 .. .. .. .. .. 4 8 .. 33.3 49 86 .. .. .. .. .. 83 42 10 61.4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57 41 .. .. .. .. .. 69 22 7 33.8
DIVISIONS AND STATIONS. Years. Total Number Vaccinat- ed. SEX. Males. Females. SIND DIVISIONS........ Halla................ 1856.. 88 57 31 1857.. 14 10 4 Average of 2 years.... 51 33 18 Roree................ 1856.. 197 94 103 1857.. 269 157 112 Average of 2 years .... 233 125 108 Taroosha.............. 1856.. 36 25 11 1857.. 42 18 24 Average of 2 years.... 39 22 17 Kittee................ 1855.. 64 32 32 1856.. .... .... .... 1857.. .... .... .... Average of 3 years.... 21 11 10 ADEN .................. Aden................ l854.. 887 692 195 1855.. 825 646 179 1856.. 1,786 1,277 509 1857.. 901 714 187 Average of 4 years.... 1,099 832 267 PERSIAN GULF ........ Bushire................ 1853.. 95 41 54 1854.. 279 135 144 1855.. 382 196 186 1856.. 115 59 56 1857.. 195 91 104 Average of 5 years.... 213 104 109 Total.... 1,83,326 1,04,985 78,341
CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Percentage of Success. Hindoos. Mussul- mans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Success- ful. Unsuc- cessful. Doubtful. 23 65 .. .. .. .. .. 88 .. .. 100.0 3 11 .. .. .. 5 9 14 .. .. 100.0 13 38 .. .. .. .. .. 51 .. .. 100.0 117 73 .. .. 7 .. .. 195 2 .. 98.9 138 127 2 .. 2 154 115 268 .. 1 99.6 127 100 1 .. 5 .. .. 232 1 .. 99.2 17 19 .. .. .. .. .. 12 24 .. 33.3 28 14 .. .. .. 10 32 29 13 .. 69.0 23 16 .. .. .. .. .. 11 18 .. 51.1 6 58 .. .. .. .. .. 48 4 12 75.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 19 .. .. .. .. .. 16 1 4 25.0 44 781 3 .. 59 .. .. 866 21 .. 97.6 43 767 10 .. 5 .. .. 825 .. .. 100.0 125 1,606 51 .. 4 .. .. 1,786 .. .. 100.0 55 80 40 3 723 41 860 901 .. .. 100.0 67 808 26 1 197 .. .. 1,094 5 .. 99.4 .. 83 4 .. 8 .. .. 88 7 .. 92.6 .. 258 11 .. 10 .. .. 265 14 .. 94.9 .. 358 8 .. 16 .. .. 380 2 .. 99.4 .. 106 5 .. 4 .. .. 69 46 .. 60.0 .. 177 18 .. .. 133 62 144 51 .. 73.8 .. 196 9 .. 8 .. .. 189 24 .. 84.1 1,37,069 41,138 2,757 598 1,764 .. .. 1,64,356 8,559 10,411 448.7
TABLE No. 2 C. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated for Five Years at Twenty Civil Stations, at each of which a Vaccinator is allowed, with the Average yearly work of each Vaccinator. YEARS. Total Number Vacci- nated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1853............ 45,279 25,774 19,505 38,489 6,251 359 72 108 .. .. 39,886 3,043 2,350 88.1 1854.......... 31,492 18,035 13,457 23,163 7,692 386 90 161 .. .. 28,343 1,371 1,778 90.0 1855.......... 29,695 17,112 12,583 23,196 5,826 483 181 9 .. .. 26,875 1,082 1,738 90.4 1856.......... 28,283 16,388 11,895 20,516 7,097 531 109 30 .. .. 25,624 1,005 1,654 90.5 1857.......... 26,767 15,119 11,648 20,196 4,674 473 129 1,295 10,099 16,668 23,852 1,199 1,716 89.1 Total.... 161,516 92,428 69,088 125,560 31,540 2,232 581 1,603 .. .. 144,580 7,700 9,236 448.1 Average of 5 years..... 32,303 18,485 13,818 25,112 6,308 446 116 320 .. .. 28,916 1,540 1,847 .. Average each Vaccinator. 1,615 924 691 1,256 315 22 6 16 .. .. 1,446 77 92 89.5
TABLE No. 2 D. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated for Five Years at Fifteen Stations where no Vaccinator is allowed, with the Average yearly work performed at each Station. YEARS. Total Number Vacci- nated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Farsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1853............ 1,062 605 457 660 370 12 2 18 .. .. 828 158 76 77.9 1854............ 3,031 1,812 1,219 1,368 1,585 60 4 14 .. .. 2,520 217 294 83.1 1855............ 8,610 4,837 3,773 5,534 2,980 78 2 16 .. .. 8,124 102 384 94.3 1856........... 7,568 4,374 3,194 3,411 3,780 303 5 69 .. .. 6,984 190 394 92.2 1857.......... 1,539 929 610 536 883 72 4 44 533 1,006 1,320 192 27 85.7 Total.... 21,810 12,557 9,253 11,509 9,598 525 17 161 .. .. 19,776 859 1,175 433.2 Average of 5 Years .... 4,362 2,511 1,851 2,302 1,920 105 3 32 .. .. 3,955 172 235 .. Average at each Station per annum........ 290 167 123 153 128 7 .. 2 .. .. 264 11 15 90.1
TABLE No. 3 A. VACCINATION UNDER NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated by Vaccinators under Native Chiefs, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, with Percentage of Success, for the Years 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856 and 1857, with an Average of Vaccination for Five Years. YEARS. Total Number Vacci- nated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1853............ 19,986 11,370 8,616 17,585 1,438 120 .. 843 .. .. 16,442 1,486 2,05S 82.2 1854............ 30,538 17,046 13,492 27,969 2,098 124 .. 347 .. .. 25,958 1,718 2,862 85.0 1855........... 45,072 24,164 20,908 41,935 3,047 89 1 .. .. .. 38,313 2,580 4,179 85.0 1856.......... 53,663 27,865 25,798 50,087 3,479 95 2 .. .. .. 47,293 1,963 4,407 88.1 1857.......... 44,013 22,990 21,023 39,031 3,060 118 16 1,788 13,630 30,383 38,429 2,380 3,204 87.3 Total........ 193,272 103,435 89,837 176,607 13,122 546 19 2,978 .. .. 166,435 10,127 16,710 427.6 Average of 5 Years.... 38,654 20,687 17,967 35,321 2,624 109 4 596 .. .. 33,287 2,025 3,342 86.1
TABLE No. 3 B. VACCINATION UNDER NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated in each Division by Vaccinators under Native Chiefs, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, with Percentage of Success, for the Years 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, and 1857, with an Average of Five Years Vaccination in each Division. DIVISIONS AND STATIONS. Years. Total Number Vaccinated SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Female. Hindoos. Mussalmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. S. DIVISION. Kolapoor,&c........ 1853.. 6,299 3,957 2,342 5,776 241 .. .. 282 .. .. 5,093 264 942 80.8 1854.. 5,765 3,509 2,196 5,122 574 .. .. 69 .. .. 4,783 218 764 82.9 1855... 7,604 4,126 3,478 7,274 328 2 .. .. .. .. 6,181 256 867 85.2 1856.. 9,806 5,263 4,543 9,438 360 8 .. .. .. .. 8,842 154 810 90.1 1857.. 8,723 4,621 4,102 8,109 349 .. .. 265 2,155 6,568 8,121 213 389 93.1 Average of 5 years.. 7,639 4,307 3,332 7,144 370 2 .. 123 .. .. 6,664 221 754 86.4 W. GUZERAT. Mahee kanta ...... 1853.. 6,913 3,778 3,135 5,628 724 .. .. 561 .. .. 5,678 540 695 82.1 1854.. 12,008 6,434 5,574 11,051 826 .. .. 131 .. .. 9,979 648 1,381 83.1 1855.. 22,595 11,796 10,799 21,053 1,542 .. .. .. .. .. 19,612 917 2,066 86.7 1856.. 30,152 15,436 14,716 27,620 2,532 .. .. .. .. .. 26,340 911 2,901 87.3 1857.. 15,289 8,065 7,224 12,625 1,264 .. .. 1,400 6,286 9,003 13,565 548 1,176 88.7 Average of 5 years.. 17,391 9,102 8,289 15,595 1,378 .. .. 418 .. .. 15,035 713 1,643 85.6 E. GUZERAT. Baroda & Rewa Kanta. 1853.. 2,527 1,445 1,082 2,262 252 13 .. .. .. .. 1,792 327 408 71.0 1854.. 6,072 3,721 2,351 5,375 545 5 .. 147 .. .. 4,926 490 656 81.1 1855.. 9,308 5,466 3,842 8,423 884 .. 1 .. .. .. 7,258 1,037 1,013 77.9 1856.. 6,742 3,726 3,016 6,244 496 .. 2 .. .. .. 5,945 429 368 88.1 1857.. 7,756 4,057 3,699 6,978 686 2 16 74 1,799 5,957 6,326 691 739 81.5 Average of 5 years.. 6,481 3,683 2,798 5,857 572 4 4 44 .. .. 5,249 597 637 79.9
DIVISIONS AND STATIONS. Years. Total Number Vaccinated SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussalmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. N. DECCAN. Peint(Nassick)...... 1854.. 30 17 13 15 15 .. .. .. .. .. 19 1 10 63.3 1855.. 890 439 451 890 .. .. .. .. .. .. 776 47 67 87.2 1856.. 325 169 156 325 .. .. .. .. .. .. 247 33 45 76.0 1857.. 305 138 167 305 .. .. .. .. 37 268 253 17 35 83.0 Average of 4 years.. 387 191 196 383 4 .. .. .. .. .. 324 24 39 77.4 S. DECCAN. Sawunt Warree ...... 1853.. 4,247 2,190 2,057 3,919 221 107 .. .. .. .. 3,879 355 13 913 1854.. 6,663 3,305 3,358 6,406 138 119 .. .. .. .. 6,251 361 51 93.8 1855.. 4,675 2,337 2,338 4,295 293 87 .. .. .. .. 4,186 323 166 89.5 1856.. 6,638 3,271 3,367 6,460 91 87 .. .. .. .. 5,919 436 283 89.1 1857.. 6,102 3,073 3,029 5,844 142 116 .. .. 811 5,291 5,000 664 438 81.9 Average of 5 years .. 5,665 2,835 2,830 5,385 177 103 .. .. .. .. 5,047 428 190 89.1 KATTYWAR. Rajcote................ 1857. 5,838 3,036 2,802 5,170 619 .. .. 49 2,542 3,296 5,164 247 427 88.4 Total.... 193,272 103,435 89,837 176,607 13,122 546 19 2,978 .. .. 166,435 10,127 16,710 427.6
TABLE No. 4 A. GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated each year by all Establishments, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, with Percentage of Success, for the Years 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, and 1857, with an Average of Vaccination for Five Years. YEARS. Total Number Vacci. nated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful, 1853............ 180,916 101,703 79,214 150,438 21,354 2,088 430 6,606 .. .. 154,510 14,592 11,814 85.4 1854 ............ 234,292 132,132 102,160 188,232 40,151 1,529 299 4,081 .. .. 206,168 10,752 17,372 87.9 1855........... 259,766 142,783 116,983 219,671 37,444 2,059 532 60 .. .. 232,644 9,072 18,050 89.5 1856.......... 247,749 134,477 113,272 208,680 35,754 2,871 326 118 .. .. 224,470 8,309 14,970 90.6 1857.......... 246,687 136,027 110,660 184,107 51,940 1,969 357 8,314 75,180 171,507 226,003 8,355 12,329 916 Total.... 1,169,410 647,121 522,289 951,128 186,643 10,516 1,944 19,179 .. .. 1,043,795 51,080 74,535 445.0 Average of 5 Years .... 233,882 129,424 104,458 190,226 37,328 2,103 389 3,836 .. .. 208,759 10,216 14,907 89.0
TABLE No. 4 B. GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION. Table showing the Total Number Vaccinated for Five Years by each Establishment, arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result, and the Average total work of each Establishment for Five Years. ESTABLISHMENTS. Total Number Vaccina- ted Five Years. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Percentage of Success. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1. Vaccination under Superin- 792,812 438,701 354,111 637,452 132,383 7,213 1,327 14,437 .. .. 713,004 32,394 47,414 89.9 2. Do. Civil Surgeon & others. 183,326 104,985 78,341 137,069 41,138 2,757 598 1,764 .. .. 164,356 8,559 10,411 89.7 3. Do. by the Native Chiefs Agency .......... 193,272 103,435 89,837 176,607 13,122 546 19 2,978 .. .. 166,435 10,127 16,710 86.1 Total.. .. 1,169,410 647,121 522,289 951,128 186,643 10,516 1,944 19,178 .. .. 1,043,795 51,080 74,535 265.6 Average of the Establishments___ 389,803 215,707 174,096 317,043 62,214 3,505 648 6,393 .. .. 347,932 17,026 24,845 89.0
1857.REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEARS 1858 AND 1859 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1861.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEARS 1858 AND 1859. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1861.
(iii) REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR 1858 AND 1859. No. 2673 OF 1860. From the PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR-GENERAL, MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To the SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) of Hospitals with their separate Divisional Reports, I have not consi- dered it necessary to publish them, preferring to allow the working of the Department to be judged of by the reports of the medical officers who are engaged in vaccination. But with respect to the subjoined reports of Superintendents and Civil Surgeons, it should be understood that they are only selections from the original reports, condensed and arranged with the object of economising space, and avoiding unne- cessary prolixity. I trust, however, that they will be found sufficiently interesting to merit an attentive perusal. 5. In the year 1858, there were 257,567 vaccinations performed throughout the Bombay Presidency by the agency mentioned in detail in the Appendix [see Table No. 4.] In the year 1859 the number recorded is 252,760, being higher than in either of the years 1857 or 1856, when 246,687 and 247,749 were the numbers respectively shown. 6. The average percentage of successful vaccinations in each of these years stood as follows:( v ) occasions when false returns can be rendered. During the last two years, I regret to say that four Vaccinators have been dismissed from the Service for falsification of returns, and others have received less severe punishment. 11. Under the eye of a vigilant Superintendent of a Division, it rarely happens that any system of deception can be kept up for a lengthened time, and the utility of European supervision is no where so apparent as in counteracting the tendency which many Native Vaccinators indulge in, of exaggerating either the number or the success of their operations. 12. The large extent of territory, viz. the whole of Western India and Sind, being divided into only seven Divisions,* renders it almost impossible for the Superintendent of each Division to exercise a greater or more efficient control than at present; whilst the eight months of fair season does not suffice to permit him to travel over the portion of the country committed to his care, and to inspect thoroughly the progress of Vaccination therein. 13. The periodical visitation of the Superintendent is an immense stimulus to the flagging energies of a Native Vaccinator; whilst the careful scrutiny of the work performed, and the rigid examination and inquiries instituted, forbid prolonged deception, and render the present system of conducting Vaccination in the Bombay Presidency almost as perfect as can be devised. 14. It will be seen by the tables that, out of the total number vacci- nated in each year, by far the largest proportion of the work was per- formed under Superintendents ; thus, in 1858 there were 183,486 out of about 250,000 persons vaccinated, i. e. in the proportion of 71.2 per cent.; and in 1859 there were nearly 178,000 out of about 250,000, or in the proportion of 70.3 per cent. The next largest sphere of conducting Vaccination operations is through the agency of the Native Chiefs, and about 28,000 individuals annually receive the benefit of Vaccination through the liberality of the Chieftains, Jageerdhars, &c. of Western India, and that in the remotest and wildest parts of the country. The smallest number vaccinated is under Civil Surgeons in the chief sudder stations. Civil Surgeons, however, have only a very limited establishment, viz. one Vaccinator allowed to each, or a total of twenty, as will be seen by reference to Table No. 2 in the Appendix. At many places, however, there are no special agents, as will be also seen by reference to the same table, and much credit is therefore due to the medical officers and subordinates who thus assiduously prosecute Vaccination. The * The Presidency town of Bombay not included.
( vi) number of Native Vaccinators employed by the Native Chiefs under the direction of the Superintendents of Vaccination was, in 1858 fifty-two, and in 1859 sixty-five, the increase being due to the enlargement of the Kattywar Circle. The number of Native Vaccinators directly under Superintendents was, in 1858 one hundred and nineteen, and in 1859 one hundred and twelve, the diminution arising from the introduc- tion of the new system under which Vaccination in the Presidency town of Bombay is conducted. 15. By reference to Table No. 1 in the Appendix, the specific work performed by each Superintendent can be traced ; and it will be observed that in 1858 a very large increase took place in the Concan Division( vii ) nation in Sind, there has been a great and steady augmentation, as will be seen by the Table on the margin at page 26 of the Report for 1858, but which does not include the still larger returns for 1859. There can be no doubt that Dr. Martin has gained the confidence of the people, and is entitled to great praise. * Superintendent. As- sistant Surgeon Ross. ( viii ) cent. of the total vaccinated in 1858 was about 55 males to 45 females, and in 1859 about 54.5 males to 45.5 females ; whilst as regards &quot; age&quot; in 1858, out of 100 vaccinated there were about 32 under one year of age, and 68 above that period ; and in 1859 there were nearly 33 under one year and 67 above that age, demonstrating that, in the year 1859, some slight progress was made in prosecuting Vaccination at an earlier period of life, and in the female sex, than in the year 1858. Full details, with respect to age, will be found in the last Table in the Appendix. 26. Amongst the general subjects connected with Vaccination in 1858, mention must be made of the exertions of Dr. Morehead, when acting as Superintending Surgeon, Poona, to introduce a more thorough system of Vaccination into the Military Bazars and Regimental Lines. Although this is not the place to enter at length into the subject, yet there can be no doubt, I think, that the diminished mortality from Small-pox in 1859 compared to 1858, as shown in the Table at the end, is due, in a great measure, to the introduction of this useful measure, and to the zeal with which it was carried out. At every large military station a Vac- cinator was placed under the Staff Surgeon or Senior Medical Officer, for the purpose of vaccinating in the Military Bazars; and although these agents have been withdrawn from .several of the stations, they are kept up with great advantage at Poona and the stations in Rajpootana. 27. During the year 1858 attention was given to two subjects brought before Government( ix) thus obtained, from the circumstance that only one successful case ensued from the crust taken from the cow, and that fresh lymph from the pustules which arose upon the cows was always unsuccessful; and hence, to all who have had much dealings with the natives of India, this fact is sufficiently suggestive; yet it is stated &quot; the superiority of the lymph derived from this source was proved beyond doubt, and the natives appeared to place great confidence in it.&quot; In the same report the supposed discovery of genuine cow-pox amongst the cows of Assam is recorded, where several native children were vaccinated from the lymph obtained from scabs on the back of a cow affected with &quot; Mutha,&quot; and no doubts of the genuineness of the lymph were excited until two English children were operated on, when it was found small-pox, and not cow-pox, supervened in both cases. It is stated &quot; this was more than suspected to have happened in many of the native children who had generally dispersed a few days after the operation, and were not again heard of.&quot; As there are many spurious forms of cow-pox amongst cows, it is a matter of first consequence, if circumstances render it necessary to draw a fresh supply of virus from the cow in order to induce protection of the vaccinated, that the most accurate distinction should be made between the genuine and spurious forms ; and this is rendered the more difficulty as the true and false diseases may be prevalent at the same time. It is acknowledged by the English physicians at the present day that, from the great variety of affections in the cow, and the few opportunities of acquiring a practical knowledge of the subject, the most prudent plan, supposing it is deemed expedient to renew our supply of lymph, is to produce the disease in the cow by inoculation. 2. Whether it is advisable to try here the experiment of inoculating Cows with vaccine matter brought from Europe, with the view of obtaining fresh vaccine lymph.(x) human subject to another. But even if the deterioration was admitted as a fact, it does not appear how the process of retro-vaccination could restore its efficacy ; and what- ever its original qualities were, it is not unreasonable to suppose they would be neither better nor worse for its transmission through the cow. In Dr. Cotes' case, there can be no doubt that the lymph was as powerful before it passed through the cow as after- wards, and that, had children been vaccinated with the German lymph on its arrival, the vesicle would have been as perfect as those he describes. Mr. Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anunta Chundroba has informed the Director-General that he is of opinion that, if Hindoos were aware that vaccine lymph, obtained from the cow by retro-vaccination, was produced by the insertion of matter by means of a lancet into the udder, they would think that the same process would be resorted to always, and would, he thinks, decidedly object to cows being so treated, and, moreover, object to the matter so obtained, because, in their estimation, the cow had been injured. He states that it is the insertion of the matter by means of a lancet, and the probability of a minute drop of blood being drawn from the cow, which is the objection in their eyes. 3. Whether inoculation of Cows with the matter of human Small-pox gives them a disease not to be distinguished from the real Cow-pox.( xi) India, or produced artificially by the inoculation of the animal by either cow or small pox. The Director-General has no hesitation in expressing his conviction, that the employment of lymph obtained from Europe is the best means of propagating Vacci- nation, and supplies from the Honorable Court (overland) in June, July, and August, the Director-General considers will suffice. 28. In 1858 attention was directed to the importance of Convicts to the Straits Settlements being duly protected by vaccination, and the following extract from a despatch from the late Honorable Court was communicated for information and guidance :( xii ) INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. PAGE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTSVACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent.2 7. European children, and the children of Native gentlemen, will be vaccinated at the central Station at Byculla, between the hours of 7 and 9 o'clock, on Monday mornings. 8. The Local Superintendent will be engaged for three hours daily at a Station, and will observe the utmost regularity in the hours of attendance. 9. In the event of the Local Superintendent being prevented by temporary illness from attending to his duties, he will procure the services of a duly qualified Medical Practitioner ; but in that case, the attendance will be limited to the time absolutely required to perform the daily duties. 10. As there is a great uncertainty whether or not the children vaccinated will be brought for inspection after Vaccination, it becomes, in the highest degree, important that the operation should be performed with such care and skill as to ensure its success, except in cases of an unusual nature. The Local Superintendent will therefore himself vaccinate as many as possible of the children brought to the Station. He will always vaccinate directly from a child, and will be scrupulously careful in the selection of the vesicle from which lymph is taken. 11. Domiciliary Vaccination from glasses, points, or crusts, is strictly prohibited. 12. The practice of sending vaccinated children to supply lymph to the houses of Euro- pean or Native, residents having been abolished, is on no account to be revived; but every facility will be afforded to persons desirous of entering into a pecuniary arrangement with the parents of vaccinated children, to secure their attendance for the purpose stated. It must, however, be distinctly understood, that the Vaccination Establishment will take no part in such arrangement, and neither the Assistant Vaccinators, nor the Vaccinators' Peons, are to accompany such children. 13. A Division of the Island will be allotted to each Assistant Vaccinator, who must reside within its limits. 14. It will be the duty of the Assistant Vaccinator to visit as many as possible of the houses in which children who have been vaccinated live; to bring to the notice of the Local Superintendent every instance of failure or of irregularity in the progress of the vesicle ; and to make himself acquainted, so far as may be practicable, with the number and residences of the children in his Division who have not been vaccinated. 15. Whenever the number of children vaccinated in any one year shall exceed 8,000, a percentage of 10 Rupees per 100 upon all the successful cases in excess of that number will be allowed. Of this sum, one-third shall be received by the person by whom the operation has been successfully performed ; the remainder will be equally divided amongst the members of the Establishment. REPORT FOR 1859. ON the 31st of December 1859, the first complete year of vaccine operations, according to the scheme proposed by Dr. Peet, terminated. His main proposition was to abolish domiciliary Vaccination, and in its stead to establish vaccinating Stations and Depôts in different parts of the Island, where children could be vaccinated by a duly qualified Medical man, with matter taken directly from the arm of a successfully vaccinated child, thus securing, as much as possible, the success of the operation performed3 as to my ability, successfully, to carry it out, more especially as I was aware of the fact, that the unceasing exertions of some of the ablest and most pains-taking members of the Medical Department, through a period of nearly half-a-century, have not been sufficient to achieve much in the propagation of this best of God's boons in the Town and Island of Bombay. As proposed in the scheme, six Stations were opened in different parts of the Island; and as the several Charitable Dispensaries of Bombay were fortunately conveniently placed with reference to the different localities, it was thought advisable to secure them for vaccinating Stations. Thus, one was established at the Nag-Davee Charitable Dispensary, situated in a thickly-populated part of the Island between Mambadavee and Mandavee ; another at Girgaum, on the premises of the Shunkersett Charitable Dispensary, so as to be conveniently placed for the residents of Mahaluxumee, Malabar Hill, Girgaum, &c. ; a third at Lower Colaba, in the Branch Charitable Dispensary there situated ; the fourth in the Fort, at the Fort Gratuitous Dispensary, in the Bazar Gate Street. The original Station at the gate of the Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy Hospital, together with the four above noticed, formed five Stations in all. There was thus one more to be established in the south-western part of the Town; and as there was no conveniently-placed Charitable Dispensary near, Mr. Lisboa4 operated on, the Station was transferred to Mazagon, where, at that time, Small-pox was prevalent to a great extent. From the thickly-populated state of the Fort, it would naturally be expected that a Station there could be permanently kept up, and many persons vaccinated; but four months stay there convinced me that the task was not quite so hopeful. The greater part of the community of the Fort consists of Bunyas, Bhatyas, and Parsees, and there can be no doubt that there must be unprotected children amongst them ; but very few presented themselves for Vaccination. It is a singular circumstance that the Parsees, should be backward in availing themselves of the advantages of Vaccination. A few Parsee children were occasionally brought to the Station, but the number was so small, as to be almost nothing compared to the number of Parsees that now reside in the Fort. With the Bunyas and Bhatyas it was almost a hopeless task ; nothing could induce the majority of them to have their children vaccinated, much less could they be prevailed upon to have them brought over to the Station. We were conse- quently, towards the end of January, obliged to remove the Station from the Fort, as the time at our command was precious, and could not be wasted in fruitless attempts at inducing the obdurate Bhatyas and Bunyas to avail themselves of the advantages of Vaccination. The district of Mahim was not provided for in the scheme as originally framed; and as Small-pox was prevailing there to a great extent, the Fort Station was immediately transferred to that locality. Happily we met with little or no opposition there. The greater number of the inhabitants seem to have perfect confidence in the prophylactic virtues of Vaccination, and nothing could have been more welcome to them, the more so as Small-pox was committing considerable ravages in the neighbourhood. For months together, we weekly visited this part of the Island, including Augar, Wurlee, Naguam, Sion, and vaccinated a great many children. The success of the operations was also very considerable ; indeed, there were very few cases of failure. Of all the parts of the Island, Mahim is the only one where Vaccination can be said to have at all satisfactorily progressed. When Small-pox was spreading rapidly all over the Island, it was thought very desirable to extend Vaccination over as extensive a part of it as possible, and the Stations were therefore opened in the evening as well as in the morning. The Girgaum Station, on account of the thinly-populated state of its vicinity, was never very largely attended, and it was temporarily closed in October, in order to establish one between Mandavee and Dongaree ; but towards the end of December, we returned to the original Station at Girgaum. Though this Station was chiefly intended for the convenience of the European residents of Malabar Hill and Mahaluxamee, yet, strange to say, none ever availed themselves of it, as the generality prefer taking their children to the Byculla Station to be vaccinated The Mazagon Station was closed, after visiting it continuously for three or four months A. Station was opened at Parell for a few weeks, in connection with the one at Byculla. Within the last month, the Mahim Station has also been given up, and one re-established at Colaba, where no vaccine operations were carried on for eight months together. The morning Stations stood thus on the 31st of December 18595 average of the five preceding years. The number vaccinated in the year 1858 was unpre- cedentally large, owing probably to the prevalence of Small-pox. Of the total vaccinated, 5,895 were Hindoos; 1,147 Mussulmans; 767 Christians; 168 Parsees; and 22 of other castes. The natives who willingly bring their children to the Station at all times of the year to be vaccinated, are the Khojas, Memons, Bohras, some of the Concanee Mussulmans, the higher and some of the middle classes6 CONCAN DIVISION. Superintendent.7 the extent to which unvaccinated, compared with vaccinated, children had been attacked; and the amount of mortality in each. The result of this inquiry was communicated to the Director- General in my letter, No. 222 of 1858, dated 4th August. In the 2nd paragraph of the letter referred to, it was reported8 intended. This practice does not exist amongst the Establishment of the Concan Division. With the exception of one man, whom I am obliged to retain in office as Karkoon9 likewise, time was necessarily lost in procuring qualified substitutes, and in recommencing their work. These are causes quite sufficient to account for the decrease in the amount of work for last year compared with the preceding one. Had the contingencies related not occurred, I have little doubt that the amount of work of last year would have equalled that of 1858 ; as it is, with the exception of the year 1858, the working of the past year has never been equalled in this Division. Of the total number vaccinated10 Vaccination at all times succeeds less prosperously in Tanna than in Rutnagherry Collecto- rate; and that, notwithstanding the population of the former exceeds by 1,50,000 inhabitants that of the latter, the amount of vaccinations in each year is proportionately smaller. The computed population of Rutnagherry Zillah is 6,65,238, and the number of individuals vaccinated during the twelve months was 25,888, or at the rate of 3 per cent. The popula- tion of Tanna Zillah is estimated at 8,15,849, whilst the total number vaccinated during the year amounted to but 13,781, or in the proportion of a little more than 1 per cent. During the last few years, there has been a marked change of improvement towards the propagation of vaccination in the Tanna Collectorate, and within the past two years, vaccina- tion has been introduced, and successfully carried out, in some parts where formerly nothing save inoculation was resorted to or permitted. In my Report for last year, special reference was made to one Talooka, viz. that of Tullojee, in Tanna Collectorate. Until the year 1857, vaccination, though repeatedly attempted to be introduced, had never succeeded in that district. The inhabitants invariably resisted with violence a Vaccinator amongst them. This Talooka was infested with Inoculators, who gained a livelihood by their practice, getting two annas a head for every child they inoculated. These men were the sole cause of prevention to vaccination being introduced. When once the Inoculators were eradicated, and vaccination fairly established, every obstacle was removed, and within the compass of six months upwards of 2,500 children were vaccinated. At present a Vaccinator is employed successfully in that district. But the most gratifying circumstance which I am enabled to record, with refer- ence to the Tanna Collectorate during the past year, is the fact of the villagers, belonging to the separate State of the Rajah of Jowaur, having petitioned my Vaccinator11 some of the northern districts12 NORTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. Superintendent.13 The lymph throughout the year has been of excellent quality in all the Collectorates of this Division; large supplies have been distributed wherever required. Amongst other places, the station of Dapoolee and the Malwa and Rajpootana Divisions of the Army have been successfully furnished with lymph. It may be worth while to notice that these supplies were packed for transmission in the manner suggested by Superintending Surgeon Maxwell of the Madras Army, courteously brought to my notice by Dr. Morehead, and that I am inclined to attribute these unusually successful results, not only to the good quality of the lymph, but mainly to its preser- vation from decomposing causes, as secured by this method, which consists simply in enveloping the lymph in a little coarsely-powdered quick-lime, wrapped over with foil or wax-cloth. Small-pox as usual was more or less prevalent at the approach of the hot season, especially in the villages lying close around Poona and Kirkee, and towards the Western Ghauts; but I am unable to say to what extent the disease prevailed, though my impression was that it soon disappeared. Measures were at once taken for vaccinating the unprotected community wherever the disease appeared, which the apathy of the people renders necessary by their indifference to vaccination in ordinary times. It seems impossible not to attend to a district attacked with Small-pox, however recently the Vaccinator may have been over it, and the people offered the opportunity of having their children vaccinated, which they have at the time neglected. By these frequent interruptions to regular work, much time is lost; the Vaccinator is obliged to make use of dry lymph, which is seldom successful, and his stock has to be renewed. It is evident that vaccination can scarcely be said to be so progressive in this Division as its extent and population would render desirable. No instance of inoculation has been brought to my notice, and I have no reason to believe that the practice now exists in my Division, though doubtless such was the case formerly. For the more effectual spread of vaccination, one of two things appears necessary : that the people themselves should be more alive to the benefits of vaccination ; or the Native Vaccinators chosen from a class who would possess sufficient intelligence and patience to set aside scruples and overcome apathy. Neither of these conditions are at present fulfilled. The people are not anxious for vaccination ; and too often the Vaccinator feels that he has done his duty, when he has visited a village, and been informed by the Patel that none of his people wish to be vaccinated. I feel convinced that the success of the Vaccinator is attributable more to his prestige as a servant of Government, and the support he derives as such from District Officers, than to any anxiety, on the part of the people, to avail themselves of vaccination, or to any intrinsic merit of his own. The remedy is I think obvious, but impossible to secure, as long as the present system of remunerating the Department continues. My tour of inspection did not commence until the end of February, when, leaving Poorundhur, I passed into the south-eastern districts of the Poona Collectorate, visiting Sassoor, Beemthunee, Soopeb, Baramuttee, and Indapore Talookas, and inspecting vaccination therein. Returning northwards, I next proceeded to the Kheir and Vetala districts, and subsequently went into the Ahmednuggur Zillah, where I felt obliged to proceed to look into some Returns which had been sent in from that Collectorate, which, on examination before the Assistant Magistrate, were proved to have been fabricated, and the delinquent was in consequence dismissed the service. My attention has been more especially directed to the confirmation of Native Returns, which have gone through a stricter scrutiny than usual, and have, proved generally satisfactory. I have also been occupied in devising and carrying out a better system of checking these Returns, and in communication with the several Magistrates of my Division, and with the sanction of the Director-General Medical Department, the method before in use has been abandoned. In place of allowing Native Vaccinators to forward with their Returns certificates of their work from Heads of villages, many of whom are incapable of writing or reading, Mamlutdars will, in future, certify direct to the Superintendent the monthly number of vaccinations that have been effected in their respective charges.
14 REPORT FOR 1859. IN the Northern Deccan Division, during the year 1859,20,013 persons of both sexes have been vaccinated15 page 45. I presume all Superintendents entertain similar opinions on this subject, and are equally desirous to see a more liberal scale of salary introduced, with some arrangement respecting pension after old age incapacitates for further service. This last point cannot, I think, be too strongly insisted on. The introduction of a Senior Vaccinator into each Zillah, charged with the duty of inspecting Returns, and reporting on supposed obstacles to vaccination, as frequently urged by Vaccinators, would, I think, further the cause of vaccination. I have found that Vaccinators too frequently succumb to these difficul- ties16 SOUTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. Superintendent.17 No case of inoculation has been reported to me during the year, and I have no reason to believe that the practice prevails in the Division. There is much ignorance, or much indif- ference, on the part of Patels in regard to filling up the Police Report, Form IV. My inspections have satisfied me that it is a frequent practice with them to sign the form with such numbers as the Vaccinators give them, without having made any personal inspection of the cases operated on, and as the signature is often given at the very time of the operations being performed, it is impossible that the result can be known either to the Vaccinator or Patel. The value of Form IV. is, in such cases, entirely nullified. Both in overlooking the working of the Patels18 REPORT FOR 1859. THE total number vaccinated in 1858 was 15,285, in 1859 only 13,318, showing a decrease of 1,967. The chief cause of this diminution has undoubtedly been the violence with which cholera raged throughout the Division during the months of May, June, and part of July. The greater number of Vaccinators reported that their work was very much interrupted by the disease. The people of the Deccan have not the same lively dread of Small-pox that is entertained by the inhabitants of the Concan, and the prevalence of any other sickness at once checks the very slight inclination they might feel to receive vaccination; besides which, the Vaccinators themselves are greatly influenced by the fear of cholera, and do not willingly travel far from their own homes. During the first four months of the year, the returns averaged 1,364 monthly; during the next four, they fell off to 886; and in the last four they had become 1,079. Another cause of decrease has been the death of two Vaccinators. Of these, one was the Head Vaccinator, whose Return for 1858 was much the largest of any made by the Establishment. He went away on leave in April and died in September, and his sub- stitute was unable to keep up anything like his numbers. By his death alone, I calculate that 600 cases were lost. Another Vaccinator had for some time been working steadily and increasing his returns, but he was in hospital for nearly five months before his death. Several other Vaccinators have suffered from sickness for various periods. The services of one Vaccinator have been almost entirely lost, in consequence of the office being removed to Rutnagherry during the rains. The proportion of females is rather smaller than in 1858, being 45.85 per cent. against 4,760. Almost the only improvement is in the matter of age, and my constant representations to Vaccinators, village authorities, and people, at last appear to have produced some effect, the numbers &quot; under one year&quot; being in the proportion of 32 per cent., while in 1858 it was only 24, and in 1857,26.4. The actual number is in excess of both the two previous years, being 4,271 against 3,673 in 1858, and 3,991 in 1857. The percentage of successful cases is slightly- less than in 1858, being 92.26 against 93.6; but this arises rather from the increase in the number of &quot;doubtful&quot; than of actually &quot; unsuccessful&quot; cases, as the Vaccinators have the strictest orders to enter as &quot;doubtful&quot; every case, the success of which they are unable to ascertain by personal inspection. There has been a slight improvement in the number of &quot;other castes&quot; who have been vaccinated. I have tried hard to combat the prejudices of the Dhers, &c., and to induce the Vaccinators to do their utmost among them, but though there has been a yearly increase, it has been very small, the numbers in 1857, 1858, and 1859 being respect- ively 298, 307, and 344. The number of Christians vaccinated is much less than in the two previous years. This arises from the Vaccinator, who was stationed in the Pudshapore Talooka, being forbidden from vaccinating in Belgaum and the neighbourhood without special orders. The condition of the lymph and vesicle has been good throughout. An attempt to introduce lymph from England failed,19 clear that, until the people are made acquainted with the nature and value of vaccination, they will not avail themselves of it. Where it has once been established, there, if they do not demand it eagerly, at least opposition in a great measure cases; but though nearly seven years have now elapsed since the Division was formed, there is a very large portion of it to which the advantages of vaccination have not been extended ; and why ? because the number of Vaccinators was not sufficient to introduce it, in the first instance, in all parts. To show how inadequate the means are, I will contrast this Division with the Concan, in which there are two Zillahs containing a population of about 1,500,000, impressed with the greatest dread of Small-pox, and eagerly demanding vaccination, and for this, there are eighteen Vaccinators. The area, too, is such that the Superintendent is able to visit nearly the whole Division during the year. Here there are four Zillahs containing20 EASTERN DIVISION, GUZERAT. Superintendent.21 REPORT FOR 1859. IN 1858 there were 20,503 operations, and in the year under review there were 21,871, or an increase this year over last of 1,368. A greater increase than is now shown would have appeared, if the Establishment had not been short-handed. The difference in the comparative numbers vaccinated by each Vaccinator is more striking than I expected. I looked for greater equality, in consequence of the promise which I made that I would give the sum of Rs. 50 to him who vaccinated the greatest number above two thousand. I am disappointed to say that one man, and one man only, accomplished the number in question, and that he merely exceeded the requirement by sixty-four. The stimulus of a pecuniary reward has most signally failed in improving the returns from this Division. I am, however, inclined to believe that a permanent impulse might be given to the work, if Government were to promise a retiring pension to Vaccinators whose average number of operations amounted, after a given number of years service, to a certain sum. Of the total number vaccinated, 12,347 were males, and 9,524 females. The age of the majority vaccinated was above one year. There seems an unwillingness, perhaps prejudice, on the part of parents to have their children vaccinated at an earlier period. The successful cases numbered 18,894. During the year the lymph has proved, and still continues good. But few cases of Small- pox have occurred ; those mentioned in the Returns of March and April, took place in Kupperwunj in the Kaira, and Ahmode in the Broach Collectorates. Reports that inoculation is practised in the Division, seldom or never reach me, and I would fain hope that vaccination is slowly, yet surely, making progress. During the year, I visited all the Vaccinators in the Division, with the exception of those in the Rajpeepla and Rewa Canta States. I had every reason to be satisfied touching the practical knowledge each possesses of his work. There is, however, an amount of idleness which has still to be got rid of. As to the best means of diffusing the benefits of vaccination, I have, in conversation with the more intelligent natives, been astonished to find that some of them made use of an argument, identical with that mentioned in Southey's Common-place Book, page 394, which was adopted with good effect by the Bavarian Government, and is as follows:22 WESTERN DIVISION, GUZERAT. Superintendent.23 In examining the Register of the Vaccinator and those operated on in any village, my usual custom is to collect the children with their parents, and calling out the names as they are in the book, or the Telattee or Mooknee calls out the names as in his list; then each parent, if present, answers to his name, and brings the child, whose arms are examined ; if not present, and unable to be so, the reason is entered, and the next name called. After the whole list is thus gone through, conversation on the healthiness of the village during the last two or three, and sometimes as far back as ten years is discussed; the soil and productiveness of the land : what grain or produce the land is best adapted for ; if water is plentiful, also if it is sweet or brackish; and if any are ill, I go to see them, and prescribe, telling the name of the medicine or drugs employed, and the quantity used; I also inquire of the native modes of treatment for the most common diseases, and the medicines in vogue. Vaccination, its history, and use, forms a lively topic of conversation; but the natural suspicious character of the native mind is shown, by the common question &quot;are you quite sure that the Government do all this, and spend so much for kindness to us only, and that they derive no benefit from it.&quot; I received charge of the office on the 15th of January, and in February I visited Dholera, Mavch Ghoga, and Bownuggur. In April I was recalled to Ahmedabad, where I was employed on military duties till the end of May. During the rains, I took advantage of those days in which travelling was practicable to visit the villages of the Northern and Western Divisions of Dholera, until I was ordered to Baroda in August, where I staid till the beginning of November. About the midde of that month, I began my present tour, commencing at Sunnund and thence to Verumgaum, Mandall, and Radhunpoor. I generally stay twelve or fifteen days in each district, so as to examine ten or twelve villages, of which the Register has not been examined during the preceding two or three years. In the past year, I have endeavoured24 3rd.25 During the past year I have not heard of any Small-pox, except at two villages in the Gonghur district, and at Burwalla, in the Dhundooka district; in either case, if it existed at all, it was confined to the villages named. From inquiries made by myself at Gonghur, Dholka, and Dhundooka, the truth of the report was denied; and in the villages of the Gonghur district, the Mooknees said that two children had been ill with a rash, supposed to have been Small-pox, but that none caught it from them. The only obstruction to the spread of vaccination is in the superstition and credulity arising from the ignorance of the natives' want of faith in, and suspicious regarding anything done by, the English. An adult Dher refused to be operated on, although he had never been inoculated or had had the Small-pox, of which he said he was in great dread ; and when asked to give the reason for his antipathy to the prophylactic, stated &quot;that he had heard it asserted the Government would take the Caste from all in India; that vaccine lymph was originally pus, taken from the sores of the bones of a dead man, so, of course, one of the means employed to destroy Caste.&quot; Nothing more ridiculous or improbable than this could have been promulgated; yet this man, and I have no doubt thousands implicitly believe it as this man evidently did, so that any benefit bestowed under the auspices of Government is, however patent the good effects, looked on with suspicion by all classes of natives. No argument or exposure of the nonsense in the tales spread alter the facts as they deem them. The only means by which vaccination will become universally received are either26 SIND DIVISION. Superintendent.27 Of the total number (47,130) operated upon during the year, 28,656 were males, and 18,474 females. Very few Christians or Parsees have been vaccinated, the numbers being 15 of the former, and 23 of the latter. The number of Mahomedans, as compared with Hindoos, is very large, 38,657 Mussulmans having been vaccinated, whilst of the Hindoos only 7,252 came under the operation. The population of Sind is mainly a Mahomedan population, in the proportion of 4 to 1, as stated in the Government Records, and this fact will serve to explain the preponderence in the return of Mahomedans over Hindoos. As to the age of those vaccinated, there were 14,616 cases under one year, and 32,514 above this age. Adult vaccination is never practised, except at the request of the individuals. I only remember to have seen three or four cases during the year. Of the number above one year, the great mass, as far as I have had an opportunity of judging, has been under eight years of age. As to the result, of the total number vaccinated (47,130), there were 45,155 cases reported as suucessful, giving a percentage of 95.8. The number reported as successful includes cases which had primarily failed or were doubtful, but have been subsequently re-vaccinated with success. With the constant use of fresh lymph, failures are of very rare occurrence. I have been frequently surprised at the amount of success on inspecting a large number of cases. Vaccination from glasses is generally unsatisfactory ; a few of the older Vaccinators only can be relied upon for a successful result with lymph taken in this way. The lymph and vesicles have, throughout the year, preserved their characteristic appearance, and continue very good. I have found no difficulty in preserving the quality of the lymph through the hot weather. I was employed during the last hot weather, and what is called the rains28 that the present Establishment can do, and is doing, a great deal to extend protection to the population of the province. On reviewing the work of the year, it gives me the utmost gratification to be able to say that the successful working of the Establishment is, in a great measure, due to the assistance and countenance of the Collectors and Deputy Collectors of the province. No complaint has ever been made to me as to the intemperate conduct of Vaccinators, and my belief is, that they are carrying on the work in a way which, far from rousing the prejudices of the people, is likely eventually to disarm them. REPORT FOR 1859. THE total number vaccinated during the year 1859 was 49,525. In the year 1858, there were 47,130 operations. This number shows an increase in the work of 1859 as compared with that of 1858 of 2,395. During the year under report, there were vaccinated 28,891 males, and 20,634 females. Of these, under one year of age, 12,022 were operated upon; 37,503 above this age. Owing to the prevalence of Small-pox during the early part of the year in the Sakra Talooka of the Jerruck districts, and to the fear the prevalence of the disease and the numerous deaths from it occasioned, a considerable number of adults29 severe, a few children had been vaccinated sometime previously in another part of the province, their parents having recently come to reside in these villages. The cicatrices in their arms left no doubt of the fact of their having been properly protected; and all these children, with- out a single exception, escaped the disease. Children and adults all around the houses occu- pied by these cases of protection were seized with Small-pox, one after another; but they escaped scatheless. This kind of trial continued for three or four months; and as a practical instance of the good resulting from vaccination, nothing could have been more opportune, no other circumstance could have so favourably influenced people of all kinds30 VACCINATION IN THE NATIVE STATES. SOUTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. Sixteen Vaccinators31 REPORT FOR 1859. SIXTEEN Vaccinators have been employed, distributed as follows :32 REPORT FOR 1858. THE total number vaccinated amounted to 5,846, being a decrease of 1,910 from the former year. The decrease is due to the causes explained by the Superintendent in his Report of Guzerat, see page 21 ante. There were 2,882 males, and 2,964 females vaccinated. Under one year of age 1,256, and above 4,590. The percentage of sucess was 77.7. REPORT FOR 1859. THE total number vaccinated was 4,774, being a considerable falling off even from last year, but which is not explained by the Superintendent. WESTERN GUZERAT. MYHEE KANTA AND PALHUNPORE. Under the Superintendent North-Western Division. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 13,693 .... 1,596 11,544 84.3 1859.... 14,511 818 .... 12,520 86.2 REPORT FOR 1858. THE total number vaccinated during the year has been 13,693. In the year 1857, 15,289 were vaccinated, so that the decrease amounts to 1,596. This is to be accounted for by the disturbed state of the country, and the unsettled disposition of the people. The average number vaccinated by each Vaccinator is about 1,369. Only about 52 per cent. are under one year of age, owing to the unfrequency of the Vaccinators' visits in the large districts allowed to each Vaccinator. The proportion of females to males is 93.5 per cent., and the percentage of success about 84.3 per cent. This large percentage of unsuccessful cases is owing to the Vaccinators' districts being separated by the intervention of other States, so that one part of the charge is eight or ten koss from the other. The Vaccinator leaves one part of the charge without ascertaining the result of his last operations, but enters them in the Register as &quot; doubtful.&quot; REPORT FOR 1859. THE total number vaccinated during the year has been 14,511, against 13,693 in 1858, or about 818 more, which, I hope, is but the beginning of a steady increase. The percentage of those under and over one year of age is nearly equal33 KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.34 mostly natives of that part of Guzerat, they were looked upon as strangers in Kattywar, and a distrust felt in their motives and operations. This was in some instances overcome, but in others never ceased to operate. The vaccination regulations too, as carried out in the Government districts, and other portions of the Ahmedabad Division, were not considered by the Political authorities, if enforced to their full extent, as calculated to gain the co-operation and good-will of the people here, who seem exceedingly jealous of any interference with their authority. A consideration of these and other circumstances, submitted to Government in a lengthened correspondence, and by Government to the Medical Board, led the latter to express an opinion that some improvement in the existing system in Kattywar was called for ; and Government, in their Resolution of the 28th March 1857, decided on appointing the Civil Surgeon in Kattywar, Superintendent of Vaccination in that province, according to the terms specified in the Resolution. This was subsequently confirmed by the Supreme Government for a probationary period of one year. Under this sanction, and pending permanent confirmation, a distinct Superintendent's Office, in every respect similar to those kept in the other Vaccination Divisions, has been opened, and all records and returns regularly kept and forwarded since the 1st July 1857. ' A portion of the Government Establishment of Vacci- nation in the Westen Division of Guzerat, counting eight subordinates* of different grades, has been transferred for employment in the Kattywar districts. The aid of the Chiefs has been solicited, and will, no doubt, be more freely afforded than hitherto, as their own people are trained for them near their homes, and their duties carried on under the superintendence of the Medical Officer of the Agency, who they know is on the spot, and with whom many of them have opportunities of becoming acquainted. The Government Vaccinators being only a portion drawn from the Ahmedabad Establishment, no additional expense is, on this account, caused to Government; and the Chiefs men being paid by them, we thus have an Establish- ment equal, I believe, to that in most of our Vaccination Divisions, with little or no extra cost to the State. Compared with the preceding year, only over the latter half of which, however, our opera- tions extended, the table before given shows a large increase; but this is owing more to the greater length of time to which the returns extend, than to any very remarkable difference in the numbers operated on by each Vaccinator for a like period in either year. The sex, age, and results are numerically noted in the returns forwarded.35 vaccinating with such matter, irritable sores generally prematurely suppurating are produced, and the Vaccinators' work is obliged to be dropped until fresh lymph can be brought from elsewhere. To get over this disadvantage, and that aid might be always present with the Vaccinators, I was anxious for the services of Peons ; but I have not been able to overcome the objections on other grounds that exist to their being employed with the Vaccinators, and must therefore endeavour, by such local means and influence as can be brought to bear, to lessen the frequency of such occurrences as above complained of, and the checks to vaccina- tion resulting from them. At the close of 1857, I had described my tour as having extended to Nowanuggur on the north-west coast there, and I remained there for some time at the commencement of 1858, and effecting an arrangement with His Highness the Jam, for maintaining two Vaccinators in his districts, I was desirous of obtaining employment for a third, for whom there would be ample work, but did not succeed. From Nowanuggur I marched by Harriand and Joorid, where I found Small-pox had lately prevailed ; and as no Vaccinator appeared to have before visited these towns, I had one of the Nowanuggur men sent to carry on operations in them. After this we moved to Luttcepoor and afterwards to Yunkara, in the Mahee Kanta, where the principal Chief in that district came to visit, and promised to keep up a Vaccinator for his talooka, which he has since carried into effect. I next went to Wunkaneer, the Chief of which has received vaccination in his own family, and is favourably disposed towards it; but an arrangement for keeping up a Vaccinator in conjunction with a neighbouring talooka, which I at one time hoped would be effected, has been abandoned, in consequence of a bound- ary fight, and the unamicable feeling resulting. From Wunkaneer I went to Hulwud and Drangdra, the Chief of which places keeps up two Vaccinators36 to work at Dantha, the chief place in his charge. I then moved on to Mhowa, where I left the Bhownuggur Vaccinator, and travelled along the coast to Channchbunder and Jafferabad, from thence to Roeensa, from which place I went to Dudden, to visit the Government Vaccinator employed in Babriawar, found his lymph good, and endeavoured to obtain him some aid in extending his operations. After this I travelled to Oona and Dilwarra37 It is said38 SAWUNT WARREE. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 5,426 .... 676 4,257 78.4 1859.... 4,135 .... 1,291 3,194 77.2 REPORT FOR 1858. By Assistant Surgeon J. KEARNEY, in Medical charge. THE number vaccinated during the year has been 5,426, being 676 less than in the previous year. The district is said to have an area of about 1,000 square miles; a population of 162,000 souls; and the number of houses about 28,000, which will give 162 inhabitants to the square mile, and between five and six residents to each house. From the first establishment of vaccination39 which there is for work now than previously, when vaccination was established. The condition of the lymph throughout the year has been said to be uniformly good. During the past two months of the year, I have myself noticed the practice of vaccination in the Warree town, and watched its results, and from personal observation, I can assert that the vesicles have been pretty good, though I must confess not so good and well-formed as might be wished,40 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. PEINT (NASSICK.) Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 330 25 .... 230 69.6 1859.... 428 98 .... 313 73.1 REPORT FOR 1858.41 POONA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 1,236 .... 456 970 78.4 1859.... 1,460 224 .... 1,228 84.1 RETORT FOR 1858.42 REPORT FOR 1858.43 REPORT FOR 1858.44 such might be inferred from the above result. The percentage of success is slightly greater than in previous years, being 89.0. The lymph has been uniformly of good quality throughout the year. I have frequently tested it during the above-mentioned period, and, although in some instances the vesicles have appeared ill-formed in native children, the lymph taken from them has produced a perfect result when applied to the arms of Europeans. I am of opinion that the prejudices of the natives against vaccination are gradually giving way, and that they are more fully aware of the advantages attending the operation ; and in cases where such a pre- judice does still exist, I have usually observed that the individuals are those of the better class. Small-pox has occurred in the town of Sholapore to a very slight degree, and medical aid was in no instance appplied for. Inoculation is not practised in this locality. Vaccination has lately been extended to the prisoners confined in the jail. Most of this class of persons, however, are found, on their admission to jail, to be protected either by a previous attack of Small-pox, or by vaccination45 places. Vaccination is regularly practised amongst those prisoners in the Jail who are ascertained, on their admission, to be protected neither by a previous attack of Small-pox, nor by vaccination. The percentage of success in these cases is much below that of the operations conducted outside the Jail, many of those operated on having probably had Small-pox previously, though exhibiting no marks of the disease. I have received every assistance from the Civil authorities in extending the benefits of vaccination to the inhabitants of Sholapore; and I am satisfied with the manner in which the Assistant Vaccinator has con- ducted his duties. DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 912 .... 12 758 83.1 1859.... 633 .... 279 601 94.9 REPORT FOR 1858.46 NASSICK. One Vaccinator under the Sub-Assistant Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.. .. 1,100 .... 332 826 75.1 1859 .... 1,110 10 .... 870 78.3 No special Reports furnished. AHMEDABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 3,057 275 .... 2,835 92.7 1859.... 2,620 .... 437 2,454 93.6 REPORT FOR 1858.47 REPORT FOR 1859.48 any objection offered. This total includes Kaira and the villages in the immediate neighbour- hood. In the villages around there is less opposition offered than in the town ; but instances do occur in every village where a few of the inhabitants have an objection to their children being vaccinated. The vesicles and lymph have been for the most part healthy ; the former occasionally have been small, and not well developed. In the town of Kaira four cases of Small-pox were reported; the cases were children, averaging from three to five years of age, and neither had been vaccinated; the cases were all fatal. One case in the Camp Bazar was reported to me, in which the subject49 REPORT FOR 1858.50 BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1853.... 1,536 1 .... 1,320 85.9 1859.... 1,561 25 .... 1,303 83.4 REPORT FOR 1858.51 otherwise intelligent character, and might be subjective of a doubt whether claims to psycholo- gical superiority have been so unquestionably established. At any rate it discloses an unworthy and baneful prejudice, demanding the severest reprobation, but which, in others less favoured, might call forth either our pity and perhaps respect. Inoculation has not been practised in this locality for several years, its professors for a long period previous to this having received little or no patronage or encouragement. The lymph continues very good; and the zeal, assiduity, and general conduct of the Assistant Vaccinator deserve commendation. BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 643 116 .... 599 93.1 1859.... 478 .... 165 435 91.0 REPORT FOR 1858.52 always previously vaccinated in it, was for the time excluded. The great Small-pox epidemic of 1857 secured a large number of children, and this also undoubtedly tended to reduce the number of subjects available for vaccination. DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 1,025 .... 618 891 86.9 1859.... 1,222 197 .... 1,090 89.1 REPORT FOR 1858.63 KOLAPORE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 2,954 .... 243 2,639 89.3 1859.... 2,036 .... 913 1,864 91.5 REPORT FOR 1858.54 being a proportion of about 10 per cent. This figure seems scarcely to present a fair average. In the absence, however, of population statistics, this can hardly be estimated. With refer- ence to the sexes, the numbers would appear to be pretty equally and naturally balanced. No fault has been found with the condition of the lymph, which has been good, as evinced by the increase in the percentage of successful operations. RUTNAGHERRY. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 587 .... 384 517 88.0 1859.... 961 374 ... 873 90.8 REPORT FOR 1858.55 REPORT FOR 1859.56 taining the correctness of the entry, and the state of the vesicle. The lymph has been carefully kept up and propagated throughout the year, and small supplies have, on several occasions, been forwarded to other stations when required. A few cases of Small-pox appeared in the town during the spring of the year, but none fell under my observation. HYDRABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 1,233 .... 293 986 79.9 1859.... 1,533 300 .... 1,195 77.9 REPORT FOR 1858.57 SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 1,211 278 .... 1,211 100.0 1859.... 1,417 206 .... 1,416 99.9 REPORT FOR 1858.58 cally speaking with better success than attended our efforts in the year 1857. The returns for the year 1858 show that 1,136 individuals have been vaccinated : of which number, 1,042 are entered as successful, and only 94 as unsuccessful operations, giving an increase of 141 successful cases on the returns of last year. Of the total number, 864 were males, and 272 females ; but the amount of children operated on under one year of age is very small when compared with the total number, viz. only 32 of both sexes. The percentage of success, according to this number, would be 91.7. In the returns.all cases where a vesicle was produced after the operation are indiscriminately entered as successful. Native Vaccinators are naturally sanguine of success; and it is impos- sible for the Superintendent personally to inspect the result of every case. But I do not think that it could be confidently asserted that, out of the 1,136 cases vaccinated during the year, more than 470 are such as can be relied on as affording protection against or modifying Small-pox. If therefore 666 cases be considered as doubtful and unsuccessful, the percentage of success would be reduced to 41.3. Small-pox prevailed to some extent in the town of Aden, and in the Somali village, near the Mala Bunder, from the month of January until September; in fact, since 1856 the epidemic had not left the station entirely. No case of the disease has, however, been known to exist in the peninsula since September 1858. The significant fact that 678 of the total number of individuals who submitted to vaccination were Somalies, taken into consideration with&quot; the very small number operated on under the age of one year, clearly points out the light in which this prophylactic measure is regarded by the inhabitants of Aden. The Somalies, who form about one-third of the population, undergo the operation because it is painless, does no harm, and produces, in a more pleasant mode than the actual cautery, indelible scars on the arms. Every assistance is afforded by the Political authorities to further the spread of vaccination; but the Native Assistant has to seek out practice. Were he not to pursue this course, few indeed would be the cases brought to him for operation. Inoculation, as far as I can ascer- tain, is not practised at Aden, nor does any obstruction to the diffusion of this hygienic measure exist, beyond prejudice on the part of the minority of the people59 REPORT FOR 1858.60 VINGORLA. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 213 11 .... 148 69.4 1859.... 89 .... 124 48 53.9 REPORT FOR 1859.-By Mr. Apothecary GEORGE. THE total number vaccinated for the year ending 31st December 1859 has been 89, while that of the year preceding was 213. The chief reason for this falling off is, that few children have since been born and fit to receive vaccination. The Hindoos, however, do not quite rely upon vaccination as a prophylactic, and are disposed rather to propitiate their Deity by sacrifices on the appearance of Small-pox, in order to avert the evil, than to trust to vaccination. BUSHIRE. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1858.... 177 .... 18 172 97.1 1859.... 225 48 .... 206 91.5 REPORT FOR 1858.APPENDIX. a
TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Divisional Vaccination, showing the Number and Names of the Divisions, and their compared with those of last Year; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Operations performed by each Vac Number. DIVISIONS. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS, Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. 1857. Increase. Decrease. 1858 1 PRESIDENCY . . . . . . . . . . . Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anunta Chundroba. 10 8,709 6,747 1,962 .. 2 CONCAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . Assistant Surgeon T.B. Beatty . . . . . . . . 18 45,983 33,756 12,227 .. 3 NORTHERN DECCAN . . . . No. 1 (For 1858 and 1859.) SUPERINTENDENTS. Superintendents; the Number of Vaccinators employed; the Total Vaccinations performed, Age, and Result; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated; and the Average Number of cinator, for the Years 1858 and 1859. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toTABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. SUPERINTENDING SUR- GEONS DIVISIONS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1857 Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY . . . . . Tanna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 330 254 82 .. 198 138 Alibaugh . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 189 69 120 .. 100 89 Bandora Dispensary . . . . . .. 75 76 .. 1 48 27 Coorla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 20 .... .. .. 10 10 Total.. 1 620 399 221 .. 356 264 2 POONA . . . . . . . . Poona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,236 1,692 .. 456 734 502 Ahmednuggur . . . . . . . . 1 1,349 1,112 237 .. 751 508 Sattara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2,116 1,233 883 .. 1,162 954 Sholapore . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,355 1,588 .. 233 1,019 336 Dhoolia . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 912 924 .. 12 488 424 Nassick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,100 1,432 .. 332 597 503 Mahableshwur . . . . . . . . .. 57 214 .. 157 28 29 Total.. 6 8,125 8,195 .. 70 4,779 3,346 3 NORTHERN . . . . . . Ahemedabad . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3,057 2,782 275 .. 1,658 1,399 Kaira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,236 1,448 .. 212 773 463 Rajcote . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 785 524 261 .. 430 355 Surat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,543 1,894 .. 351 815 728 Broach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,536 1,535 1 .. 930 597 Bhooj Dispensary . . . . . . . . .. .... 38 .. .. .. .... Total.. 5 8,157 8,221 .. 64 4,615 3,542 4 SOUTHERN . . . . . . . . Belgaum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 643 527 110 .. 393 250 Dharwar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,025 1,043 .. 618 569 456 Kolapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2,054 3,197 .. 243 1,511 1,443 Rutnagherry . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 587 971 .. 384 290 297 Vingorla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213 202 11 .. 132 81 Total.. 4 5,422 6,540 .. 1,118 2,895 2,527 5 SIND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Kurrachee . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 769 651 118 .. 429 340 Hydrabad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,233 1,526 .. 293 663 570 Shikarpoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,211 033 278 .. 644 567 Kurrachee Dispensary .... .. .... 17 .. 17 ,. .... Ditto Jail . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. 95 74 21 .. 93 2 Hydrabad do. and Civil .. .. 217 173 44 .. 216 1 Shikarpoor do. . . . . . . . . . . .. 34 .... 34 .. 32 2 Jerruck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 51 261 .. 210 29 22 Meerpoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 33 31 2 .. 18 15 Roree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 162 209 .. 107 76 86 Mahomed Khan's Tanda .. .. 47 10 37 .. 31 16 Halla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .... 14 .. 14 .. . . . . Taroosha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 714 32 672 .. 461 253 Larkhana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 59 .... 59 .. 39 20 Total.. 3 4,625 4,001 624 .. 2,731 1,894 6 ADEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Aden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,136 901 235 .. 864 272 7 PERSIAN GULF .... Bushire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 195 .. 18 91 86 Grand Total.. 20 28,262 28,452 .. 190 16,331 11,931
No. 2. CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details, as in Table No. 1, for the Year 1858. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toTABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. SUPERINTENDING SUR- GEONS DIVISIONS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1858 Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY . . Tanna . . . . . . . . . . . 1 235 336 .. 101 165 70 Alibaugh . . . . . . . . . .. 99 189 .. 90 57 42 Bandora Dispensary . . . . . .. 49 75 .. 26 27 22 Coorla do. . . . . . . . .. 20 20 .. .. 12 8 Total.. 1 403 620 .. 217 261 142 2 POONA.......... Poona . . . . . . . . 1 1,460 1,236 224 .. 925 535 Ahmednuggur . . . . . . . 1 986 1,349 .. 363 581 405 Dhoolia . . . . . . 1 633 912 .. 279 308 325 Sholapore . . . . . . . 1 1,405 1,355 50 .. 1,017 388 Sattara . . . . . . . . . 1 2,016 2,116 .. 100 1,112 904 Nassick . . . . . . . 1 1,110 1,100 10 .. 571 539 Mahableshwur . . . . . . . . . .. 148 57 91 .. 86 62 Total.. 6 7,758 8,125 .. 367 4,600 3,158 3 NORTHERN . . . . . . Ahmedabad . . . . . . . . . . 1 2,620 3,057 .. 437 1,392 1,228 Kaira . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,129 1,236 .. 107 783 346 Rajkote . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,409 785 624 .. 759 650 Surat . . . . . . . . . 1 1,298 1,543 .. 245 700 598 Broach . . . . . . . . 1 1,561 1,536 25 .. 925 636 Total.. 5 8,017 8,157 .. 140 4,559 3,458 4 SOUTHERN . . . . . . . Belgaum . . . . . . . . . . . 1 478 643 .. 165 304 174 Dharwar . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,222 1,025 197 .. 672 550 Kolapore . . . . . . . . . . 1 2,036 2,954 .. 918 1,038 998 Rutnagherry . . . . . . . . 1 961 587 374 .. 475 486 Vingorla . . . . . . . . . .. 89 213 .. 124 48 41 Total.. 4 4,786 5,422 .. 636 2,537 2,249 5 SIND........... Kurrachee . . . . . . . . . 1 1,014 769 245 .. 567 447 Hydrabad . . . . . . . . . 1 1,533 1,233 300 .. 824 709 Shikarpoor . . . . . . . . 1 1,417 1,211 206 .. 770 647 Kurrachee Jail . . . . . . . . . .. 10 95 .. 85 10 ... Hydrabad do. . . . . . . . .. 256 217 39 .. 249 7 Shikarpoor do. . . . . . . . .. 357 34 323 .. 340 17 Jerruck Civil Jail . . . . . . . .. 21 51 .. 30 15 6 Roree do. . . . . . . . . . .. 308 162 146 .. 163 145 Mahomed Khan's Tanda .. .. 37 47 .. 10 24 13 Halla Police . . . . . . . . . .. 32 .... .. .. 15 17 Taroosha Dispensary . . . . .. 182 714 .. 532 109 73 Larkhana do. . . . . . . . .. 323 59 264 .. 194 129 Bolakan's Tanna Police . . .. 19 .... .. .. 9 10 Meerpoor . . . . . . .. .... 33 .. 33 .... .... Total.. 3 5,509 4,625 884 .. 3,289 2,220 6 ADEN . . . . . . . . . Aden . . . . . . . . . . 1 853 1,136 .. 283 630 223 7 PERSIAN GULF .. Bushire . . . . . . . . . .. 225 177 48 .. 119 106 Grand Total .. 20 27,551 28,262 .. 711 15,995 11,556
No. 2 (FOR 1859.) CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details, as in Table No. 1,for the Year 1859. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toTABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination through the Agency of the Native Chiefs, arranged according for the Years Number. DIVISIONS. STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. 1857. Increase. Decrease. 1858 1 SOUTHERN DECCAN .. Kolapore.&c..... Asst.Surg.J.Mills ..... 17 10,275 8,723 1,552 .... 2 WESTERN GUZERAT .. Malice Kanta.... No. 3. NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. to the Divisions of Vaccination, and showing Details, as in Tables Nos. 1 and 2, 1858 and 1859. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent, of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 5,386 4,889 9,395 552 13 .. 315 2,850 7,425 9,662 389 224 94.0 604 7,073 6,620 11,732 931 .. .. 1,030 7,090 6,603 11,544 903 1,246 84.3 1,369 2,832 2,964 5,224 555 .. 1 66 1,250 4,590 4,548 571 727 77.7 531 167 163 330 .. .. .. .... 52 278 230 70 30 69.6 330 2,767 2,659 5,202 83 141 .. .... 892 4,534 4,257 686 483 78.4 5,426 5,412 4,160 7,775 1,786 .. .. 11 4,010 5,562 8,392 564 616 87.6 1,196 370 307 338 337 .. 2 .. 80 597 656 3 18 96.8 169 24,057 21,762 39,996 4,244 154 3 1,422 10,230 29,589 39,289 3,186 3,344 85.7 881 5,218 4,682 8,851 551 18 .. 480 2,726 7,174 9,121 530 249 92.1 582 7,503 7,008 12,561 753 1 2 1,194 7,390 7,121 12,520 994 997 86.2 1,451 2,378 2,396 4,247 349 .. 1 177 1,910 2,864 3,672 495 607 76.9 367 198 230 428 .. .. .. .... 64 364 313 81 34 73.1 428 2,115 2,020 3,786 226 123 .. .... 802 3,333 3,194 599 342 77.2 4,135 7,424 5,935 11,546 1,795 .. .. 18 6,113 7,240 11,992 848 519 89.7 703 97 64 102 59 .. .. .... 17 144 138 8 15 85.7 40 24,933 22,335 41,521 3,733 142 3 1,869 19,022 28,246 40,950 3,555 2,763 86.6 727 b
TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1857. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1858 No.1,Vaccination under Superintendents .......... 183,486 174,368 9,118 .... 101,205 82,281 No.2, Ditto under Civil surgeons,&c .......... 28,262 28,452 .... 190 16,331 11,031 No.3, Ditto by Native Chiefs' Agency .......... 45,819 45,179 640 .... 24,057 21,762 Total.. 257,567 247,999 9,568 .... 141,593 115,974 1859 1858 No.1,Vaccination under Superintendents ........... 177,941 183,486 .... 5,543 97,206 80,735 No.2, Ditto under Civil surgeons,&c .......... 27,551 28,262 .... 711 15,995 11,556 No.3, Ditto by Native Chiefs' Agency .......... 47,268 45,819 1,449 .... 24,933 22,335 Total.. 252,760 257,567 .... 4,807 138,134 114,626
No. 4. FOR THE YEARS 1858 AND 1859. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Rtatio ppr Cent, of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 127,256 48,738 1,207 478 5,807 54,489 128,997 170,393 6,691 6,402 92.8 10,745 6,162 437 125 1,793 11,234 17,028 24,857 1,683 1,722 87.9 39,996 4,244 154 3 1,422 16,230 29,589 30,280 3,186 3,344 85.7 186,997 59,144 1,798 606 9,022 81,953 175,614 234,539 11,560 11,468 91.0 121,142 49,012 1,135 174 6,478 52,037 125,904 165,516 6,977 5,448 93.0 19,069 6,438 266 159 1,619 11,948 15,603 24,065 1,755 1,731 87.3 41,521 3,733 142 3 1,869 19,022 28,240 40,950 3,555 2,763 86.6 181,732 59,183 1,543 336 9,966 83,007 169,753 230,531 12,287 9,942 91.2
TABLE No. 5 SMALL- Table showing the Admissions and Deaths from Small-pox amongst European and Native Troops, with the Percentage of Deaths to Strength DIVISIONS. EUROPEAN TROOPS. NATIVE TROOPS. PRISONERS IN Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. 1858 PRESIDENCY DIVISION ...... 1,080 2 1 3 3 .. .. .. .. 3,065 4 36 40 39 1 .. 0.03 2.5 1,052 .. .. .. .. .. .. POONA (for 1858 and 1859.) Pox. Prisoners in Jails, Civil Hospitals, and Dispensaries, in each Division of the Bombay Presidency and to Treated, for the years 1858 and 1859. JAILS. CIVIL HOSPITALS. DISPENSARIES. EUROPEAN GENERAL HOSPITAL, BOMBAY. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. .. .. Unknown and variable. 1 60 61 25 33 3 .. 54.1 Unknown and variable. .. 6 6 6 .. .. .. .. Unknown and variable. .. 48 48 37 11 .. .. 22.9 0.05 50.0 .. 6 6 5 1 .. .. 16.6 .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 5 5 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 3 1 .. .. 25.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. 5 58 63 44 19 .. .. 30.1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 0.01 20.1 6 130 136 80 53 3 .. 38.9 .. 12 12 11 1 .. .. 83 .. 48 48 37 11 .. .. 22.9 0.09 33.3 Unknown and variable. 3 57 60 39 21 .. .. 35.0 Unknown and variable. .. 4 4 3 1 .. .. 25.0 Unknown and variable. .. 18 18 16 2 .. .. 11.1 .. .. .. 7 7 6 1 .. .. 14.3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 2 2 .. .. 50.0 .. 7 7 6 1 .. .. 14.3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 3 3 3 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 41 41 26 13 2 .. 31.7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 0.01 33.3 3 112 115 70 37 2 .. 32.1 .. 14 14 12 2 .. .. 14.3 .. 18 18 16 2 .. .. 11.1
TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1858, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS, &c. AGE. DIFFERENCE. TOTAL VAC- CINATED. Under one Year. Above one Year. Under. Above. I. Superintendents . . . . . . . . . . 54,489 128,997 .... 74,508 183,486 II. Civil Surgeons and others . . . . . . . 11,234 17,028 .... 5,794 28,262 III. Native Chiefs' Agency . . . . . . . . . 16,230 29,589 .... 13,359 45,819 Total.. 81,953 175,614 .... 93,661 257,567 I.TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1859, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTALISHMENTS, &C. AGE. DIFFERENCE. TOTAL VAC- CINATED. Under one Year. Above one Year. Under. Above. I. Superindendent . . . . . . . . . . 52,037 125,904 .... 73,867 177,941 II. Civil Surgeons and others . . . . . . . 11,948 15,603 .... 3,655 27,551 III. Native Chiefs' Agency . . . . . . . . . 19,022 28,246 .... 9,224 47,268 Total.. 83,007 169,753 .... 86,746 252,760 I.77 GENERAL DEPARTMENT. GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION No. 521, 23RD APRIL 1861. The Governor in Council has perused, with much interest, the Report of the Principal Inspector-General of the Medical Department on the state of Vaccination in this Presidency during the years 1858 and 1859. It is on the whole satisfactory. 2. The delay in issuing the Report, although sufficiently accounted for, is to be regretted, as much of the interest which attaches to such periodical statements is lost if they are not quickly forwarded. The Principal Inspector- General should therefore be requested to arrange that the Annual Report for 1860 be prepared and submitted at as early a date as possible. If the full details which are considered necessary to be published cannot be prepared before the 1st May of each year, a brief sketch of the working of the Depart- ment should, in the first instance, be sent in to Government. 3. According to the returns now submitted, the total number of vaccina- tions performed throughout the Bombay Presidency average about (2½) two and a-half lacs per annum, and that of these it is stated about one-tenth are failures. His Excellency the Governor in Council trusts that these figures may represent, with tolerable accuracy, the work performed ; but from the remarks in the Principal Inspector-General's 9th, 10th, and 11th paragraphs, and in the Superintendents' Reports, and from his own observation, he cannot doubt that the Native Vaccinators are in the habit of exaggerating, to a certain extent, the number and success of their operations, and considers that such conduct should, when detected, be invariably followed with instant dismissal and prohibition from re-entering the public service in any capacity. The Governor in Council understands, from the 6th paragraph of Dr. Rooke's letter, that one of the objects of setting forth the number of unsuccessful cases and comparing them with the successful, is to judge of the ability of the operators and of the quality of the vaccine lymph employed. If the result is as shown in the returns, it seems satisfac- tory in both these respects. 4. In speaking of the quality of the vaccine lymph, the several Superin- tendents all report favourably regarding it. According to Dr. Martin, there was &quot; no difficulty in preserving it (in Sind) through the hot weather.&quot; In Bom- bay it is reported to be &quot; of good quality ;&quot; in the Concan Division &quot; could not I
78 be surpassed in excellence;&quot; in the Northern Deccan Division it was &quot; of excel- lent quality;&quot; in the Southern Deccan &quot; good throughout;&quot; in Eastern Guzerat &quot; good and effective;&quot; and in Western Guzerat&quot; generally good.&quot; 5. The mode of securing and forwarding vaccine matter, mentioned by Dr. Davey,* should be widely made known, and thus, perhaps, such statements as those made by the Civil Surgeon, Surat, viz. that &quot; all attempts to renew the lymph had failed,&quot; and again in the following year &quot;deteriorated and never renewed,&quot; may, in future, be avoided. The Civil Surgeon, Ahmedabad, it should be observed, appears to have always had abundance of lymph available to meet the want of neighbouring; medical officers. Surat should therefore have been supplied from thence; for besides Surat being the head quarters of the Superintendent of the Eastern Division of Guzerat, it was that officer's duty, as a well as that of the Civil Surgeon, to insure the propagation and continuance of good lymph at Surat; and it is strange that the want of it should have escaped observation.. 6. Bombay.79 Guzerat (Eastern Division).BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FOR THE YEAR 1860. Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1861.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1860. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1861.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1860. No. 1919 OF 1861. From the PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department, To the SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) (if the reports and returns represent an approximation to the truth) have been efficiently protected from Small-Pox. 3.The agency which has effected this amount of work has been as heretofore, the Vaccinating Establishments under Superintendents, Civil Surgeons, and Native Chiefs. 4.The vaccinations performed by the former, viz. seven Assist- ant Surgeons as Superintendents, and one Sub-Assistant Surgeon in Bombay, aided by 112 Native Vaccinators, amounted to 195,132, or, discarding the unsuccessful cases, to 182,933, i. e., 93.7 per cent. of success (see Table No. 1, Appendix) ; those performed by Civil Surgeons at the several Zillah stations, assisted by 20 Native Vaccinators, were 28,408, or 24,170 successful cases, being only 85.1 per cent. of success (see Table No. 2, Appendix); and lastly, those performed by Vaccina- tors, to the number of (65) sixty-five, under Native Chiefs' agency (paid for by the Rajas and Native Chiefs), and whose work is supervised by the Superintendents, were 50,893, or about 44,334 with success, being above 87.1 per cent. (see Table No. 3, Appendix). 5.The Superintendents of Vaccination were at their posts nearly all the year, with the exception of Dr. Lord, who only returned at the end of 1860 from sick leave to England, but whose duties were satisfactorily carried on in his absence by Assistant Surgeon Hewlett. Before the year expired, however, three Superintendents left on medical certificate for England, viz. Dr. Beatty of the Concan Division, Dr. Ross, of the Eastern, and Dr. Thorp, of the Western Division of Guzerat, and to their failing health and departure from India the meagreness of their reports should be ascribed. Their places were not filled up by Government; consequently, in the last three months of the year( v ) siderable interest; and the remark that in a part of the country hostile to vaccination more labour is expended in vaccinating 50 than 500 in districts where no prejudice exists, is very just. Assistant Surgeon Plumptre will have shortly a larger circle to attend to, the Tanna Collectorate having been added to his Division, under the new arrange- ments regarding vaccination lately sanctioned by Government. 7. The Southern Deccan Division was carefully gone over last year by the Acting Superintendent, Dr. Peach, and I point with satisfaction to his interesting Report at pages 4 to 7. This large Division is now constituted the &quot;Southern Circle,&quot; and has added to it the Rutna- gherry Collectorate, and hence it will require increased exertions on the part of both the Superintendent and his Deputies. S. For many years past the energetic Superintendent in Sind, Dr. Martin, has shown progressively increasing numbers of persons vaccinated. In 1860 there were upwards of 10,000 individuals vacci- nated over the previous year. It is true that prejudice to the operation has almost vanished from the province, and that vaccination is much more practised than formerly, but nevertheless it must be remarked that it greatly preponderates in favour of children over one year of age. Vaccination of infants under that age amounted only to about 16,000,whilst there were 43,000 above one year old, and probably many of them were adults (see Table of Ages in the Appendix). Dr. Martin's report, as usual, repays a careful perusal. 9.In the Presidency Town of Bombay Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anunta Chundroba was absent for two months, owing to illness, otherwise he has maintained satisfactorily the efficiency of vaccination. I anticipate, before the close of the present year, a special report on the plan of Dr. Peet as carried on in Bombay, when the latter part of paragraph 6 of Government Resolution No. 521, of the 23rd April, will be specially reported on. 10.I found it desirable to introduce during the year a form of daily employment report, as giving me a clearer insight into the movements of Superintendents than I before possessed. The return, which is submitted upon the 1st day of every month, shows, opposite to each day,( vi ) made use of for a portion of the year, otherwise it was my intention to have an analysis of the return made and published, and hereafter such a course will be adopted. 11.I reproduce the Despatch No. 5, of the 20th February 1860, from the Secretary of State for India, relative to Superintendents pass- ing in the Native languages( vii ) the Civil Hospitals there were (55) fifty-five cases of Small-Pox treated, and (15) fifteen deaths, the greater number of which occurred at Aden. 15. Full details of every particular regarding Vaccination will be found in the Appendix, and it will be seen that the different &quot; sexes&quot; vaccinated stood in the relation of 54 males to 46 females per 100; and of &quot; castes,&quot; there were Hindoos about 70 per cent., Mussulmans 25, other castes, 3.8, Christian 0.4, and Parsees 0.2, per cent; and with respect to &quot; age,&quot; there were 67.5 above one year, and 32.5 per cent. below one year, showing that the necessity for infantine vaccination is still unrecognised by the mass of the people. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, B. P. ROOKE, M.D., Principal Inspector-General, Medical Department. Bombay, 22nd September 1861. P. S.( viii ) INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. PAGE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTSVACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent.2 Parsees, with respect to Vaccination, is quite inexplicable. At the commencement of the past year, the authorities of the Fort Gratuitous Dispensary having requested that a Vaccination Station might be opened in connection with it, for the benefit of the Parsee community and others desirous of having their children vaccinated, and several Parsee Graduates, interested in the working of the Dispensary, having promised to try their influence to induce persons to bring their children there, a station was opened in connection with it; but I am sorry to say that, notwithstanding the unremitted exertions of the parties concerned, the attendance of Parsee children was not at all encouraging. The obstructions in the way of the spread of Vaccination, as stated in the' last Annual Report, continued to be more or less powerful as before. The result of the operations of the past year, however, has been rather favorable; inasmuch as the greatest part of the total vaccinated were children, there being only 245 persons above 10 years of age in the whole number. During the year all the districts of Bombay and Colaba have been visited. The lymph in use has been of good quality ; and the vesicles produced, for the most part, of a genuine nature. The conduct of the subordinates has been unexceptionable. CONCAN DIVISION. Superintendent.3 lymph examined; upwards of 1,500 children who had been vaccinated were inspected. The work was most satisfactory. On the 23rd of the month, owing to the setting in of the monsoon, I returned to head quarters at Rutnagherry. The parts of the Division which have not lately been visited, and. which it was my intention to have gone to had I remained, are the entire of the Southern Concan Districts and Sawunt Warree,4 I venture to think that the system of constantly fining the establishment for neglect of duty is a mistake, and records in the office bear me out in the opinion; for it appears that in one year the recoveries for fines amounted to Rs. 87, and yet the number vaccinated that year was actually less than the year preceding, when it amounted to only Rs. 8, a confirmatory proof that fines do not tend to increased exertion. If a member of the establishment is found so thoroughly indolent that he can only be kept to his work by repeated fining, it is better to warn him, and if that is unattended with benefit, to discharge him, and make room for one of the many candidates for employment. SOUTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. Acting Superintendent.5 Collectorates. Number of Vaccinators employed. Total of ope- rations during the year. Yearly Aver- age by each Vaccinator. Percentage of Success. Belgaum . . . . . . . 5 4,349 868 93.5 Sattara . . . . . . . 5 4,205 841 88.3 Dharwar . . . . . . 4 2,869 717 93.9 Sholapore . . . . . 3 1,790 596 88.0 Total.. 17 13,213 777 91.3 As usual a larger proportion of males have been vaccinated during the year than females, the percentage being males 54.4, females 45.6; of caste, the Hindoo predominates greatly, the proportion percent. being of Hindoos 87.8, Mussulmans 9.5, Christians 0.4, other castes 2.2. As regards age, the proportions are, under one year 30.6, above one year 69.4,6 on the subject when visiting the districts; but more than this is required, and until the active co-operation of the Native officials is secured, no great result can be expected; as far as my ob- servation goes, the Mamlutdars generally take no interest in the progress of Vaccination, and give really very little aid to the Vaccinators. Neither do they trouble themselves to combat the prejudices of the lower classes, or to enlighten their ignorance as to the benefits afforded by successful Vaccination; apparently they look upon every thing connected with the subject as foreign to their own proper duties, and it is only in exceptional instances that active assis- tance is afforded by them. I have found, during my tour of inspection, that my presence in a talooka was evidently considered tiresome ; and instead of the Mamlutdar or his deputy coming forward with alacrity to consult as to the best means to be adopted for the extension of Vaccination, they, as a general rule, hang back, and on more than one occasion I have been compelled to call the attention of their superiors to the slight and incivility I have experienced from the chief native officials during my stay at the station. The Mamlutdar's example is naturally and generally followed by those beneath him, down to the village Patels, who, had they the will, have the power of rendering immense assistance, but not unfrequently exercise it in the wrong direction. To give one or two examples which have lately come to. my knowledge :7 given. Want of energy and zeal on the part of the Vaccinators8 and Hursolee districts, but the greater part of his time seems to have been devoted to the Native Chief's Establishment, employed in the neighbouring Myhee Kanta States. Dr. Thorp left on sick certificate to England in November 1860. Dr. Wyllie states:9 SIND DIVISION. Superintendent.10 ral fact as encouraging to the efforts of the establishment, and it is hoped as matter of satis- faction, as far as it goes, to Government. Epidemic Small-pox, of a more or less severe type, seems never for any considerable period to leave the Province. In last year's Report I drew attention to a serious epidemic in the Sacra Talooka of the Jerruck District. The commence- ment of this year found the disease at Sukkur among the families of the 2nd Belooch Regi- ment, en route to Hydrabad; no mischief was done, though two large towns, Sukkur and Roree, may be supposed to have been in danger from the presence of so many cases of Small- pox. Both these important towns are fairly protected by Vaccination. In the course of the year occasional or sporadic cases of Small-pox were reported, and towards its close in Novem- ber, a tolerably active epidemic was brought to my notice by the Civil Authorities in the Halla District at Shahdadpore, subsequently appearing in the town and neighbourhood of Halla. It was reported to me that one or two deaths occurred daily, but actual examination did not bring satisfactory evidence that there had been so great a mortality from Small-pox. It is usual to suppose that the average number of deaths to cases is 1 in 6, so that, had there been twenty deaths (and more than this number had been reported) there should have been about 100 cases left, more or less scarred by the disease, to support the bill of mortality. In the town of Shadadpore there were about 350 cases of Vaccination, and on two occasions a miscellaneous collection of people, young and old, were gathered about me, probably the larger proportion of the inhabitants of the town came under my personal notice, but I could not discover a single case of recent Small-pox, and in all the neighbouring villages into which my work took me, no sign of recent disease was observed. There are several affections com- mon to the young, any or all of which may be, and indeed are, frequently mistaken for true Small-pox by the people11 KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.12 VACCINATION IN NATIVE STATES. SAWUNT WARREE. Under the Superintendent of the Concan, from whom no special report has been received. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1859 . . . . 4,135 .... 1,291 3,194 77.2 1860 . . . . 4,585 450 .... 3,837 83.6 SOUTHERN DECCAN DIVISION. Under the Acting Superintendent Southern Deccan Division. Establishment.13 cinator individually during 1860, contrasted with the returns for the previous year; this also gives the increase or decrease and monthly average, omitting fractions. TABLE I. NATIVE STATES. Number of Vaccinators. Total of ope- rations during the year. Yearly aver- age of the Vaccinators. Percentage of Success. Belgaum Zillah . . . . . 7* 2,567 410 90.7 Kolapore State . . . . . 5 4,686 937 94.2 Sattara Zillah . . . . . 4 1,644 411 90.0 Sholapore do. . . . . . 1 368 368 96.7 Dharwar do. . . . . . 114 TABLE II.15 mit that their people do not understand the objects of Vaccination, and that it is their igno- rance, which, at present, obstructs the efforts of the Vaccinators ; but it does not appear that they take any steps to overcome impediments, by instructing those under their rule, or by encouraging the Vaccinators in the performance of their duties. They are profuse in promises, but do nothing. The wonder is, that paying as they do the expenses of Vaccination, they do not look for their money worth in return; but the truth I fear is, that they maintain Vacci- nators, not from any regard as to the benefits to be derived from their work, but because it is the wish of Government that they should do so, and my belief is, that they understand and care as little about the subject, and the advantages which would accrue, were Vaccination properly and thoroughly practised in their territories, as the meanest of their dependants. The prospect, at present, is very discouraging, and I see little chance of improvement, as long as matters remain as they are. During my tour I have been received with politeness and attention by the Chiefs whose dis- tricts I have visited, with one exception. At Sanglee I was treated with incivility, almost amounting to rudeness, and was obliged to leave the place, as I could obtain no assistance to enable me to carry out my inspection. I reported the circumstances to the Assistant Politi- cal Agent, Captain Anderson, (who, I may mention, has, on all occasions, shown every desire to assist me,) and an apology was afterwards made. The year 1860 ended during my stay at Jhutt, and I now close my report by stating that, during the period I have been able to travel (about 3½ months), since assuming charge of the office, I have inspected the work of twelve Vaccinators : seven employed by Government, and five by Native Chiefs, and up to the date of this report, have, in addition, visited three others. WESTERN GUZERAT. MYHEE KANTA AND PALHUNPOOR. Under the Superintendent North-Western Division. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1859 . . . . 14,511 818 .... 12,520 86.2 1860 . . . . 17,292 2,781 .... 14,753 85.3 THE Civil Surgeon, Ahmedabad, in temporary charge of the duties, reports : &quot; There has been a material increase, as will be remarked, in the work done during the year, compared with what was accomplished in 1859. This difference is ostensibly due to a greater degree of activity on the part of the Vaccinators, called for by the enforcement of fine, when, without valid reasons, the number vaccinated falls short of a certain minimum, fixed with reference to the size of the districts, and with a view to each being fully gone over during the year. However well this plan may appear to work, it is not altogether free from suspicion, as possibly leading to fraud, there being no check by which to verify the Vaccinators' Returns,
16 as in the case of the Government establishment. As to sex, males predominated in accordance with common experience, in proportion of 8,735 to 8,557 females ; but the difference in this respect was much less noticeable than usual. As regards age, the majority were &quot; above one year,&quot; the number being 9,714 above 7,578 below that term, and these relative proportions correspond closely with results noted in previous years, while they stand in suggestive contrast with the preponderance of operations &quot; under one year,&quot; invariably remarked in the Govern- ment districts where Vaccination has long been established. The results were not so satis- factory as might have been expected. The percentage of success was only 85.3, in other words considerably below the average of the previous five years, while that of the unsuccessful was as high as 8.8, and of the doubtful 5.9. How far this is due to the presence of measles, and how far to carelessness on the part of the establishment, I have no means of knowing. The lymph remained good, exhibiting no tendency at any time to deterioration, and the vesicles, so far as reported, were well formed and normal throughout. Only one instance of loss of lymph occurred, and that was purely accidental, owing to the sickness of the Assistant. Small-pox was prevalent in April in the Myhee Kanta, and in the same month the epidemic was also reported at Kakrej and Santulpoor, in the Palhunpoor States, but these are the only in- stances. Not a single case of inoculation was brought to notice, and no obstructions appear to have been met with by the Vaccinators, except in the presence of measles, which prevailed throughout the various districts from March to August; cholera also being present from April to July. The Superintendent was absent on his tour from January to June, passing the greater part of the time, as it appears, in the Myhee Kanta and Palhunpoor.&quot; EASTERN GUZERAT. REWA KANTA AND RAJPEEPLA. Under the Superintendent Eastern Division. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1859 . . . . 4,774 .... 1,072 3,672 76.9 1860 . . . . 5,596 822 .... 4,535 81.0 Dr. Ross, the Superintendent, states that, owing &quot;to ill-health, he was unable to visit the Native States. The Vaccinators in these States are very idle, some of them incorrigibly so; but as they are appointed to, retain, or lose their situations without reference to the Super- intendent, they can completely ignore his authority. The record of operations is, therefore, highly unsatisfactory.&quot;
17 KUTCH. Years. Total. Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1859 . . . . 161 .... 516 138 85.7 1860 . . . . 104 .... 57 98 94.2 Report by Mr. SUDASEW HEMRAJ. VACCINATION is decreasing in Kutch year after year. During the last year there have been 104 Vaccinations performed throughout the whole province of Kutch and city of Bhooj. These numbers, compared with those of the preceding year, show a decrease of 57. This cannot be ascribed to anything but prejudice and apathy on the part of the people. I think Vaccination cannot be practised in Kutch unless it is made lawful and compulsory on the people. PEINT (NASSICK). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1859 . . . . 428 98 .... 313 731 1860 . . . . 590 162 .... 453 767 No Report. C
18 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. TANNAH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.19 condition of the lymph has been excellent throughout the year, and a good supply of it has been supplied to out-stations whenever required. Small-pox was not prevalent in an epidemic form in the city and its neighbourhood. The large increase in the number of persons annually vaccinated shows that the good effects of Vaccination are being more appreciated by the people. Inoculation appears never to have been practised in the city of Poona. AHMEDNUGGUR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.20 SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.21 on the number of cases operated upon during the period under review, with that of the pre- vious year, shows an increase of 52, but a deficiency of 47 in the total of successful cases, the ratio of success being also considerably less than observed during 1859, when it amounted to 84.6. The lymph employed during the year has been uniformly of good quality, and there has been no falling off in the supply : the results have been verified by myself, and the vesicles carefully inspected every week, with a view to the detection of any deterioration occurring in their appearance. The number of males vaccinated still preponderates over that of the females, though not in so large a proportion as has been observed in former years. Little difficulty is experienced in propagating the vaccine virus amongst the native population, the chief obstacle being the excessive apathy and indifference of the native character; though in some instances a dislike to the removal of the lymph from the children after Vaccination has been manifested by the parents, but on what ground I have not ascertained. The Assist- ant Vaccinator carries out Vaccination amongst the inhabitants of the town twice a week, when he is assisted by two peons detailed for that duty by the Police authority. The Assistant Vaccinator also vaccinates in camp under the superintendence of the medical officer in charge of Staff and details whenever his services are required for that purpose. Vaccination is prac- tised in the jail, whenever any cases require the operation; the number of prisoners unprotected either by Small-pox or previous Vaccination is, however, very small, and the success in the operation much less than in those vaccinated outside the jail; many of the prisoners operated on, having probably suffered from variola, though exhibiting no marks of the disease. Every assistance has been afforded me by the Civil Authorities in the propagation of Vaccination, and the Assistant Vaccinator has been attentive to his duty. DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.22 vaccine pustules, resulting from the application of the virus sent from this Station. I have still to complain of the want of that efficient support from the Civil Authority to the spread of Vaccination contemplated in the Government Notification No. 4., dated 12th January 1854, General Department. NASSICK. One Vaccinator under the Sub-Assistant Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1859.... 1,110 10 .... 870 78.3 1860.... 1,797 687 .... 1,435 79.8 No Report. AHMEDABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.23 In respect of sex,males have usually predominated24 RAJCOTE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1859.... 1,409 624 .... 1,253 88.9 1860.... 966 .... 443 848 87.7 No Report. SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.25 BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.26 411 were successful, being a percentage of 91.5 on the whole number. Besides the above, 27 persons have been vaccinated in the Sudder Bazar, all of which have been successful. The decrease noticed in the return has been caused partly by the sickness of the Vaccinator and the scarcity of subjects. DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.27 THE Vaccinations performed by the station Vaccinator in the city and neighbouring villages of Kolapore have been both numerically and in point of success very satisfactory during the past year. Exclusive of Vaccinations in Camp and Cantonment Bazars which are not report- ed here, 3,017 have been vaccinated : this is an increase of 981 as compared with the preceding year, namely 1859. This result may be attributed to the absence of obstructive causes as cholera and small-pox ; the latter does not seem to have prevailed at all, and the former only to a comparatively inconsiderable extent. The percentage of successful cases gives 92.8 as the result, being an increase of one per cent. over the operations of the preceding year, 3.7 over those of 1858, and 4.7 over those of 185728 KURRACHEE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.29 SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon.30 In February the vaccine matter obtained from Bombay appears not to have been very reliable, as it produced, according to a note appended to the Report for that month, the typical vesicles in Europeans, but was too highly successful with Natives, showing a tendency to degenerate. Late in March the virus forwarded by the Royal Jennerian Institution in London proved efficient, producing vesicles with the true characteristics, and this continued to act satisfactorily until July, when it is remarked that the lymph again began to deteriorate. In August a fresh supply arriving from London, typical vesicles were the result of all the operations, and this favourable report continue to the closing of the year. The total number of operations performed during the year has been 1,150, giving a large increase above those of the year 1859. I attribute this favorable result in a great measure to the countenance given to Vaccination by the Civil Authorities. Natives are naturally quick in divining the wishes of those placed in authority over them; but the association of a Police peon with the Native Vaccinator is, though perfectly ligitimate, a broad and sig- nificant hint not easily to be misunderstood. The proportion of male children who have undergone the operation compared with females is very remarkable, the former being more than double the number of the latter. The number of children vaccinated under one year of age, as compared with those above one year of age (respectively 85 and 1,065), is yet more striking. It is difficult to arrive at any satisfactory explanation of this fact, unless it be in some degree accounted for by the statement, that by far the chief number of operations have taken place among Arabs and Somalis, the latter (in this Report classed with Mussulmans) a fluctuating population; both readily subject their grown up children to the experiment, but are more solicitous about their infants, dreading the febrile excite- ment with which the operation is attended. The large proportion of unsuccessful and doubtful to the successful cases which stands recorded as far below one-half of the total number vaccinated, evinces a nervous caution in entering successful cases amounting almost to timidity. To expect to see patients after the fourteenth day is to expect what will rarely take place. They are willing enough to show the progress of the pustule up to the tenth day, but when a scale commences to form, they consider themselves well, and are not to be per- suaded to appear before the Vaccinator. The legislature in England sanctions the granting of a certificate of protection by a legalized Vaccinator on the tenth day, provided the pustule shows the proper characteristic of incipient desication. The Vaccine Institutions uphold that protection can only be warranted on an inspection of the scabs on the fourteenth day. Not to enter into this controversy, although I incline to the latter opinion, yet it appears to me that a Superintendent of Vaccination is perfectly justified in returning a case as successful if he has satisfied himself that the pustule has gone through its normal course up to the tenth day (when the lymph is known to be producing characteristic pustules), although he may not have the opportunity of examining the scabs. It becomes the duty of the Vaccinator, with a mixed and fluctuating population like that of Aden, to make the opera- tions, and after attendance on himself for observations, as easy as possible to the people, or Vaccination would soon become unpopular. It is gratifying to find the Jews (classed under &quot;all other castes&quot;) again having recourse to the operations ; although the number is but small, yet it is a beginning, which may bear a good result in convincing this perverse, and by no means inconsiderable, proportion of the population of the efficacy of this prophylactic remedy against Small-pox. The Christians being but few in number, excepting in the Camp where the European troops are stationed, show necessarily but a very limited number of cases. The Hindoos, considering their prejudices, have afforded a fair proportion of cases. Fewer Small-pox patients have been under treatment during the year 1860 than in previous years, but the station can never be free from the disease as fresh importations from Africa and Arabia may always with certainty be expected.
APPENDIX.
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Divisional Vaccination, showing the Number and Names of the Divisions, and their and compared with those of last Year ; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Operations performed by each Vac Number. DIVISIONS. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS, Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cination attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. 1859. Increase. Decrease. 1 PRESIDENCY.......... Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anunta Chundroba. 3 8,027 7,009 28 .. 2 CONCAN.............. Assistant Surgeon T. B. Beatty ........ 18 45,773 39,669 6,104 .. 3 NORTHERN DECCAN .... iii No. 1. SUPERINTENDENTS. Superintendents; the Number of Vaccinators employed; the Total Vaccinations performed, Age, and Result; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated; and the Average Number of cinator,for the Year 1860. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toiv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according No. DIVISIONS OF DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1859. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna................ 1 221 235 .. 14 133 88 Alibangh .............. .. 282 99 183 .. 153 129 Bandora .............. .. 60 49 11 .. 37 23 Coorla.............. .. 22 20 2 .. 14 8 Total.. 1 585 403 182 .. 337 248 2 POONA .......... Poona ................ 1 1,839 1,460 429 .. 1,212 677 Ahmednuggur .......... 1 932 986 .. 54 605 327 Sattara................ 1 1,803 2,016 .. 213 994 809 Sholapore ............... 1 1,457 1,405 52 .. 833 624 Dhoolia ............... 1 899 633 266 .. 466 433 Nassick ............... 1 1,797 1,110 687 .. 968 829 Mahableshwar.......... .. 84 148 .. 64 43 41 Total.. 6 8,861 7,758 1,103 .. 5,121 3,740 3 NORTHERN ...... Ahmedabad ............ 1 2,647 2,620 27 .. 1,436 1,211 Kaira.................. 1 110 1,129 .. 1,019 69 41 Rajkote .............. 1 966 1,409 .. 443 493 473 Surat ................ 1 1,382 1,298 84 .. 698 684 Broach ................ 1 1,904 1,561 343 .. 1,208 696 Total.. 5 7,009 8,017 .. 1,008 3,904 3,105 4 SOUTHERN ...... Belhaum .............. 1 449 478 .. 29 270 179 Dharwar .............. 1 1,052 1,222 .. 170 563 489 Kolapore .............. 1 3,017 2,036 981 .. 1,556 1,461 Rutnagherry ............ 1 544 964 .. 417 286 258 Vingorla ................ .. 19 89 .. 70 13 6 Total.. 4 5,081 4,786 295 .. 2,688 2,393 5 SIND ............ Kurrachee .............. 1 1,100 1,014 86 .. 598 502 Hydrabad ................ 1 1,577 1,533 44 .. 832 745 Shikarpore .............. 1 1,423 1,417 6 .. 759 664 Jail, Civil, Police, and Dis- pensary Hospitals .... .. 1,063 1,545 .. 482 769 294 Total.. 3 5,163 5,509 .. 346 2,958 2,205 6 ADEN ............ Aden .................. 1 1,150 853 297 .. 798 352 7 PERSIAN GULF.... Bushire .............. .. 559 225 334 .. 336 223 Grand Total.. 20 28,408 27,551 857 .. 16,142 12,266
V No. 2. CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details, as in Table No. 1,for the year 1860. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according tovi TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination through the Agency of the Native Chiefs, arranged according for the Number. DIVISIONS. STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. 1859. Increase. Decrease. 1 SOUTHERN DECCAN.. Kolapore, &c . Asst. Surg. W. Peach .... 17 9,351 9,900 .. 549 2 WESTERN GUZERAT.. Mahee Kanta .. vii No. 3. NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. to the Divisions of Vaccination, and showing Details, as in Tables Nos. 1 and 2, Year 1860. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toviii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1859. Increase. Decrease Males. Females. No. 1, Vaccination under Superintendents .......... 195,132 177,041 17,191 .... 105,719 89,413 No. 2, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ........ 28,408 27,551 857 .... 16,142 12,266 No. 3, Ditto by the Native Chiefs' Agency ...... 50,893 47,268 3,625 .... 26,598 24,295 Tota1.. 274,433 252,760 21,673 .... 148,459 125,974
ix No. 4 FOR THE YEAR 1860. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according tox TABLE SMALL- Table showing the Admissions and Deaths from Small-pox amongst European and Native Troops, with the Percentage of Deaths to Strength DIVISIONS. EUROPEAN TROOPS. NATIVE TROOPS. PRISONERS IN Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died Remaining. Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. PRESIDENCY DIVISION .... 1,037 .. 4 4 4 .. .. .. .. 4,667 .. 2 2 1 .. 1 .. .. 1,006 .. .. .. .. .. .. POONA xi No. 5 Pox. Prisoners in Jails, Civil Hospitals, and Dispensaries, in each Division of the Bombay Presidency, and to Treated, for the year 1860. JAILS. CIVIL HOSPITALS. DISPENSARIES. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Remained. Admitted. Total. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Percentage of Deaths to Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. Strength. Treated. .... .... Unknown and variable. .. 16 16 8 4 4 .. 25.0 Unknown and variable. .. 4 4 4 .. .. .. .. .... .... .. 2 2 1 1 .. .. 50.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... .. 2 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 2 .. .. .. .. .... .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... 2 31 33 17 10 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... 2 53 55 30 15 10 .. 30.3 .. 6 6 6 .. .. .. .. F
xii TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1860, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS, &c. AGE. DIFFERRENCE. TOTAL VAC- CINATED. Under one Year. Above one Year. Under. Above. I. Sperientendents ................ 58,273 136,859 .... 78,586 195,132 II. Civil Surgeons and others ........ 12,303 16,105 .... 3,802 28,408 III. Native Chiefs' Agency .......... 18,368 32,525 .... 14,157 50,893 Total.. 88,944 185,489 .... 96,545 274,433 I.GENERAL DEPARTMENT. GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION No. 221, 7TH FEBRUARY 1862. With respect to the increase which is exhibited in this Report, as also to the decrease in the ratio of &quot; doubtful&quot; and &quot; unsuccessful&quot; cases, as compared with the previous year, the Governor in Council observes that the Principal Inspector- General qualifies his statement on these points by the remark (paragraph 2) &quot; if the returns and reports represent an approximation to the truth.&quot; His Excellency in Council therefore fears, that, taking this passage in connection with paragraph 12 of the Principal Inspector-General's letter, there is reason to believe that the results of the year's operations, which are shown by the Superintendents in their Reports, cannot be depended upon. 2. The question of admitting Vaccinators to the benefits of the Pension Rules is one of considerable importance to the efficient working of the Department, and should be brought to the notice of the Government of India in order that the system on which this important sanitary measure is regulated may be uniform throughout British India. 3. His Excellency in Council is gratified to find that the Principal Inspector-General is able to speak in high terms of the zeal and attention to their duties which the several Superintendents have shown, and in particular Assistant Surgeon Plumptre and Drs. Peach and Martin. (Signed) J. B. PEILE, Acting Under-Secretary to Government.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND. FOR THE YEAR 1861. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1862.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1861. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1862.
( iii ) REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR 1861. No. 712 OF 1862. From the PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department, To the SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) reported to have been operated on, 8.5 per cent. have been discarded for want of a verified successful result, which appears to be about the average rate of failures in this Presidency for a number of years, and is less, perhaps, than in many parts of England. 4. By reference to Table No. 1, the decrease in the vaccinations performed by Superintendents can be traced as occurring chiefly in the &quot; Southern Circle &quot; and in Sind. There is no explanation offered of the cause of decrease in the former Circle, whilst that of the latter is doubtless correctly ascribed by the Superintendent to sickness and to changes in the Establishment. A decrease is also observed of about 2,000 vaccinations in the &quot; Central Circle,&quot; and of about 1,000 in the &quot; Northern Circle.&quot; Indeed, considering the changes all the Divisions have undergone during the past year, a larger amount of decrease might have been anticipated. It-is satisfactory therefore to turn to the Presi- dency Circle, where there has been an increase of about 800, especially as, under the recent Report submitted to Government by my predecessor's letter No. 170 of the 27th January 1862, the whole of the operations reported as &quot; successful &quot; may be implicitly relied upon, which is evidenced also by the fact shown in the tables( v ) located within a comparatively easy distance of the Vaccinators and Superin- tendent. 8. I produce the orders on the subject, and the Rules regarding the duties of Deputy Superintendents :( vi ) Superintendent any misconduct of the Vaccinators, particularly should they detect any falsification of Returns. Rule 4.( vii ) sion to which they had been educated, and was, moreover, a duty they were not aware they should be called upon to perform when they entered Govern- ment Service ; hence the number of resignations which resulted. 11. Since the publication of the above Notification, the undermentioned Sub-Assistant Surgeons have resigned Government Service, viz :( viii ) INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent.2 CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.3 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.4 NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.5 3. Patels give or withhold their aid to the vaccinator according to their bias for or against vaccination. The most zealous supporter of vaccination I met with was a poor Patel whose face was disfigured from small-pox, and whose girl had lost an eye from the same disease. Hindoos taken as a whole are most favourable to vaccination, and the Parsees the least. But among the Hindoos the Nagger Brahmins are the most averse, with the exception of the wild fishermen. This is a very unfortunate circumstance, as these Brahmins are the most influential natives of this province, from their intelligence and their position, not only religious, but public, holding Government situations, as they do, from Mamlutdarships downwards to village Tallateenship. Here I must close these brief remarks for want of time, being about to be relieved from the work of this office this day. 4. The table shows a decrease, amounting to 1,245, in the number vaccinated by the Govern- ment establishment during the year, as compared with the work accomplished during the corresponding months of 1860. 5. It is due to the Vaccinators to say, that as a body I believe they have worked steadily and well throughout, while the conduct of several has given me every satisfaction. In one or two instances it will be observed that the number falls short of the minimum fixed by the late Superintendent of 120 operations per month. Various causes have contributed to this, and some, such as temporary sickness, travelling or working in a thinly-inhabited district, are admissible enough. But others were open to question and productive of vexation, particu- larly the frequent complaint of the assistance of peons not being forthcoming6 SIND DIVISION. Superintendent.7 KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.8 tenance especially should be requested for it, and its progress be inquired after by them earnestly, and as if with interest, while they travel through their districts. The Superintendent has of himself no political or magisterial power, so carries but little weight, and can only influence the Chiefs through the Political Agent or Assistants. To the latter then must Government look in a great degree if it be their desire effectually to spread the benefits of vaccination through this large and, in this respect, insufficiently-provided-for province.* KUTCH. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 104 .... 57 98 94.2 1861.... 26 .... 78 21 80.7 REPORT BY SURGEON M. STYLE, IN CHARGE OF BHOOJ DISPENSARY. The Vaccinators usually go to perform their duties in the interior of Kutch in the beginning of November and return at the close of June. But owing to the total failure of the monsoon in 1860, His Highness, with the concurrence of the Political Agent, did not detach them into the districts. It was only in November last that they have been sent on their tour, and since that up to the 31 st of December they have only vaccinated twenty-six persons. It seems from the reports of the Vaccinators that they get even this small number after visiting several villages. It is evident that their business is not carried on well, and under these circumstances there is every possibility of lymph being spoiled. PEINT (NASSICK). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully- Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 590 162 .... 453 76.7 1861.... 122 .... 472 68 55.7 To stimulate individual exertions among the Vaccinators, I had in comtemplation to offer annually prizes of 50, 30, and 20 Rupees each to the three most deserving men on the establishment, whether in Government or Native Chiefs' employ, the expenditure of which small amount (Rs. 100 per annum) I hoped to have been able to get sanctioned from one of the local funds (the infanticide one probably). The qualifications for prizes I would say should be9 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. TANNA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. KEARNEY (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 221 .... 14 207 93.6 1861.... 256 35 .... 221 86.3 The Annual Vaccine Return is more favourable than that of the preceding year, there being an addition of thirty-five vaccinations, though the Return includes a period of nine months only. POONA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. G. FRASER, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,889 429 .... 1,540 81.5 1861.... 1,753 .... 136 1,487 84.8 During the year 1861 there have been 1,055 males and 698 females vaccinated, which, as compared with the total vaccinations for the previous year 1860, shows a decrease of 157 males, and an increase of 21 females, the total number of vaccinations for the year 1861 being 136 less than for the preceding year 1860. The lymph has been very good throughout the whole year, and in the majority of cases has produced a full, healthy-looking vesicle. In those cases in which the lymph has been sent to a distance on glasses, it has, so far as I am aware, proved equally successful. The Assistant Vaccinator states the greatest number of failures to have occurred during the wet, rainy season of the monsoon. 2. The Assistant Vaccinator is a very steady and attentive man, and visits the different parts of the city on different days of the week. He is always accompanied by a police peon as a protection and guide, and since this practice has been adopted he has seldom met with any obstruction or opposition in the performance of his duty. 2v
10 AHMEDNUGGUR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Asst. Surgeon H. COOK, M.D. (Officiating). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 932 .... 54 703 75.4 1861.... 1,119 187 .... 870 77.7 The total number of vaccinations would have been greater than it at present stands but for the great prevalence of measles amongst children for the first five months of the year. This disease was universal amongst the children of the town during the time specified, and acted reasonably enough to deter parents from bringing their children to be vaccinated whilst suffering from the sickness itself or from the debility which usually followed. 2. Of the total number, 605 were males, and 514 females, showing a less disparity between the sexes than that usually observed at this station ; 236 were children under one year, and 883 children above that age and adults. There were only 122 decidedly unsuccessful cases, and in these the want of success was almost entirely due to want of care on the part of mothers in disturbing and abrading the vesicles before they were fully formed. As stated in the first paragraph, the percentage of success is rather in excess of last year. There is a great unwilling- ness on the part of parents to show their children after vaccination. In very many instances the child has been watched by the Vaccinator up to within a few days of the perfection of the pustule when suddenly the child has disappeared, the parents having under some pretence taken it away into the country or secreted it in the town, apparently from some undefined dread lest the child should suffer inconvenience or the effect of the vaccination be lessened by the virus being abstracted from the pustule by the Vaccinators. This leads to the great number of cases placed under the head of &quot; Doubtful.&quot; 3. The quality of the lymph throughout the year has been all that could be desired11 SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon M. M MACKENZIE. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,803 .... 213 1,622 89.9 1861.... 1,811 8 .... 1,630 90.0 Of the various castes the Hindoos have been the most numerous, viz. 1,622 ; next Mussul- mans 116; Christians 8 ; and other castes 65; total 1,811. Of these, 978 were males, and 833 females, being 145 more of the former. The greater proportion were vaccinated under one year, viz. 918 ; the remainder 893 above that age. 2. The inhabitants seem fully to appreciate the value of vaccination, and come forward at all times most willingly. Every assistance is given by the Civil authorities to the Vaccinator in the performance of his duties, and I hear of no complaints of obstruction, &c. 3. The lymph has at all times proved good and abundant, and has, when called for, been despatched to Mahableshwur and other places. SHOLAPORE; One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. J. SYLVESTER, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1 57 52 .... 1,043 71.6 1861.... 1,434 .... 23 995 69.3 During the year under review the number vaccinated has amounted to 1,434, of which. 995 were successful, 236 unsuccessful, and 203 doubtful, the percentage of success being 69.3. As compared with the year 1860 there is a slight decrease in the total number operated on, also in the percentage of success, that of last year being 71.6. 2. The lymph has been of good quality throughout the year, and there has been no inter- ruption in its supply. The results have been verified by me weekly, the children who have been operated upon in one week being brought for my inspection in the week following in order that any deterioration in the character of the vesicles might be at once detected. 3. In regard to the proportion of the sexes who have been vaccinated during the above period, the usual preponderance in the number of males has not obtained; on the contrary the excess is on the side of the females, of whom 755 have been vaccinated, being 76 more than the number of males, which has amounted to 679.
12 DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon R. W. JAMES, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 899 266 .... 847 94.2 1861.... 802 .... 97 800 99.7 There have been 802 persons vaccinated during the past year, showing a decrease of 97 from the previous year. This I am inclined to attribute to indisposition of the Vaccinator for nearly two months from attacks of ophthalmia and fever. His duties were, however, performed by 1st Grade Apprentice Chotay Khan, of the Civil Hospital, who, though anxious to do his best, could not devote his time so fully to vaccination, nor could it be expected that he could have felt the same interest in the work as one who gained his bread by it. There have only been two doubtful cases, which gives a percentage of only 0.2513 AHMEDABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon D. WYLLIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 2,647 27 .... 2,478 93.6 1861.... 2,820 173 .... 2,666 94.5 The vaccinations for the year exceeded by 173 the number performed in 1860. The increase is not sufficiently marked to dwell upon, but most probably it was due to some sense of proximate danger, awakened by the occurrence of a few cases of small-pox during the summer months. On the other hand, the prevalence of measles throughout the early part of the year tended materially to narrow the sphere of operations, and thus the difference is less decided than it would otherwise have been. On the whole, however, the result is satisfactory, and bears evidence to the Vaccinator's industry. 2. The lymph continued of good quality throughout, and the resulting vesicles were well- formed and distinctive. On no occasion has any tendency to deterioration been remarked; and the virus was found to be equally effective in the rains as during the other seasons. Moreover, there has been abundance available at all times to meet the requirements of neigh- bouring medical officers, and supplies were also sent, as wanted, to Surat, Deesa, Neemuch, Nusseerabad, Khairwarrah, and Abboo. 3. A few cases of small-pox, perhaps about thirty in all, were reported in the city during the summer months. With one or two exceptions they appear to have been imported14 KAIRA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. K. COLSTON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 110 .... 1,019 103 93.6 1861.... 520 410 .... 447 85.9 Vaccination has been carried out in the first ten months of the past year with great care, and I can myself certify to the successful extent returned, as every case was brought for my inspection previous to its being pronounced successful or otherwise. For the last two months of the year the station was without an Assistant Vaccinator, and consequently vaccination has been restricted; for though there is no active opposition to its being carried out in Kaira, still, through apathy and indifference, the inhabitants will not voluntarily come or bring their children to the Dispensary for that object; hence from house to house vaccination is necessary, and cannot be carried out without the aid of a special Vaccinator. RAJCOTE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon R. G. LORD. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 966 .... 443 848 87.7 1861.... 1,123 157 .... 972 86.5
15 Though numerous cases of small-pox occurred in the native town, there has not been much loss of life from the disease. 2. During the year, 1,123 have been vaccinated. Of these, 972 were successful, 95 failed, and 56 were doubtful. In the previous year there was a total of 966 vaccinations, so that for the past year an increase of 157 has been registered. Some of the children belonged to the wealthier classes of natives. Two of the Rajcote Chief's children (a boy and girl) were success- fully vaccinated. From the increase of vaccinations, both in the station and in the districts, the people continue to value the blessings of vaccination; and it is a satisfactory proof that there is no want of zeal in the Vaccine Department. Those who are averse to bring the children to hospital are encouraged by having their children vaccinated in their own houses. The vaccine lymph has been of good quality and abundant, and where the vesicles were allowed to pass through their usual course, the cases were successful ; but often, from not being attended to, vesicles are injured, and rubbed off, and lose their salutary effects. The vaccination is practised weekly by the Station Vaccinator, and no opportunity of ensuring the spread of vaccination is allowed to pass unavailed of. Inoculation is not practised in any part of Kattywar. SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon-Major M. PELLY (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,382 84 .... 1,187 85.8 1861.... 1,871 489 .... 1,624 86.7 The total number vaccinated during the year 1861 in the town of Surat was 1,871. That for the preceding year was 1,382, showing an increase in favour of the former of 489. 2. The average of the previous five years was 1,458; so that the number vaccinated during 1861 is also an increase upon that of 413. The general result too has been more than usually favourable, it being at the rate of 86.7 per cent. of successful cases, whereas in no year since 1857 has it been so high. The most probable cause for this increase is, that variola was raging for some months in the town, and people thought it advisable to let their children be vaccinated.
16 BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. GLEN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,904 343 .... 1,553 81.5 1861.... 1,541 .... 363 1,323 85.8 The total number of persons vaccinated during the year 1861 amounts to 1,541, being a decrease of 363 when compared with the year 1860. Of this number, 856 were children under one year, and 685 above that age. Again, 991 of these were males ; the remainder females. The successful cases amount to 1,323, being a percentage of 85.8. The lower castes of the Hindoo community, as is usual, furnish the largest number of children for vaccination. The cause of the decrease of children vaccinated this year is attributed by the Vaccinator to the withdrawal of the peon who assisted him in his duties. The withdrawal was occasioned by the Broach Collectorate having been reduced to a Sub-Collectorate, thereby diminishing the number of peons on the establishment. BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon-Major H. GLASSE. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 449 .... 29 411 91.5 1861.... 624 175 .... 604 96.7 Six hundred and twenty-four persons have been vaccinated during the past year in the town of Belgaum, which is an increase of 175 on the number vaccinated during the previous year. Of these, 604 were successful and 20 unsuccessful, or a failure of 1 in every 31. Besides the above, 62 subjects have been vaccinated in the Sudder Bazar by the Assistant Vaccinator, of which number 9 failed. A few cases of small-pox have occurred in the Native Town and Sudder Bazar; none have died, and they have all, with two exceptions, been mild. The quality of the lymph has been good throughout the year, and the vesicles of a normal character.
17 DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. MILLS (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,052 .... 170 933 88.6 1861.... 1,087 35 .... 857 78.8 During the past year there has been an increase of 35 over the previous year. This increase should have been greater, but the Vaccinator was sick in the beginning of the year, and during the months of February and April the lymph was lost and was with difficulty re-established, besides which, for some time the Vaccinator did not exert himself. The usual indifference of the natives has been somewhat dispelled during the months of November and December by the prevalence of small-pox, and they have received vaccination for their children with unusual willingness. Small-pox has been very prevalent in the town and station during the last two months, and many cases have come under my observation in persons on whom vaccination had been successfully performed, and one or two in persons who had before had small-pox ; these cases have all been mild as to the constitutional symptoms, although in several the vesicles have been very numerous and have run their regular course. KOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. G. WIEHIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 3,017 981 .... 2,801 92.8 1861.... 2,877 .... 140 2,658 92.3 The vaccinations during the past year number 2,877, showing, in comparison with those of the preceding year, a small decrease of 140. These figures do no include the vaccinations by the Station Vaccinator in the camp and cantonment bazar. Since the close of the monsoon, cholera has prevailed in the town and to a far greater extent in the neighbouring districts. This, together with the existence of small-pox also about that time, may naturally account for the operations having fallen short of those of the preceding year. The successful vaccinations amount to 2,658, being a percentage of 92.3. This equals the ratio of the preceding year and may be considered satisfactory. 3 v
18 RUTNAGHERRY. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Asst. Surgeon E. N. C. DE CRESPIGNY, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 544 .... 417 472 86.7 1861.... 522 .... 22 456 87.3 There has been a slight decrease in the numbers vaccinated compared with last year's Return, and there is still a considerable falling off when compared with the Returns of previous years. The cause of decrease is partly due to the indolence of my Assistant Vaccinator, and partly to the fact of his dismissal in October for misconduct. The vacancy has not yet been filled up, but operations were carried on by the candidate during the month of November and since then by an Assistant on the Superintendent of Vaccination's Establishment, who received at our hands supplies of lymph of which especial care was taken to see that the quality was good. Operations were twice suspended for some days during the year owing to the carelessness of the Assistant Vaccinator in having allowed the lymph to die out, as brought to the notice of the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals in the correspondence which took place on the subject; complaints were also made that parents were averse to the vesicle being interfered with, and that this circumstance was another reason why lymph was not always forthcoming for propa- gation. But whatever difficulties the Vaccinator may have experienced on this head may be safely ascribed to his own rough and unconciliating manners, as my former Assistant (deceased) never made this an excuse for being without the means of carrying on his work. It will be observed that a large proportion of the operations are returned as unsuccessful. Besides ordi- nary causes another reason of unsuccessful result is to be found in the practice of vaccinating too many children at once from the lymph afforded by one little subject; for even when all the vesicles are well developed, lymph cannot be obtained in sufficient quantity from one child to vaccinate more than four or five others properly and successfully. KURRACHEE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. BEAN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,100 86 .... 1,007 91.5 1861.. .. 795 .... 305 709 89.1
19 During the past year 709 persons have been successfully vaccinated, showing a decrease of 298 successful operations as compared with the previous year, and for this there are several causes: it was owing chiefly to the insanity which seized the Hindoo Vaccinator Thawardass Battia in the early part of the year, who was placed by his friends as a lunatic in the jail, thereby causing a suspension of vaccination for a period of nearly two months, during which time no other person could be procured to fill his place. In the beginning of March a Mussulman, Shaik Rahim, was appointed, but being new to the duty, and little instructed in it, it was long before he could exert any influence with the people, who still betray the same reluctance in producing their children for operation, or in bringing them afterwards for inspection, that has been before complained of. HYDRABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. STEDMAN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,577 44 .... 1,129 71.5 1861.... 1,675 98 .... 1,249 74.5 During the year 1861 the total number vaccinated was 1,675, being an increase of 98 on that of last year, which was 1,577. The number of males vaccinated exceed that of the females by 45; and regarding age, 648 were above one year of age, and 1,027 below that age. Of 1,675 eases of vaccination, 1,249 were successful, 184 unsuccessful, and 242 doubtful. The reason for so many being doubtful is accounted for by the Vaccinator from the parents of the children returning to their villages. The lymph and vesicles appear to be very good. There has been no epidemic of small-pox during the year, although a few cases have occurred in the city. The Vaccinator has much trouble in overcoming the dislike or want of confidence of the people in the efficacy of vaccination. SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon A. E. RIDDELL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,423 6 .... 1,421 99.8 1861.... 1,445 22 .... 1,444 99.8
20 During this year 739 male children and 706 female children have been vaccinated, making a total of 1,445. Out of these one case is recorded as doubtful. Of these, 1,318 were under one year. Of the total number vaccinated, 7 were children of Christians, 619 Mussulmans, 817 Hindoos, and 2 Parsees. Increase above last year 22. The average character of the lymph has been clear, and satisfactory vesicles are procured from the use of it. Lymph has been supplied to Jacobabad and to those Vaccinators who have applied for it. No opposition, has been offered on the part of the natives to the practice of vaccination, which takes place once a week at the Charitable Dispensary in the town under my personal superintendence. ADEN. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. F. STEINHAEUSER. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1860.... 1,150 297 .... 528 45.9 1861.... 945 .... 205 686 72.5 At the commencement of the year 1861 the lymph at this station was found to be satisfac- tory, and continued to produce typical vesicles until the month of March when it began to show symptoms of deterioration by yielding a much larger number of unsuccessful cases. In April, with the increasing heat, the number of failures so far increased that the virus was almost lost; an application was therefore made to Bombay for fresh lymph. In the month of May vaccination was still carried on with the old lymph and with more favourable results. In June a fresh supply arrived from Bombay, but being sent on points only, failed in every case both in my hands and those of the Native Vaccinators. Though there were numerous unsuc- cessful cases in July, yet a fair proportion of operations proved successful. The fresh lymph, however, sent by the Royal Jennerian Institution from London in this month completely failed, though numerous operations were performed with it by the Vaccinator, and carefully by myself. From the month of August until the end of the year the success met with in vaccinating with the old lymph has been beyond expectation.
APPENDIX.
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Divisional Vaccination, showing the Number and Names of the Divisions, and their and compared with those of last Year; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Operations performed by each Number. DIVISIONS. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. 1860. Increase. Decrease. 1 PRESIDENCY .......... Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anunta Chundroba. 3 8,861 8,027 834 .. 2 CENTRAL CIRCLE ...... Assistant Surgeon F. H. Plumptre ...... 30 42,518 44,782 .. 2,264 3 SOUTHERN CIRCLE .... iii No. I. SUPERINTENDENTS. Superintendents; the Number of Vaccinators employed; the Total Vaccinations performed, Age, and Result; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated; and the Average Number of Vaccinator, for the Year 1861. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toiv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. DIVISIONS OF DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1860. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna ................ 1 256 221 35 .. 143 113 Alibaugh .............. .. 66 282 .. 216 38 28 Bandora .............. .. 90 60 30 .. 57 33 Coorla ................ .. .. 22 .. 22 .. .. Total.. 1 412 585 .. 173 238 174 2 POONA .......... Poona ................ 1 1,753 1,889 .. 136 1,055 698 Ahmednuggur .......... 1 1,119 932 187 .. 605 514 Sattara ................ 1 1,811 1,803 8 .. 978 833 Sholapore .............. 1 1,434 1,457 .. 23 679 755 Dhoolia ................ 1 802 899 .. 97 417 385 Nassick ................ 1 1,656 1,797 .. 141 862 794 Mahableshwur .......... .. 119 84 35 .. 60 59 Total.. 6 8,694 8,861 .. 167 4,656 4,038 3 NORTHERN ...... Ahmedabad ............ 1 2,820 2,647 173 .. 1,436 1,384 Kaira .................. 1 520 110 410 .. 307 213 Rajcote ................ 1 1,123 966 157 .. 600 523 Surat .................. 1 1,871 1,382 489 .. 1,060 811 Broach ................ 1 1,541 1,904 .. 363 991 550 Total.. 5 7,875 7,009 866 .. 4,394 3,481 4 SOUTHERN ..... Belgaum .............. 1 624 449 175 .. 369 255 Dharwar .............. 1 1,087 1,052 35 .. 588 499 Kolapoor .............. 1 2,877 3,017 .. 140 1,455 1,422 Rutnagherry .......... 1 522 544 .. 22 292 230 Vingorla .............. .. 144 19 125 .. 87 57 Total.. 4 5,254 5,081 173 .. 2,791 2,463 5 SIND ............ Kurrachee .............. 1 795 1,100 .. 305 481 314 Hydrabad .............. 1 1,675 1,577 98 .. 860 815 Shikarpoor ............ 1 1,445 1,423 22 .. 739 706 Civil and Dispensary Hos- pitals ................ .. 689 1,063 .. 374 431 258 Total.. 3 4,604 5,163 .. 559 2,511 2,093 6 ADEN ............ Aden .................. 1 945 1,150 .. 205 618 327 7 PERSIAN GULF .... Bushire ................ .. 481 559 .. 78 263 218 Grand Total.. 20 28,265 28,408 .. 143 15,471 12,794
v No. II. CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. I. for the Year 1861. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according tovi TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination through the Agency of the Native Chiefs, arranged according for the Number. Divisions. STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. 1860. Increase. Decrease. 1 SOUTHERN CIRCLE .. Kolapoor, &c. .. Asst. Surg. W. Peach .... 18 11,971 9,351 2,620 .. 2 NORTHERN CIRCLE .. Mahee and Rewa Kanta. vii No. III. NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. to the Divisions of Vaccivation, and showing Details, as in Tables Nos. I. and II. Year 1861. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toviii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1860. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. No.1, Vaccination under Superintendents .......... 173,380 195,132 .... 21,752 94,515 78,865 No. 2, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ........ 28,265 28,408 .... 143 15,471 12,794 No. 3, Ditto by the Native Chiefs' Agency .... 58,023 50,893 7,130 .... 30,425 27,598 Total.. 259,668 274,433 .... 14,765 140,411 119,257
ix No. IV. FOR THE YEAR 1861. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according tox TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1861, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS. &c. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under One Year. Above One Year. Under. Above. I. Superintendents ................... 54,698 118,682 .. 63,984 173,380 II. Civil Surgeons and other .............. 12,871 15,394 .. 2,523 28,265 III. Native Chiefs' Agency ................. 19,075 38,948 .. 19,873 58,023 Total.. 86,644 173,024 .. 86,380 259,668 Ixi EMPLOYMENT RETURN OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1861. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.xii SIND DIVISION. Superintendent. xiii KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.xiv No. 791 OF 1862. GENERAL DEPARTMENT, Bombay Castle 7th May 1862. To the PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department. CIVIL PAYMASTER. Copy of the Resolution passed by Government on a Letter from the Principal Inspector General Medical Department, No. 712, dated 9th April 1862, forwarding Extracts from the Reports of Superintendents of Vaccination for the past year 1861. The Governor in Council regrets to learn that there has been a falling off in the number of vaccinations during the year under report to the extent of 14,000 compared with the number of vaccinations performed during the preceding year. Of the decrease in question more than one-half, or 10,407 cases, took place in the Sind Circle, which is ascribed chiefly to sickness among the Vaccinators, as also to changes in the establishment. There was also a decrease of 10,513 cases in the Southern Circle. 2. The Governor in Council is of opinion that the scheme, which was sanctioned by the Resolution of the 20th November 1860, No. 2250, will in time prove to be well calculated to promote the efficiency of the Department, by affording to each Superintendent the assistance of two Sub-Assistant Surgeons as deputies to aid him in supervising the Native Vaccinators. Its apparent want of success seems at first to be owing solely to the circumstance that the number of Native Medical Graduates is as yet insufficient to make these appointments as profitable as the private practice which attracts our graduates to establish themselves in the principal towns in this Presidency. 3. This in itself is a gratifying fact. It satisfactorily denotes the benefit which the people are deriving from the education imparted at the Grant Medical College. It shows that the fear that the profession of the European system of Medicine would not sufficiently command the confidence of the people to provide a remunerative field of practice to the graduates of the College has proved unfounded, and that on the contrary there is a very encouraging field open to them.
XV 4. The Principal Inspector General reports in paragraph 11 that only- one of the Sub-Assistant Surgeons who had been appointed to the Department remains. 5. It is so essential to the due discharge of their duties by these assistants that nothing should be opposed to their being active in their movements, that the Governor in Council considers it would be proper to assign to them a travelling allowance, and is therefore pleased to sanction their drawing, whilst moving through their Circles, a daily allowance of Rs. 1 ½ per diem, if the charge can be provided for from the sum estimated for in the Budget. 6. The percentage of successful operations is reported to amount to 91.5 per centum in the Mofussil, whilst in the Bombay Circle the percentage is only 81. The Governor in Council fears that these figures indicate that the returns of the Vaccinators in the Mofussil, which cannot be so well tested as the returns of the Vaccinators in Bombay, are not so trustworthy. There is no reason why the operations in the Mofussil should be so much more successful than in Bombay. 7. The question of admitting Vaccinators to the benefits of the Pension Rules is under reference to the Government of India, whose reply, as soon as received, will be communicated to the Principal Inspector General. A. D. ROBERTSON, Acting Chief Secretary to Government. BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1862. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1863.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1862. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1863.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR 1862. No. 758 OF 1863. From The PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department, To the SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. Bombay, 31st March, 1863. SIR,( iv ) II.( v ) 8. There were seven vaccinators employed, but the operations were insigni- ficant in number for so large a district. There was no mode of verifying the accuracy of returns, beyond obtaining the signature of the Tahsildars of talooks, unless the Civil Surgeon himself was able, now and then, to visit some place where a vaccinator had recently been at work, and thus to test personally the actual results with the returns. The Civil Surgeon had little or no control over the vaccinators, all power being placed in the hands of the Collector. 9. There appeared, moreover, to be difficulties to contend with, connected with the feelings and prejudices of the inhabitants themselves. It was represented by Dr. Williams, the predecessor of the present Civil Surgeon, not only that the people generally were most unfavorably disposed towards Vaccination, but that the Brahmins, as a body, fostered the most absurd traditions in favour of small-pox, and threw every obstacle in their power in the way of vaccinators. It was even said that many of the Native officials might as reasonably be expected to forward the views of Missionaries, as to assist a vaccinator. 10. Dr. Williams was requested by a Native official, holding a high posi- tion, to treat his children for fever. A few questions elicited the fact that they had been ill ten days. On asking why he had not applied earlier, he replied that he had hoped they were going to have small-pox, and that his caste custom would not permit of any medicine being given in that disease. On Dr. Williams speaking to him about Vaccination, he replied that &quot;his caste liked to have small-pox.&quot; Yet this man was said to be an intelligent person compared with many around him. 11. It was further reported that so prevalent and fatal was small-pox, that hundreds of the population died of it every year. 12. In this state of matters I suggested to Government, in July, that exist- ing arrangements should at once be put an end to, and that North Canara should be brought under the Vaccination system of this Presidency, in the same manner as all the other Collectorates. Government were pleased to approve of this course. The district was accordingly added to the Southern Circle, and placed under the management of its Superintendent. 13. As this arrangement only came into force towards the close of the year, the returns from North Canara will not be included in this report. 14. Several changes took place during the year among the Superintend- ents. Assistant Surgeon Dick succeeded Assistant Surgeon Rustomjee Byramjee in the Northern Circle, in February; and Assistant Surgeon Beatty, on his return from Europe in March, replaced Assistant Surgeon Plumptre in the Central Circle. Assistant Surgeon Asher succeeded Assistant Surgeon Peach in the Southern Circle; and Assistant Surgeon Butler, Dr. Lord, in the Kattiawar Circle.
( vi ) 15. I now proceed to state the general results of the year. The total number of Vaccinations was 244,681, being 14,987 less than in 1861. This cannot be regarded as otherwise than unsatisfactory. Some Superintendents attribute the diminished numbers to the prejudices and indifference of the natives,( vii ) grant of travelling allowance, and with the view of filling up vacancies amongst the Deputy Superintendents, I took measures in August to ascertain how many sub-assistant surgeons, then employed by Government in different parts of the Mofussil and in Sind, would voluntarily enter the Department. The result showed that ten out of twelve declined. The two, who volunteered, were Sub-Assistant Surgeons Cooverjee Dorabjee and Wamon Wassoodeo. The former was attached to the Southern, and the latter to the Central Circle. 23. In justice to my predecessor, Dr. Rooke, I think it should be placed on record that the reduction in the number of European Superintendents was not made by Government on his recommendation. On the contrary, Dr Rooke maintained that to diminish the amount of European agency was to impair the efficiency of the Department. At the date of my last report, I had too re- cently assumed charge of my present office, to feel justified in expressing an opinion on the point, but the knowledge acquired by a twelve-months' experi- ence of the working of the Department, enables, nay even compels, me to ex- press my concurrence in Dr. Rooke's view. 24. I fully admit that much may be advanced in support of the plan, which was adopted, of introducing educated native agency. The intimate intercourse with the people, of a native Government servant holding a certain position, whose sole duty is to encourage the diffusion of Vaccination,( viii ) of the Southern, in which,( ix ) evident that native parents at that time had a very strong aversion to Vaccina- tion during infancy. The returns for the past year show, on the contrary, that out of 244,681 Vaccinations, no less than 80,177 were in children under one year of age. In other words, every third person was vaccinated,( x ) universal acceptance, is, as a body, opposed to its introduction. I allude to Brahmins. I have already given the testimony of the medical officer of North Canara on this point, and it closely corresponds with evidence from other quarters. Dr. Asher, for instance, states that&quot; Brahmins are pre-eminent in hardness of belief and in opposition.&quot; 42. This feeling of distrust occasionally deepens to positive aversion; and, in one instance, it extended even to open opposition. Dr. Dick mentions that in the southern districts of the Surat Collectorate, the prejudices are so strong that recently some inhabitants of a village assembled in a riotous manner and drove the vaccinator out of it. No similar occurence, however, has taken place elsewhere; and Dr. Dick, while mentioning it, states at the same time that the people generally seem to appreciate the benefits of Vaccination, and that he has often heard them express their gratitude to Government for disseminating so great a blessing. 43. With regard to sex( xi ) that the figures are to be regarded, not in the light of perfect accuracy, but merely as an approximation to it. 47. To expect, indeed, perfect trustworthiness in men on the scanty salary of native vaccinators,( xii ) such an arrangement, or oppose it on the ground of its being an infringement on their prerogatives or dignity. 55. Greater progress appears to be making in the Rutnagherry Collectorate and in the Sawunt Waree State, than elsewhere in the Circle. The Superinten- dent attributes this, in the former case, to the circumstance, that the inhabitants of the Concan are more intelligent and open to persuasion than their fellow- countrymen above the ghats; and, in the latter, mainly to the fact of the Political Agent having long taken a warm interest in the subject. 56. As a proof of the extent to which Vaccination has been carried in Sawunt Waree,( xiii ) own villages. Dr. Martin states, however, that in Sind it is a mere money difficulty, and that parents would not object, provided they were paid for it. 63. He then points out that the sum sanctioned for this purpose,( xiv ) 69. For the purpose of enabling the question to be fully and fairly viewed, I must premise that by Clause 19 of the Vaccination Rules, sanctioned by Government, the Civil authorities in the districts are authorized to afford the occasional aid of peons, and I have reason to believe that until recently such aid was freely given. 70. Complaints, however, have reached me from the Superintendents, and more especially from those of the Northern and Central Circles, that the assistance of peons has been to a considerable extent withheld. The reason assigned for this is the recent reduction in the revenue establishment,( xv ) that the complaints of vaccinators come chiefly from the best men in the Department, and not from the worst. 75. That the reasons for this necessity may be clearly understood, I beg to explain,( xvi ) vanced to a sound and healthy condition, when it will be able to dispense with pecuniary assistance from the State. 80. Yet. as the objects of municipal taxation embrace, or ought to embrace, all questions connected with the preservation of the public health,( xvii ) the continuance of the practice. The man pleaded ignorance, and was dis- missed with a warning. An instance also occurred in the Northern Circle at Bulsar. The Police interfered, and the circumstance was reported to the Magistrate by the Superintendent. 86. In Sind, however, inoculation appears to be still carried on to a consi- derable extent, and the Superintendent attributes to this mischievous practice, the prevalence of small-pox in various localities. He fears there is no hope of putting it down, except through the intervention of the Magistrate. 87. The character of the vaccine lymph has been well reported on by all the Superintendents and Civil Surgeons, except at the Presidency itself, where there was considerable deterioration during the monsoon, attributable apparently to the hot and moist condition of the atmosphere. 88. It deteriorated, indeed, for a time, to so great an extent, that the Super- intendent experienced some difficulty in keeping up a supply. Government are aware that, for the purpose of guarding against the inconvenience resulting from too limited a supply of lymph, Dr. Peet proposed, in his very able and valuable report on Vaccination for the three years ending with December 1861, to enter into an arrangement with at least two vaccine depôts in Great Britain, with the view of ensuring the receipt of periodical supplies. 89. Consequent upon carrying out this arrangement, which was sanctioned by Government, supplies were received during the year from the National Vac- cine Establishment in London, and from the Royal Dispensary, Edinburgh. The requirements at home, however, were so great, that the supply from the former was very limited, while from the latter it has altogether ceased,( xviii ) 92. As an illustration, however, of the good effects which are occasionally derived from even a single drop of European lymph, I may mention what re- cently happened in the hands of Dr. Mills, at present Civil Surgeon at Kola- poor, but who, at the commencement of the year under review, was Civil Sur- geon at Dharwar. 93. In January 1862 the Rev. Mr. Huber, of the German Mission, gave Dr. Mills, then at Dharwar, a single capillary glass tube, containing lymph fresh from Europe. Three or four children were immediately vaccinated, and Dr. Mills reports that every puncture took effect, forming large, healthy, well-shaped vesicles, far superior to those produced by the virus at that time in use. The result was so satisfactory, that Dr. Mills subsequently replaced all the old lymph used at that station from the new supply. 94. But this was not the sole benefit. Shortly afterwards Dr. Mills became Civil Surgeon at Kolapoor, and introduced the new Dharwar lymph so effect- ually at that station, that the proportion of successful cases, under his personal observation, rose from 93 per cent. in 1861 to 95 in 1862. 95. It affords me great gratification to report that the Superintendents, generally, but especially those of the Sind and Southern Circles, cordially acknowledge the ready and obliging assistance afforded by the European Civil authorities on all occasions, when their aid and support were required in furtherance of efforts to extend the usefulness of the Department. 96. I regret, however, to state, that many complaints have reached me of indifference, and even of passive opposition, on the part of native officials. This is greatly to be deplored. I would therefore venture to appeal to all Euro- pean Civil functionaries in the Mofussil, to endeavour to induce their native subordinates to give the same countenance and support, which they themselves are so ready at all times to afford. The influence thus brought to bear would be of incalculable importance. 97. In the absence of statistics of population, no opinion can be formed as to the proportion which the total number of persons, who have been vaccinated in this Presidency since the Department was formed, bears to the millions of Western India. 98. It is, however, a subject of congratulation that more attention is now being paid to such matters. The bill for taking a census of the Bombay Presidency, recently introduced into the Legislative Council, will, on becoming law, and on being carried into effect, materially assist in solving many problems of deep interest, connected with questions appertaining to the public health. Should its provisions be extended to the Mofussul, we may be able, hereafter, to form some well-grounded opinion as to the proportionate extent to which Vaccination has been carried. 99. Again, in the absence of an accurate registration of births throughout the Mofussil, it is impossible to state whether Vaccination is keeping pace with
( xix ) the requirements of the population. I much fear it is not. Indeed it would be unreasonable to expect that it is. 100. It was mentioned by Dr. Peet, in the report to which I have already alluded, that previous to the passing of the Act, which rendered Vaccination compulsory in England, the percentage of vaccinations to births, in the paro- chial districts, was only 33. He at the same time showed that the correspond- ing percentage in Bombay was upwards of 50. In other words, that out of 7,919 children born during 1861, 4,080 were vaccinated under one year of age. 101. This will, I think, be admitted as very satisfactory as far as Bombay is concerned. But in the absence of Mofussil registration, the same test cannot be applied. I trust, however, the day is not very distant, in which the importance of population statistics,( xx ) 105. As an illustration of the truth of this remark, I would refer to the case of Dr. Martin, who, after six years of energetic labour and unequalled success in Sind, has just left the Department at a moment when he had suc- ceeded in securing the confidence of the people. 106. I might also allude again to Dr. Asher, an officer of great energy and ability, who during the past year effected much good in the Southern Circle, and who likewise has just vacated his post of Superintendent. 107. His Excellency the Governor in Council, it is true, has been pleased to recognise the services of both these officers by transferring them, at their own request, to the Civil Surgeoncies of Ahmednuggur and Tanna; but I regret, for the sake of the Department, that it held out no inducement to such men to remain,( xxi ) mortality? Were kilns for the consumption of refuse built in convenient and suitable situations, or even places set aside as receptacles for such, in the neighbourhood of all small villages, (which are here chiefly referred to), the inhabitants might gradually be induced to use them, and a great improvement be worked, without the help of any municipal authority.&quot; I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, M. STOVELL, M.D., Principal Inspector General, Medical Department.
( xxii ) INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTSVACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent.2 was, however, mostly in cases of infants and children under one year of age; as they are generally thought by the Natives to be too tender for the operation. Besides these, there were other causes, which, though, in themselves, of minor importance, were yet in the aggregate such as to exercise an influence on the working of the Department. The decrease in number is not confined to any particular class of the community, as will be seen from the following comparative statement:3 CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.4 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.5 NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.6 establishing excellent lymph, but complained of difficulty in finding subjects for operation. In the adjoining districts of Amode and Wagra, I found General No. 14 busily and satisfactorily employed ; and after inspecting his work, and that of apprentice, General No. 190, who was working with him, I travelled into Oolpat Purgunna, in Surat Zillah, and was engaged in examining the work of General Nos. 47 and 179, till the rains drove me into Surat. During the monsoon I occasionally visited some of the villages in Chorasee district, and on December 3rd, I commenced my present tour by going to Neriad. Having examined Vaccination in that district, and in the neighbouring Purgunna of Matur, I crossed into Dholka with the view of ascertaining the reason of a falling off in the returns of the two vaccinators who reside there. One I found had been suffering from fever, and both were loud in their complaints that they do not get proper assistance from the native officials. I have little doubt that they have some reason for such complaints, but as I have lately communicated with the acting Collector, and he has consented to issue instructions on the subject, perhaps there may be some improve- ment. Sub-Assistant Surgeon Dossabhoy Pestonjee, Deputy Superintendent, joined this Department on the 14th January. He first proceeded into Rajpeepla, and examined the work of the vac- cinators employed there. He reported favorably on Ardesur Edulsaw, but very unfavorably on Puddumsing and Pehlwansing, who were soon afterwards dismissed. The Raja by whom the vaccinators are paid, affords them assistance and encouragement, and appreciates the benefit of the prophylactic. He next travelled through the Punch Mahals and Rewa Kanta, visiting successively the town of Hallole, Kallola, Godra, Deoghur, Dohud, Jhallode, Loona- wars. He mentions as obstacles to the propagation of Vaccination in those districts the extreme ignorance of the people,7 SIND DIVISION. Superintendent.8 KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.9 KUTCH. MR. SUDDASHEW HEMRAJ, G.G.M.C. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 26 .... .... 21 80.7 1862.... 79 53 .... 44 65.6 No report received. PEINT (NASSICK). One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon SPENCER. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 122 .... .... 68 55.7 1862.... 148 26 .... 100 67.5 The total number of persons vaccinated in Peint during the year is 148, which is 26 more than the previous year. Of these 104 were males and 44 were females, 100 were successful, being 67.5 per cent. excluding the doubtful cases, or those that were never seen after the operation. The increase, I think, is chiefly attributable to the exertion of the present native vaccinator. The inhabitants, so far as I am able to judge, do not offer any objection to the spread of Vaccination; but, on the contrary, they seem anxious to avail themselves of the great blessing afforded to them by Government.
10 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. POONA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon G. G. W. MAITLAND. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 1,753 .... .... 1,487 84.8 1862.... 1,832 79 .... 1,535 83.7 Vaccination has been steadily carried on by the assistant vaccinator during the past year. The number vaccinated has been somewhat in excess of the previous year. The total number of Vaccinations for the year 1861 was 1,753, during 186211 AHMEDNUGGUR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon M. M. MCKENZIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 1,119 .... .... 870 77.7 1862 1,240 121 .... 1,010 81.4 From the above table it appears that the total number of Vaccinations for the past year 1862, is more than the year 1861. The total number of Vaccinations would have been greater than it at present stands, but for the great prevalence of Cholera from the month of March to the end of June 1862. SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. COOK, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 1,811 .... .... 1,630 90.0 1862 1,435 .... 376 1,265 88.1 The total number vaccinated during the year has amounted to 1,435, showing a decrease of 376 compared with the preceding year. This decrease is attributed by the vaccinator to the very general prevalence of Cholera in the neighbourhood during the past 9 months of the year, and I think the reason given may be considered a sufficient one. The greatest number of Vacci- nations were performed in April and May, this being the period when fewer duties in the field allow the parents more time to bring forward their children for the purpose. During the monsoon, Vaccination is almost confined to the town and immediate neighbourhood, and the numbers vaccinated are consequently fewer, whilst in the cold season the people are so greatly occupied in agricultural operations, that they are unwilling to afford time for other matters. Of the total number 765 were males and 670 were females; 654 were children below one year, and 781 were children above that age and adults. 5c
12 SHOLAPORE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Asst. Surgeon C. F. OGILVIE, M.D. (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 1,434 .... .... 995 69.3 1862 1,392 .... 42 854 61.3 During the past year, the number of persons vaccinated has amounted to 1,392, of which 712 were males and 680 females; 531 were children under one year, and 861 children above that age; 854 were successful, 305 unsuccessful, and 233 doubtful: the percentage of success being 61.3. As compared with the year 1861, there is a slight decrease, 42, in the total num- ber of operations. The percentage of success, also, does not contrast favourably; that of last year having been 69.3, but I attribute the want of success in a very great many cases to the carelessness of the parents not taking the necessary measures to preserve the pustule. Of the various castes, the Hindoos have been the most numerous, viz. 757, next Mussulmans 400, and other castes 234. Only one Christian, and no Parsee has been vaccinated. The lymph has been of good quality throughout the year, the virus being apparently equally effective during the monsoon, as in other seasons, and the supply has been uninterrupted. I have personally very carefully examined the result of the operation, twice weekly, with a view of detecting any deterioration in the character of the vesicles; but it is very clear to my mind, that there is not only a great objection to submit to the operation, but also to bring the children for inspection after Vaccination. DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. R. COLSTON (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 802 .... .... 800 99.7 1862.... 857 55 .... 796 92.8 Vaccination has been performed with great care and proportionate success during the period of the year that I have been in charge, and I may say that I have never before observed such unqualified success as regards the vaccine vesicles and pustules that were produced, which was no doubt attributable to care in the selection of cases for the propagation of the
13 virus. I find the same apathy and indifference however, to the benefits of Vaccination, here as elsewhere, which will doubtless continue as long as Vaccination is left optional. The opposi- tion experienced is generally of a passive nature, but the most prejudiced and troublesome are the Brahmins, and those chiefly in Government employ as Carkoons, a plausible reason for which opposition I am unable to discover. The Assistant Vaccinator Shaik Imam has been very attentive to his duties, and always succeeds in finding out more unprotected children than are returned as such by the Mamlutdar. All cases of Vaccination are brought on two occa- sions in the week for my inspection, so that I am able to certify to the full extent of success returned, and no doubtful cases are included. Vaccine lymph has been supplied to the stations of Malligaum, Indore, and Mundlaisir on request. NASSICK. One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon SPENCER. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 1,656 .... .... 1,333 80.4 1862 854 .... 802 629 73.6 During the year now under review the number of subjects vaccinated has been 453 males and 401 females, making in all 854, being 802 less than the preceding year. The decrease I regret to say was chiefly owing to the Assistant Vaccinator not having had the aid of a peon as before in collecting subjects for the operation. The removal of the peon therefore is much to be deplored. AHMEDABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon D. WYLLIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 2,820 .... .... 2,666 94.5 1862.... 2,778 .... 42 2,666 95.9 The above table shows a trifling decrease of 42 in the number vaccinated during the past, as compared with the previous, year. This difference is sufficiently accounted for in the
14 circumstance that the vaccinator was in a measure new to his duties, and thus laboured under some disadvantage in respect of local knowledge compared with his predecessor. The entire number was vaccinated by Assistant Vaccinator &quot;Vallubram Dinanath, General No. 177, the only subordinate detailed for this duty. His work ranged from a maximum of 284 operations in February (small-pox then being present), to a minimum of 188 in December, when the pre- . valence of intermittent fever interfered with progress. The patients in every case were residents of the city or its suburbs. In reference to sex, males predominated as usual, but to a much greater extent than before, the numbers being 1,601 to 1,177 females. I fear these figures must be interpreted as expressive of a higher solicitude on the part of parents for the safety of their male offspring than of females; at least that is the only reason I have heard assigned for a result so far at variance with the well-known proportions the sexes bear to each other. As to age, a very large majority, that is 2,194, were under one year, against 629 over that age. There is here a wide difference compared with the experience of the preceding year, when the numbers in each category were nearly balanced. But the question of period of life is liable to be affected by the prevalence or otherwise of infantile epidemics, as I have else- where remarked. Relative to results, the figures are particularly satisfactory. There were but 63 unsuccessful and 49 doubtful cases out of a total of 2,778 vaccinated. In other words, the ratio of success was equal to 95.9 per cent., a higher average than has hitherto been reached. The lymph continued of good quality throughout, and the vesicles were charac- teristic and well formed. It was equally effective during the rains as in the other seasons, and at all times there was abundance to meet the requirements of neighbouring medical officers. Small-pox began to appear in January, and lingered in the city till July. At first the cases were due to importation from Rajpootna, where, in the absence of any organized system of Vaccination, the epidemic is ordinarily active. Others, however, were traceable to Dhollera, and thence to Bombay. But in all there were only 28 deaths from this cause throughout, a fact significant of the extent to which the inhabitants are already protected. No instance of inoculation has been reported for many years past; nor is there any other obstruction to the spread of Vaccination beyond a general feeling of apathy and indifference, with here and there an occasional show of resistance ; but that even rarely, save among some of the more exclusive sects of the Mahomedan population. RAJCOTE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon BUTLER (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 1,123 .... .... 972 86.5 1862.... 821 .... 302 708 86.2 No Report received.
15 SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. A. SHEPHERD (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 1,871 .... .... 1,624 86.7 1862 1,740 .... 131 1,518 87.2 The number of Vaccinations performed at Surat during the year 1862, in comparison with that of last year, shows a decrease of 131, for which no assignable reason can be suggested, while over the average of the last five years there being an increase of 143 may be considered an improvement. The general result this year is markedly good, being at the rate of 87.2 per cent. of successful cases. This is the highest percentage of any year. The assistant vaccinator reports the greatest number of unsuccessful cases to have occurred during the months of June, July, August, September, and October. There is no marked difference in the numbers in the sex, but a most decided one is manifested in the age columns, which show under the age of one year an increase of 416 over the average of the last 5 years, and above one year a decrease in the same average of 173. This I venture to remark may be considered a great improve- ment, as Vaccination under one year is performed at a period when small-pox may be expected to be most fatal, and Vaccination most efficacious. BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. GLEN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 1,541 .... .... 1,323 85.8 1862.... 931 .... 610 735 78.9 During the past year 931 children have been vaccinated in the town and neighbourhood. Of these, 531 were males, the remainder females. Of children under one year of age there were 402 vaccinated, and of children above that age 529. The successful cases amounted to 735. The number vaccinated have been less by 610 than those of the year 1861.
16 BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major H. GLASSE. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 624 .... .... 604 96.7 1862.... 556 .... 68 542 97.4 In the town of Belgaum there have been vaccinated, during the past year, 556 persons, which is a decrease of 68 on the number vaccinated during the previous year 1861, but still an increase of 107 on that of the year before 1860. Of these 556 vaccinated, 542 were suc- cessful cases. Besides the above, 278 persons have been vaccinated in the Suddur Bazar, being 216 more than those of the previous year 1861, and 251 more than those of the year before 1860. Of the above number, 278 vaccinated, 260 were successful. The assistant vacci- nator has also been useful in repeatedly vaccinating, direct from the subject, in the several, European and Native Regiments, at the station. Small-pox, which had just broken out at the beginning of the year, was present during the first three months, and prevailed greatly in January and February. In the Sudder Bazar 143 cases and 53 deaths occurred. In the town, there were comparatively much fewer, but the number could not be so accurately ascertained. DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon GILBERT (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 1,087 .... .... 857 78.8 1862.... 1,478 391 .... 1,346 91.0 No report received.
17 KOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. MILLS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 2,877 .... .... 2,658 92.3 1862.... 2,879 2 .... 2,737 95.0 During the months of February and March, the numbers were decreased by the prevalence of measles in the town and neighbourhood. Cholera prevailed in April and May, but it did not affect the progress of Vaccination. The ratio of success has very materially increased, viz., from 92.3 to 95 per cent. This I attribute to the introduction of new lymph from Europe, which has proved of such excellence, that it would, I think, be well to state how it was obtained. In January 1862, while acting Civil Surgeon of Dharwar, a single capillary glass tube, containing 2 or 3 drops of lymph was given to me by the Reverend Mr. Huber of the German Mission, who had just received it from Europe. I vaccinated 3 or 4 children with it. Every puncture took, forming large well-shaped healthy vesicles, far superior to those produced by the lymph at the time in use. Before leaving Dharwar in the following March, I had replaced all the old lymph from the new supply. I have, while Superintendent of Vaccination, Southern Division District, tried lymph received from Europe on ivory points, or between glass plates, but never with success. The lymph mentioned above was as clear and liquid as when taken from the vesicle. Immediately on my arrival at Kolapoor, at the end of March last, I obtained a supply of lymph from Dharwar, which was fully established in the month of April, and since that time there have been only six cases known to have been actually unsuccessful out of 2,082 operations, or 0.3 per cent. against 26 out of 961, or 3.3 per cent. in the previous 4 months. I can speak with the greater confidence of the small amount of really unsuccessful operations, having seen how very few failures occur in the Vaccinations performed at the Dispensary where, since the new lymph was introduced, there has not been a single unsuccessful or doubtful case.
18 RUTNAGHERRY. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon KEARNEY (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 522 .... .... 456 87.3 1862 514 .... 8 481 93.5 In October 1861 the vaccinator of the station was dismissed, his place was not filled up till June 1862, so that during the year under review, Vaccination was carried on only for seven months, and in the previous, for nine months. The number of operations as shown in the above table in the two imperfect years have been much the same, though in 1862 there was two months' less work than in 1861. I am every way satisfied with the present vaccinator, and after inquiry I have no reason to doubt much the number of operations he has returned. Whether any reliance can be placed on the statement that 93 per cent. of last year's operations were successful it is difficult to say, but I have especially remarked to the vaccinator that truthfulness on this matter is all important. My predecessor (who remained here eight years) annually noticed that the town-people are always averse to receive the benefits of Vaccination; the same complaint still continues. There are said to be 3,005 males and 5,059 females in the Hoojoor, including adults and children, so that if we allow one-third of these to be children, or 3,300, an idea can be formed of the opposition of the town-people. Mothers continue to oppose infants in arms being vaccinated, and this year the difference in those above, and those below, one year, has again been great. Nearly all the vesicles that I have seen have been good. Small-pox has not visited the town, but in July it approached within 10 miles at a village, whose Patell did not welcome the district vaccinator in April. It carried off 40 children, out of a supposed number of 200. KURRACHEE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. BEAN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 795 .... .... 709 89.1 1862 1,130 335 .... 1,061 93.8 The returns of the past year for the Civil and Police show an increase of 335 in the number of Vaccinations, the entire number being 1,130, of which 1,061 were successful operations.
19 The protective powers of Vaccination would seem to be better appreciated among some classes than formerly, for many parents have lately brought their children voluntarily from some distance near the Hubb river for operation, these were Brahoes from Meekran. In other cases opposition continues to be encountered, and this is especially the case among the fishermen and laborers at Kemaree. Small-pox has been slightly prevelant two or three times during the year, but not in an epidemic form, and only 2 cases were admitted for treatment, one of which died. HYDRABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon R. M. CONNELL (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861.... 1,675 .... .... 1,249 74.5 1862.... 1,611 .... 64 1,269 78.7 During the past year 1,611 persons have been vaccinated, of which 1,269 are reported successful, 187 unsuccessful, and 155 doubtful, being an increase of 20 successful cases compared with the preceding year, though there is a docrease of 64 in the actual number vaccinated. The vaccinator seems steady and attentive to his duties, he has on several occasions succeeded in taking children from Hydrabad to Kotree for the purpose of supplying lymph to the latter station, and has been the means also of furnishing lymph to many District Dispensaries, and to the Troops stationed here. The lymph and vesicles appear tolerably good, SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon A. E. RIDDELL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 1,445 .... .... 1,444 99.8 1862 1,448 3 .... 1,447 99.9 Fourteen hundred and forty-eight children were vaccinated during the year, of these only one case was unsuccessful. Thirteen hundred and five were under one year, one hundred and forty-three above that age. Seven hundred and fifty-four were males, and six hundred and 6c
20 ninety-four females, of these 781 were Hindoos, 662 Mussulmen. Two Europeans and three Christians, 1,409 children are said to have been born in the town of Shikarpoor, but this return cannot be depended on. Twenty-three cases of small-pox were reported to me in the first 5 months of the year, none in the last 7 months, of these 11 cases proved fatal, viz., 6 males and 5 females, and 12 recovered, 6 males and 6 females. No opposition is offered to the practice of Vaccination which is performed under my superintendence. ADEN. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. F. STEINHAUSER. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1861 945 .... .... 686 72.5 1862 1,004 59 .... 587 58.4 The vaccine lymph in use at this station, produced typical vesicles until the month of April, when with the increasing heat numerous failures showed that it was deteriorating. This result continued until the month of July, when a fresh supply arrived from the National Vaccine Establishment, London, which proved perfectly successful. In the month of September, this virus again manifested signs of deterioration, and was actually lost for a few days ; but fortu- nately the National Vaccine Establishment sent at this period liquid lymph in hermetically- sealed capillary tubes as recommended by Dr. Husband of Edinburgh, which enabled the vac- cinator to carry on the operations with success until the 20th of December, when the lymph was again lost, owing chiefly to the neglect of the Assistant Vaccinator himself, who, contrary to orders, relied on the wandering Somales for cases, rather than on the permanent residents of the town. Notwithstanding the doubtful efficacy of the lymph during four months of the year, an increase of 59 cases vaccinated is recorded on the total number for the year 1862, but the number of successful cases is about 100 below that of 1861. This station as before observed, relies on England for its vaccine lymph, which was formerly sent yearly by the Royal Jennerian Institution. It is now provided by direction of the Secretary of State for India by the National Vaccine Establishment which forwards virus on ivory points or glasses, and in capillary tubes. The charged ivory points have never yet proved successful at Aden, the dry lymph on glasses has frequently failed, but on many occasions been found efficient, whereas the liquid lymph in capillary tubes has never been tried without producing typical vesicles. There can be no doubt that, Dr. Husband's method for transmitting lymph is the most easy and the most judicious. During the year 1862 small-pox first showed itself in the month of August in a Somali, and a few cases have presented themselves for treatment until the end of the year. The disease, however, has not been epidemic; only 15 cases having been admitted to Hospital, of which number two proved fatal. The majority of these cases were of the confluent form, and occurred among Somalis and Arabs.
APPENDIX.
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Divisional Vaccination, showing the Number and Names of the Divisions, and their and compared with those of last Year ; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, of Operations performed by each Number. DIVISIONS. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1861 Increase. Decrease. 1 PRESIDENCY ............ Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anunta Chundroba. 3 6,081 8,861 .. 2,780 2 CENTRAL CIRCLE ........ Assistant Surgeon B. Beatty ............ 31 39,701 42,518 .. 2,817 3 SOUTHERN CIRCLE ...... iii No. I. SUPERINTENDENTS. Superintendents ; the Number of Vaccinators employed; the Total Vaccinations performed Age, and Result ; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated; and the Average Number Vaccinator, for the Year 1862. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according toiv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last Year. Sex. 1801. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna ............ .. 38 256 .. 218 22 16 Alibaugh .............. .. 89 66 23 .. 50 39 Bandora ............... .. 79 90 .. 11 44 35 Coorla .............. .. 8 .. 8 .. 4 4 Total...... .. 214 412 .. 198 120 94 2 POONA ............ Poona .................. 1 1,832 1,753 79 .. 1,201 631 Ahmednuggur ........ 1 1,240 1,119 121 .. 708 532 Sattara ............... 1 1,435 1,811 .. 376 765 670 Sholapore .............. 1 1,392 1,434 .. 42 712 680 Dhoolia .................. 1 857 802 55 .. 452 405 Nassick ................. 1 854 1,656 .. 862 453 401 Mahableshwur ......... .. .. 119 .. .. .. .. Total ....... 6 7,610 8,694 .. 1,084 4,291 3,319 3 NORTHERN ........ Ahmedabad .......... 1 2,778 2,820 .. 42 1,601 1,177 Kaira ............. .. .. 520 .. 520 .. .. Surat ................... 1 1,740 1,871 .. 131 919 821 Broach .............. 1 931 1,541 .. 610 531 400 Rajcote ............. 1 821 1,123 .. 302 407 414 Total ......... 4 6,270 7,875 .. 1,605 3,458 2,812 4 SOUTHERN...... Belgaum .......... 1 556 624 .. 68 320 236 Dharwar ........... 1 1,478 1,087 391 .. 844 634 Kolapoor .......... 1 2,879 2,877 2 .. 1,479 1,400 Rutnagherry ........... 1 514 522 .. 8 315 193 Vingorla .............. .. 159 144 15 .. 91 68 Total ....... 4 5,586 5,254 332 .. 3,049 2,537 5 SIND ............... Kurrachee .............. 1 1,130 795 335 .. 685 445 Hydrabad ............ 1 1,611 1,675 .. 64 922 688 Shikarpoor ......... 1 1,448 1,445 3 .. 754 694 Dispensaries ........... .. 2,461 689 1,772 .. 1,529 93 Total ........ 3 6,650 4,604 2,046 .. 3,890 2,760 6 ADEN ............. Aden ........... 1 1,004 945 59 .. 610 394 7 PERSIAN GULF .... Bushire................ .. 324 481 .. 157 171 153 Grand Total ....... 18 27,658 28,265 .. 607 15,589 12,063
V No. II. CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. I. for the Year 1862. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according tovi TABLE VACCINATION UNDER Table of Vaccination through the Agency of the Native Chiefs, arranged according for the Number. DIVISIONS. STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vncci- nated. Compared with last year. 1861. Increase. Decrease. 1 SOUTHERN CIRCLE .. Kolapoor, Sawunt- warree, &c. .... Assist. Surgeon J. G. Asher. 10 16,734 16,616 118 .... 2 vii No. III. NATIVE CHIEFS' AGENCY. to the Divisions of Vaccination, and showing Details as in Tables Nos. I. and II., Year 1862. Total Number Vaccinated arranged according toviii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1861. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. No. 1, Vaccination under Superintendents ............ 163,637 173,380 .... 9,743 88,556 75,081 No. 2, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ........ 27,658 28,265 .... 607 15,589 32,069 No. 3, Ditto by the Native Chiefs' Agency ....... 53,497 58,023 .... 4,526 28,152 25,345 Total 244,702 259,668 .... 14,876 132,297 112,495
ix No. IV. FOR THE YEAR 1862. Total Number Vaccinated arranged according tox TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1862, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS, &c. AGE. DIFFERANCE. Total Vaccinated. Under One Year. Above One Year. Under. Above. I. Superintendens ...................... 50,331 113,306 .... 62,975 163,637 II. Civil Surgeons and others ................ 12,603 14,944 .... 2,341 27,547 III. Native Chiefs' Agency .............. 17,243 36,254 .... 19,011 53,497 Total.. 80,177 164,504 .... 84,327 244,681 I.xi EMPLOYMENT RETURN OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1862. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.xii SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.xiii KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.xiv RESOLUTION OF GOVERNMENT. GENERAL DEPARTMENT, No. 1131. Bombay Castle, 27 th July 1863. THE Governor in Council regrets again to find that there has been a falling off in the number of Vaccinations in the year under report, as compared with the number during the previous year. They are stated to be 14,876 less than in 1861, and when added to the falling off of 14,765 cases in 1861, gives a total falling off in 1862, as compared with 1860, of 29,752 cases. 2. The diminution in the numbers is attributed &quot; to sickness and indolence on the part of some of the Vaccinators, to want of support from native offi- cials, and to increasing difficulty in obtaining the assistance of peons in the districts;&quot; but, as observed by the Principal Inspector General, with the exception of the last-mentioned cause, the state of matters described has always been in existence more or less, even when Vaccination was making favourable progress, and cannot therefore be received as now especially explaining the falling off in members; and Dr. Stovell, although he states it would be premature to hazard an opinion on the subject, and that the expe- rience of another year or two will be required before sufficient data for deter- mining the question can be obtained, appears disposed to ascribe the falling off in the Vaccinations to the diminished amount of European agency in superintending the department. 3. His Excellency in Council concurs with the Principal Inspector General that the data are insufficient to form an opinion ; for in Sind, where no change has taken place, the decrease in the number of Vaccinations during 1861 was upwards of 10,000, and during the past year there has been a further decrease of upwards of 6,000. It is possible, that those who were most open to persuasion to adopt the prophylactic having permitted them- selves and their families to be vaccinated, the field of operations is becoming year by year narrowed to those who are most opposed to and prejudiced against the measure, and that the difficulties of maintaining the high numbers which have of late years been attained are therefore daily increasing. That this seems to be the case appears to be borne out by the gratifying fact, adverted to in paragraphs 35 to 37 of Dr. Stovell's report, that the proportion of infantile vaccinations has increased. This His Excellency in Council considers a surer test than any other of the value which Vaccination maintains amongst those whose objections and scruples against it have been overcome.
xv 4. The Honorable the Governor in council is, however, of opinion that much assistance might be afforded to the personal efforts of the Superinten- dents and of their Vaccinators by having information proving the benefits of Vaccination, such as is given in paragraph 39 of the report, carefully collected and published in the vernacular of each district, and distributed among the people. 5. The Revenue Commissioners, as well as the Collectors and Officers in charge of districts, will also be requested to give the aid of their influence in support of the Department, and to impress from time to time upon all their subordinates the importance Government and themselves attach to the exten- sion of the safeguard, in which every philanthropic person may reasonably be supposed to take a deep interest. 6. Extract (paragraphs 50 to 54) of the report should be transferred to the Political Department, with the view that the co-operation of the native Chiefs in the work may be invited through the Political Officers. 7. With reference to paragraph 53, the Governor in Council considers Government could not ask the Chiefs to contribute to a Vaccinating Fund, but those who have already employed Vaccinators of their own will be urged to place them under the supervision and control of the Superintendents, and those who have not as yet moved in the matter will be urged to lose no further time in doing so. 8. His Excellency in Council is sanguine that if the Political Officers earnestly and fully explained to the Chiefs the extent to which Government appreciate such efforts for the good of their people, there may be more activity on the part of the Jagheerdars and others to assist in the work. 9. The Governor in Council is also of opinion, that the aid of Municipa- lities might, as suggested in paragraph 80 of Dr. Stovell's report, be enlisted in support of Vaccination. All Municipalities of any size or importance might with advantage, His Excellency in Council considers, permanently employ a Vaccinator, in whose labours, and in checking whose returns, the Municipal Commissioners should be induced to interest themselves. 10. The zeal and energy exhibited by Drs. Asher and Martin are highly creditable to those Officers, and the Governor in Council desires that the Principal Inspector General will convey to them the high sense which is entertained by Government of their exertions during the year under review. They are, in the opinion of the Governor in Council, fully entitled to the high encomium which Dr. Stovell has passed upon them in paragraphs 58 and 65 of his report. 11. With regard to the suggestion made in paragraphs 62 and 63, His Excellency in Council is of opinion that it is not advisable to charge the 8c
xvi discretional allowances placed at the disposal of Collectors and their Assistants, which are already insufficient for the many calls upon them, with remuneration to parents who allow vaccine lymph to be taken from their children, and that it would be preferable to place at the disposal of each Superintendent a certain sum, to be disbursed in the manner proposed, which it would be the duty of the Superintendents to see expended by the Vaccinators. The Principal Inspector General should report the sum he thinks should be sanctioned for each Circle, and the proportions in which the amount should be distributed among each of the districts of which the Circles are composed. 12. The difficulties complained of in consequence of the withdrawal of Peons the Governor in Council conceives to be well founded, for much of a Vaccinator's time may be saved, and considerable assistance may be given by an intelligent Peon being sent in advance to warn the village authorities of the Vaccinator's intended arrival, and to make arrangements for collecting the children for vaccination and inspection ; and His Excellency in Council is satisfied that it is no luke-warmness on their part that has compelled any of the Collectors to withdraw this aid. The proper remedy is to permit the Vaccination Department to employ Peons of its own, as recommended by Dr. Stovell, in his 77th paragraph. The total number required, it is stated, would be 125, and the expense, it is presumed, at Rupees 5 each, would amount to Rupees 625 per mensem ; this the Governor in Council will recom- mend to the Government of India for sanction. 13. His Excellency in Council will also support with his recommendation to the Government of India the suggestion offered, in paragraph 103, for the appointment of a General Superintendent. 14. The attention of the Commissioner in Sind should be called to para- graphs 85 and 86 of the Report, with the view of adopting such measures as may appear to him advisable for the purpose of putting a stop to the practice of Inoculation, which is stated &quot;to be carried on to a considerable extent.&quot; 15. It is to be regretted that the difficulties of obtaining a regular and constant supply of Vaccine Lymph from Europe have prevented its being fully tried in this Presidency. It seems a point of importance to ensure the receipt of the Lymph at a suitable season of the year, for it will be perceived that that given by the Reverend Mr. Huber to Dr. Mills arrived in the month of January. It is not stated at what period the supply sent up to Sind which &quot;succeeded so well&quot; was received, but this should be noted for future guid- ance, and it is also worthy of consideration whether the receipt of supplies in good condition at all seasons of the year might not be ensured by an appli- cation to the Directors of the Peninsular and Oriental Company to allow the cases containing the hermetically-sealed tubes to be kept in the ice-houses of
xvii their steamers during the voyage. The preservation of the Lymph might perhaps be further secured at the Presidency by obtaining permission to allow the supply to lie in the Ice-house until required for distribution and use. 16. The Revenue Commissioners should be requested to draw the special attention of all officers under their control to the observations in the last paragraph of Dr. Stovell's Report. A. D. ROBERTSON, Secretary to Government. BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIRIY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
