REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1863. Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1864.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1863. Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1864.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1863. No. 694 OF 1864. From the PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department, To the SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) 3. There is, I think, good reason to be satisfied with the amount of work performed. In the report for 1862 it was shown that the number of opera- tions was nearly 15,000 less than during the preceding year, and it was stated, in consequence, that the general result could not be &quot; regarded as other- wise than unsatisfactory.&quot; I am happy to say, however, that the returns for 1863 show a decided improvement, and contrast favourably with those of the former year. Thus, while the total number of vaccinations in 1862 was 245,565, the number for the past year was 267,995, being an increase of 22,430. 4. This increase, though not very large, is nevertheless much greater than I expected. Indeed I anticipated a falling off in numbers, owing to the great difficulty which was experienced by the Superintendents in obtaining the aid of peons, to assist their vaccinators in the districts in collecting children for vaccination, and subsequently for inspection. 5. In the last report I dwelt at some length on this subject. It was pointed out that in consequence of recent reductions in the revenue establish- ment, the Collectors had been compelled, to a great extent, to withhold the assistance of peons, their diminished number being merely sufficient for the discharge of the revenue duties for which they were entertained. I, in con- sequence, urged the importance of removing these obstacles to progress by sanctioning the entertainment of one peon for every vaccinator, employed by each Superintendent in British territory. 6. It is gratifying to record that these dfficulties are now at an end, for, owing to the support which was afforded to my recommendation by His Ex- cellency the Governor in Council, the sanction of the Government of India has recently been received for the employment of 125 peons to be attached to the Department. 7. I anticipate as the result,( v ) 9. The greatest increase in any one Circle was in the Northern. Dr. Dick attributes it very much to the more effectual assistance which was afforded by the Native officials, in consequence of the strict orders issued by the Civil authorities. As doubtless, however, equally strict orders were given by the Civil authorities in all other parts of the Presidency, I am inclined to regard it as due mainly to his own unwearied exertions. 10. Dr. Beatty seems to attribute the improvement shown in the returns from his Circle chiefly to a plan which he adopted for facilitating the work of his vaccinators, by arranging personally with Native officials for the vacci- nation of children in the districts through which he passed. Thus, after having inspected the work and register of a vaccinator, and satisfied himself as to the quality of the lymph, he proceeded in advance, visiting the villages and towns on his route, and collecting the children. With the aid of the patel and kulkurnee, a list of all unvaccinated children was then made out, signed, and forwarded to the vaccinator who was to follow. 11. The particulars of the plan will be found in the extracts from his report, and as I consider the mode of procedure very judicious, I would commend it to the consideration of the other Superintendents. Dr. Pinkerton adopted a somewhat similar plan in the districts through which he travelled in Sind. 12. Out of the total number of operations, about 10 per cent. proved unsuccessful. Thus out of 267,995 vaccinations, 243,138 were reported as successful. Every practicable means appear to have been taken by the Superintendents to test, personally and otherwise, the accuracy of the returns of their vaccinators, and there is good reason to believe that in the main they are correct. Two instances of falsification, however, came to light in Sind, one in Canara, and one in the Central Circle. It should therefore be understood that the figures are to be regarded, not in the light of perfect accuracy, but merely as an approximation to it. 13. In reporting the case of falsification in the Central Circle, Dr. Beatty, who has had a very large and very lengthened experience, and who is there- fore not likely to be mistaken, stated that with that one exception, the returns had invariably been found correct, and that the reported percentage of suc- cessful cases was &quot; as near an approximation to truth as possible.&quot; 14. Dr. Dick also, after examining the work of no less than 29 vacci- nators, and verifying their returns, states that he failed to discover any false names recorded, and that he is &quot;satisfied that falsification does not take place to any great extent.&quot; 15. With regard to sex( vi ) 16. The castes were as follows:( vii ) population, with regard to its permanent efficacy as a safe-guard. A longer experience, and a more extended education, will no doubt assist in gradually removing this feeling. In the meantime, the Superintendents, I have no doubt, take every available opportunity of pointing out the fact, that vaccina- tion not only effects an enormous amount of good by diminishing the extent of small-pox, but by modifying the character of this disease when it does appear, changes a deadly disorder into one of comparatively slight importance. 22. In proof of the correctness of this remark, it may be mentioned that the returns of the London Small-pox Hospital, extending over a long series of years, show that the average rate of mortality among the patients, therein admitted, unprotected by vaccination, has been 37 per cent., whereas the mortality among the patients, properly protected, has been less than half of one per cent. 23. The Superintendent in Sind even states on the latter point, that after making many inquiries, and taking no little pains to find out, he has never heard of a single successfully vaccinated child having died of small-pox. 24. With the exception of Bombay itself, where small-pox prevailed to a great extent at the commencement of the year, and of Kurrachee where it was equally prevalent towards its close, the disease does not appear to have shown itself in a severe form in any part of the presidency. Throughout Gujerat it is reported to have been much less prevalent than usual, and the Superintendent in Kattiawar mentions that he had not seen a single case in a protected sub- ject. There was very little in the Northern Deccan, but in the Southern Maratha Country it was met with in nearly all the zillahs during the earlier part of the year, though apparently in a mild form. In Sind a few cases appear to have shown themselves in nearly every district, but not in a severe form. Wherever it did make its appearance, active measures were immedi- ately adopted by the Superintendents and their establishments to arrest its progress. 25. It was mentioned in the last report, that with exception of Sind, the practice of inoculation appeared to be gradually disappearing from nearly every part of the Presidency. I stated, however, that one case had come to light in the Tanna zillah, and one at Bulsar. During the past year no case came actually to the knowledge of either of the Superintendents. Dr. Dick, however, of the Northern Circle, has recently received information that it is still practised in the Bulsar pergunna, and he is the more inclined to believe that such may be the case, from the circumstance of the extreme unwillingness of the people in that district to accept of vaccination. 26. He states that the bias of the villagers for vaccination or inoculation depends very much on the patel, and that as the latter is perfectly indifferent on the subject, he affords his support to the inoculator in consideration of
( viii ) the fees which he receives. Dr. Dick is of opinion that an effectual stop to the system might be put by holding the village officials responsible, as they must always be aware of the inoculator's proceedings. As the new Penal Code provides, I believe, against the continuance of the practice, I would suggest whether it would not be desirable for Government to communicate with the Magistrate of Surat on the subject. 27. With regard to the practice in Sind, I am happy to state that not a single case came to light during the year, and the Superintendent is of opinion that recent steps taken by the Commissioner will completely put an end to it. 28. The character of the vaccine lymph has been well reported on by nearly every Medical Officer, the resulting vesicles having been generally well developed and well-marked. Dr. Ritchie, for instance, the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals, who has long taken an active interest in the Depart- ment,( ix ) 33. Dr. Beatty regards the change as a &quot;great boon,&quot; while Dr. Plumptre and others are of opinion that, by leading to the discontinuance of the objec- tionable mode of procedure, just mentioned, the purity of the lymph will be promoted, and the percentage of successful cases consequently increased. 34. The Superintendents of the Central and Sind Circles have recently suggested the advantage of being supplied with empty capillary glass tubes. They think that their vaccinators could easily be instructed in the method of filling them, and that thus a constant supply of lymph would at all times be available for transmission wherever it might be required. I have already anticipated this suggestion, however, for in June last I directed the Medical Storekeeper to procure a supply from England with this object in view, and it may be expected to arrive at an early date. 35. In paragraph 4 of the Resolution passed by Government on my last report, it was suggested that much assistance might be afforded to the per- sonal efforts of the Superintendents, and their vaccinators, by collecting and publishing in the vernacular of each district, and by distributing among the people, the particulars of any striking facts which might be met with proving the benefit of vaccination. 36. This subject has not been lost sight of. I impressed on Superinten- dents the necessity of bearing it in mind, and requested that every opportunity which presented itself for carrying into effect the desire thus expressed by Government, might be taken advantage of. 37. The Superintendents have not failed to give attention to the subject, but hitherto no very marked instances have been met with. Dr. Beatty, for instance, reports that when travelling through his districts he took much pains to collect facts, such as he formerly brought to notice, sufficiently strik- ing for publication, but that he had failed in meeting with such. 38. Dr. Pinkerton also states that no special case came to his notice during the year. He adds, however, that after having travelled over the greater part of Sind, and after having examined thousands of children and hundreds of villages, he feels sure that nobody could proceed from one end of the province to the other, without reading in the faces of the rising generation the striking benefits of vaccination;( x ) to support this view, and expressed an opinion that all municipalities of any size or importance might with advantage permanently employ a vaccinator, in whose labours, and in checking whose returns, the Municipal Commissioners might be induced to interest themselves. 40. Thanks to the intelligent zeal of Dr. Plumptre, the Superintendent of the Southern Circle, and to the hearty co-operation of Mr. Chapman, the Collector of Sattara, the system has been commenced in that zillah, by group- ing together several municipal towns into what Mr. Chapman calls a &quot; division,&quot; and by employing therein a vaccinator on 15 rupees a month. Six such divisions have been formed as an experimental measure. The size of each is such as will permit of all the towns therein being visited by the vacci- nator once every three months. 41. As far as the Collectorate of Sattara is concerned, this arrangement is equivalent to doubling the staff of vaccinators, without any increase of expen- diture on the part of Government. I shall watch its progress with much interest, for I attach very great importance to the successful commencement of a plan which promises to identify local municipal bodies with efforts to render the protective system of vaccination more extended, efficient, and complete. 42. Dr. Plumptre has commended the subject to the consideration of the Collectors of the other zillahs within his range ; and I trust the Superintendents, generally, in communication with the Civil authorities, will endeavour to introduce the system into their respective circles. In a further part of this report I have extracted in full all the remarks made by Dr. Plumptre on the subject. 43. It is satisfactory to learn, that the Municipal Commissioners of Kotree have likewise recently adopted the system, and have sanctioned an expenditure of 15 rupees a month for a vaccinator. The Municipality of Hooblee also entertain a vaccinator of their own. 44. It gives me great pleasure to state that the Superintendents, generally, express their cordial acknowledgements for the substantial assistance they have at all times received from the Civil, Political, and Police authorities. Dr. Plumptre dwells especially on the warm interest taken by Mr. Chapman in the extension of the safe-guard. 45. Dr. Butler, again, the Superintendent in Kattiawar, pointedly alludes to the very valuable assistance afforded by the Political Agent in that Province. He mentions that Major Keatinge had written to each Chief requesting his countenance and support( xi ) during the year. The junior in the Department, Dr. Pinkerton, the Superintendent in Sind, is spoken of very highly by Dr. Ritchie, the Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, particularly for his exertions in per- sonally testing the work of his vaccinators. The employment returns at the end of the report will show that he travelled upwards of 1,500 miles, and personally inspected more than 7,000 children. In doing this, he travelled further, and inspected more children, than anybody in the Department. 47. Dr. Dick, of the Northern Circle, travelled nearly as far, and made a very extended tour, during which he examined the work of no less than 29 vaccinators, scattered in different localities throughout his extensive range. Dr. Beatty, of the Central Circle, personally inspected nearly twice the number of children which he did the previous year, and travelled to a much greater extent. 48. Dr. Butler, the Superintendent in Kattiawar, both travelled further, and inspected more children, than during 1862, although his duties at Rajkote only admitted of his spending a very limited time in the districts. Mr. Anunta Chundroba, the Superintendent at the Presidency, also did his work well. 49. In the Southern Circle, Dr. Plumptre inspected more children than during the previous year, and although he did not travel quite so far, he particularly distinguished himself by organizing, in communication with Mr. Chapman, the scheme of municipal vaccination in the Sattara zillah. He also did every thing in his power,( xii ) loss of his matured experience will be severely felt. I beg to offer him my best acknowledgments for the deep interest he has taken in promoting the success of the cause entrusted to his care, and at the same time to express the high opinion I entertain of the ability and judgment which have characterized his proceedings. 53. In paragraphs 6 and 31,I alluded to two important measures, recently sanctioned by Government, which have very materially increased the efficiency of the Department; but there is still another to record which, while conferring an invaluable boon on a considerable number of deserving men, cannot fail to prove of the greatest benefit to the cause. I allude to the recent admission of Native vaccinators to the privilege of pension. 54. The necessity of improving the condition and prospects of these men has often been pointed out. It has frequently been represented that no efforts to extend the usefulness of the Department, commensurate with its great importance, could reasonably be expected to prove successful, except on the condition of such improvement being made. Government fully recog- nized the necessity, and submitted the subject for the favourable consideration of the Government of India. It is now most gratifying to me to be able to record that sanction for this great booh has recently been received. 55. Not only will the present race of men, with this brightening view be- fore them, be stimulated to greater energy and activity ; but with the improve- ment thus made in the status and prospects of a vaccinator, a better class of men may reasonably be expected to enter the Department. This, in itself, I regard as a point of much importance, for the greater personal influence of such men could scarcely fail to prove of the highest value in smoothing difficulties, and in removing prejudices. 56. The adoption, by Government, of these three important measures, bears convincing testimony to the great practical interest taken by His Excellency in Council in everything relating to the improvement and efficiency of the Department. I am quite sure they will be fully appreciated by the Superin- tendents and their establishments, and I am equally sure they will be responded to on their part by increased exertions, leading to far greater results than have ever yet been shown. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, M. STOVELL, M.D., Principal Inspector-General, Medical Department. Bombay, 31st March, 1864.
( xiii ) INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTSVACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent.2 The working of the establishment during the past year has been attended with marked success, as 48,562 children have been operated on, showing an increase in the past over the preceding year of 8,861. This increase I attribute to greater activity on the part of the vaccinators, and to the assistance they have received from the Collectors of Poona, Sholapore and Khandeish, who, with much consideration, have granted, as a temporary measure, a peon to accompany each vaccinator. In the Collectorate of Nuggur, peons were given on the payment of Rupees five (5) per month for each. In the Tannah Collectorate no peons were granted. This aid was only granted during the months of November and December, but the increase was at once perceptible compared with the returns of the previous month, those of November exceeded by over 900, and in December they still further increased by 1,800 cases. The average number per month previously being 3,500. There can be no question of the benefit which will result on peons being permanently sanctioned. The great object gained thereby will be the time saved in collecting children for the vaccinators. They will likewise prove a check, in some degree, to false returns of numbers being sent in, and my experience proves that the presence of a peon with each vacci- nator imparts confidence rather than intimidation. In fact, amongst the very poorer classes, a peon represents the Sircar, and they feel security in any undertaking when a Government peon is present, and in their eyes in a measure responsible. But perhaps the principal cause to which the increased work of last year may be ascribed, is a method I adopted of arranging personally for the vaccination of children in the districts through which I passed. After having first inspected the work and registers of the vaccinator, and satisfied myself as to the quality of his lymph, my plan was to proceed in advance, visit all villages and towns, and collect all the children of each. With the help of the patell, and kulkurnee, a list of all unvaccinated children was made out, signed, and forwarded to the vaccinator who would subsequently follow. Thus a double object was effected. The old excuse resorted to regarding opposition offered by the people, or scarcity of subjects, was at once done away with, and from my knowledge of the numbers ready for vaccination, I was in a position to judge whether each man performed a fair amount of work. Time was saved also, the vaccinator was not obliged to delay, for immediately on visiting each village all necessary preliminary arrangements had been made. This method was attended with excel- lent results. The returns of several of the most indolent men became nearly trebled. The average number of persons vaccinated by each man was 1,566, or at the rate of 130 operations per month, I have every reason to expect that on the permanent establishment of peons this number will become largely increased. The Bheel tribe, who formerly were the most violent opponents, now readily accept vaccina- tion, and except in the very wildest parts of the Satpooree hills and western districts of Khandeish they offer no resistance. It is my intention to visit these districts as early as possible. Mr. Ashburner, the present Collector, has rendered me every assistance, and vaccination has never been attempted as yet amongst these wild races. I anticipate but little difficulty, as with these people it is only ignorance and not bigotry which has to be overcome. The number of children, under one year old, vaccinated was 6,152, a comparatively small percentage, being 12.51 of the whole, or in other words, every seventh person was operated on during infancy. This was exactly in the same proportion as last year. The people have an extreme aversion to have their children meddled with before they are able to walk, unless compelled; they never take them out of doors during infancy, and no persuasion will induce
3 the generality to submit them for vaccination. They entertain a belief that teething is as much as an infant can endure, and dread any additional fever likely to be consequent on vaccination. Of the total number vaccinated 45,008 were successful cases, being a percentage of 92.7. I believe that this is as near an approximation to truth as possible. Every means have been taken both by the Deputy Superintendent and myself to test the accuracy and truth of the men's returns, and in addition they have from time to time been verified by the Collector's assistance. With one exception they have invariably been found correct. A great boon has been conferred by Government in sanctioning the sum of one Rupee per month to each vaccinator for the purpose of conveying fresh matter from village to village. The old system of trusting to lymph on glass and points was attended with delay and frequent failure. When vaccinating with dry lymph, even a clever operator could not calculate on more than one successful case in six. He was obliged therefore on visiting a new village to wait for a sufficient number of fresh vesicles, and great delay was thus occasioned. There is no doubt too that the people lost confidence in a great degree, observing several operations performed followed by no pustules. The case is different now. In every village two or three children with fresh matter can be easily obtained for a small remuneration, and for the future unsuccessful cases should invariably be the exception. I would beg to offer a suggestion as to the advantage of supplying Superintendents of Vac- cination annually with empty tubes in lieu of the square glasses and ivory points supplied by the Medical Storekeeper. Vaccinators could be easily instructed in the method of filling them, and a constant and certain supply of vaccine matter would at all times be available for transmission to the Presidency and other distant parts. The Principal Inspector-General's Circular, No. 2037 of 1863, dated 8th September last, impressing on Superintendents of Vaccination the necessity of bearing in mind the wish of Government, conveyed in paragraph 4 of Resolution 1131, dated 27th July, has not been lost sight of, and when travelling through the districts I have been at much pains to try and collect facts regarding the protective power of vaccination, such as I formerly brought to notice, sufficiently striking for publication, as yet I have failed in meeting with such ; but in addition to my own inquiries the Collectors of each district have been written to, and requested to obtain through the mamlutdars information on the following points :4 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.5 graph 9 of the Resolution of Government on that Report. From my previous experience in the Central Circle as well as in this, I immediately saw the numerous advantages such a plan possessed, which may be summed up as follows:6 asking him to accompany me to the village. A morning was fixed, and two children with fresh vesicles sent to the village. On our arrival there, the inhabitants were collected at the Chowdry, and were addressed by the karbarree and my karkoon on the benefits and nature of vacci- nation, and within half an hour some forty children were brought forward to be vaccinated, a result which I much doubt would have been produced, but for my being on the spot ; indeed during the week I was at Koorundwar, owing to the stimulus it gave the native officials by my directing the Chief's attention to the subject, nearly as many children were vaccinated in that time as is usually done in that State in a couple of months. Some time ago, acting upon a suggestion of His Excellency the Governor in the last Reso- lution on this subject, I drew up a form of notice or hand bill, containing a simple statement of facts descriptive of vaccination, such as might easily be understood by the uneducated mass of the people. This form having been approved of by the Principal Inspector-General Medi- cal Department, was forwarded by me in the early part of November last to the Oriental Translator to Government, for the purpose of being translated into Murathee and Canarese, but in consequence of the great delay in receiving these translations, I have not yet been able to issue them. NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.7 The proportion of successful cases is rather lower than in the previous year, but as new lymph has been introduced over a great part of the Circle, and I hope will soon be dissemi- nated over the whole, I anticipate great improvement in the result in future years. As far as I can learn, all previous attempts to renew the lymph in Guzerat have failed, and there- fore that in use up to the present time must have been in course of transmission from subject to subject for more than forty years, so that now a fair opportunity is afforded by comparing the two kinds to form an opinion as to whether vaccine lymph does or does not degenerate in the course of years. In the case of the old lymph failures are frequent, the vesicles are small, many of them ill developed, and contain a scarcely appreciable quantity of lymph and leave cicatrices which not unfrequently disappear entirely or nearly so in a few years, whilst in the other case failures are rare, the vesicles are large, perfect in appearance, and contain abundance of lymph, and leave scars which promise to last for life. Some cicatrices of ten or twenty years standing which I have seen in Guzerat are much more distinct than those of late years, and I am therefore inclined to think that deterioration has taken place principally during the last few years. Whether the prophylactic power of the virus has been impaired is a question which can be decided only by observation, but I fear that in this respect the result will prove less satisfactory than would be desirable. Statistics show that to confer the utmost possible immunity from small-pox well marked permanent cicatrices are essential ; and they also seem to show that the degree of protection is in direct proportion to the quantity of lymph, or at all events to the number of perfect vesicles that have formed, for four vesicles confer more perfect immunity than three, three than two, or two than one. No instance of inoculation came to my knowledge during the year, but J have just received information (February 1864) from which it appears that this system is being practised at present in Bulsar purgunna. That this practice is the favourite in that district seems pro- bable from the extreme unwillingness of the people to accept vaccination: this they manifest by concealing their children, by deserting their dwellings, when the vaccinator visits them, and they occasionally resort to measures of intimidation by reminding him of the beatings which other vaccinators suffered when employed in the district. The bias of the villagers for vaccination or inoculation depends in a great measure, sometimes entirely, on the patell, and he being perfectly indifferent, affords his support to the inoculator in consideration of the fees which he receives. A simple and effectual way to put a stop to the system, I submit, would be to hold the village officials responsible, as they must always be aware of the inoculator's movements, and to punish them. The measure under the consideration of Government for granting travelling batta to vaccinators would be found a most valuable one for extending the practice of vaccination. From the Annual Report of 1857, it appears that in the first year after batta was granted to the vaccinators in Sind the number of operations was between twice and three times larger than in the preceding year, and although the numerical increase in this division could scarcely be so large, still great benefit would result by enabling the vaccinators to meet the expenses of travelling, and affording them an inducement to visit a larger number of villages, and to go over their districts more frequently, and thereby to confer the benefit of the prophylactic on the rising generation at the earliest possible age, and to reduce the number of unprotected persons to a minimum. The increased emolument would also add to the vaccinator's prestige in his district, and attract a superior class of men into the service. During the year an attempt was made to cause the village officials to prepare a list of all unprotected persons in their villages at the time the vaccinator was about commencing operations. This would seem a perfectly legitimate duty, and one not entailing much trouble
8 to persons having some authority in the village and acquainted with the people; but the result was such as to convince me of the determination of a large majority of those persons, especially of the tullatees, to afford no active assistance to this Department. Nearly all neglected to prepare these lists, and when called to account stated that they had given them to the vaccinators, or that they were not asked for them, or that the people denied that they had any unprotected childern, &c. In one instance a tullatee prepared an indiscriminate list of persons in his village, of whom many had no children, and many had no unprotected children, while the names of several persons who had unprotected children were omitted. On the other hand, one vaccinator was much surprised at being supplied with these lists, and also at receiving active assistance from the patels in several villages where he was working, and the cause of this it seems was that one patel had been suspended for some months the pre- vious year for neglecting to make a requisition for the assistance of a vaccinator when small- pox was prevalent in his village. It is much to be regretted that the difficulty of proving complaints against patels and tullatees is so great, because occasional punishments induce these officials to afford active support to the vaccinators, and when this is afforded work almost invariably goes on satisfactorily, while without it very little progress can be made. On the 1st January 1863 I was at Sannud, thence I travelled to Verrumgaum and Mandul, after that through the Palunpoor States, where I visited Sumee, Deodur, Babur, Wan, Deesa, and Palunpoor. I then travelled southerly through the Mahee Kanta and through Morassa, and afterwards visited Kuppurwunj, Jeytulpoor, Kaira, Neriad, Napar, and Borsud, examining the work of the vaccinators in the different districts. During and after the monsoon I examined the work of the vaccinators in Chorassee and Oolpar, then crossed to Gogo, and travelling into the Dhundooka district, I examined vaccination in and around Burwalla and Dholera. I then travelled into the Dholka district, where I was when the year terminated. In this tour I examined the work of 20 Government and 9 Native Chiefs' vaccinators, some of the latter had not been inspected for years, and one had never been visited, although he had been employed for nearly eight years in his district. In verifying their returns I failed to discover any false names recorded, and although in some cases when examining the children there was a larger number of persons reported absent by the patels than I could have wished, still I am satisfied that falsification does not take place to any great extent. The patels seem frequently to take no trouble in ascertaining the correctness of the numbers in the Form V 2 which they attest, sometimes relying on the vaccinator's statement and at others even signing the blank form and allowing the vaccinators to fill in the numbers afterwards.
9 SIND DIVISION. Superintendent.10 I think it may be stated that there exist no very serious obstacles on the part of the people in Sind generally to the spread of vaccination, but at the same time I am of opinion that the majority submit their children to be vaccinated, more because they know that Government wish them to do so, than from any desire of their own to protect their children from small- pox, and I fully believe that if the people were not influenced by the known wish of Govern- ment, few comparatively would be vaccinated; it is true that generally the people are acquainted with the prophylactic power of the virus ; still indifference, and among many Hindoos positive aversion to vaccinating their children exist. I have made many inquiries on this subject, and find that one substantial reason every where exists for objection, viz. the objection that a pa- rent naturally has to carry his child from his home to another village for the purpose of supplying lymph wherewith to vaccinate others ; in many places I have been told by the people, &quot; we have no objection to have our children vaccinated, but object to carry our chil- dren to other villages, and to have the lymph taken from the vesicle to vaccinate other children.&quot; Among many Hindoos there are objections to every thing in connection with vacci- nation, for reasons which are well known, but it is pleasing to be able to state that the Brahmins and other influential Hindoos as well as Mussulmans in Tatta gave me every assistance in persuading the ignorant, and set the example of submitting their own children to be vaccinated ; the Bhatias of that town are incorrigible, and I believe they are every where the same in Sind, as regards vaccination, but they are only a small body. The Brah- mins object to let the lymph be taken from the arm, apparently from no other reason than the fear of giving the child pain : at present in Sind no other method of carrying on vaccina- nation exists, than from arm-to-arm, and it is still doubtful if tube-lymph will remove the necessity for always carrying a child with the vaccinator. To diminish the inconvenience arising to parents from having to carry their children to other villages, I have given strict injunctions to the vaccinators, that they shall never take a child further than is absolutely necessary, and always to pay the parents in cash, for the loss of the wages of labour for the time they may detain them. To ensure as much control in this matter as I possibly can, I have issued a cir- cular on the subject, and instructed each vaccinator to send me a weekly report, from which I can form a tolerably correct notion of his movements, and of his payments to parents. In the month of September I visited Colonel Green (then Acting Commissioner) in Kurrachee, and in a conversation regarding the introduction and spread of vaccination in the Northern Frontier District he said that the Belooches there had as much aversion to vaccination as they had years ago, that he had personally endeavored to persuade some of them to submit to vaccination, but had not succeeded, and that probably any attempt to spread vaccination there at present will be unsuccessful. I have not yet visited that district, and personally know nothing of the feelings of the people, but I think if Colonel Green could not persuade them, it is not likely I will be able to do so. There are several ways of testing the truthfulness of the vaccinators' reports :11 where vaccination had been carried on two or three years previously, and he appropriates the names of children previously successfully vaccinated. When the Native official went to the place it would turn out that the children were vaccinated, but it is not likely that he would take such trouble as to discover those who had been vaccinated by the vaccinator whose work he might be testing, and those who had been vaccinated years before by another vaccinator, hence this method is also open to objection. The third method is the only one which I con- sider offers a certain test both of the truth of the Register and of the character of the work performed ; I have therefore adopted that course alone. This method is very simple and only requires a great deal of patient labor, but the result amply repays the trouble, for it demon- strates the actual state of the work performed by the vaccinator whose work is under examination, and gives great opportunity for the Superintendent obtaining correct information regarding the conduct of the vaccinators in their intercourse with the people, and this latter point requires some attention. When I first began inspecting, I was content with merely seeing as many children as were collected, and drawing a very general conclusion, because I seldom ever saw as many children as had been reported, hence I determined to abandon such a loose method of testing the reports, and adopted the following plan. At every village where I go to inspect work, I generally first call over the names of the reported children either to the pattell, zemindar, mookhee, or some person who was present at the time the children were vaccinated ; while the roll is being called over the children are collecting. I make a mark against the names of children of whom they deny the existence; second, when the children are assembled the names are again called over, and I see each child's arm as his or her name is called, and the result, successful or otherwise, is noted, or if they have not been vaccinated that fact is noted; in short, whatever the result may be, it is marked down in the Nominal Roll. With reference to Circular No. 2037 of 1863, dated 8th September 1863, of Principal Inspector-General Medical Department, calling for a notice of&quot; any striking facts regarding the protective power or success of vaccination, in order that it may be widely made known by being published in the vernacular of each District, &c.&quot; I cannot say that any special case has come to my notice during the past year, but I can state, that after having travelled over the greater part of Sind, and after having personally examined thousands of children and hundreds of villages, that a man only requires to travel from the one end of Sind to the other with his eyes open to read in the faces of the rising generation what the benefits of vaccination are to this Province. Here almost every adult is marked with small-pox, and a great portion of the population below ten years old are vaccinated and have escaped small- pox; it is true a great many below ten years old are marked, but few marked were vaccinated, no doubt some who were vaccinated are also marked by small-pox. After many inquiries, and no little pains taken to find out, I can say that I have never heard of a single successfully vaccinated child having died of small-pox ; I know that a few unsuccessfully vaccinated chil- dren have died of small-pox. What the deaths from small-pox must have been among a popu- lation, whose every adult's face is marked, may be imagined. I will keep the object of the Circular in view, and if any thing worthy of being reported occurs, I will report it.
12 KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.13 REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent.14 PEYNT (NASSICK). One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon SUMMERS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 148 .... .... 100 67.5 1863.... 305 157 .... 177 58.0 It is satisfactory to report that the assistant vaccinator who joined the Peynt State in June 1862, has shown much zeal in the performance of vaccination during the past 12 months ; the excess in the total number vaccinated the past, compared with the previous year, amounts to 157, of the total number vaccinated 128 are shown in the return as unsuccessful, for which no cause is assigned in the vaccinator's Muratha report. The people in the district are desirous of availing themselves of the benefit of vaccination, but averse to bring the children to show the result.
15 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. TANNA. Assistant Surgeon J. G. ASHER, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 38 .... .... 9 23.7 1863.... 71 33 .... 61 85.9 The work returned for last year has been accomplished through the agency of the Civil Hospital Establishment, and is satisfactory in results though far from so in quantity. Whenever I can see a chance of succeeding, I shall attempt to have a special vaccinator for the town entertained by the Municipality, and by this means perhaps such indirect sanction and support of vaccination by the more influential natives, who constitute Municipal Commis- sioners, may not be without its small effect for good. POONA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. G. LORD, M. D. (Acting.) YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,832 .... .... 1,535 83.7 1863.... 1,918 86 .... 1,587 82.7 The assistant vaccinator appears from his reports to have carried on work regularly and diligently for the past year. There is a trifling increase in the total numbers operated on, and in the proportion of female children, though why the latter should be so many less than the males, I am at a loss to understand. In former days, if occurring in a Rajpoot State, it might be looked upon as indicative of the practice of female infanticide, but in Poona no such cause can be supposed to exist, and there must be some disinclination on the part of parents to submit female children to the operation.
16 AHMEDNUGGUR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon J. G. FRASER, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,240 .... .... 1,010 81.4 1863.... 1,260 20 .... 1,017 80.7 During the year 1863 as compared with the preceding year 1862 there has been an increase of 20 persons vaccinated, the total number of vaccinations being 1,260, there has also been an increase of 7 in the number of successful cases, the percentage of success being very nearly the same as for the preceding year 1862. The decrease during the year 1862 as compared with the preceding year 1861 was accounted for by the great prevalence of cholera from the month of March to the month of June 1862, and the increase for the year embraced in the present report may be similarly accounted for by the absence of cholera during almost the whole year 1863 ; very few cases of small-pox having occurred within the same period, either in the city of Nuggur or its immediate neighbourhood. SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Sugeon, Asst. Surgeon H. V. CARTER, M.D. (Acting.) YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,435 .... .... 1,265 88.1 1863.... 3,832 2,397 .... 2,924 76.3 The above table includes the whole of the past year. It shows a very large increase indeed on the numbers of previous and some late years (amounting to upwards of 60 per cent. in the former) and may be regarded as furnishing satisfactory evidence of the efficiency of the assistant vaccinator as well as of the desire of the people to partake of the advantages held out to them in preventing sickness. The report of my predecessor, which is here included,
17 for the first nine months of the year, shows that during that time, as in the last three, there was a continuous increase in the number vaccinated. Dr. Cook has also noted that the lymph was generally good, and the same remark may now be made, although the vesicles I have seen have not been large. The large number vaccinated in the past year seems to be accounted for by the unusual prevalence of small-pox in the districts around Sattara, which has induced the inhabitants to seek more freely the desired protection. Such is the statement of the vaccinator, I have no means of verifying it, but think the explanation reasonable. Small-pox has not prevailed as an epidemic in the town of Sattara during the past year, and though my experience in this locality is limited, I consider that the opportunities for vaccination are sufficient to place this prophylactic measure within easy reach of the people. SHOLAPORE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Asst. Surgeon C. F. OGILVIE, M.D. YEARS . Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.. 1,392 .... .... 854 61.3 1863.. 1,438 46 .... 819 56.9 During the past year the number of persons vaccinated has amounted to 1,438; of which 754 were males, and 684 females; 420 were children under one year, and 1,018 children above that age ; 819 were successful, 336 unsuccessful, and 283 doubtful, the percentage of success being nearly 57. As compared with the previous year there is an increase of 46 in the total number of operations, but the percentage of success does not contrast favourably with last year, that having been 61.3; but I would remark, that although the percentage of the last two years is very small, it may be accounted for in this way. I very carefully examine the result of the operations twice weekly, and if through the carelessness of the parents, the pustules are destroyed, these are returned, as unsuccessful, and are again vaccinated. This will also account for the large proportion of cases returned as doubtful. It is most probable that most of these would have been successful, if proper care had been taken of the arm in the first instance. My reasons for making this assertion, are, that in no instance where I have myself performed the operation has it proved unsuccessful. Of the various castes the Hindoos have been the most numerous, viz. 787, next Mussulmans 410, and other castes 240. Only one Christian is reported. The lymph has been of good quality throughout the year, the virus being apparently as effective during the monsoon, as in other seasons, and the supply has been uninterrupted. v 3
18 DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. R. COLSTON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862 857 .... .... 796 92.8 1863 732 .... 125 655 89.4 Vaccination has been performed twice a week in this station during the past year, with about the usual result, and great care has been exercised in selection of cases for propagating the virus ; the usual apathy and passive opposition have been experienced, and the difficulties in obtaining subjects for Vaccination have increased, the Vaccinator making incessant complaint that he does not meet with the necessary assistance from the Native official whose duty it is supposed to be to seek out the unprotected. The return furnished monthly by the mamlut- dar confirms the vaccinator's statement, as the latter succeeds with perseverance and difficulty (having no peon allowed now bearing the insignia of authority) in hunting out at least four- fold the number returned as unprotected by the former. NASSICK. One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. SUMMERS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 854 .... .... 629 73.6 1863.... 570 .... 284 426 74.7 During the year just expired the number of children vaccinated has been less than the preceding year, which exhibits a total of 854, and for the year 1863 the figures are 314 males and 256 females, making a total of 570, less by 284 compared with the preceding year. This is attributed to the difficulty of procuring subjects for the operation, owing to the want of the aid of a peon, who was removed in April 1862.
19 BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon G. G. W. MAITLAND (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Sucess- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 556 .... .... 542 97.4 1863.... 547 .... 9 536 98.0 During the past year 547 persons have been vaccinated in the town of Belgaum. Of these 536 were successful, 9 unsuccessful, and 2 doubtful. Taking into consideration that the population of Belgaum is upwards of 30,000 persons, the amount of work performed is not satisfactory. The want of a peon is one cause ascribed for the paucity of vaccinations, and judging by former experience, I am inclined to believe a peon, to assist the vaccinator in collect- ing subjects and arranging for their re-appearance at stated intervals, very essential to the well working of the system. Small-pox as an epidemic has not manifested in either of the towns of Shapoor or Belgaum during the past year. DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. MENNIE. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated Percent- age of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,478 .... .... 1,346 91.0 1863.... 1,080 .... 398 971 89.9 Throughout the year the vaccine lymph continued in good condition, and never failed, and judging from the appearance of the vesicles it did not deteriorate in character. The conduct of the vaccinator is satisfactory, and his work carefully performed. The total number of persons vaccinated during the past year was 1,080, while in 1862 there were 1,478. The above table will therefore show that there has been a decrease in actual figures of 398 in the returns of this, compared with the preceding year. Of the number vaccinated there were 971 successful cases recorded, or 89.9 per cent. on the whole. 853 were above the age of one year, and 227 under one year. The decrease in the number vaccinated may be accounted for from the fact that small-pox did not prevail in an epidemic form during the year, so that the natives were not so willing or anxious to have the benefit of vaccination, excepting in the month of January, when a few cases of small-pox occurred in the town, and 104 children were vaccinated in this month.
20 KOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. MILLS, YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 2,879 .... .... 2,737 95.0 1863.... 3,022 143 .... 2,945 97.4 The progress of vaccination during the past year has been satisfactory. In 1862 there was an increase of 63 over the average of the five preceding years, but of only 2 over 1861. In 1863 there has been an increase of 271 over the average of five years, and of 143 over 1862. The monthly average of vaccinations has been 252, but during February, March and April it was greatly in excess of this number. The average during three months being 424. The fears of the people were excited by the prevalence of small-pox, and a great stimulus was thereby given to vaccination. I have again the pleasure of recording a considerable increase in the proportion of successful operations ; in 1862 they increased from 92.3 to 95 per cent., and during the past year they have reached 97.4 per cent., but only 6 cases are actually known to have been unsuccessful, the remaining 71 are cases in which the children have not been seen after operation, and of which it is fair to conclude that a very large proportion were successful,21 HONORE. On Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon A. E. M. Ross. YEARS. Total Vaccinated Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percent- age of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 773 .... .... 654 84.6 1863.... 474 .... 299 371 78.2 I regret to have to notice a serious falling off in the past as compared with the preceding year in the number of operations performed by the station vaccinator of 299, the total number vaccinated in 1863 being 4 74, in 1862, 773. In the latter year 119 cases were unsuccessful, in the former 103, Thus not only has the number of operations performed become less, but the proportion of unsuccessful to successful cases has become much greater. The prejudice of the Hindoo population against the prophylactic is still, I regret to say, as strong as ever, and to this cause must the vaccinator's want of success be partly ascribed. The prevailing fever forms a prominent excuse on the part of those of the people who are unwilling to receive the prophylactic. If an interest were shown by the Magisterial Department in the spread of the prophylactic, it would, I am sure, be much more favourably received, but from the reports I receive from the vaccinator I am led to believe that the subordinate officers of that department are still among the most vigorous opponents of its introduction. VINGORLA. Senior Apothecary S. HANSON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 159 .... .... 145 91.2 1863.... 162 3 .... 145 89.5 The total number vaccinated during the year ending 31st December 1863 was 162, being an increase of 3 on that of the previous year. Of these 84 were male, and 78 female children ; 33 were under one year, and 129 above that age. The successful vaccinations have been 145 or 89.5 per cent. on the total number vaccinated. The lymph and vesicles were good. No cases of small-pox came under observation during the year.
22 ADEN. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon J. F. STEINHAUSER, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated Compared with the preceding Year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,004 .... .... 587 584 1863.... 622 .... 382 426 68.5 The very large decrease in the numbers vaccinated during the year 1863 sufficiently demonstrated how unsatisfactory vaccination at this station has been during the year. At the close of 1862 the lymph in use was good, producing vesicles with the true characteristic appearances, but was lost by culpable neglect on the part of the assistant vaccinator. I succeeded in re-establishing on this occasion perfect lymph from capillary tubes sent from England, but in the month of January the assistant vaccinator absconded. Vaccination from this period was carried on with effective virus by the Second Hospital Assistant of the Civil Hospital with a view to preserve the lymph by direct vaccination from arm to arm until a new candidate for the vacant post could be found. Of the many applicants a young Arab with the rare accomplishment among this people of being able to read and write, was selected and duly placed under instruction. Healthy children were now selected for operation with the lymph sent from England in the month of July and August, but by six capillary tubes employed not one typical vesicle was produced, proving that lymph even thus preserved will deteriorate in this hot and damp climate. There can never be a dearth of subjects for vaccination at Aden, though they may be difficult to find, as the population is very fluctuat- ing, nor are the Arabs, Somalis, and Jews23 During the past year 231 persons were vaccinated with success, thus showing a decrease as compared with 1862 of 93. The vaccine lymph failed last year on the 9th of May on account of the heat, a fresh supply of matter was got from Bombay, and vaccination was recommenced on the 26th of November. AHMEDABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon D. WYLLIE, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Sucees- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 2,778 .... .... 2,666 95.9 1863.... 2,686 .... 92 2,588 96.3 In respect of age, males as usual predominated, the number being 1,508 to 1,178 females. But this difference was less marked than it was during the previous year, when the former equalled 57.6 per cent. of the whole. As to age, 1,862 were under one year, against 824 over that age. Previous to 1859 the number falling under the latter head had been uniformly the larger. The results were particularly satisfactory, and compare favourably with previous experience, the failures only amounting to 51, and the doubtful cases to 47. The lymph continued of good quality up to September when there were signs, in some few cases, of deterioration which led to a trial of lymph from Europe. A larger and better form- ed vesicle was the result, and thus the new lymph was gradually introduced till it finally supplanted the old towards the close of the year. A few isolated cases of small-pox occurred in camp during January and February, but the first appearance of the disease in the city was delayed till March. It lingered on till the middle of June, and vanished with the first heavy fall of rain. The type of attack was not only milder, but the seizures were also fewer than I have hitherto known; while the entire number of deaths did not exceed twelve. No instance of inoculation has come to notice for many years, and no doubt the practice has altogether ceased in this Collectorate. Vaccination is in no way opposed. Ordinarily speaking it must simply be brought to the doors of the people, and be arranged to suit their convenience to succeed. There are exceptions, of course, for some few voluntarily seek it, mostly the humbler class of settlers from a distance, and particularly those from Rajpootana ; while others stand quietly aloof, notably the Borah and other exclusive sects of the Maho- medan population.
24 KAIRA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. JHONSON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... .... .... .... .... .... 1863.... 433 433 .... 358 82.7 The total number vaccinated during the year is 433. Of these males 318, femlaes 115; total number of successful cases 358. The lymph used was generally of fair quality, and the vesicles of average size and well formed. There has been no difficulty in getting children for vaccination. The vaccinator merely having to give notice of his arrival, and the people willingly brought their children to be vaccinated. The better class of Mussulmans and Hindoos send for the vaccinator to their houses, and are glad to avail themselves of his services, and seem thankful for them. His tour has extended as far as three coss about the suburbs of Kaira, and in and about the town. He now confines his labours more to the town of Kaira itself, the assistant vaccinator of the district having taken objection to his working in the districts. SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. A. SHEPHARD. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,740 .... .... 1,518 87.2 1863.... 1,955 215 .... 1,749 89.4 During the year ending on the 31st of December 1863, 1,955 children of Surat were vacci- nated, exhibiting an increase of 215 over the year 1862, and nearly 100 over the records of any previous year. Of the 1,955 a large proportion, viz. 1,672 were Hindoos; 1,108 were children under one year; and those above one year, viz. 847, although not thus shown in the table, were nearly all children under 2 years of age. Vaccination is now performed at two stations at different ends of the city, namely, the Civil Hospital, and the Station Dispensary. It is performed at each of these places, twice a week, and is immediately under my personal observation, direction, and control.
25 BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. GLEN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 931 .... .... 735 78.9 1863.... 1,203 272 .... 1,040 78.9 The total number of persons vaccinated during the past year has amounted to 1,203, being an increase of 272 over the year 1862. Of this number 723 were males, the remainder females. Of children vaccinated under one year, the number amounts to 696, above that age to 507. Of the various castes, Hindoos, as has ever been the case in Broach and its vicinity, greatly preponderate ; they never, or rarely ever, raise objections concerning religious or other caste prejudices, such as are frequently met with in the Mussulman and Parsee com- munities. The increase this year may be attributed to the more steady working of the vaccination establishment, and to a better acquaintance with the people, which the present incumbent has gained. RAJCOTE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon E. R. BUTLER. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 821 .... .... 708 86.2 1863.... 1,341 520 .... 1,192 88.9 No Report received. v 4
26 KUTCH. Mr. SUDDASHEW HEMRAJ, G. G. M. C. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 79 .... .... 44 55.6 1863.... 15 .... 64 .... .... No Report received. KURRACHEE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. BEAN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,130 .... .... 1,061 93.8 1863.... 3,945 2,815 .... 3,945 100.0 The returns of the year just terminated exhibit a large increase in the number of vacci- nations. This is mainly due to the zeal and attention of the station vaccinator, whose conduct in the discharge of his duties has always merited the highest approval. In the beginning of November last his sphere of action was considerably enlarged by the extension of Municipal limits, consequent on the taking over of the large bazaars of the camp, from the Military authorities, and the doing away of the appointment of camp vaccinator. It will be seen by the returns, that, comparatively, only a small number of Hindoos has been vaccinated, and it is to be regretted that much opposition continues to be experienced from this section of the population, in our endeavours to propagate vaccination, notwithstanding the aid and assistance we have always received in this matter from the magisterial autho- rities. The migratory population, such as Bruhooes and Mekranees, appear to have the highest opinion of its efficacy, and have throughout the year attended voluntarily at the Civil Hospital to be vaccinated, latterly in large numbers, since small-pox has been prevalent. This disease made its appearance about two months ago, and has been slightly epidemic ever since.
27 HYDRABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Asst. Surgeon A. N. E. RIDDELL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Precentage of Success. Increase. Decresae. 1862.... 1,611 .... .... 1,269 78.7 1863.... 1,115 .... 496 872 78.2 During this year 1,115 cases have been vaccinated, showing a decrease of 496 on the previous year. Of males 582, and females 533, were vaccinated. Of these 155 cases were considered unsuccessful and 88 doubtful. I took charge of the Civil Hospital in the month of April, and found that the vaccinator was in the habit of vaccinating in the city, and only brought children to me occasionally to show the quality of lymph and vesicles : I told him it was necessary I should see, if not all the cases vaccinated, yet a large proportion of them, and as he failed in this, I desired that vaccination should take place at the Civil Hospital. This was done daily in the month of July, and the returns at once fell nearly one-half. Finding daily vaccination unsatisfactory,. I finally succeeded in establishing it twice a week, viz. On Mondays and Thursdays, at the Civil Hospital, under my personal inspection. I have no doubt that the decrease in the yearly total is due to my personal superintendence rendering it almost impossible for a false return to be made. SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. F. FFOLLIOTT. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percent- age of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 1,448 .... .... 1,447 99.9 1863.... 1,618 170 .... 1,456 89.9 Vaccination has been steadily carried on by the assistant vaccinator under my superintendence during the past nine months, the total number vaccinated during the year shows a slight increase as contrasted with the previous year, and the quality of the lymph and character
28 of the vesicles continue satisfactory. No opposition is offered to the practice of vaccination, which is conducted in my presence from arm to arm, and shows a high percentage of success- ful results. During the spring months small-pox was prevalent in the town of Shikarpoor, but not in an epidemic form, only two cases came under treatment, both of whom recovered, and no death from the disease has been reported by the fouzdar. Lymph continues to be supplied to the Civil Surgeon at Jacobabad, and the Sub-Assistant Surgeon at Sukkur, when required. From the accompanying table it will be seen that the total number vaccinated has amounted to 1,618, the operation has been successful in 1,456 cases ; unsuccessful in 155, and doubtful in 7. Of the unsuccessful cases only one occurred in a child under 10 years of age, and the remaining 154 in adults. The vaccinator is correct and industrious. KOTREE. Assistant Surgeon R. M. CONNELL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1862.... 28 .... .... 28 100.0 1863.... 112 48 .... 108 96.4 There is no vaccinator employed under the Civil Surgeon. The number 28 vaccinated in 1862 were vaccinated in the month of December of same year, consequently it cannot be considered a yearly return. 112 were vaccinated at the Civil Hospital, Kotree, during the year 1863, viz. 10 Christains, 18 Hindoos, 84 Mussulmans, of whom 19 were under one year old, 39 above one year. In the absence of a native vaccinator, great difficulties are experienced in carrying on vaccination. On receipt of the last annual vaccination report by the Principal Inspector-General, I brought to the 'notice of the Municipality the suggestion contained in paragraph 9 of the Government Resolution with reference to paragraph 80 of the Principal Inspector-General's Report, and I am happy to say, it was decided that a native vaccinator for the town and talooka of Kotree be entertained on a salary of Rupees (15) fifteen a month, to be paid by the Municipality.
APPENDIX.
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERIN- Table showing the Number and Names of the Circles, and their Superintendents; the those of last Year; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Operations performed by each Number. CIRCLES. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1862. Increase. Decrease. 1 PRESIDENCY ................. Sub-Assistant Surgeon Annuta Chundroba. 3 7,016 6,081 935 .. 2 NORTHERN ................ Assistant Surgeon R. Dick, M. D. ........... 32 49,346 38,160 11,186 .. 3 CENTRAL ............. iii No. I. TENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. Number of Vaccinators employed; the Total Vaccinations performed and compared with Result; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated; and the Average Number of Vaccinator, for the Year 1863. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toiv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS Table of Vaccination through the Agency of Native Chiefs, arranged according to for the Number. CIRCLES and STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1862. Increase. Decrease. 1 NORTHERN .... Assistant Surgeon R. Dick, M. D. ................ 10 16,317 13,746 2,571 .. 2 CENTRAL ........ Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. Summers ......... 1 305 148 157 .. 3 SOUTHERN .... Assistant Surgeon F. H. Plumptre ................. 19 15,319 16,734 .. 1,415 4 KATTIAWAR .. v No. II. AND OTHERS IN NATIVE TERRITORY. the Circles of Vaccination and Stations, and showing Details as in Table No. I., Year 1863. Total Number Vaccinated arranged according tovi TABLE VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1862. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna ................... .. 71 38 33 .. 35 36 Alibaugh ................... .. 89 89 .. .. 50 39 Bandora ................... .. 65 79 .. 14 50 15 Coorla................ .. 9 8 1 .. 6 3 Total.... .. 234 214 20 .. 141 93 2 POONA .............. Poona ................... 1 1,918 1,832 86 .. 1,121 797 Ahmednuggur ................... 1 1,260 1,240 20 .. 818 442 Sattara ................... 1 3,832 1,435 2,397 .. 2,115 1,717 Sholapoor ................... 1 1,438 1,392 46 .. 754 684 Dhoolia ................... 1 732 857 .. 125 399 333 Nassick ................... 1 570 854 .. 284 314 256 Total.... 6 9,750 7,610 2,140 .. 5,521 4,229 3 NORTHERN ...... Ahmedabad ................. 1 2,686 2,778 .. 92 1,508 1,178 Kaira ..................... 1 433 .. 433 .. 318 115 Surat ......................... 1 1,955 1,740 215 .. 1,057 898 Broach ......................... 1 1,203 931 272 .. 723 480 Rajcote ................... 1 1,341 821 520 .. 731 610 Total.... 5 7,618 6,270 1,348 .. 4,337 3,281 4 SOUTHERN ....... Belgaum ..................... 1 547 556 .. 9 318 220 Dharwar ..................... 1 1,080 1,478 .. 398 580 500 Kolapoor ...................... 1 3,022 2,879 143 .. 1,566 1,456 Rutnagherry ..................... 1 713 514 199 .. 416 297 Honora ..................... 1 474 773 .. 299 249 225 Hooblee ..................... 1 1,088 1,186 .. 98 567 521 Vingorla ..................... .. 162 159 3 .. 84 78 Total.... 6 7,086 7,545 .. 459 3,780 3,306 5 SIND ........................ Kurrachee ................. 1 3,945 1,130 2,815 .. 2,191 1,754 Hydrabad ................ 1 1,115 1,611 .. 496 582 533 Shikarpoor ................. 1 1,618 1,448 170 .. 947 671 Dispensaries................ .. 2,563 2,461 102 .. 1,466 1,097 Total.... 3 9,241 6,650 2,591 .. 5,186 4,055 6 ADEN ...................... Aden ....................... 1 622 1,004 .. 382 485 137 7 PERSIAN GULF.... Bushire................ .. 231 324 .. 93 120 111 Grand Total.... 21 34,782 29,617 5,105 .. 19,570 15,212
vii No. III. SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. I. for the Year 1863. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according toviii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1862. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. No 1, Vaccination under Superintendents in British Territory ................................................... 181,464 163,637 17,827 .... 98,484 82,980 No. 2, Ditto ditto and others in Native ditto .. 51,749 52,311 .... 562 27,105 24,644 No. 2, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ....... 34,782 29,617 5,165 .... 19,570 15,212 Total.... 267,995 245,565 22,430 .... 145,159 122,836
ix No. IV. FOR THE YEAR 1863. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according tox TABLE No. V. TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1863, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS, &c. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under One Year. Above One Year. Under. Above. I.xi TABLE No. VI. EMPLOYMENT RETURN OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1863. NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.xii SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.xiii KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.XV GENERAL DEPARTMENT. GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION, No. 1100, 25TH JUNE 1864. The Governor in Council is gratified to find that the returns for the year under report show a &quot;decided improvement,&quot; and that the number of vaccina- tions has more than recovered the falling off which was noticed in 1862; and His Excellency in Council trusts that the sanction given to the employment of Peons with the view of assisting the Vaccinators in collecting the children of the villages visited for vaccination and inspection will have the results anticipated by the Principal Inspector-General of the Medical Department in paragraph 7 of his Report. 2. The Governor in Council has also learnt with satisfaction that the desire which Government expressed in paragraph 5 of their Resolution No. 1131, dated 27th July 1863, that Officers in charge of Districts should give the aid of their influence in support of the Vaccination Department, has been so cordially attended to by the Native Officials of the Northern Circle. His Excellency in Council trusts that every Native Official will bear in mind the wishes of Government in this respect. 3. The Principal Inspector-General, whilst noticing the assistance which Dr. Dick acknowledges to have thus received from the Civil authorities, ascribes the large increase in the number of vaccinations in the Northern Circle as &quot;mainly due to his own unwearied exertions.&quot; The distance which Dr. Dick travelled, and the large number of Vaccinators whose work he examined, during the season, appear to His Excellency in Council to fully justify the high opinion recorded by Dr. Stovell of his diligence and zeal. 4. The plan adopted by Dr. Beatty for facilitating the work of his Vacci- nators is a very judicious one, and, as it appears to have worked satisfactorily, it is deserving of trial in the other Circles. 5. The Governor in Council is glad to learn that the suggestion thrown out in the Principal Inspector-General's Report of the previous year, and approved of by Government, to enlist the aid of the Municipalities in support of vaccination, has been acted upon in the Collectorate of Sattara. v 7
xvi 6.His Excellency in Council has perused with interest the remarks of Dr. Plumptre on this subject, and considers that the acknowledgements of Government are due to Dr. Plumptre for the manner in which he has carried out this proposal, and to Mr. Chapman for his co-operation in the measure. 7.The Governor in Council desires that the satisfaction of Government may also be expressed to the Municipal Commissions who have so readily entered into the suggestion. 8.The satisfaction of Government should likewise be expressed to the Municipalities of Kotree and Hooblee, by which Vaccinators were entertained at their own expense. 9.The acknowledgments of Government are also due to Major Keatinge for the interest he has shown, and the support he has given, to the cause of vaccination in Kattywar, and the Governor in Council desires that he will express the same to those Chiefs within his jurisdiction who have afforded him co-operation in the good work. 10.The Political Agent Southern Muratha Country should intimate to the Chief of Koorundwar and his Karbaree the pleasure with which Govern- ment have learnt from the report of Dr. Plumptre the assistance given to him by them personally when he visited the Jagheer. The Governor in Council trusts that the other Chiefs and Jagheerdars of the Southern Muratha Country, as also elsewhere, will not content themselves with merely employing Vacci- nators, but that they will give that support to the efforts of the Officers of the Department which the exhibition of their personal interest in the work is so calculated to afford. 11.With regard to paragraphs 21 to 24 and 35 to 38 of the Report, the Governor in Council regrets that the Principal Inspector-General has been unable to do anything towards carrying out the suggestions contained in para- graph 4 of the Resolution on last year's Report for the publication in the ver- nacular of each District of a statement of facts proving the great benefits con- ferred by vaccination, for distribution among the people. Dr. Plumptre seems to have drawn up some such statement, but it is to be regretted that, owing to delay in the Oriental Translator's Office, he did not receive it in time for issue during the season under report. 12.His Excellency in Council considers that the translation into the vernaculars, and the publication annually in the form of a small tract, of the Report of the Principal Inspector-General, and of the Resolution of Govern- ment thereon, for distribution, might do much good, and will have the present Report translated and published. The Principal Inspector-General in his
xvii next year's Report should be requested to state whether he considers the plan should be continued. 13. His Excellency in Council also considers that it might draw the atten- tion of the people generally to the subject of vaccination, and have a useful effect, were the Village Officers throughout all the Districts required to submit returns of the number of cases of small-pox which have occurred during the year, the number of these in which the patients had been vaccinated, and the number unprotected by the prophylactic, the number of the former who were vaccinated during infancy or otherwise, and, lastly, the mortality among each class. The publication and distribution of this information annually would doubtless do much good. 14. It is gratifying to find the proportion of infantile vaccinations conti- nues to increase. As observed in the Resolution on last year's Report, there can be no surer test than this of the value which vaccination is acquiring in the eyes of the people, and it is of the greater importance as it is stated (para- graph 20 of the Report) that the accumulated experience of Europe shows that vaccination during infancy gives a greater security from small-pox than when resorted to at any later age. This is a fact which cannot be too promi- nently made known or explained. 15. The Governor in Council has learnt with satisfaction that there have been no cases of inoculation during the year under report in Sind, and that the steps taken by the Commissioner in Sind appear calculated to put an end completely to the practice in that Province. 16. The attention of the Magistrate of Surat should be drawn to para- graphs 25 and 26 of the Report. 17. The character of the vaccine lymph is a subject of great importance, and it is satisfactory that the quality of it &quot;has been well reported on by nearly all the Medical Officers.&quot; Nothing is more calculated to create greater distrust of the efficacy of vaccination as a safeguard than the occurrence of cases of small-pox in vaccinated subjects, the result, probably, of the employment of deteriorated lymph. It is, therefore, highly gratifying to learn that the increased remuneration authorized to be given to Native parents for allowing their children to be conveyed from village to village for ensuring the transmis- sion of fresh lymph has had beneficial results. 18. The suggestion adverted to in paragraph 34 of the Report is a judicious one, and the Governor in Council is glad to find that Dr. Stovell has taken steps to carry it into practice.
xviii 19. In conclusion, the Governor in Council desires to record his appre- ciation of the services of the several Superintendents whose exertions have been prominently brought to notice by Dr. Stovell. Special mention has already been made of Drs. Beatty, Dick, and Plumptre. Dr. Pinkerton, in Sind, appears to have maintained the high character which the Department bore in that Province under his predecessor. His Excellency in Council has perused with pleasure the testimony borne by Dr. Stovell to the conduct of the Vaccinators generally. (Signed) H. J. JACOMB, Officiating Under-Secretary to Government. BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND. FOR THE YEAR 1864. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1865.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1864. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1865.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1864. No. 555 OF 1865. From the PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department, To the SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) 4. In the report for 1863, I alluded to three important measures recently sanctioned by Government for increasing the efficiency of the department, viz: 1st.( v ) Kotree ; but there was a considerable falling off under the Civil Surgeons at Sattara, Kolapoor, Kurrachee, and Hydrabad. 10.About 8 per cent. of the operations proved either unsuccessful or doubtful. Thus out of the 332,894 vaccinations, 306,525 were reported as successful. That the returns received by the Superintendents from their native vaccinators, on this and other points, are in the main correct, there is good reason to believe ; and certainly the most strenuous efforts are made by the Superintendents to test their accuracy by personal inspection and by other means. Instances of falsification, however, are occasionally met with. It should, therefore, be understood that the figures are to be regarded, not in the light of perfect accuracy, but merely as an approximation to it. Two such instances occurred during the year, viz. one in the Central and one in the Southern Circle. In each case the vaccinator was dismissed the service. 11.As some 200 vaccinators, however, are employed under the Superin- tendents, and as only these two were detected in making false returns, it seems reasonable to conclude that the practice is by no means common. On this point Dr. Pinkerton states very pointedly that he travelled during the year in every district in Sind, that he examined the work of 14 vaccinators, and inspected upwards of 10,000 children, yet failed to detect a single instance of false registers. He then adds, &quot; if falsification existed I should certainly have detected it.&quot; 12.Dr. Butler makes a very similar remark. He states that he travelled over the greater part of Kattiawar, and examined the work of 19 vaccinators, yet &quot; did not find a single false return.&quot; 13.With regard to sex( vi ) than when resorted to at a later age. The result of the accumulated expe- rience of Europe all points in this direction ; and as still further confirmatory of the correctness of this view, I may mention that it was recently stated in a medical periodical that, at an interview which a deputation of the Epidemio- logical Society in London had a few months ago with the President of the Privy Council, it was urged by the members of the deputation that &quot; if every body was thoroughly well vaccinated in early infancy, small-pox might be nearly banished from our death registers&quot;. 17.I would, therefore, again urge upon the Superintendents of the Central and Southern Circles,( vii ) 21.Proofs, however, of the immunity afforded by vaccination, properly performed, may be met with everywhere. One of the most signal of all is perhaps to be found in the fact,( viii ) 26. The Superintendent in Sind, in his report for last year, mentions that when he went into the hills lying between Kurrachee and the Khan of Khelat's territory towards the Hubb River, he saw a number of children who had recently been inoculated, and on making enquiries he ascertained that at least two inocu- lators had been at work in that direction. He further states that the practice resulted in conveying small-pox into Kurrachee, and was the direct cause in producing the epidemic which prevailed in that town at the close of 1863. He adds that as soon as the disease took its terrible hold on Kurrachee, the inoculators went off, but he could not ascertain where they lived. 27. The Superintendent also ascertained that in the Meerpoor Sacra Kardarate, small-pox was kept up during the hot season by an inoculator named Shah Meer, a fukkeer. He saw the man's work in several villages, and states that as soon as the man ceased to inoculate, the disease ceased also. The circumstance was immediately reported to the Deputy Collector at Jerruck, who appears to have taken prompt measures with the view of stopping the practice. 28. Again. The Superintendent of the Central Circle mentions that reports had reached him of the existence of inoculators in the Tanna districts, and that in each case he had requested the magistrate to enquire into the matter, and to take proceedings against them, under the impression that paragraphs 269 and 270 of the Indian Penal Code gave him the requisite power. The magis- trate, however, replied that he had no power to do so. As differences of opinion appear to exist on this point, I would venture to suggest whether a reference might not be made to the law officers of Government,( ix ) 30. In some places, however, it appears at times to be impossible to keep up a supply of matter so as to be always ready for use ; but this need not excite any feeling of surprise, inasmuch as the same complaint is occasion- ally made in different parts of Europe. In illustration of my remark, I may mention that for a considerable time, last year, lymph could not be main- tained at Aden, and vaccination was in consequence suspended. Unhappily too, and for some reason unknown, as recently reported by the Civil Surgeon, the supply annually sent to that station direct from the National Vaccine Institution, failed to be received. At the Presidency itself it is sometimes exceedingly difficult to keep up a sufficient supply, and the difficulty is the greater in consequence of the strong dislike on the part of native parents to have the vesicles of their vaccinated children interfered with. 31. In the report for 1862 I mentioned that, for the purpose of guarding against the inconvenience resulting from this cause, Dr. Peet had entered into an arrangement with the National Vaccine Establishment, London, and the Royal Dispensary, Edinburgh, with the view of ensuring the receipt of periodical supplies. For a time the plan succeeded, but the requirements at home appear to have become so great that both these sources failed, and Dr. Husband, the Superintendent of the latter dept, reported that the demand in Scotland exceeded his capability of meeting it. 32. Dr. Plumptre, of the Southern Circle, alludes to the subject in his recent report, and urges the importance of obtaining lymph from Europe. He points out that thus &quot; there would be a continuous supply of fresh matter coming into the country, and the fear which has been expressed that the prophylactic in the course of years in a hot climate wears itself out, and ceases to possess its special properties, would be removed.&quot; 33. Without entering on the disputed question whether unrenewed lymph would or would not lose its properties in this country in the course of time, there can be no doubt that it is an object of importance to guard against its possible degeneration by obtaining occasional supplies from fresh sources. For this, as well as for other reasons, it seems most desirable that some arrangement should be made, if possible, to carry out more effectually than hitherto the proposal originally made by Dr. Peet, and now renewed by Dr. Plumptre. 34. Dr. Plumptre seems to think that an arrangement might be made for securing a quarterly supply. Bearing in mind, however, that the result of the general experience of India proves that lymph, obtained from Europe, more frequently fails than succeeds, and believing, as I do, that this loss of its properties is attributable to the injurious effects of heat during its passage 2 vac
( x ) from Egypt, and its subsequent transmission to out stations by post, I am inclined to think that the most effective plan would be to procure only one supply annually, and that during the coldest season of the year. It might be sent from England in November, so as to arrive here in December. By this arrangement we should secure the opportunity of distributing the lymph, wherever required, during the height of the cold season, and consequently of guarding as much as possible against the injurious effects of heat in transit. 35. For the purpose of carrying out this plan effectually I would invoke the aid of Government. I would venture to suggest that the Secretary of State for India be moved to communicate with the National Vaccine Establishment in London, with the view of obtaining, and of forwarding, an annual supply during the month specified. I would also suggest that the Secretary of State be further moved to request the Directors of the Peninsular and Oriental Company to allow the lymph to be kept in the ice-house of their steamers during the passage from Suez, as was proposed by Government in paragraph 15 of the Resolution passed on the report for 1862. The lymph ought to be forwarded solely in vaccination tubes, a very small number being sent to Aden, and a larger supply to Bombay. 36. In the last report it was mentioned that the plan of vaccination by municipalities, suggested by me in 1863, and approved of by Government, had been commenced by Dr. Plumptre in the Sattara zilla, with the hearty co-oper- ation of Mr. Chapman, at that time the Collector. Several municipal towns were grouped together into a &quot; division,&quot; to which was appointed a vaccina- tor on a salary of 15 rupees a month, and six such divisions were formed. I attached much importance to the commencement of this plan, as it promised to identify local municipal bodies with efforts to render the protective system of vaccination more extended, efficient, and complete. 37. Dr. Plumptre is not altogether satisfied with the result, which he states has disappointed him. The Deputy Inspector General of his Division, how- ever, does not participate in this feeling of disappointment, and sees no sufficient reason for being dissatisfied, merely because the expectations entertained have not been realized to their full extent. In the view thus expressed by Dr. Glasse I fully concur. The scheme, indeed, is so completely in its infancy that it would be premature to hazard an opinion as to its ultimate success. The result at present is, at all events, so far encouraging that nearly 3,000 people have been vaccinated by these six men. 38. In commencing the system, Dr. Plumptre stated that, beyond requiring a monthly return from each of the vaccinators, and examining the quality of the lymph, he should in no way interfere with its working, which ought to
( xi ) be left in the hands of the municipality which defrayed the expense. The returns, however, appeared to the Superintendent to be so very small, that he proposed to the Collector that a minimum amount of work to be done by each vaccinator should be fixed, and that if he failed to do this, he should receive a salary of only 10 rupees instead of 15. 39.The Collector, however, did not approve of this suggestion, and pro- posed instead that the Superintendent should take upon himself the entire control of the vaccinators in the way of punishing by fine. The Superin- tendent objected to this, and, I think, on well-based grounds. His main argument is thus stated:( xii ) to the influence of Dr. Lord at Poona, and of Dr. Asher at Tanna, vaccinators have recently been entertained by the municipalities of both these towns. Municipal vaccination has, therefore, now been introduced into the Sattara districts, and at Hooblee, Dharwar, Kotree, Poona, and Tanna. 44.Vaccination in Sind, which for many years past has been in a satis- factory state, has recently been rendered still more effective by the adoption of a plan, proposed by Dr. Pinkerton, the Superintendent, for appointing local vaccinators as a supplementary aid to the Government establishment. Considering the extent and population of the province, and the impossibility of the existing number of vaccinators going over the whole of it sufficiently often to keep the infant population protected, Dr. Pinkerton proposed an addition of 11 vaccinators, to be employed in the same number of different districts, and to be paid out of the local funds. 45.The proposal was warmly supported by Dr. Ritchie, the Deputy In- spector General of the Division, as being well adapted for increasing the effici- ency of the department, and for extending its benefits more thoroughly and completely over every part of the province. It was ultimately sanctioned by the Commissioner, who thus unmistakeably proved the deep interest he takes in the subject. 46.Government are aware that some time ago Dr. Plumptre drew up a short paper, descriptive of the facts of vaccination, and illustrative of its bene- fits. It was written in so plain a style as to be readily understood by the mass of the people. Translations have since been made into Marathi, Guje- rati, and Canarese, and copies widely circulated. I have reason to believe that much good has already resulted in those districts in which copies were early distributed, and I have no doubt will also result in those in which there was some delay in doing so. The paper not only brings the subject directly before the people, but being circulated by order of the Civil and Political authorities, it will no doubt have the desirable effect of impressing upon native officials the wishes of Government on the subject, and consequently the importance of their affording every assistance in their power in furthering the cause. 47. In paragraph 12 of the Resolution of Government on the last report, His Excellency in Council expressed an opinion that the translation into the vernaculars, and the publication, of the report and of the Resolution of Go- vernment thereon, might do much good, and decided that such should be done, directing me, at the same time, to state whether I thought the plan should be continued. 48. I am as yet unable to form any decided opinion on the point, inas- much as I have had no opportunity of ascertaining its effect, the translations
( xiii ) not having yet been printed. On the 13th ultimo the Oriental Translator to Government, in reply to an inquiry, informed me as follows :( xiv ) moting the success of the cause entrusted to their care, and the statements in paragraphs 6 and 8 prove how great that success has been. I, therefore, beg to commend to the favourable notice of Government the exertions of Drs. Butler, Dick, Plumptre, Pinkerton, and Turnbull. 54.Nor must I omit to state that, with a few exceptions, the general conduct of the vaccinators was very satisfactory. The good effects of the late decision of Government, to admit these men to the benefit of pensions, is already becoming apparent in promoting industry and good conduct. The knowledge that dismissal now involves the loss of prospective, as well as of present advantages, appears to be exerting a marked influence for good. 55.Before concluding the report I beg to record briefly that, since the commencement of the present year, the Government of India have been pleased, on the recommendation of His Excellency in Council, still further to increase the efficiency of the department by sanctioning several measures which were submitted for consideration. Among these I may mention the formation of an additional circle of vaccination, a small increase to the number and pay of the native vaccinators, and the grant of an additional travelling allowance for the Superintendents. As these subjects, however, do not strictly come within the history of the past year, I merely mention the bare facts, leaving further particulars to be dealt with at the proper time. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, M. STOVELL, M.D., Principal Inspector General, Medical Department. Bombay, 31st March, 1865.
( xv ) INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTSVACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent2 The average number of operations performed by each man is 2,235, an increase over 1863 of 669 per man. The greatest number of operations performed by a single individual was performed by General No. 80, Govind Moray, who vaccinated 4,345, children, and who was primus last year also. Close upon him, on the descending scale, come General Nos. 223, 159, and 133, all of whom have vaccinated upwards of 3,000 children. The honor of having vaccinated the smallest number is due to General No. 216, who was dismissed the service in December last for falsification of returns. I regret much my inability to report an increase in the proportion of children vaccinated under one year. The per-centage to total vaccinated is 11.41, or 1.36 per cent. less than last year : as will be seen below, the per-centage has been diminishing yearly for the last four years; these years show a per-centage as under3 I think it right, the preceding year having been my first in the department, to give an account of the method of inspection which I have adopted and invariably carry out. It is as follows:4 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent5 5thly.6 and the beginning of 1864, I visited the whole of the Kolapoor Native State, as well as some of those in the Belgaum Zillah, which gave at least a temporary stimulus to the vaccinators and the native officials. I have also been able to make some improvements in the position of the former, and, through the aid of the Political Agents, have obtained in some instances an increase to their pay, corresponding to the increase which the Go- vernment vaccinators draw as grain compensation allowance. More expeditious payments to the vaccinators is another point I have brought to the notice of the Political Agents, and also in one instance have had the pay changed from a fictitious to an actual coinage : the standard rupee being substituted for the hookeree rupee, a coin worth some two or three annas less. The more I see of the Native Chiefs, the more am I compelled to agree with the opinion of my predecessors, that there is little or no real interest felt by them in the promotion of vaccination in their States. Vaccinators are maintained only because they know it to be the wish of the Government. The Chiefs of Veeshalghur and Sawunt Warree are, perhaps, exceptions to this general assertion. In my Report for 1863 I mentioned that in a personal interview with the Chief of Sanglee (whose jagheer includes about 350 towns and villages distributed over an immense area of country) I had represented the insufficiency of only one vaccinator for the work, and obtained a half promise from him that another should be engaged. After a great deal of delay I received a final answer from him in Decem- ber to the effect that he declined to accede to the proposal. I cannot but regard vaccination under the Municipal Commissioners as the most unfavor- able portion of the whole of this Report. The system, it is true, is in its infancy, the first year of its existence having hardly been completed at the time this Report is being prepared; but still I am compelled to admit the result has disappointed me. On my introducing the system into the zillahs of this Circle I distinctly stated in my letter to the Collectors that, beyond requiring a monthly return from each of the vaccinators and examining the quality of the lymph in use, I should in no way interfere with the working of the establishment. Had I rigidly adhered to this resolution, the result of the system would have been much more un- satisfactory than it has already proved, and to prevent an utter failure I have written letter after letter on the subject of the small returns received. At last, in September, I proposed to Mr. Chapman, the Collector of Sattara, a difference in the system of payment of the vaccinator which in the case of those employed by the Municipal Commissioners was one very easy of adoption, namely fixing a minimum amount of work to be done by each vaccinator. If he failed to do this minimum, he would receive only Rs. 10 of his salary ; if he exceeded it, then he would draw the full amount of Rs. 15 a month. This proposition Mr. Chapman refused to accede to, and requested me to take upon myself the whole control of the vaccinators in the way of punishing by fine, as I do with the Government vaccinators. This I declined to do, as such a course seemed perfectly unnecessary, considering that, in the case of the Municipal Commissioners, the employers and the employed, both being on the spot together, nothing can be easier than for the members of the Commission to see that their vaccinator works to the full of his powers. The policy of my taking all the control of these men on myself seemed to me questionable. If the Municipal Commissioners are to be regarded as holding a position analogous to Parochial Boards in England, and in that light I view them, to begin a work by taking all independence of action and control from their hands, is the very way to promote apathy and indifference in the discharge of their office. The great thing is constantly to have it urged upon them, that their apathy is expensive to themselves, and that if they take no interest in seeing that their servants do their work properly, they, the masters and payers, are the people who suffer from the neglect.
7 NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.8 Of the total number, 54.6 per cent. were males and 45.4 females. Under the head Circles, 84.3 per cent. were Hindoos and 86 Mussulmans. The proportion of other castes is larger than in former years, amounting now to 6.7 per cent. and the Parsees also have increased, but their number is still insignificant, being only 159 or 0.2 per cent. of the total. Under the head of Age, 48.3 per cent. were under, and 51.7 above, one year. The former class prepon- derated in 1863, and the reason that older children are now in excess, is that up to this time certain villages, in consequence of their distance from the vaccinator's residence or some other cause, had been seldom or never visited, and consequently a larger number of unprotected children, or even adults, had accumulated in them. These arrears are now being cleared off; and as the present establishment, with the support it now receives from Government, is able to visit almost every village in the Circle in a year, there is every reason to hope that the report of 1865, or at any rate those of subsequent years, will exhibit a large excess of infants. The vesicles have been normal in appearance and filled with abundance of pure lymph. In the monsoon, however, they generally burst too early, and during that season normal crusts rarely form. On the return of the cold season, however, they resume the normal appearance and present well-formed crusts. Small-pox was nearly absent from the Surat and Broach Districts. It appeared in a number of villages of Kaira Zillah in February, March, and April, and I have no doubt would have been very prevalent and caused large mortality if most of the villages had not been carefully gone over by the vaccinators a few months previously. Measures were taken to arrest the disease by vaccinating all the unprotected children in the villages as rapidly as possible. With the exception of the cause referred to in last annual report, inoculation was not heard of, and as the practice is confined to narrow limits, viz. Bulsar and Bugwara, I have little doubt it will soon be entirely supplanted by vaccination, which is making considerable progress. The number of capillary tubes received, although not sufficient for general use by the establishment, was sufficient to show that the vaccinators can be taught how to charge them. The tubes, although they are excellent means for conveying lymph, are not free from objections. The contained lymph sometimes decomposes, and if made use of at a particular stage may produce the same ill effects as other decomposing animal fluids. The contents of some tubes received from England had become quite f9 SIND DIVISION. Superintendent10 great use for carrying lymph long distances, but I think it very improbable that they can be always used instead of a child with fresh lymph on the arm; certainly not, if we want much work done. At the end of 1863 and beginning of 1864 there was a severe epidemic of small-pox in the town of Kurrachee ; the disease also existed in the adjacent districts, especially in the Kardar- ate of Meerpoor Saera. There were also a few sporadic cases in other talookas which I do not consider require particular notice. The epidemic which occurred in Kurrachee and its neighbourhood was both severe and prolonged; of the town of Kurrachee it is not my pro- vince to speak, as it is under the Civil Surgeon there. But when I went into the hills lying between Kurrachee and the Khan of Khelat's territory towards the Hubb River, I saw a number of children who had been recently inoculated, and on making enquiries I found that at least two individuals had practised inoculation in that direction, and that they carried the disease from the Khan's territory to Kurrachee, and as soon as the disease took its terri- ble hold on the town they went off, but I could not learn where they belong to ; the people said that they did not know anything about where they lived. Some of the children had been unsuccessfully inoculated, and the parents were very irate, as they had paid the inoculator, who had not returned to see the result of his work. At the opening of the year I was engaged examining the work of General No. 165, Gungaram, in the Mehur District, which I found satisfactory. Thence I passed into the Larkhana District, where I examined very closely the work of General No. 27, Luchmon, and found it generally well done, his records true, and lymph good. But the marks on the arms of some children who had been vaccinated during the preceding inundation months were not very good, and showed that the size of the vesicles had diminished considerably; but with the cooler weather and careful selection, he had brought it up to what I saw. Afterwards I marched into the Sukkur District, and there examined a very large number of children who had been vaccinated by General No. 114, Assoo Mull. This vaccinator had done an immense deal of good work, his records were true, and his lymph good. I consider this man's work highly satisfactory. After going through Sukkur and Shikarpoor Districts I crossed the Indus and came down through the Roree District, in which I examined the work of General No. 79, Suroopsing. I found his records true and his lymph good. I consider this vaccinator's work also highly satisfactory. Suroopsing has been some years in this District, and seems generally to have won the confidence and good will of the people there; still he occasionally meets with some difficulty. I have much pleasure in stat- ing that the Deputy Collector, Mr. Foxton, has at all times given him every assistance in the way of persuading those who offered opposition. Such an interest shown by the district officer is of the very highest benefit in spreading vaccination. In the town of Roree I examin- ed the children vaccinated during the year 1863 by the first hospital assistant ; the work had been well done, as far as I could test it, perfectly truthful, and his lymph was good. Here in February I saw H. H. the Ameer of Khyrepoor's vaccinator. He said he had vaccinated some hundreds of children during 1863; he showed me his register, which was neatly and well kept. I did not inspect any of his work; at the time I saw him, his father (who was H. H. the Ameer's Hakim) was ill and dying, so he could not leave him; otherwise I meant to look at his operations,11 From Roree I marched through the Khyrepoor State and vi Sukkrund and Kefroah to theOomerkote districts: en route I saw a few children in Taroosha, who were vaccinated in thattown by the hospital assistant there. In the Little Desert I examined the work of GeneralNo. 199, Allah Bux, and found it satisfactory. Here I saw many adults who had freelysubmitted themselves. A vaccinator had never before been here, and though the populationis thin, still this man had done a good deal of work ; whole villages, young and old, werevaccinated ; they appeared very thankful for the services of the vaccinator. The vaccinatorsaid, that on first coming among these desert people they were very shy of him, but afterthey became acquainted with his practice, they very willingly and gladly availed themselves ofthe blessing sent them. Although this vaccinator is very young, he carried on his duty amongthose peculiar people with very praiseworthy discretion. Many people came across theboundary from the Khyrepoor State to have their children vaccinated by him, and also fromthe Jeysulmeer State. After crossing the sand hills I went into Oomerkote, where I saw afew children who had been vaccinated during the year by the hospital assistant there. HereI met Captain Tyrwhitt, Political Superintendent of Thurr and Parker, who takes a verygreat interest in vaccination; he looks upon it as a sure means of increasing the populationof his thinly peopled districts, and would gladly employ six vaccinators in his districts, butI am sorry to say that I have only been able to spare him three. However, I shall now beable to give him at least one more out of the Local Establishment. The hospital assistantsin his districts are working well, and with the amount of attention and care given to thespread of vaccination by Captain Tyrwhitt, these districts will soon be as well protected as Sind.After passing through Oomerkote I examined the work of General No. 142, ChellahRam, in the Nubeesur Tappa, and found it satisfactory in quality. From the Thurrand Parkur Districts I returned into the Halla District, and in the Kardarate of ShahdadpoorI examined some recent work of the head vaccinator, which was everything I could desire.Thence I passed through Hydrabad into the Mahomed Khan's Tanda District, where in thelatter end of April I examined the lymph of General Nos. 212 and 197, and found thevesicles very small, and numbers requiring to be re-vaccinated. These two hands werenot vaccinating as carefully as they ought to have done. The lymph in use had shortlybefore been received from the Civil Hospital of Hydrabad, and had been just beforethat propagated from tube-lymph received from London by Dr. Riddell. When I saw it,the vesicles were very small and some of them badly shaped; however, there were manycharacteristically formed. I took the vesicles under my own care, and by carefullyselecting the best and vaccinating from them, it improved very quickly, and in the courseof two weeks produced good vesicles; afterwards I took this lymph with me intoShahbunder District and set it going in Meerpoor Buttora, where I had it under observationfor several weeks longer; the vesicles improved rapidly in size and their course andprogress were also correct. I examined the work of General No. 212 in the MahomedKhan's District, and found it satisfactory, with the exception of what I have saidregarding the lymph. The head vaccinator went through this apprentice's work to seeif any of it required doing over again; he reported that generally the children bore goodmarks. Those I saw myself had very few unsuccessful or bad marks among them;the lymph seems to have deteriorated just about the time I first saw it. In MeerpoorButtora I examined a good many children who had been vaccinated by the assistantapothecary. In Shahbunder District I examined many villages in the Jar Tappa, whichhad been gone over during the previous inundation months by General No. 197, IchangeeMull; I found that he had done his work well. From Shahbunder I again crossed theIndus into Jerruck District, and then in the Meerpoor Saera Kardarate in the month of
12 July. I examined the work of General No. 185, Damoo Mull; I found it generally well done and his records satisfactory, but his lymph had very much deteriorated. I took him into Kurrachee to get good lymph, which I soon established in this Kardarate. At this time there were a good many cases of small-pox in the town and neighbour- hood of Saera. The disease, as I have already said, had been kept up by an inoculator. As soon as he ceased to inoculate, the disease also ceased. In the month of September I went into the hills near Kurrachee and examined the work of General No. 148, Lalloo, and found it satisfactory; here the population is very spare, and I had to ride long distances to see very few children. Towards the end of October I commenced my cold season tour, and at the beginning of November I again examined Damoo Mull's work in the Meerpoor Saera Kardarate, and found him working well; passed up through Jerruck, there taught the hospital assistant the use of capillary tubes. In Decem- ber I examined the work of General No. 108, Mehar Chand, in the Sukkrund Kardarate, and found it satisfactorily done, his records true, except as regards ages: last year I had to bring this man to notice for falsifying his records. I am happy to say that this year his register was all correct, with the exception of errors in the columns of ages. Afterwards I crossed the Indus into the Sehwan District. In the town of Sehwan I saw a few children who had just been vaccinated by Mr. Apothecary Pollard from glass lymph. The vesicles were all bad; I vaccinated two children from tubes, and one of them eight days afterwards had very good vesicles. Leaving Sehwan I passed through Tulti and Cachar Tappidarates, examining the work of General No. 77, Jettah Mull, en route. I found his records correct, and the work well done. I could not say so much for him in my former report. I will conclude this resum by saying, that I have travelled and examined work in every district of Sind, with the single exception of the Jacobabad district (in which there is none to see). I have gone over fourteen vaccinators' and seven medical subordinates' (in medical charge of dispensaries) work. I travelled 1,528 miles between stations, and I saw 10,297 vaccinated children in 565 villages. KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent13 It is with much pleasure I have to report a large increase in the total number of children vaccinated during the year 1864, not only in comparison with the year 1863 but with any previous year, the total number vaccinated, as per return 26,689, showing an increase of 5,570 on the year 1863, and an increase of 4,467 on the greatest total of any previous year. The increase is due equally to the greater number vaccinated both by the Government and Chiefs' vaccinators. The principal reasons of the increase are, increased assistance render- ed by the Chiefs, the great support given by the Political Agent and his assistants, the greater activity of the assistant vaccinators, and, lastly, the people are beginning to respond to the interest the Governor and Government take in the subject. To the Thakoor of Bhownuggur great thanks are due for his continual countenance and assistance in forwarding the spread of this valuable preventive agent; he has just appointed a fourth native vaccinator for his talooka, and a superintendent on 25 Rupees per mensem. I have only two serious complaints to make about the Chiefs, one against the Wurdwan Durbar for decreasing the vaccinator's pay to Rupees 7-8, and the other against the Rajkote Durbar, who, on appointing a vaccinator of their own, prohibited the station vaccinator from propagating the lymph. The consequence was, that he was unable to circulate the lymph, and till fresh was procured nearly a fortnight was lost; there are not sufficient children in the station of Rajkote to keep vaccine in circulation, and unless the town of Rajkote and a few of the surrounding gaums are placed in the charge of the station vaccinator it would be impossible to keep up a fresh supply of lymph for the station. I have reported the matter to the Political Agent, who, I hope, will make a satisfactory arrangement. The minor complaints against the Chiefs are, keeping their vaccinators in arrears of pay, and employing them on other duties ; on the whole the Chiefs have given more assistance during 1864 than any previous year. Three chtota Chiefs who had steadily refused to have their children vaccinated, on my telling them the Governor had all his children vaccinated, at last consented. The increased activity of the assistant vaccinators is sufficiently proved by the return. The per-centage of success again shows an improvement; this is attributable, as last year. to the still greater care and attention of the assistant vaccinators and the improved state of lymph. I hope it will continue to improve, as I have lately introduced some new lymph from Ahmedabad which is superior to the old Kattywar lymph ; at present it has only been propagated in one talooka, but I have forwarded supplies of it in tubes and on glasses to three other talookas. The lymph, when practicable, is taken fresh from child to child, but when the gaums are far apart, on glasses. My assistant vaccinators have not yet learnt to fill tubes; I have tried to teach three of them, but at present they have not succeeded in sending me a single tube fit for use. The only tubes forwarded for transmission of lymph have been filled by myself and by the 1st assistant vaccinator, my writer; I am happy to state that I have not had to discharge a single vaccinator in 1864. Although I travelled over nearly three-fourths of Kattywar, and examined most of the vaccinators' work last year, it gives me pleasure to record that I did not find a single false return. During the. early part of the year small-pox raged in two large towns14 my charge, and from having to remain so much with it, cholera having attacked the troops, I was unable to visit as many gaums as I otherwise should have done I have had Dr. Plumptre's hand-bills freely circulated, and have explained to the people personally the benefits to be derived from vaccination. REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent15 I regret I am unable to report so well of the Rewa Kanta. The decrease this year is owing to the idleness of the vaccinators and the indifference of the Native Chiefs. The vaccinators' pay in the Rewa Kanta is so small that they are perfectly indifferent about their situations, and frequently leave them without giving any notice whatever. I am endeavouring to rectify this, and have procured an increase in the pay of three vaccinators out of the five employed in the Rewa Kanta. Two of the vaccinators resigned their situations and two have been dismissed with the sanction of the Political Agent during the last year. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent16 fully rely. They obligingly fulfilled their promise, and though no fresh supplies of lymph were received from the Mofussil I was enabled to establish a supply of excellent lymph, and at the same time to vaccinate a great many children. Unlike the previous year, small-pox did not prevail, during the last months of the year, to any appreciable extent; and thus the total number for the year, though greater by a few hundreds than in the year preceding, yet did not come up to what was expected at the commencement of the year.
17 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. TANNA. Assistant Surgeon J. G. ASHER, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 71 .... .... 61 85.9 1864 64 .... 7 51 79.7 Early in the year vaccination was carried on in the town of Tanna by one of the Central Circle Vaccination Establishment, whose operations will of course be included in the returns of that Circle. At my instance a vaccinator has been lately entertained by the Municipality, and the work reported for 1864 has been accomplished within the last three months through his instrumentality. POONA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. G. LORD, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 1,918 .... .... 1,587 82.7 1864 1,878 .... 40 1,555 81.7 The vaccinator has kept up his work regularly throughout the year, and been useful not only in his own district, but as a means of supplying good and fresh vaccine infection to European hospitals and families in the vicinity. One vaccinator is not enough for a town like Poona. v3
18 containing over 80,000 inhabitants, exclusive of the adjoining Civil Limits, where this man's duties also call him. The Municipality should be called on to divide the city into districts, and appoint a vaccinator to each. AHMEDNUGGUR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon W. DAVEY (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 1,260 .... .... 1,017 80.7 1864 1,4 13 153 .... 1,236 87.4 Dr. Fraser records that vaccination was diligently and successfully kept up in the city and neighbourhood of Ahmednuggur by the station vaccinator, and by the establishments of the Civil Jail and Police Hospitals within their respective departments during the year 1864. In the city and neighbourhood of Ahmednuggur were vaccinated by the station vaccinator 1,413, of whom 1,236 were successful, 104 unsuccessful, and 73 doubtful. The per-centage of successful cases is 87.4, which is the highest success recorded for several years, and may be taken as a proof of the goodness of the lymph and of the skill of the vaccinator. The table shows the work done by the station vaccinator in the year 1864 as compared with the previous year, and is satisfactory as showing that vaccination is appreciated by the people and attended to by the vaccinator. Regarding the sex, age, and caste of the vaccinated, I find that 846 were males and 567 females; that of these 619 were under one year and 794 above that age; that 39 were Christians, 1,230 Hindoos, 143 Mussulmans, and one Parsee. SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. V. CARTER, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 3,832 .... .... 2,924 76.3 1864 2,230 .... 1,602 1,719 77.0
19 The total number of vaccinations, as shown above, is considerable, being in fact larger than any recorded in the annual reports for the previous 10 years, the year 1863 excepted ; yet in comparison with this year a large decrease is noted. The explanation of this decrease seems to be manifold. Firstly, additional vaccinators were established in districts around Sattara in the earlier part of the year (as at Wai, Karar, Walwa, Wurooj, Malseerus) from all of which localities children were formerly brought to Sattara. These new vaccinators are in pay of the local municipal authorities, and report to the Superintendent of Vaccination. Secondly, cholera was widely prevalent in the Sattara Collectorate during the fore part and middle of 1864 ; and as is usually the case at such times, the inhabitants are so stricken with fear that the voice of the vaccinator is unheeded. Thirdly, small-pox was unusually rare in 1864 ; hence the people had not the utility of vaccination so immediately brought to their notice, and so far failed to appreciate it. Perhaps the next most notable feature in the return is the much larger proportion of children vaccinated, under one year of age, amounting to near 61 per cent, in comparison with about 40 per cent. in 1863. SHOLAPORE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. F. OGILVIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 1,438 .... .... 919 56.9 1864 1,459 21 .... 782 53.6 During the past year, the number of persons vaccinated has amounted to 1,459, of which 663 were males and 796 females; 519 were children under one year, and 940 were above that age; 782 were successful, 373 were unsuccessful, and 304 doubtful, the per-centage of success being 53.6. As compared with the previous year, there is a trifling increase in the number of persons vaccinated, viz. 21. The per-centage of successful cases recorded, is less than in the previous year, that having been 56.9. The apparent want of success I stated in my last report, was owing to the carelessness of the parents in preserving the pustules : and I regret to state they seem very careless of the result of the operation, notwithstanding I frequently personally explained to them its importance as a preventive against an attack of small-pox.
20 DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C K. COLSTON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase Decrease. 1863 732 .... .... 655 89.4 1864 764 32 .... 692 90.5 Vaccination has been performed in this station twice a week, and with about the usual result and under the usual difficulties in carrying it out fully, through the apathy and passive oppo- sition of some classes of the community, though one would think that the most impenetrable mind could not but discover the benefit of the prophylactic against small-pox in the almost entire immunity from that disease, year after year, of the inhabitants of this town. No one class or caste in particular, as the return shows, appears to me to object from religious prejudices to vaccination ; in fact, when it is brought to their doors, one and all seem to appre- ciate it, but some object to lymph being taken from the arms of their children. This I believe is more for the sake of making some show of opposition than anything else, and is easily overcome by authority. NASSICK. One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. SUMMERS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 570 .... .... 426 74.7 1864 711 141 .... 573 80.5 I have the gratification of reporting that vaccination has been carried on to a larger extent during the past year compared with the preceding one of 186321 BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major G. G. W. MAITLAND. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 547 .... .... 536 98.0 1864 689 142 .... 669 98.0 The increase in the number vaccinated during the year, as shown in the above table, is no doubt owing to the fact that during the past eight months the vaccinator has been assisted by a peon, obligingly furnished by the Collector at my request. The total number of children vaccinated in the town of Belgaum is 689 ; of these 669 were successful and 22 failed. The vaccinator has likewise been engaged in vaccinating in the cantonment, and at the Garrison and Detail Hospital. In the former, 96 persons were vaccinated, at the latter 22, showing a total 307 vaccinations as the actual work performed by the station vaccinator. The quality of the lymph throughout the year has been uniformly good, and although cholera prevailed in the town and cantonment during the months of April and May, it but slightly interfered with the progress of vaccination. DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon E. H. R. LANGLEY (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 1,080 .... .... 971 89.9 1864 872 .... 208 771 88.4 During the past year 872 persons have been vaccinated, whilst in 1863 there were 1,080, showing a decrease of 208 between the two years in the number vaccinated; there were 771 successful cases recorded or 88.4 per cent. on the whole : 691 were above one year, 181 under
22 one year: the decrease in the number vaccinated may be accounted for from the fact that small-pox did not prevail in an epidemic form during the year, and that therefore the Natives were not so willing or anxious to undergo vaccination. The lymph appears to have been of good quality, and, judging from the vesicles, it did not deteriorate in character. The conduct of the vaccinator satisfactory, and his work carefully performed. KOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon J. MILLS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 3,022 .... .... 2,945 97.4 1864 1,860 .... 1,162 1,844 99.1 The annexed statement shows a very great falling off in the number of vaccinations per- formed during the past year, there having been 1,162 less than in 1863 and 906 less than the average of the previous five years. Several circumstances have combined to cause this diminution, among which the principal are as follows:23 RUTNAGHERRY. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon II. DAY, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 713 .... .... 572 80.2 1864 987 274 .... 740 75.0 The return of the number of cases vaccinated this year compares favorably with the return of the preceding year. It will be seen that 274 more cases have been operated upon during the year ; the per-centage of success, however, is not so great, but the difference is not very marked. VINGORLA. Senior Apothecary S. HANSON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 162 .... .... 145 89.5 1864 238 76 .... 227 95.3 The total number vaccinated during the year 1864 was 238, being an increase of 76 on that of the previous year. Of these 111 were male and 127 female children. 73 were under one year, and 165 above that age. The successful vaccinations have been 227, or 95.3 per cent. on the total number vaccinated. The lymph and vesicles were good.
24 HONORE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon E. M. Ross. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 474 .... .... 371 78.2 1864 547 73 .... 475 86.8 I have much pleasure in noticing an increase in the number vaccinated by the station vaccinator during the year under report of 73 over the number operated on in the preceding year. I regret to state, however, that the people, especially the Brahmins and upper class Hindoos, are still as averse as ever to the reception of the prophylactic. I believe that nothing short of legislative interference (and how urgently it is called for may be judged by the prevalence of small-pox epidemic in and near Compta, Gairsoppah, and other parts of North Canara) will ever cause it to be universally adopted. The people are so blinded by their religious prejudices that they will not see the advantages that the prophylactic holds out to them, and it is hopeless ever to induce them by mere argument and example willingly to submit to it. The enforcement by legislation of vaccination on the people would be the means of saving hundreds of lives annually in North Canara alone, and the importance of this fact, with reference both to humanity and to its political bearing in a country already far too thinly populated, is, I think, sufficient to outweigh all considerations against the measure. KAIRA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon A. N. E. RIDDELL (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Sucess- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 433 .... .... 358 82.7 1864 683 250 .... 574 84.0
25 683 children have been vaccinated during the past year. Of these the result was doubt- ful in 109 cases ; in the remaining 574 it was successful. Of the total vaccinated 619 were Hindoos and 64 were Mussulmans ; 518 were under one year and 165 were above that age. By this return it will be seen that a slight increase has taken place in the numbers vaccinated as compared with the returns of last year. No opposition is offered to the practice of vaccination; on the contrary the natives appear to recognize the value of it, and readily avail themselves of its benefits. The vaccine lymph employed and the vesicles have uniformly been of fair average quality. AHMEDABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major D. WYLLIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 2,686 .... .... 2,588 96.3 1864 3,440 778 .... 3,429 99 Vaccination was more largely practised than during any previous years, the number exceed ing by 778 that accomplished in 1863. The increase is simply due to the circumstance of the vaccinator having had, since June last, the services of a municipal peon specially detailed for this duty, whereas formerly he was dependent on such intermitting and uncertain assist- ance as the police could give, and that latterly rendered with something like reluctance. The change adverted to has, therefore, fully realized the expectation expressed in the last Annual Report. The vaccinator was employed on 356 days during which all the different quarters of the city were gone over oftener than once, and the more populous neighbourhoods repeatedly. The greatest number of operations was in June, when 361 were vaccinated, and the smallest in March, when there were only 150; work being at all times hindered by the prevalence of measles. In respect of sex, male preponderated, as invariably happens; the numbers being 1,925 to 1,539 females. These figures are in close keeping with the relative proportion of the sexes vaccinated on an average of the past five years. There were 2,655 operations &quot; under &quot; and only 809 &quot; above &quot; one year. Ever since 1858 each year's experience has shown a large and growing increase in the proportion of vaccinations under one year26 The lymph employed was that introduced from Europe towards the close of last year. It has invariably produced a large, well-formed, typical vesicle, and has never exhibited any tendency to deterioration. Supplies were sent to Deesa, Aboo, Sadra, and other stations during the year. There was not a single case of small-pox in the city, throughout; but within the last two months a few instances have happened in camp, all, however, due to importation. The practice of inoculation has long since ceased as respects this neighbourhood. Vaccination is never openly opposed, and there are seldom any more serious obstacles to its spread than apathy and indifference on the part of the people, with here and there some remains of prejudice, to contend against. Refusals, however, are comparatively rare, and are now, with very few exceptions, limited to the lower classes of the Mussulman population. SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. A. SHEPHERD. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 1,955 .... .... 1,749 89.4 1864 2,234 279 .... 2,057 92.1 No report received. BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon G. GLEN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease 1863 1,203 .... .... 1040 78.9 1864 1,221 18 .... 1092 89.4
27 Vaccination continues to be carried on steadily in Broach, the numbers operated upon amounting to 1,221, being an increase of 18 on that of the previous year. The number of males vaccinated nearly double that of females, and the numbers under one year amount to 742 and 479 above that age. Vaccination is gradually being received more favourably by the population of the town and neighbourhood28 The returns of vaccination for the year show 1,829 successful operations out of 1,964 per- formed by the station vaccinator ; but they at the same time show a large apparent decrease in the numbers as compared with the preceding year; this is attributable to the operations performed by a vaccinator from the establishment of the Superintendent of &quot;Vaccination in Sind, who was ordered on duty here during the great prevalence of small-pox in the early part of the year, not having been recorded in the civil returns for Kurrachee, but in those of the Superintendent. It is to be regretted that certain castes of Hindoos con- tinue to refuse permission for their children to be vaccinated, and during the period under report the proportion of Hindoos as compared with Mussalmans is even less than before. Mekranees and some others come to the Civil Hospital voluntarily and without any solicitation for the purpose. HYDRABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon N. HOPKINS (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 1,115 .... .... 872 78.2 1864 812 .... 303 583 71.8 Vaccination has been performed twice every week at the Civil Hospital under my personal superintendence. The above return contains only the summary of all such cases as I have personally examined. Of this number 415 are reported successful, 70 as unsuccessful, and 110 as doubtful. This return shows an undoubted falling off in comparison with the same period of last year; but whilst I can vouch for the accuracy of this return, I cannot do so for that of the previous year. The vaccinator employed during the past and many former years was discharged in the month of May for disobedience and general misconduct, and the present vaccinator entertained. He has been zealous in the discharge of his duties, and the returns have increased since he has taken charge of the vaccination here. In the month of January I received from private sources a supply of English lymph in capillary tubes from the Jennerian Society's Dept in London. Strange to say it signally failed in every case, and yet it was procured under circumstances which altogether prevented any- thing but lymph from genuine vaccine vesicles being supplied. The same plan has been pursued since I have had charge of the civil duties as regards vac- cination as was carried on by my predecessor Dr. Riddell,29 SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. F. FFOLLIOTT. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 1,618 .... .... 1,456 89.9 1864 1,358 .... 260 1,252 92.2 The total number vaccinated during the year exhibits a falling off of 260 compared with the preceding year: this decrease may be reasonably accounted for, by the fact of the whole popu- lation under 10 years being protected by vaccination and the operations being consequently limited to children born within the year. Only 69 individuals over one year old have been vaccinated, and they were mostly Puttans who came of their own accord from the Kaffila Serai to have the operation performed. On referring to the Fouzdar's register of vital statistics, I find the number of births in the town of Shikarpoor much below the average, viz. 988, the mean of the four preceding years being 1,391. Vaccination is conducted in my presence every Monday at the Charitable Dispensary, and the quality of the lymph and character of the vesicles continue satisfactory. Lymph has been supplied to the Civil Hospital at Jacobabad, and Dispensary at Sukkur, when required. KOTREE. One Vaccinator (Municipality's) under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon R. MCCONNELL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 112 .... .... 108 96.4 1864 426 314 .... 351 82.4
30 This is the annual return of vaccination for the year 1864, performed by the vaccinator entertained and paid by the Kotree Municipality under the superintendence of the Civil Sur- geon, there being no Government vaccinator attached to the Kotree Civil Hospital. Of the number 426, vaccinated during the year, 351 are recorded successful, and I have every reason to believe the return correct, having personally inspected the majority of the cases. I consi- dered the lymph and vesicles pretty good. The vaccinator experienced some considerable difficulty in persuading the natives to allow themselves or their children to be vaccinated, except when accompanied by a peon; and as the latter was not always available from the Kardar's Establishment, on being brought to the notice of the Municipal Commissioners at a general meeting, it was unanimously agreed that a peon be employed to accompany and assist the vaccinator, subject to the sanction of the Commissioner in Sind. KUTCH. Mr. SUDDASHEW HEMRAJ, G.G.M.C YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 15 .... .... .... .... 1864 193 178 .... 111 57.5 No report received. ADEN. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon J. F. STEINHAEUSER, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1863 622 .... .... 426 68.5 1864 446 .... 176 334 74.9
31 The result of the vaccination at this station has proved more unsatisfactory during the year under consideration than in the preceding year, but from unavoidable causes. The lymph employed at the commencement of 1864 was good, producing typical vesicles until the month of June, when they began to evince signs of deterioration by running too rapidly through their course. In the month of July this feature became so strongly marked that it was thought advisable to discontinue the use of this inefficient lymph and to trust to the arrival of fresh virus which for the last 10 years had been forwarded annually in August and September from England to Aden through the India Office. For reasons unknown and contrary to custom, the National Vaccine Establishment or the India Office sent no lymph during the year, and the application to Bombay for a supply remained unanswered until the end of November; the station was therefore four full months without vaccination. From January to July a fair number of children were subjected to the operation; during these months in fact the whole vaccination of the year took place. As is usual at Aden, the number of children vaccinated whose age is above one year, disproportionately exceeds that of infants under one year who are not readily obtained from Arabs, Jews, or Somalis, constituting the bulk of the population of this settlement. In like manner the number of males subjected to the operation is far larger than that of females.
APPENDIX. 5 v
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERIN- Table showing the Number and Names of the Circles, and their Superintendents ; the those of last Year ; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Operations performed by each Number. CIRCLES. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS. Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1863 Increase. Decrease. 1 CENTRAL ................. Assistant Surgeon P. S. Turnbull, M. D. . 34 69,299 47,646 21,653 2 SOUTHERN .............. iii No. I. TENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. Number of Vaccinators employed ; the Total Vaccinations performed and compared with Result ; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated ; and the Average Number of Vaccinator, for the Year 1864. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 36,474 32,825 63,484 2,717 29 .. 3,069 7,910 61,389 66,141 1,485 1,673 95.4 2,038 18,508 16,200 32,214 1,981 89 .. 424 5,115 29,593 32,767 956 985 94.4 1.120 36,825 30,662 56,919 5,823 16 159 4,570 32,621 34,866 61,741 2,928 2,818 91.5 1,983 25,909 20,531 5,567 37,756 5 .. 3,112 15,729 30,711 43,151 397 2,892 92.9 2,732 3,534 3,148 5,989 614 .. .. 79 3,029 3,653 6,173 287 222 92.4 835 1,587 1,608 2,698 412 1 .. 84 1,738 1,457 2,906 218 71 91.0 639 4,197 3,298 4,738 1,169 852 566 170 3,252 4,243 5,696 769 1,030 75.9 2,498 127,034 108,272 171,609 50,472 992 725 11,508 69,394 165,912 218,575 7,040 9,691 92.9 1,783 Municipalities in the Southern Districts.
iv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS Table of Vaccination through the Agency of Native Chiefs, arranged according to for the Number. CIRCLES and STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1863 Increase. Decrease. 1 CENTRAL .............. Assistant Surgeon P. S. Turnbull, M.D. .. 2 2,550 1,221 1,329 .. 2 SOUTHERN ........... v No. II. AND OTHERS IN NATIVE TERRITORY. the Circles of Vaccination and Stations, and showing Details as in Table No. I. year 1864. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1,353 1,197 2,367 60 .. .. 123 604 1,946 2,334 78 138 91.5 1,275 9,923 8,893 17,024 876 232 1 683 4,091 14,725 17,345 934 537 92.3 855 10,251 9,313 16,928 1,201 2 .. 1,433 8,536 11,028 17,840 961 763 91.2 1,778 11,025 8,982 16,928 2,930 .. .. 149 9,251 10,756 18,365 987 655 91.7 1,000 1,608 1,656 2,935 140 .. 3 186 1,877 1,387 3,069 62 133 94.0 653 95 98 119 73 .. 1 .. 54 139 111 72 10 57.5 48 34,255 30,139 56,301 5,280 234 5 2,574 24,413 39,981 59,064 3,094 2,236 91.7 1,006
vi TABLE VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according for the Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex 1863 Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY ............. Tanna ...................... .. 64 71 .. 7 29 35 Alibaugh ................. .. 213 89 124 .. 118 95 Bandora .................. .. 57 65 .. 8 34 23 Coorla ..................... .. 30 9 21 .. 20 10 Oorun ...................... .. 276 .. .. .. 153 123 Total.... .. 640 234 130 .. 354 286 2 POONA ........................... Poona ....................... 1 1,878 1,918 .. 40 1,168 710 Ahmednuggur .......... 1 1,413 1,260 153 .. 846 567 Sattara ...................... 1 2,230 3,832 .. 1,602 1,239 991 Dhoolia .................... 1 764 732 32 .. 440 324 Sholapoor ................ 1 1,459 1,438 21 .. 668 796 Nassick ................... 1 711 570 141 .. 398 313 Total.... 6 8,455 9,750 .. 1,295 4,754 3,701 3 NORTHERN .................. Ahmedabad .............. 1 3,464 2,686 778 .. 1,925 1,539 Kaira ........................ 1 683 433 250 .. 453 230 Surat ........................ 1 2,234 1,955 279 .. 1,415 819 Broach ..................... 1 1,221 1,203 18 .. 742 479 Rajcote .................... 1 1,117 1,341 .. 224 589 528 Total .... 5 8,719 7,618 1,101 .. 5,124 3,595 4 SOUTHERN ................... Belgaum ................. 1 689 547 142 .. 405 284 Dharwar ................. 1 872 1,080 .. 208 455 417 Hooblee ................. 1 1 ,353 1,088 265 .. 694 659 Kolapoor ................ 1 1 ,860 3,022 .. 1,162 993 867 Rutnagherry ........... 1 987 713 274 .. 590 397 Vingorla ................. .. 238 162 76 .. 111 127 Honore ................... 1 547 474 73 .. 265 282 Total.... 6 6,546 7,086 .. 540 3,513 3,033 5 SIND ............................. Kurrachee ............... 1 1,964 3,945 .. 1,981 1,253 711 Hydrabad ................ 1 812 1,115 .. 303 454 358 Shikarpoor .............. 1 1,358 1,618 .. 260 696 662 Kotree ..................... 1 426 .. .. .. 249 177 Dispensaries ........... .. 3,828 2,563 1,265 .. 2,147 1,681 Total ..... 4 8,388 9,241 .. 1,279 4,799 3,589 6 ADEN ............................... Aden ....................... 1 446 622 .. 176 367 79 7 PERSIAN GULF..... Bushire .................. .. .. 231 No Grand Total.... 22 33,194 34,782 .. 1,588 18,911 14,283
vii No. III. SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. 1 . year 1864. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under One Year. Above One Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 40 4 15 2 3 27 37 51 7 6 79.7 64 180 7 3 .. 23 66 147 196 11 6 92.0 213 16 11 30 .. .. 31 26 32 20 5 56.1 57 8 1 21 .. .. 6 24 18 2 10 60.0 30 245 24 6 1 .. 120 156 223 9 44 81.0 276 489 47 75 3 26 250 390 520 49 71 81.2 .. 1,546 294 29 9 .. 944 934 1,555 135 188 81.7 1,878 1,230 143 39 1 .. 619 794 1,236 104 73 87.4 1,413 2,059 91 11 5 64 838 1,392 1,719 196 315 77.0 2,230 531 129 11 .. 93 546 218 692 28 44 90.5 764 710 473 1 .. 275 519 940 782 373 304 53.6 1,459 501 76 16 .. 118 451 260 573 4 134 80.5 711 6,577 1,206 107 15 550 3,917 4,538 6,557 840 1,058 77.5 1,409 2,880 523 9 8 44 2,655 809 3,429 9 26 99.0 3,464 619 64 .. .. .. 518 165 574 .. 109 84.0 683 1,734 441 6 51 2 1,054 1,180 2,057 74 103 92.1 2,234 751 380 2 68 20 748 473 1,092 31 98 89.4 1,221 919 175 2 4 17 508 609 959 99 59 85.9 1,117 6,903 1,583 19 131 83 5,483 3,236 8,111 213 395 93.1 1,744 574 106 9 .. .. 383 306 669 20 .. 98.0 689 752 107 13 .. .. 181 691 771 94 7 88.4 872 934 408 10 .. 1 315 1,038 1,194 107 52 88.2 1,353 1,833 27 .. .. .. 601 1,259 1,844 2 14 99.1 1,860 866 120 1 .. .. 242 745 740 89 158 75.0 987 215 2 21 .. .. 73 165 227 3 8 95.3 238 448 10 85 .. 4 71 476 475 51 21 86.8 547 5,622 780 139 .. 5 1.866 4,680 5,920 366 260 90.4 1,091 312 1,352 115 43 142 996 968 1,829 63 72 93.1 1,964 278 520 3 .. 11 601 211 583 77 152 71.8 812 782 572 4 .. .. 1,289 69 1,252 88 18 92.2 1,358 97 280 22 .. 27 117 309 351 37 38 82.4 426 1,784 1,913 4 .. 127 1,165 2,663 3,429 255 144 89.5 .. 3,253 4,637 148 43 307 4,168 220 7,444 520 424 88.8 1,140 10 2 1 .. 433 60 386 334 66 46 74.9 446 returns received. 22,854 8,255 489 192 1,404 15,744 17,450 28,886 2,054 2,254 87.0 1,357
viii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1863 Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. No 1, Vaccination under Superintendents in British Territory .............................................................. 2,35,306 1,80,548 54,758 .. 1,27,034 1,08,272 No 2, Ditto ditto and others in Native ditto .. 64,394 52,665 11,729 .. 34,255 30,139 No 3, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ................ 33,194 34,782 .. 1,588 18,911 14,283 Total.. 3,32,894 2,67,995 64,899 .. 1,80,200 1,52,694
ix No. IV. FOR THE YEAR 1864. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per Cent. of Successful to Number Vaccinated. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under One year. Above One year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1,71,609 50,472 992 725 11,508 69,394 1,65,912 2,18,575 7,040 9,691 92.9 56,301 5,280 234 5 2,574 24,413 39,981 59,064 3,094 2,236 91.7 22,854 55 469 192 1,404 15,744 17,450 28,886 2,054 2,254 87.0 2,50,764 64,007 1,715 922 15,486 1,09,551 2,23,343 3,06,525 12,188 14,181 92.1 v 6
x TABLE No. V. TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1864, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS, &c. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under One Year. Above One Year. Under. Above. I.xi TABLE No. VI. EMPLOYMENT RETURN OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1864. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.xii SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.xiii KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.xiv GENERAL DEPARTMENT. GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION, No. 828, 12TH MAY 1865. His Excellency the Governor in Council is glad to learn that the Returns for the year under report show a decided improvement, the total number of Vaccinations being an increase of 64,899 over that of the preceding year. This increase is very satisfactory. 2. The number of Vaccinations in 1863 of children under one year of age was 92,948, whereas the returns for the year under report give 109,551, being an increase of 16,600. This also is satisfactory. 3. Dr. Stovell states that the people in the Deccan and the S. M. Country have stronger prejudices against infantile vaccinations than those in Guzerat and Sind. The Revenue Commissioner S. D. should be directed to inquire into the causes of this prejudice, and suggest to the Principal Inspector-General the best means of removing it. 4. His Excellency the Governor in Council believes that, as stated by Dr. Stovell, the pratice of inoculation is disappearing in most districts, and it will be sufficient in such districts to trust to the gradual spread of knowledge and to the appreciation by the people of the practical benefits of vaccination. If, however, it be found that professional inoculators still take advantage to any extent of the ignorance of the people in the less civilized parts of the country, it may be expedient to interfere. The Magistrate of Tanna should report on the 28th paragraph of the report, when it will be considered how far the pro- visions of the Penal Code are applicable. 5. There is another mode, however, by which inoculation may be super- seded by vaccination, and the Principal Inspector-General should direct the Superintendents of Vaccination to turn their attention to it. It is not impro- bable that those who have hitherto gained a livelihood by inoculation may be induced to take employment as Vaccinators. The Governor in Council has been informed of an instance in which an old Brahmin who formerly practised inoculation would gladly enter the Government service as a Vaccinator. If the payment were by successful results, no harm could result from a trial of these suggestions.
xv 6. His Excellency the Governor in Council approves of the views express- ed on the subject of the vaccine lymph in paragraphs 34 and 35 of Dr. Stovell's report. The Secretary of State will be requested to communicate with the National Vaccine Establishment in London, in order to obtain and forward to this country a supply of lymph in the month of November of each year in the manner suggested by Dr. Stovell, and to arrange with the Peninsula and Oriental Steam Navigation Company to cause it to be kept in the ice-house of their steamers during the passage from Suez. Government Resolution No. 1100, dated 25th June 1864. 7. Vaccination, through the agency of the Municipalities, has been in- troduced into the Sattara Districts, and into the towns of Hooblee, Dharwar, Kotree, Poona, and Tanna. His Excellency considers that although the experiment in the Sattara Districts did not at first realize the anticipations entertained by Dr. Plumptre, the result is by no means discouraging. 8. The very greatest assistance may be derived from the development of this agency. The Commissioner in Sind and the Revenue Commissioners should direct the attention of the Municipal Commissioners to it. His Excellency the Governor in Council does not see any grounds for Dr. Plumptre being dissatis- fied with the results in Sattara. His disappointment is owing to his having ex- pected too much from the Municipal Commissioners. They will provide the funds, and they will give valuable advice as to the feelings of the people and the means to be taken to overcome their prejudices, but he cannot reasonably expect them to exercise that supervision for which they have no special quali- fications, and the Collector of Sattara was right in requesting the Superinten- dent to control the proceedings of the Municipal Vaccinators. So long as care is taken to consult the Municipal Commissioners or any general course of proceeding, details will be much better supervised directly by the Superin- tendent of Vaccination. 9. It is clear that the staff of Vaccinators in large towns is too weak. The want can be best supplied by the appointment of Vaccinators by the Municipal Commissioners, so as to leave the Vaccinators paid by Government more leisure for work in the Districts. In the Presidency town the number of Vaccinators appears to be ridiculously small, considering the number of persons still unvac- cinated, and the Governor in Council requests that special inquiry may be made on this point, and that Dr. Stovell will suggest how the want may be supplied. If facilities be given for vaccination the people will accept it more freely, and the great object, next to the supplying of good vaccine matter, is to render vaccination accessible to the mass of the population. With only three
xvi Vaccinators for all Bombay and one for Poona it is very doubtful whether this? object is attained. 10. The state of vaccination in Sind, as reported in paragraphs 44 and 45 of Dr. Stovell's report, is considered by Government to be very satisfactory. 11. On the subject of paragraphs 47 and 48, the Principal Inspector-Gene- ral may be referred to the Government Resolution No. 564, dated 3rd April 1865, with which copies of the Murathee, Guzerathee, and Canarese transla- tions of the Vaccination Report for 1863 were forwarded to him. 12. It is not desirable to translate any more reports, as there is a great deal in these reports which, however interesting for record, cannot be appre- ciated by the native population. If Dr. Stovell will direct one of the Superin- tendents of Vaccination to mark any passages in the Report or Appendices which it may be considered useful to circulate, these extracts can be translated and distributed. 13. In conclusion, the Governor in Council desires to record his appre- ciation of the valuable services of the several Superintendents whose exertions have been prominently brought to notice by Dr. Stovell. F. S. CHAPMAN, Officiating Chief Secretary to Government. BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1865. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay : PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1866.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1865. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay : PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1866.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1865. From the PRINCIPAL INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department, To the CHIEF SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) Welsh was nominated in December to officiate during Mr. Fleming's absence. 3. At the close of the year the Superintendents were as follows :( v ) the first two months the newly appointed men were taught by the old vaccina- tors how to operate and keep their records, and generally the method of carry- ing on work. During the remainder of the year they vaccinated nearly 12,000 children, and the Superintendent reports that they have more than realized his expectations. General accuracy of Re- turns. 8. Out of the total number of operations, about 8 per cent. proved either unsuccessful or doubtful. Thus out of 358,198 vaccinations, 332,176 are reported as successful. Every practicable means appear to have been taken by the Superintendents, both personally and otherwise, to test the accuracy of the returns received from their vaccinators, and there is good reason to be- lieve that in the main they are correct. The testimony of the Superintendents on this point becomes stronger year by year. In his recent report, for in- stance, Dr. Butler states that throughout his tour in Kattiawar, he &quot; did not find a single false return.&quot; Testimony to the same effect is borne by Dr. Turnbull, who reports that, though he visited 395 villages, and inspected upwards of 12,000 vaccinated children, he did not discover a single false name, although on each occasion the names of the children were read over, and he carefully examined their arms one by one. Dr. Pinkerton also states that, although he travelled nearly 1,700 miles, examined the work of 18 vacci- nators in 400 villages, had the children's names called over from the registers, and at the same time saw the vaccination marks on their arms, he did not detect a single false name. Occasional falsification of Returns. 9. Yet, notwithstanding the strong evidence thus brought forward, in- stances of falsification do occasionally come to light; and it is mentioned in the report from the Northern Circle, that while Dr. Dick was on his tour in Gujerat, he personally ascertained that the returns of two villages near Hansote had been falsified by a vaccinator. The man was in consequence brought before a Magistrate, under Section 182 of the Penal Code, and sentenced to one month's imprisonment. It is thus evident that the figures must not be re- garded in the light of perfect accuracy, but merely as an approximation to it. Sexes. 10. With regard to sex 193,510 were males and 164,688 were females. This relative proportion corresponds very closely with that of previous years.
( vi ) 11. The castes were as follows :( vii ) more extensive, for the Superintendent in Sind mentions in his recent report that the larger and more intelligent Zemindars are now more willing to use their influence in favour of vaccination than they formerly were, particularly in the neighbourhood of the town of Shikarpoor; and he attributes this feeling in a great measure to the fact of vaccination having been so steadily and con- tinuously practised for years by the Civil Surgeon, and to the surrounding inhabitants having observed the immunity from small-pox, which has resulted therefrom. Small-pox. 15. With regard to the prevalence of small-pox, the reports received from all quarters show that, with the exception of Aden and Ahmedabad, there was much less of that disease throughout the entire Presidency than in the previous year, and that where it did prevail, it assumed in most places a milder form than usual. In the Northern Circle it is reported to have made its appearance in a few villages in the Cambay and one or two other districts, but not elsewhere. In Kattiawar Dr. Butler mentions that it prevailed in several villages in the Dedan talooka, particularly at Khater Kotree, where it proved fatal to upwards of a hundred children, but he was assured by the Patel that not a single vaccinated child had died. Throughout the Deccan there appears to have been very little indeed, and nowhere in an epidemic form, except in a few villages near Dhoolia. In the Concan no notice is taken of its prevalence except at Vingorla, where the Deputy Inspector General reports its having raged among the families of the fishermen; so much so indeed that these people,( viii ) 17. In Bombay itself the mortality from small-pox was less than during the two previous years. In 1863 the deaths from this cause were 1,113, and in 1864 they reached 1,678, while last year they were only 561. It must not be supposed, however, from this statement, that I wish to imply that the suc- cess of vaccination was really much greater in 1865 than in the two preceding years. Far from it, for the actual increase in the number of vaccinations was only 334. Moreover, the statistics of small-pox in Bombay show that the number of deaths since 1848, (when Dr. Leith first commenced his valuable mortuary returns) has greatly fluctuated, the wave of mortality, from some inexplicable cause, rising every second or third year to its greatest height and then receding, and this without the least connection apparently with the actual state of vaccination. Facts of this nature lead to the conclusion that, apart from the progressive condition of vaccination, the extent and virulence of small-pox are dependent on certain epidemic influences, of the precise nature of which we are at present profoundly ignorant. 18. Owing to the want of accurate registration throughout the mofussil, it is only of the Presidency town itself that any statement can be made with confidence, relative to the precise extent of mortality from small-pox; and recollecting that in 1863 upwards of 2,000 people died of this disease in London, where vaccination has been compulsory by law since 1854, I think it must be admitted that there is no reason to be surprised at the amount of deaths from this cause in Bombay, where vaccination is not compulsory. Inoculation. 19. In the last report allusion was made to the mischievous practice and fatal consequences of inoculation, and I suggested the desirability of procuring a legal decision on the point whether, or not, sections 269 and 270 of the Penal Code gave Magistrates power to take proceedings against inoculators, as differences of opinion appeared to exist on the subject. The Magistrate of Tanna, in whose districts inoculation was said to be in practice, was directed by Government to report on my remarks. He replied by sending copy of a letter addressed by his predecessor to the Superintendent Central Circle, in which it was stated that &quot; to render a man amenable to these enactments, his act must be proved to be either illegal, negligent, or malignant, and that the only chance of conviction rested on being able to show that the act was illegal, for it could not be either malignant or negligent.&quot; It then said that &quot; the High Court had ruled that no general order of the Magistrate, declaring the practice of inoculation illegal, was valid,&quot;
( ix ) and added that it was &quot; a question whether a special order, served on the practitioner, would be admitted to be more cogent.&quot; 20. This reply from the Magistrate having been sent to me by Government for any remarks I might wish to make, I referred to paragraphs 25 to 28 of the report for 1864, in which were stated certain facts proving that the practice of inoculation did great harm by spreading and perpetuating small- pox, and that it also caused great mortality. I, at the same time, suggested whether a Legislative enactment might not be passed to render such practice penal, if the provisions of the Code were ineffectual for the purpose. 21. I was subsequently informed by Government that, under the existing law, parties practising inoculation could not be proceeded against, and that Government would await the receipt of further information before deciding on the expediency of having recourse to legislation. 22. It, therefore, now becomes necessary to submit all the information on the subject which the reports from the Superintendents for the past year will enable me to supply. It is reported from the Northern Circle that Dr. Dick, while on his tour in the districts of Bulsar and Bugwara, found that inocula- tion was much practised by the caste of Ghatees, and that they secure encour- agement, if not direct aid, from some of the village Patels, to whom they offer a small fee for each child inoculated. Dr. Dick also noticed many recently inoculated children, and traced some deaths, and also some cases of small-pox, as the direct results of inoculation. This he officially reported to the Magistrate, but the result is not mentioned. Dr. Butler, the Superin- tendent in Kattiawar, mentions that he visited two villages where inoculation had been performed, but that he could not find any traces of the inoculator. He adds that this was the first time he had met with any cases of inoculation in that province. In no other part of the Presidency was a single case brought to light during the year, not even in Sind or in the Tanna Collector- ate, which in previous years were its two strongholds. 23. It will now remain with Government to decide whether it will be sufficient, for the purpose of ensuring the abolition of the practice, &quot; to trust to the gradual spread of knowledge, and to the appreciation by the people of the practical benefits of vaccination,&quot; or whether it &quot;may be expedient to interfere.&quot; Inoculators. 24. In connection with this subject, it should, I think, be recorded in this place that it was suggested by Government that men, who had hitherto gained a livelihood by the practice of inoculation, might probably be induced to 2 vac
( x ) take employment as vaccinators, and that inoculation might thus be super- seded by vaccination. It was further suggested that if payment were made by successful results, no harm could result from a trial. The attention of the Superintendents was accordingly directed to the subject. 25. From the reports received from these Officers it appeared that the Superintendent in Sind had personally, on several occasions, endeavoured to induce inoculators to take service as vaccinators, but without success. He stated his belief, however, that there are now very few left in that province, and that with the increase recently made to his establishment, inoculation would cease. He seemed to think that the chief reasons for their declining to take service were the smallness of the pay, and the restraint of being kept regularly at work. He mentioned having been told that in former years an inoculator would make hundreds of rupees in a season, and that a rich Zemindar frequently gave him valuable presents for inoculating his family. 26. With regard to Gujerat, it was reported that there was only one known inoculator, and that he refused employment as a vaccinator. In the Southern Circle no case of inoculation had come to light for a long period while in the Central Circle inoculators appeared to confine their work to the Tanna collectorate. It was further reported that they are not only men of low caste and wholly uneducated,( xi ) Vaccination by Muni- cipalities. 29. Municipal vaccination, which was introduced in 1863, is gradually making progress. The plan was suggested by me as being calculated to identify local municipal bodies with efforts to render the protective system of vac- cination more extended, efficient, and complete. It was first brought into operation by Dr. Plumptre in the Sattara districts, and has been extended by him to Gudduk and Bettigherry in the Dharwar, and to Gokak in the Bel- gaum collectorate. The number of vaccinators supported at the expense of municipalities in these places, and in the Sattara districts, has increased to eight, and the number of operations to upwards of 5,000. The plan has succeeded better there than in other parts of the Presidency, a circumstance which is mainly attributable to the judicious and active interest taken in the subject by the Superintendent. 30. It has recently been adopted in Gujerat, where the municipality of Ahmedabad now employs two vaccinators and two peons, and that of Dakore, in the Kaira collectorate, one vaccinator. The arrangement was made in the former town by the influence of Dr. Wyllie, the Civil Surgeon, and in the latter by that of Dr. Dick, the Superintendent. The other municipalities in the Kaira collectorate are said to be &quot; far too poor and pressed for funds&quot; to enable them to contribute to expenses of this kind. It is reported, however, that there is a probability of arrangements being made for the engagement of a vaccinator by the municipalities of some of the principal towns in the Ahmedabad collectorate, and also of Sholapoor and Beejapoor. Municipal vaccination has now been introduced, not only into the Sattara districts, but also at Hooblee, Gudduk, Bettigherry, Belgaum, Gokak, Tanna, Poona, Kotree, Ahmedabad, and Dakore. Character of the vaccine lymph. 31. Except in Canara and at Aden, the vaccine lymph was well reported on throughout the Presidency, the resulting vesicles being generally well-developed and well-marked. In one or two instances, in which there appeared to be slight tendency to deterioration, fresh lymph was immediately procured and introduced. The Superintendent in Sind reports that only on one occasion had he reason to find fault with it. In 1864 he received a supply from England in capillary tubes, and the result was so satisfactory that he caused it to be spread over the province, so that with one or two exceptions all his men are now working with it. In Canara, however, the Superintendent found the lymph so much deteriorated that he was compelled to suspend work, until a fresh supply had been obtained from Belgaum and Hooblee.
( xii ) Want of sufficient lymph, 32. Complaints have been received, as in former years, of the difficulty, in a few places, of keeping up a sufficient supply of lymph so as to be always ready for use. In Bombay itself this want was recently reported to be felt with increasing pressure, owing mainly to the strong repugnance felt by the parents of vaccinated children to allow lymph to be taken from their arms for the purpose of vac- cinating other children,( xiii ) packet, and to report the result. Replies have already been received from four of these officers, and I much regret to state that, although the lymph appears to have been used in the most careful manner in vaccinating both Native and European children, failure was the result in each case. So anxious was one of the Superintendents to meet with success, that in addition to making the most careful selection of healthy children, and to taking the usual precautions, he actually promised a sum of money to each of the parents of those children, on whose arms a true vesicle should appear. I would therefore again very earnestly request that the next supply may be forwarded solely in tubes. Vaccination at the Presi- dency. 36. In the Resolution passed by Government on the last report, some re- marks were made on the small number of vaccina- tors in the Presidency town, and I was requested to make inquiry on the point, and to suggest how the want might be supplied. In accordance with these instructions, I communicated with Dr. Giraud, then Honorary Inspector of Vaccination at the Presidency, and having ascertained his views, I reported on the subject to Government, the result being that, on the recommendation of His Excellency in Council, the Government of India, towards the close of the year, sanctioned an increase from three to six. 37. It may perhaps be well to place on record, in this place, a few circumstances connected with vaccination at the Presidency, which led to this result. 38. At the close of 1858 the number of vaccinators was ten, but at that period there was no paid Superintendent, and consequently not that active supervision of operations and of their results, which was requisite. In January 1859, however, a new scheme was introduced, with the sanction of Government, which originated with Dr. Peet, who at that time was the Hono- rary Inspector of Vaccination. The establishment of vaccinators was reduced from ten to six, and a Sub-Assistant Surgeon was appointed to perform the duties of Superintendent. Domiciliary vaccination was put a stop to, and vaccination at stations, under the direct supervision of the Superintendent, was introduced. The island was divided into six districts, to each of which a vaccinator was appointed. The result of the plan was to be reported on after three years. 39. In August 1859, however, eight months after its commencement, the number of vaccinators, at the recommendation of the local Superintendent, (which was approved of by the Honorary Inspector) was reduced to three, as &quot; the experience of the past six months has fully shown that the number of
( xiv ) vaccinators now attached to the establishment is greater than what is actually required, seeing that all the vaccine operations are performed by the Super- intendent.&quot; 40. In January 1862 the operation of the new system of vaccination was reported on by Dr. Peet, who stated that &quot; the increase in the numbers vac- cinated during the three years, now reported on, as compared with the two immediately preceding periods of the same length, is about 2,000. If this had been the sole result of the reorganization, it might perhaps be viewed as meagre and unsatisfactory. The main object was a trustworthy system, but it was hoped that this would not be incompatible with the extension of the benefits of vaccination to a larger number of persons.&quot; Dr. Peet then added, &quot;there is, I think, conclusive evidence that an honest and trustworthy system of vaccination has been substituted for one that was unsatisfactory and delusive. It cannot, however, be denied that the increase in the num- ber vaccinated has fallen short of what was anticipated.&quot; 41. This was written in 1862, since which time vaccination in Bombay has not materially increased in numbers. Though there is, no doubt, a bet- ter feeling than formerly towards vaccination, it has not yet reached that point at which the majority of parents will, unasked, bring their children to be vaccinated, and there is in consequence required from the native vacci- nators a large amount of work in finding out children, and inducing their parents to bring them to the stations. 42. Dr. Giraud, who succeeded Dr. Peet, stated his opinion that three vac- cinators were inadequate to perform the duties required of them, and which, according to existing rules, are to visit as many as possible of the houses in which children, who have been vaccinated, live; to bring to the notice of the Superintendent every instance of failure, or of irregularity of the vesicle; and to make himself acquainted, as far as may be practicable, with the num- ber and residences of the children in his division who have not been vaccin- ated. He therefore recommended that as Bombay is divided into six districts, each with its vaccinating station, there should be six vaccinators, one for each station and district. This modification was adopted, and has recently been carried into effect. Assistance from Civil and Political authorities. 43. It gives me much pleasure to state that the Superintendents, gener- ally, express their acknowledgments for the cordial support they received from the Civil and Political authorities. Dr. Butler also pointedly mentions that the Native Chiefs in Kattiawar gave him more assistance than during any previous year.
( xv ) Services of Superin- tendents. 44. It likewise affords me great satisfaction to report that the Superin- tendents, without a single exception, worked throughout the year with a diligence and earnestness which could not be surpassed, and which well en- title them to the favourable notice of Government. Conduct of Vaccinators. 45. In justice to the body of vaccinators, it must also be mentioned that, with a few exceptions, their conduct during the year has been highly spoken of by the Superin- tendents and Civil Surgeons. Reorganization of the department. 46. Having now concluded my statement of the working of the depart- ment during the year, it becomes necessary, previous to closing the report, to place on record certain changes recently made in its organization. 47. It will be recollected that in 1861 the department was modified to the extent of reducing the number of vaccination &quot; Divisions,&quot;into which this Presidency was at that time mapped out, from eight to six, and of introducing Native Sub-Assistant Surgeons as Deputy Superintendents a post which had not previously existed. Two divisions were in con- sequence absorbed into others, and the services of the two Assistant Surgeons, who were the Superintendents, were placed at the disposal of Army head quarters. Thus the Concan division was broken up and added to the Central and Southern districts, while the two divisions in Gujerat were united into one. The term &quot;Division&quot; was at the same time changed into that of &quot;Circle.&quot; 48. With the view of compensating for this loss of European supervision, it was intended by Government that each of the three most extensive Circles should be provided with two Deputy Superintendents. Their chief duties were to assist the Superintendent in the inspection of the vaccinators, to explain to the people of the districts, in which they might be employed, the objects and benefits of vaccination, and to encourage its diffusion by persuasion and by all other legitimate means. 49. This arrangement was made by Government during the time of my predecessor, but not on his recommendation. On the contrary, Dr. Rooke maintained that to diminish the amount of European agency was to impair the efficiency of the department. 50. As mentioned in previous reports, the new system worked badly. The Sub-Assistant Surgeons disliked the nature of their new appointments, even though carrying with them increased emoluments. The main objection on
( xvi ) the part of some was the necessity of the almost constant travelling which was involved, while to others the duty was distasteful as estranging them from the practice of the profession for which they had been educated. 51. On one occasion, in particular, very convincing proof was given of this strong dislike. With the view of filling up some vacancies in the post of Deputy Superintendent, I found it necessary to ascertain how many Sub-Assistant Surgeons, then employed by Government in different parts of the mofussil in charge of Dispensaries, would voluntarily enter the depart- ment. The result showed that ten out of twelve declined, while before long the two, who did enter, begged to be allowed to resign. 52. The scheme thus proving an entire failure, it became necessary to lay the subject before Government. The result was the abolition of these appointments, and a modified return to the system which was in operation before they were made. Some of the Circles were accordingly re-arranged, and the amount of European agency was increased to the extent to be now stated. 53. It was mentioned, in paragraph 47, that the two divisions, formerly existing in Gujerat, had been united into one. I did not propose to disturb that arrangement by dividing the province again into two, because in the meantime a Medical Officer had been sanctioned for the Gujerat Bheel Corps at Dohud, and as he was nominated at the same time Superintendent of Vacci- nation in the Rewa Kanta and Punch Mahals, the former of which had previously formed part of the united Gujerat Division, its extent had in consequence been considerably reduced. It was therefore not considered too great for efficient supervision by one Superintendent, particularly at a time when the number of medical officers was, and still is, insufficient to meet, adequately, even the ordinary requirements of the Civil and Military departments. 54. It was different, however, with the Central and Southern Circles, which embraced the whole of the Deccan, Southern Maratha Country, and Concan. The great extent of each of these Circles rendered it impossible for a Superintendent, however zealous and energetic, to effect that thorough supervision over the vaccinators, or to exercise that strict personal insight into the working of the department, which is so essentially necessary. 55. I therefore suggested that these two Circles should be divided into three, by separating from them the collectorates of Tanna and Rutnagherry
( xvii ) and the Sawunt Waree State, and by forming these into a third. Circum- stances did not at that time, nor do they now, admit of more being done in the way of sub-division. I trust, however, that, at some future time, means may be found for still further reducing the extent of all the larger Circles, for it is obvious that the smaller the district in charge of a Superintendent, the greater would be his opportunities for more closely and repeatedly inspecting the work of each of his vaccinators,( xviii ) 58. Assistant Surgeon Blanc has been appointed Superintendent of the new Western Circle, but as he is detained on special duty under the orders of the Political Resident at Aden, and as the Medical Department is at pre- sent too weak in numbers to admit of an Assistant Surgeon being spared to officiate, the new arrangements are in abeyance pending Dr. Blanc's arrival. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, M. STOVELL, M.D., Principal Inspector General, Medical Department. Bombay, 31st March, 1866.
( xix ) INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTSVACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 With the exception of the indifference of the people, and want of assistance on the part of many Patels and Koolkurnees, few obstacles exist to the progress of vaccination. But this very indifference which in Pabul, Bhimthurree, and eastern portions of the Jooneer and Khair talookas of the Collectorate of Poona, almost amounts to opposition, leads very much to the gradual deterioration of lymph. I have often wondered at and admired the way in which many vaccinators keep up their vaccine lymph. It is done only by much travelling and hard work, which, were vaccination compulsory, would be very much diminished. It is compulsory in Britain, and as Mamlutdars and other native officials have informed me, and as is proved by all castes submitting their children to be vaccinated, that no religious or other objection exists to vaccination, I cannot see any reasons against, but every thing in favor of, making it compulsory in India also. Of this I am certain, that until it is made so, natives will never have the faith in it they ought to. That prejudices against vaccination do exist amongst the native population is well known. A most intelligent man, Mr. Ruttonjee Nowrojee, Catechist of the Church Missionary Society stationed at Yeola, in the Ahmednuggur districts, has, in a communication to me, given a very remarkable instance of one ; I give it in Mr. Ruttonjee's own words, he says : &quot;A ridiculous report has been spread by some fanatical Mahomedans that some remarkable personage is to make his appearance in the world during the latter days, and who will be known by milk oozing out of his arm, instead of blood, when vaccinated, Hence Europeans, say they, being anxious to discover that extraordinary being, lavish so much money and labour in persuading the people to vaccinate their children. Vaccine tubes have been extensively used in transmitting lymph by post to persons both in and out of the district, but they have generally been filled by myself. During the current year it is my intention to distribute a few tubes to each vaccinator, and call for one, filled and and sealed, monthly. At the end of the year a prize is to be given to the person who, in my opinion, has best succeeded in filling, sealing, and packing them, for transmission by post. The quality of the lymph will also be taken into consideration in awarding the prize. The tour during the past year has been a very extended one. It includes all the Ahmed- nuggur, nearly the whole of the Poona Collectorate, and a considerable portion of the Collectorates of Kulladghee and Khandeish. From Churchun in the Kulladghee Collectorate I proceeded castwards inspecting the work of General No. 168, which though small in amount, was exceedingly well executed, and his books, &c., were correct and well kept, I then crossed the river Bheema into the State of Akulkote. On the work of the Raja's vaccinator here employed I reported very unfavorably in my last, and it is unnecessary to say more here than that he was removed, on my recommendation, by the Rajah, and another appointed in his stead. From Mr. Burjorjee the Magistrate of Akulkote, I then, and have since, received much and very intelligent assistance, and but for this I am sure the small number vaccinated would have been much smaller. From Akulkote I travelled by stages direct to Marheh vi Shola- poor and Mohol, there being no vaccinator employed between those two places. Learning the fact that no vaccinator had been employed in the Sholapoor Hawele talooka for several years, I immediately made arrangements for one being sent, and this man has been successfully working there during the past year. In the month of February I made the circuit of the talookas of Marheh and Kurmulla, of the Sholapoor Sub-collectorate, and examined the work of General Nos. 23 and 223. The work of these vaccinators was very satisfactory, but especially that of the latter, who, though quite a young man, I consider one of the most careful and expert vaccinators in this Circle. In the month of March I left Kurmulla
3 and travelled through the Kurjut, Jamkher, and a part of the Nuggur Hawele talooka. In Kurjut I examined some old work of General No. 13, and in the other talookas the recent work of General Nos. 215 and 237. In paragraph 10 I have already alluded to the incorrect- ness of the Returns of 13 and 215 in regard to age. In other respects the work of General Nos. 13 and 237 were found very correct, and 215 only moderately so. Leaving Ahmed- nuggur, where I was detained on account of sickness, I, in April, examined the work of General No. 237, in the remaining part of the Nuggur Hawele talooka, and also the work of General Nos. 160, 201, and 110 in the talookas of Rahoorie and Newasee; Nos. 160 and 110 were satisfactory, except in regard to age. But that of General No. 201 was not so, and I recommended his removal from the service, which was acted on. In the month of May I visited the Sungumner and Ankola talookas of the Collectorate of Ahmednuggur, and the Jooneer talooka of the Poona Collectorate, and inspected the work of General Nos. 53, 207, and 37; the former was moderately correct, and the latter two very correct, and lymph good and active. After inspecting a few villages in the Khair talooka, the work of General No. 23, I entered Poona for the rains, and while there continued monthly to inspect the work of General Nos. 40 and 263, employed in the Hawele talooka around Poona. In the month of July I went to Nassick to inquire regarding the Penth vaccinator who has since died. Having determined to visit and inspect the work of the vaccinators employed in the Collect- orate of Khandeish, I, in the beginning of November last, went by train to Nassick, thence by stages to Nephar and Yeola, inspecting the work of General Nos. 225 and 13 en route. Both were satisfactory. During December I inspected the work of General Nos. 214,144,13, and 269 in the talookas of Neola and Chandore. All were satisfactory and the lymph good. Having finished the examination of these I left the Ahmednuggur Collectorate and entered that of Khandeish, and travelled through, and inspected the work of General Nos. 225 and 60 employed in the talookas of Baglan and Malligaum. Both were in a very satisfactory state. During the year I have travelled 1,837 miles, examined the work of 21 vaccinators, visited 395 villages, and inspected 31,587 children. Thus it appears that for each vaccinator whose work I inspected I visited 19 villages, a number sufficient to give a very good idea of his work. Of the children inspected 12,373 had been vaccinated, 10,949 had been attacked and were marked by small-pox. and the remainder 8,267 were found unprotected. Of the latter lists were made in every village, and signed by the Patel and Koolkurnee, and were sent to the vaccinators for their information. The labour and exposure to the sun which the writing of these names entails may be imagined but cannot be described. My object in examining all the children of the village whether protected or unprotected, was to gain some idea as to the proportions vaccinated, protected by small-pox and unpro- tected. As will be seen, though the number vaccinated preponderated yet the numbers of the others were little short of it. But the relative proportion will be best understood by giving the proportions per cent. These numbers, however, must be understood to refer to children under ten years of age only. Regarding those above that age I can give no data. The proportion expressed by per-centage, there is4 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.5 Ratnagherry from being a part of the Southern Circle, but even with this reduction it will be almost impossible, considering the number of vaccinators employed by the Jagheerdars, as well as those of the Municipalities, in addition to the Government establishment, that they can be all visited within the seven or eight months which embrace the period of the annual tour of inspection. On the quality of the lymph in use during the year, I can on the whole report favourably, with the exception of North Canara. During the past year my opportunities of inspecting the lymph have been greater than in any preceding one, as in addition to examining the work of those vaccinators under my charge. I felt it was hardly going beyond my duty if I examined also the lymph in use at the various dispensaries under the charge of Hospital Assistants scattered throughout my Circle; I have therefore visited and inspected the vaccine operations at all the Dispensaries which have laid in my route when moving from station to station: of these I should mention the Hooblee Dispensary as being distinguished for its excellent quality. From it I have had lymph supplied to several vaccinators in the Dharwar and Canara zillahs. I have also lately examined the lymph at the Kolapoor Civil Hospital under the charge of the Sub-Assistant Surgeon Mr. Wamon Wassoodew, and am glad to be able to report that it has in no way diminished from the high standard it so long maintained under Mr. Mills. The lymph round Belgaum has throughout the year been excellent, I have had frequent opportunities of inspecting it. The vaccinator employed there, Chimmo- jee Siddojee, the senior member of this establishment, deserves much credit for the manner he has so steadily maintained it. He has thoroughly mastered the difficulties of charging the capillary tubes with liquid lymph, and lymph so preserved has been forwarded by him to Bombay, the Civil Surgeons of Rutnagherry, Sattara, and Karwar, to the Vingorla station, to several Dispensaries, and to many members of the vaccine establishment. From the majority the reports of the lymph so preserved have been satisfactory. It is almost needless to mention the great importance of having a source of lymph always ready and of a quality to be depended on. On all occasions when a successive supply of lymph has been required by medical officers at out-stations the transmission of it has been left in the hands of Chimmojee Siddojee. During the past year only one instance of active prejudice against vaccination has been brought to my notice, and that was in the Uthnee talooka in the Belgaum zillah. In the month of April or May last I received from Major Thomas, Superintendent of Police, Belgaum, a report of an outbreak of small-pox in that talooka, I immediately directed a vaccinator to proceed there. His Returns for the following three months were singularly small for a district in which small-pox was said to be present, the rule being that under the immediate influence of the fear of small-pox, the most apathetic are. then disposed to take advantage of the protection offered them, leading of course to more than ordinary large Returns of opera- tions. In the third month the vaccinator showed only eight operations in his Returns. I could hardly help believing that this very small Return was owing as much to the conduct of the vaccinator, or probably to his having absented himself from duty, as from any prejudice oil the part of the people, and I withheld his pay pending an inquiry being made by the Mamlutdar of the district, under the direction of Mr. Naylor, the Assistant Magistrate in charge, to whom I reported the case. The result of this inquiry was thoroughly to exonerate the vaccinator from any blame, and a number of certificates were forwarded to me signed by the Patels of villages to the effect that none of the inhabitants were disposed to submit their children to vaccination; upon this I immediately moved the vaccinator to other districts
6 where his services would be better appreciated. To do otherwise would have been not only a waste of time but an injustice to other districts where no such prejudice existed. In the event of my receiving again a report of epidemic small-pox in that talooka I shall decline send- ing a vaccinator, until I have some guarantee from the native officials that his services are likely to be accepted by the people. Remark has been made in the General Annual Report of Vaccination in the Presidency, of the much larger proportion of children who are shown in the Returns as being above one year of age than under, especially in this and the Central Circle. To a great extent no doubt there is an objection among parents to submit their children at a very early age to vaccination, but admitting that this prejudice might be overcome, there is still a cause left which as long as it remains must necessitate the proportion of the &quot; over one year&quot; being greater than the &quot; under one year of age. &quot; It is the small number of vaccinators as compared to the large number of scattered villages under their charge. In many parts of the Circle the number of villages comprised in the district of one vaccinator is so great that it becomes impossible for him to visit the whole within a space of two or three years, consequently when he arrives at a village under these conditions, the children above one year must be in consider- able excess of those under one year of age. In referring to vaccination under Municipalities in my last Annual Report I spoke of it as being in a most unsatisfactory condition. This opinion has been questioned, and it was suggested that my disappointment was due to my having expected too much from so recently established a system. This, if an error on my part, has the redeeming feature of being an error on the right side, it was better to expect too much than to be satisfied with too little, and being so dissatisfied I probably exerted myself more to improve the then existing condi- tions of affairs then I should otherwise have done. That there was much room for improve- ment, and that my efforts have not altogether been in vain, the accompanying Form, giving the number of operations monthly, will show :7 Returns of the Vaccinators employed by the Municipalities of the Southern Circle. MONTHS. SATTARA. DHARWAR. BELGAUM. REMARKS. Wetta or Khanapore. Waee. Walway. Mon. Punder- pore. Kurrar. Gudduck and Betti- gherry. Dharwar. Gokak 3 months only. 1865. The Vaccinator at Gokak was employed for only 2 calendar months, but it embraced parts of 3 months. January...... 17 51 132 17 44 59 90 49 49 February .... 24 47 124 25 40 52 40 45 105 March ...... 26 40 96 22 39 57 35 35 60 April ....... 33 40 92 8 40 59 35 40 .. May .......... 33 43 93 33 40 71 62 35 .. June ........... 29 43 105 60 38 48 71 30 .. July ......... 29 44 59 52 34 41 74 .. .. August...... 30 36 62 55 40 45 73 .. .. September.... 15 40 79 65 40 41 80 .. .. October ...... 36 41 105 72 44 45 80 .. .. November.... 41 43 159 127 34 45 80 .. .. December .... 31 36 78 132 58 47 80 .. .. Total.. 344 504 1,184 668 491 610 800 234 214 AverageMonth- ly number.. 28.6 42 98.6 55.8 41 51 66.6 39 71
8 No important change has taken place in this branch during the year under review. The working for a couple of months at Gokak is shown for the first time, and would prove that a vaccinator employed only for a short period does the largest amount of work at the smallest cost. In Sattara no change has taken place. In the Dharwar zillah, where last year there were two vaccinators employed by the Municipalities, only one is now engaged, namely at Guduk with Bettigherry. The Dharwar one has been discharged, nor do I think there is any intention of replacing him. In Canara there are no Municipalities employing vaccinators. Mr. Jervoise, who, for a short time, was acting Collector of the zillah, wished, during an epidemic of small-pox in the Sircy talooka, to employ additional aid there, and endeavoured to induce the people to pay for it, but the attempt failed. They were perfectly ready to avail themselves of the benefits of vaccination if offered to them gratuitously, but do not appear to appreciate the boon sufficiently to make them think it worth paying for. NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.9 With the exception of the Bulsar and Bugwara districts, and some parts of the Mahee Kanta, the inhabitants of this Circle generally avail themselves of the benefit of vaccination; The castes most prejudiced against vaccination, are, as I am informed, the Bhatelas, Machees and Dooblas of the southern districts, a few Parsees of the villages in the neighbourhood of Surat and Bulsar, Mahomedans of Radunpoor, and Bheels, and Thakoors of Mahee Kanta. One of the most unhealthy districts of this Circle, namely Mandvee, is peopled by an ignorant and timid race, whose prinicpal pleasure is drinking, who live in grass huts, and eat the commonest food. The vaccinator of this district is an inhabitant of Mandvee, well acquaint. ed with, and, therefore, better able to overcome the prejudices of the people. It is usually found that a vaccinator placed over his native district, for the above mentioned reason, is more successful, and wins the confidence of the people, more readily than a stranger. It is also desirable that as few transfers as possible be made, as time is lost before the confidence of a new district can be gained. I have much satisfaction in reporting an increase in the numbers of children vaccinated under the age of one year, also the per.cemage of successful cases. That of children under one year old, is 51.9 or 3.6, that of successful cases is 94.2 or 2.7 over the year terminating 31st December 1865. Vaccine lymph throughout the year has been good, and the vesicles normal. Loss of lymph being reported by three vaccinators during the monsoon, steps were immediately taken to supply fresh lymph, in capillary tubes, from the Civil Hospital. Small-pox was slightly prevalent in a few villages of Cambay, Wagra, and Duskroe districts, but in no other districts. SIND DIVISION. Superintendent.10 At the commencement of the year, I was in Mehur District, where I examined the work of General No. 230 Allah Buksh, in the Kukur Talooka. The operations had been carefully performed, his records were true, his lymph was good and abundant. In the town of Mehur I saw a few children who had been vaccinated by the late Mr. Apothecary Wright. From Mehur I passed into Larkhana District, and in the Talookas of Larkhana and Soojawul examined the work of General No. 247 Shankat Rai, and General No. 27 Luchmon ; the former was then a new hand and had just completed his training under the latter; their work in all respects was satisfactory. Thence passed through the Talooka of Nowshera Abro, examining the work of General No. 114 Assoo Mull, who had done a very great number of operations, and whose work I found highly satisfactory. In the town of Yassinji Ghuri alone I saw three hundred children whom he had recently vaccinated. I have already mentioned the hearty assistance which the Zemindar of that place gave this vaccinator. From the Shikarpoor and Sukkur Districts I crossed the Indus and went up through Roree District, examining the work of General No. 79 Suroop Sing, which I found highly satisfactory. In the town of Roree I saw a few children with fresh lymph on the arms, the work of Sheikh Wullee, Hospital Assistant, in charge of the Dispensary there ; this man has carried on vaccination very successfully during the past three cold seasons. In the town of Gotekee an old inoculator came to me and asked permission to get lymph from Suroop Sing whenever he might want it; he intended operating among the hill tribes on the Jacobabad Frontier, where he had formerly been in the habit of inoculating, I told him that he should have it very willingly, and further that, if he chose, I would appoint him a vaccinator on the local establishment, but this offer he declined, because he could not write, and could make more money working on his own account. From the Roree District I again crossed the Indus and went into Jacobabad District, passing through it from east to west. Along my route I made many inquiries regarding the feelings of the people towards vaccination, and if one can believe in their answers, I think there cannot be any very great difficulty in getting them to accept vaccination. In the town of Jacobabad I met Colonel Green and made arrangements with him for commencing operations in the district. I appointed a local vaccinator for the district, and since then he and Luchmon have been employed in that new field. They have not been been able to do very much work, but they have broken ground, and thereby established the fact that the difficulties are not insurmountable. I did not wish at first to use any official influence with the people, but let these two vaccinators work their own way to the good-will of the inhabitants. The Belooches of this district are altogether a more independent race of men than the general inhabitants of other parts of the province, and I thought this method to begin with would work better in the end, but now that they have seen what vaccination is, and are taking to it, I think a Sindhi Circular, setting forth the advantages of vaccination, would be useful, and would also be a guarantee to the people that the Government wishes the children to be vaccinated. I find that some of the people have been asking the vaccinators for the Government order on the subject of vaccination, and as the vaccinators have no such order they are suspicious. A Sindhi Circular would remove this suspicion. I write this from personal know- ledge. Turning south I again saw a few children operated on by Assoo Mull in the Talooka of Nowshera Abro; and again some children in the Talooka of Rata Dehra and Soojawul, who had been vaccinated by Shankat Rai and Luchmon. Passing through Larkhana I examined some children in the Talooka of Tiger in the District of Mehur, who had been vaccinated by Allah Buksh. At the end of March and beginning of April I examined the work of General No. 77 Jettah Mull, in the Sehwan District, and found his work well done, his records true and carefully kept. It has taken me some trouble to get
11 this man brought up to this pitch; had he not been an old vaccinator, I should long ago have recommended his dismissal; but I hope he will continue to do his work well and send in true Returns; any lapse in either must I feel be visited with dismissal from the service, I have warned him, that such shall be his punishment if ever he transgress again. While I write I have received a letter from the Kardar of Maujhandah stating that Jettah Mull is still in the habit of begging murad. I shall make personal inquiries shortly about this. From Sehwan I passed over to the left bank of the Indus and into Nowshera District. It was now the 8th of April, and the heat both night and day was almost unbearable. I have served through hot seasons in Aden and the southern bight of the Persian Gulf, but the heat here last April was greater than in either of these hot places; it was so great that I could only inspect a very few villages near my camp. Thence I marched straight on Hydrabad, the heat sensibly diminishing south of Halla ; en route I saw a few villages gone over by General No. 148 Lalloo. This man's work I have always found exactly true, and what is of great importance, his method of doing his work gives the villagers great satisfac- tion, by them he is always hailed as a friend and meets a hearty welcome; in this respect there is marked difference from most of the vaccinators, who are not so happy in their relations with the pepole. In May I passed down into Lar, where the presence of the sea breeze mitigated the heat and made it much more bearable, but still it was terribly great. Towards the end of the month I made a run across the District of Mahomed Khan's Tanda, examining the work of General No. 195 Kowrah Mull, and also a little which had been done by local vaccinator Ram Chand, who had just been trained by Kowrah Mull. I had every reason to be satisfied with both vaccinators. I found Kowrah Mull going steadily over the Talooka of Buddeenah, and doing his work carefully. At the beginning of June I examined the work of General No. 246 Diaram, in the Bage-jo-Tanda Talooka; he had then been nearly a year on the establishment, he was working away steadily, but had frequently complained of meeting with opposition from the villagers. He is a young, active and intelligent man. I fancied he was probably not sufficiently conciliating towards the villagers, I impressed on him the great necessity of his being courteous to them ; and that for every frivolous difficulty, he must not expect the Mookhtiyarkar to step in and assist him; that he must depend on his own method of persuasion and conciliation; however, the Mookh- tiyarkar, whom I said, had occasionally given him assistance in allaying any spirit of opposition, and promised to continue his assistance when necessary. I had a suspicion that Diaram was not expending sufficient money in payment to parents, for carrying their children from one village to another with him, or that he was misappropriating a part of it; but I am happy to say that in the villages which I inspected I did not discover any dishonesty, still I thought he might have advantageously spent more of the Rupees 2 allowed per mensem. I told him to spend it, and not spare it, making it go as far and as equally as possible. When I was in this talooka there were a few cases of cholera. The disease originated among a few fakirs, who had come from Kurrachee, where the disease then existed, to a mera12 done. Passing through Meerpoor Buttora, I saw Mr. DeSouza, who is in charge of the Dispensary there ; he was not Vaccinating on account of the great heat, and there being very few unprotected children remaining in the town. I had a great deal of difficulty in making that march, as the inundation had set in early, and the water was flowing deep and strong in the canals ; many of the temporary bridges were either swept away or had not been put up. At the end of the month I crossed over into the Jerruck District, and in July I there examin- ed the records of General No. 185 Damoo Mull, but could not go to see his operations on account of the roads being inundated between Tatta and Ghorebare, he had been at work for some months in the latter place. I passed down the high road to Gharra, where I saw a few children who had shortly before been vaccinated by local vaccinator Choteer Mull; I was anxious to see what this new hand was doing, as he reported great difficulty in getting the inhabitants of Gharra and neighbourhood to submit their children, and in fact could not keep his lymph going; he lost it and was doing nothing. I got down about the middle of July, but it was near the middle of August ere I got lymph re-established there, after that the head vacci- nator Hassah Mull, had no difficulty in vaccinating every unprotected child in the town. I had previously spoken to the Patel and Mookhee about vaccination, and they consented to have every child vaccinated, but bargained that none of their vaccinated children should be taken to other villages, to this I agreed, and the trouble was at an end. In the month of September I charged a number of glass capillary tubes with good lymph; after hermetically sealing them, I enclosed seven tubes in a quill, and having sealed up the open end of it with wax, I sent it to a Dispensary; all the Dispensaries were thus supplied in time to commence operations with the opening of the cold season. A good many of the tubes were broken in the post, but from this source vaccination was this year begun in nearly all the Dispensaries. In former years it was a very great trouble to the vaccinators to send children to the Dispensaries, with fresh lymph on their arms, now with tubes there is no difficulty. If tubes were of no other use than merely to supply the Dispensaries, they would still constitute a great boon, but they have occasionally been made use of for carrying lymph long distances, when a vaccinator was moving into a new talooka or returning to his talooka from leave. In the month of October I commenced my cold season tour; between Gharra and Tatta, skirting the hills I examined some work which local vaccinator Choteer Mull had done during the preceding two months, I found it satisfactory, his lymph good and records true. In this talooka towards the mouth of the Bagur I also examined some work of General No. 185 Damoo Mull, and it also was well done. Passing up through Jerruck I saw a few children whom the Hospital Assistant there had vaccinated since receiving the capillary tubes. Thence crossed the Indus and passed up through Hydrabad, and examined the work of General No. 148 Lalloo in the Talooka of Doaba, found it satisfactory in every way. Thence entered Halla District and in the Talooka of Shahdadpoor, examined the work of General No. 165 Gunga Ram. He had done a very great deal of work during the past year, and it was well done; his lymph was good, his records true and neatly kept; but I am very sorry to say that I had to find fault with him for begging murad from the parents of children whom he had vaccinated. Murad is a kind of auspicious gift, which in former times was given to innoculators; it generally consists of a few pice or a seer of grain, and is supposed to bring good luck to the child. I told this man that on no account would I allow him to ask murad, that I could not prevent the people giving it of their own free will, and that he might take a lakh if it were offered to him, but that he must either give up begging for it or leave the establishment; he promised to give up asking for it. At the beginning of December I examined some of the villages gone over by General No. 108 Mehar Chand, in the Mora talooka, and was satisfied that his work was
13 well done, his register correct, and lymph good. Thence passed up through Nowshera Talooka, in which I saw the work of local vaccinator Thackoordass, who has worked uncom- monly well considering how short a time he has been a vaccinator. I consider him one of the best hands in the local establishment ; his lymph was good, his records very neatly kept and true. From the Nowshera District I passed up through His Highness the Meer of Kyrepoor's territory to Roree. I did not meet the vaccinator of Kyrepoor, and did not feel free to go about the Meer's villages by myself; but I know that during the past year His Highness the Meer's vaccinator has been steadily at work. In the town of Roree I saw some fresh lymph on the arms of several children, and very fine vesicles they were, proving the utility of capillary tubes in conveying lymph long distances, for this lymph was sent in tubes from the other end of Sind. Hospital Assistant Sheikh Wallee is doing good work in Roree, and doing it in good way. Thence passed up to the Talooka of Gotekee, in the town of that name and several adjoining villages, saw the children who had been vaccinated by General No. 79 Suroop Sing; this man's work I have always found well done and highly satisfactory. To conclude, I have travelled in every District of Sind, except Thurr and Parkur. I have examined every vaccinators' work, except the three in the Thurr and Parkur, and half the number of the vaccinators' work has been twice examined within the year, a thing which has never, I think, been done before. The oftener the vaccinators and their lymph are seen, the better it is on all accounts. I would have gone into the Thurr and Parkur at the end of the year, but on second thought, considered that I could be better spared there than in Upper Sind, for I know that Captain Tyrwhitt keeps an eye on the progress of vaccination in his districts; and here I would beg to bring to the notice of my superiors how earnest and real the supervision is which he practises, as an instance of it, in the Talooka of Saughur, Captain Tyrwhitt, on looking at some work performed by General No. 199 Allah Bux, considered it so well done that he gave that vaccinator a reward in the shape of a &quot; lungi&quot;14 KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.15 I have not found a single false return. None of the vaccinators reported any cases of small-pox last year, but during my tour of inspection I found that several villages had suffered from the disease, at Khaterkotree, in the Dedan Talooka, more than 100 children had died from small-pox during the year, but the Patel assured me that not one of the children who had been vaccinated had died from small-pox. During my inspection in Babriawar I visited two gaums where inoculation had been performed, two children who had been inoculated had suffered slightly from small-pox. The inoculator I could find no traces of, he did not belong to Kattywar, and it was nearly two years since his visit; this is the first time I have met with any cases of inoculation in Kattywar. I was not able to travel more than three and a half months on inspection duty last year, on account of two months' leave to Bombay for the benefit of my health, and because I was ordered into Rajcote in April, the whole of December I was on duty with the Political Agent and Kattywar Field Force. During my tour of inspection I examined the work of 20 vaccinators. REWA KANTA CIRCLE Superintendent16 were several cases of cholera, paticularly in Ballasindoor, where it almost put a stop to the work for more than a month ; a few cases of small-pox were reported on the border of the Dohud district, but the disease did not prevail to any extent. The lymph and vesicles have been well reported on, and any that I have seen were remarkably good. The Civil Authorities have kindly rendered every assistance, by sending orders to all their subordinates to help the vaccinators in every way. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent.17 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. TANNA. One Vaccinator (Municipality's) under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. G. ASHER, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 64 .... .... 51 79.7 1865 109 45 .... 100 91.7 The Municipality has employed a vaccinator throughout the year, but further than sanction- ing payment of salary, the Commissioners have taken no active interest in the cause. The difficulties in making vaccination general in and about the town of Tanna, which have been commented on in all the reports by myself and predecessors, are as great as ever, the greater numbers being not merely indifferent, but having a positive aversion. POONA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major R. MILLAR, M.D. (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,878 .... .... 1,555 81.7 1865 1,537 .... 341 1,229 79.9 The diminution in the amount vaccinated would appear to be explained by the fact that two other vaccinators are employed by the Municipality, whose vaccinators do the work which would probably otherwise have been done by the vaccinator who is paid by Government. v 3
18 AHMEDNUGGUR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon M. M. MACKENZIE (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,413 .... .... 1,236 87.4 1865 1,480 67 .... 1,183 79.9 I have much pleasure in bringing before you the present Vaccination Report, showing as it does an increase in the actual vaccinations of 67 over that of the previous year. The num- bers stand respectively 1,413 to 1,480 for the year 1865. Under the heading, however, of &quot;successfully vaccinated&quot; it will be seen, that only 1,183 proved successful, or in other words, a per-centage of success of 79.9, being about 9 per cent. less successful than that of the preceding year. This falling off in a &quot;successful issue &quot; may be justly put to the fact, that cholera had been more or less prevalent during the months of April, May, June, July and August. At such periods, it is well known how difficult it is to get the parents to consent to the vaccination of their children, and still more difficult, for the vaccinator to keep them in view after the operation is performed. A great many hide about their homes or leave the town altogether. The months that showed the least results were during the months of April, May. June, July, and August, when cholera was more or less prevalent, while in 186419 SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. V. CARTER, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 2,230 .... .... 1,719 77.0 1865 914 .... 1,316 786 85.9 In the Annual Report of last year 1864, the chief feature was a considerable falling off in number as compared with the previous year, but not as regards more distant periods; and again a deficiency in number of the persons vaccinated has to be noticed. Last year I stated the circumstances which appeared to account for this falling off, and as they continue to prevail, have now only to repeat that the establishment of several (six in all) &quot;fixed&quot; vaccinators during 1864 in the various talookas around Sattara, has of necessity led to vaccination being prac- tised at a distance from the latter city, where the operation for those districts was formerly carried out to a considerable extent. A second circumstance is noteworthy, viz. that &quot;small- pox&quot; has been singularly rare in the Talooka of Sattara during 1865 ; so rare, indeed, in the city of Sattara, that I believe no deaths from this cause have occurred during the year. This, of course, is a subject of congratulation for the inhabitants of the locality. Of one thing I am sure, that no efforts to extend vaccination have been spared. I have inspected all the children brought to the station, and have myself generally selected those best suited for furnishing lymph for the next batch; and finding the numbers so reduced, I addressed a letter to the Collector on the subject in October, proposing that every quarter public notice should be given in each division of the city, inviting parents to send their children to the Hospital. Mr. Arthur at once acceded to the proposal, and I think that the larger number vaccinated in the latter months of the year, shows the plan to have had some good effect. SHOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. F. OGILVIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success. fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,459 .... .... 782 53.6 1865 1,969 510 .... 1,532 77.8
20 During the past year, the number of persons vaccinated has amounted to 1,969, of which 967 were males, and 1,002 were females; 686 were children under one year and 1,283 were above that age; 1,532 were successful, 201 doubtful, and 236 were unsucessful. This work has not been hitherto, since my arrival here in 1862, performed according to my satisfaction, either in regard to the numbers vaccinated, or in the per-centage of success. I have during the past year taken unusual pains with this work, and I am much pleased to be able to report a decided improvement, and that as compared with the previous year, there is an increase of 24.2 in the per-centage of success. There is, however, great room for improvement, and as I have never, I think, on one occasion been unsuccessful in any operation I have myself per- formed here, I feel convinced, that the present want of success cannot be ascribed to the lymph being of doubtful quality. I must remark, the 201 cases reported doubtful, might have proved successful, had we the same facility for carrying on observations in this country as in England, but as those facilities do not exist, according to my usual custom, all cases, where the pustules are destroyed, or are for other causes considered doubtful, are ordered to be again vaccinated, and it is very possible that in consequence, many of them are returned afterwards as unsuccessful, which would with ordinary care, after the first operation, have proved successful. In this case the per-centage of success would have been 88. DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. K. COLSTON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 764 .... .... 692 90.5 1865 819 55 .... 763 93.1 Vaccination has been performed twice a week with much the same result as hitherto, the vaccinator meeting with about the same amount of passive opposition, except during 2 months at the commencement of the year, when small-pox was prevalent and committed sad havoc in some of the villages near Dhoolia, at which time many people brought in their children (some from long distances) for vaccination, great attention was given to the selection of cases for the propagation of the virus. Vaccine lymph has been frequently supplied to other stations. The vaccinator Shaik Emam has been most attentive to his duty.
21 NASSICK. One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. SUMMERS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 711 .... .... 573 80.5 1865 756 45 .... 602 79.6 I have to report that vaccination was performed on 756 subjects during the year just expired, exhibiting an increase of forty-five compared with the previous year ; of these there were 404 males and 252 female subjects; 602 were successfully operated upon, 30 were unsuccessfully, and 124 were doubtful cases; nearly the whole of the latter were among children whose parents brought them from the neighbouring villages, and did not bring the children afterwards for inspection. The same reluctance of the parents to bring the children after vaccination was observed this year, owing to the disinclination of the parents to have the lymph extracted for operating upon fresh subjects. BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major G. G. W. MAITLAND. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease 1864 689 .... .... 669 98.0 1865 738 49 .... 700 94.8 During the past year 738 persons were vaccinated in the town of Belgaum; of these 700 were successful cases and 38 failed. The above table exhibits an increase in the numbers vaccinated compared with the preceding year, but the per-centage of success is less. In addition to the above, the vaccinator has successfully vaccinated 162 children residing in the Camp and Sudder Bazar. So that the total number of operation conducted by the station vaccinator is 900.
22 A constant supply of good lymph has been kept up during the year, and the vaccinator has never failed to produce healthy subjects to vaccinate from, when called upon to do so by the medical officer of European and Native charges. DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil.Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. CRUICKSHANK, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year.. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 872 .... .... 771 88.4 1865 548 .... 324 461 84.1 During the past year 548 persons have been vaccinated, whilst in 1864 there were 872, showing a decrease of 324 as compared with the preceding year. The decrease may to some extent be explained by the fact that small-pox has not been prevalent as an epidemic, and that very few sporadic cases have occurred this year in the zillah, and further that a vaccinator was employed by the Municipality during the first eight months of the year who, I know, vaccinated a number of persons, but on application for his returns I am informed that there is no record of the total number or successful cases vaccinated by him on the Munici- pality records. Of the number vaccinated 461 were successful, or 84.1 per cent. of the whole, and of the total vaccinated 383 were above, and 165 below, one year of age. The lymph was for the whole year in good condition, and the vesicles well formed; the conduct of the vaccinator has been satisfactory, and his work carefully performed. KOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Sub-Assistant Surgeon WAMON WASSOODEO. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,860 .... .... 1,844 99.1 1865 1,701 .... 159 1,687 99.1
23 The number of vaccinations performed by the station vaccinator during the past year amounted to 1,701; of which 890 were males, 811 were females, 2 were Christians, 10 Mussul- mans, and 1,689 Hindoos; 469 were children under one year, and the remaning 1,232 were above that age. The successful vaccinations have been 1,687 or 99.1 per cent. on the total number vaccinated. RUTNAGHERRY. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. DAY, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 987 .... .... 740 75.0 1865 431 .... 556 339 78.6 There has been very little small-pox about this year in the districts and in the town, consequently the people have not been ready to bring their children to be vaccinated, and indeed the supply of lymph failed once or twice on this account. I have several times called the attention of the Collector to this difficulty, and the Mamlutdar was told to give the station vaccinator every help. VINGORLA. Senior Apothecary S. HANSON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 238 .... .... 227 95.3 1865 542 304 .... 518 95.5 The total number vaccinated during the year 1865 was 542, being an increase of 304 on that of the previous year ; of these 293 were male, and 249 female children; 59 were under one year, and 483 above that age. The successful vaccinations have been 518, or 95.5 per cent. on the total number vaccinated. The lymph and vesicles were good.
24 HONORE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. WAKEFIELD. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 547 .... .... 475 86.8 1865 222 .... 325 177 79.7 The number vaccinated during the past year, shows a decrease of 325, to be accounted for partly by the absence of the station vaccinator on leave for 3 months, and also on account of the apathy of the Natives, as, during the past year, there has been but little sickness from small-pox in the villages adjacent, whereas in the year 1864 small-pox was prevalent, and the Natives then sought the aid of the vaccinator of their own free will. AHMEDABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major D. WYLLIE, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase Decrease. 1864 3,464 .... .... 3,429 99.0 1865 4,271 807 .... 4,183 98.0 During the past year the number vaccinated was much greater than it has hitherto been, the above table showing an increase of 807 operations over what was effected in the previous year, and exceeding by 1,585 the figure attained in 1863. This increase is solely due to the circumstance of the vaccinator having had a peon specially detailed to assist him since June 1864, an arrangement that may be regarded as having fully realized expecta- tion, since it has resulted in enlarging the sphere of utility to the extent of more than 100 operations per month beyond the work accomplished before. The lymph employed was that
25 Introduced from Europe at the close of 1863. Its efficacy continued unimpaired throughout, the resulting vesicles being invariably large, well formed, and distinctive. There was an ample supply available at all times to meet the wants of neighbouring stations. Inoculation has long since ceased in this neighbourhood, and as respects the city there is no obstruction to the spread of vaccination, which simply requires to be brought to the doors of the people, and arranged to suit their convenience, although apathy and indifference be still characteristic of ordinary native feeling on this subject, and progress thus be necessarily slow, I am yet conscious that vaccination is steadily advancing in popular appreciation, and looking back for 10 years, to a time when certain sections of the community stood obstinately aloof, or in open antagonism, it is matter for congratulation to be now able to state that there is no class or sect of the population that longer resist the boon, and that the refusals during the year have not exceeded one in a thousand. So far as the establishment goes, it has worked satisfactorily and well, but it is inadequate to do justice to the large field of operation which the city presents. This matter will, however, be remedied for the future, as the Municipality have consented to double the strength of the establishment, which will, from this date, consist of 2 vaccinators and 2 peons, maintained at the cost of the Commission. KAIRA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. JOHNSON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease 1864 683 .... .... 574 84.0 1865 577 .... 106 592 85.3 The total number of cases vaccinated during the year is 577 ; of these 491 were under one year old, 86 above that age ; of these 340 were males, and 237 females ; 4 were Christians, 515 Hindoos, and 52 Mussulmans, 6 of other castes. Though the villages of Loekra, Hurryalale, Ruttonpoor, Bunsur, and Coowanwarra have been under the care of the assistant vaccinator, Ramchunder Bausay at Kaira, the return shows a decrease in the number vaccinated of 106 ; this might infer a want of diligence on the part of the vaccinator, but I have reason to believe is not owing to any want of attention on his part, but more to be attributed to most of the children having been vaccinated during the previous two years, and consequently the return consists of young children, for the most part infants. The vesicles have been all through the year of a fair average size, and improved very much on the introduction of new lymph in capillary tubes by the Superintendent of Vaccination. The assistant vaccinator got matter v 4
26 from the arm of a child vaccinated with the capillary lymph, and has kept up the same supply till now without its much deteriorating. The inhabitants seem fully aware of the importance of having their children vaccinated, and except in cases where the parents are too careless to do so, they bring their children willingly to be vaccinated without distinction of caste or creed. SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon W. A. SHEPHERD. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 2,234 .... .... 2,057 92.1 1865 1,528 .... 706 1,407 92.0 It is but just to the vaccinator to remark, that he uses his best endeavours in the work which has been allotted him. He vaccinates twice weekly at the Civil Hospital and Cursetjee Furdoonjee Dispensary Institution, which are about two miles apart, and he attends, when- ever required, at the houses of those who object to bring their children to a public institution ; in fact every endeavour is used for the spread of vaccination. BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon G. GLEN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,221 .... .... 1,092 89.4 1865 1,003 .... 218 927 92.4
27 During the past year there has been a falling off in the numbers vaccinated of 218, a large number, which, however, may be accounted for by the very indifferent state of health of the vaccinator during a period of some months. 1,003 children have been vaccinated in all, the number of children under one year amounting to 521. The number of males amount to 552, the number of females to 451. These numbers show a considerable difference between the sexes vaccinated, compared with the year 1864, when the number of males vaccinated in that period nearly doubled that of females. The numbers are chiefly made up of Hindoos and Mussulmans, as has always been the case; but this year also it is noticeable, that a larger number of Parsees have been vaccinated than in any other year since vaccination was established in this town. This is certainly a matter for congratulation as it, in all proba- bility, indicates that their unaccountably strong prejudices against the prophylactic are gradually being removed. RAJCOTE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon E. R. BUTLER, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,117 .... .... 959 85.9 1865 496 .... 621 439 88.5 The duties of the station vaccinator are now limited to the camp and town, and hence the decrease in numbers vaccinated by him compared with previous years. The per-centage of success is high this year; a large proportion of unsuccessful cases occurred in October, when the vesicles being observed to be generally small and ill-developed, fresh lymph was procured from several sources, but all failed. The vesicles have latterly been much more perfect. KURRACHEE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon J. BEAN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,964 .... .... 1,829 93.1 1865 3,114 1,150 .... 2,800 8.9
28 During the past year there were 3,114 persons vaccinated, a fair proportion being children under one year of age ; of these operations 2,800 proved successful, a ratio of 89.91 per-cent. Compared with the year 1864 there will be observed to be an increase of 1,150 opera- tions performed by the station vaccinator during the year under report. Notwithstanding this increase, however, the operations have fallen somewhat below the number done in 1863; this is mainly attributable to a smaller migratory population than usual during the year, owing to stagnation of trade generally for a considerable period. At the end of the monsoon the vaccine lymph became deteriorated in quality, and the operation failed entirely or produced a spurious pustule, and fresh lymph had to be procured from the Superintendent of Vaccination in Sind, which has, in every case, produced excellent pustules. HYDRABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon N. HOPKINS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Pre-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 812 .... .... 583 71.8 1865 1,478 666 .... 1,205 81.5 The total number vaccinated during the past year was 1,478, being an increase over 1864 of 666; of all the number vaccinated 1,205 were successful, being an increase of those success- fully vaccinated over the previous year by 622. Vaccination is performed every Monday and Thursday, and every case is submitted to me for inspection. This year's returns show a great improvement over last year which I can only account for as being owing to the great exertion of the vaccinator who has worked hard, and has been obliged to put up with insults from the Hindoo inhabitants, who will scarcely permit him to approach their houses, although they have large families and many of them not vaccinated; I have brought this to the notice of the Civil authorities who have promised to interfere, but the vaccinator finds nothing but opposi- tion and insults; so I have told him if the people insult him again to go before a Magistrate.
29 SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. F. FFOLLIOTT. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 1,358 .... .... 1,252 92.2 1865 1,379 12 .... 1,323 95.9 1,379 children have been vaccinated during the past year, 43 only of whom were over one year of age. This return shows a slight increase over that of last year in the number of operations performed, and per-centage of successful results. No case of small-pox occurred in the town of Shikarpoor during the period under review, and the quality of the lymph employed, and character of the resulting vesicles, continue satisfactory. KOTREE. One Vaccinator, (Municipality's) under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon R. C. McCONNELL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease 1864 426 .... .... 351 82.4 1865 814 418 .... 667 79.0 The doubtful cases consist for the most part of those, who, shortly after being vaccinated, change their abode, or perhaps at the time may be travelling, and never again come under the vaccinator's observation. Lymph and vesicles tolerably good. A few instances of the pustules turning into small ulcers have come under my notice, but, on inquiry, I obtained sufficient information, to lead me to believe the cause was owing more to the unhealthy condition of those in whom ulcers developed themselves, in connection with the past hot and sickly season in Sind, rather than to bad quality of the lymph.
30 KUTCH. Surgeon.Major J. C. TRESTRAIL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 193 .... .... 111 57.5 1865 606 413 .... 532 87.8 Vaccination has been carried on at the Dispensary during the whole year, and 495 children have been vaccinated, being in excess of the last year of 302. Three vaccinators have been vaccinating in the districts since the end of November, and 111 children have been vaccinated. Great opposition has been shown on the part of the people in allowing their children to be operated on, but His Highness has fined one village, and is using his influence to have vaccination carried out. The lymph I am now using Dr. Welsh brought from England, and is the best I have ever seen. Doubtless this year there will be a great increase in the numbers vaccinated. ADEN. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon.Major J. F. STEINHAEUSER, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1864 446 .... .... 334 74.9 1865 323 .... 123 180 55.7 The vaccination at Aden for the year 1865 was commenced by a new assistant vaccinator, with lymph sent from Bombay in capillary tubes, on glasses and on points, the object being to re-establish the protective measure at the station. All operations performed by myself, or by the assistant vaccinator, under my immediate inspection failed, (though fresh supplies of lymph were regularly forwarded by mail steamer every fortnight from the Presidency) until the month of June when success was obtained from virus in tubes transmitted through the India
31 Office, from the National Vaccine Establishment in London. In July the lymph was lost by the assistant vaccinator, but restored by me in the same month from some of the remaining tubes above mentioned. In August, September, and October, the operations were successful until the end of the latter month when the specific virus was again lost. In November and December all my endeavours to produce a typical vesicle from the tubes received from England in June last, proved abortive. From this short annual history of the lymph at this station, it follows that successful vaccination has only been carried on during five months of the past year. It is, therefore, not surprising that a decrease in the number of operations performed, has to be recorded, when compared with the preceding year. That the per-centage of success should be so low as 55.72, is accounted for by the numerous futile attempts (no less than 118 having been registered) made to re-establish typical vesicles with lymph which proved inefficient. It is remarkable that virus sent from England, with an average voyage of 16 days, should produce more frequently satisfactory results, than that sent from Bombay with an average voyage of 8 days only. Such, however, is the fact, according to my experience at all seasons of the year.
APPENDIX. v 5
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERIN Table showing the Number and Names of the Circles, and their Superintendents ; the those of last Year ; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, the Average Number of Operations performed Number. CIRCLES. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS. Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1864 Increase. Decrease. 1 CENTRAL ............ Assistant Surgeon P. S. Turnbull, M. D. ....... 36 63,251 69,299 .. 6,048 2 SOUTHERN ........ iii No. I. TENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. Number of Vaccinators employed ; the Total Vaccinations performed and compared with Age, and Result ; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated ; and by each Vaccinator, for the Year 1865. Total Number vaccinated, arranged According to Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 33,526 29,725 56,540 2,715 48 16 3,932 14,958 48,293 59,350 1,882 2,019 93.8 1,757 22,312 19,674 38,257 2,526 127 .. 1,076 6,532 35,454 39,779 1,190 1,017 94.7 1,448 2,767 2,285 4,629 327 .. .. 96 1,989 3,063 4,534 308 210 89.6 631 37,560 32,652 60,405 5,101 15 83 4,608 36,460 33,752 66,166 1,397 2,649 94.2 2,128 73 87 153 7 .. .. .. 52 108 147 9 4 91.8 160 27,736 22,788 6,473 39,901 .. .. 4,150 12,541 37,983 47,618 381 2,525 94.2 2,972 6,610 5,281 1,305 10,191 .. .. 395 3,776 8,115 11,176 306 409 83.4 1,081 3,697 3,243 6,187 731 .. .. 22 3,106 3,834 6,654 154 132 95.8 867 1,717 1,620 2,864 438 .. .. 35 2,122 1,215 3,015 242 80 90.3 667 4,382 3,447 4,760 1,207 1,110 574 178 3,676, 4,153 5,646 862 1,321 72.1 2,610 140,380 120,802 181,573 63,144 1,300 673 14,492 85,212 1,75,970 244,085 6,731 10,366 93.4 1,729 Vaccination. do.
iv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS Table of Vaccination through the Agency of Native Chiefs arranged according to for the Number. CIRCLES and STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1864. Increase. Decrease. 1 CENTRAL .............. Assistant Surgeon P.S. Turnbull, M.D. ........... 2 1,915 2,550 .. 635 2 SOUTHERN ........... v No. II. AND OTHERS IN NATIVE TERRITORY. the Circles of Vaccination and Stations, and showing Details as in Table No. I., year 1865. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Above one year. Under one year. Successful. Unsuccesful. Doubtful. 1,040 875 1,853 48 .. .. 14 292 1,623 1,763 113 39 92.1 957 9,197 7,945 15,882 705 72 .. 483 3,957 13,185 15,907 875 360 92.8 745 10,516 9,602 17,187 1,386 .. .. 1,545 9,672 10,446 18,189 1,014 915 90.4 1,676 460 356 175 601 .. .. 40 290 526 681 96 39 83.4 816 11,202 8,877 17,255 2,708 .. .. 116 9,044 11,035 18,469 1,082 528 91.9 837 1,961 2,033 3,671 193 .. 6 124 2,197 1,797 3,988 4 2 99.8 799 324 282 285 321 .. .. .. 130 476 540 38 28 87.8 202 34,700 29,970 56,308 5,962 72 6 2,322 25,582 39,088 59,537 3,222 1,911 92.0 924
vi TABLE VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS-GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vac- cinators attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1864. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna* ........................... 1 109 64 45 .. 56 53 Alibaugh ........................ .. 9 213 .. 204 6 3 Bandora ........................ .. 86 57 29 .. 54 32 Coorla .......................... .. 68 30 38 .. 42 26 Oorun .......................... .. 271 276 .. 5 195 76 Total.... 1 543 640 .. 97 353 190 2 POONA ....................... Poona ............................ 1 1,537 1,878 .. 341 957 580 Ahmednuggur ........... 1 1,480 1,413 67 .. 867 613 Sattara .......................... 1 914 2,230 .. 1,316 516 398 Sholapoor ...................... 1 1,969 1,459 510 .. 967 1,002 Dhoolia ........................ 1 819 764 55 .. 455 364 Nassick .......................... 1 756 711 45 .. 404 352 Total.... 6 7,475 8,455 .. 980 4,166 3,309 3 NORTHERN .............. Ahmedabad ................... 1 4,271 3,464 807 .. 2,375 1,896 Kaira ............................. 1 577 683 .. 106 340 237 Surat .............................. 1 1,528 2,234 .. 706 896 632 Broach ........................... 1 1,003 1,221 .. 218 552 451 Rajkote .......................... 1 496 1,117 .. 621 262 234 Total ..... 5 7,875 8,719 .. 844 4,425 3,450 4 SOUTHERN ..................... Belgaum ....................... 1 738 689 49 .. 412 326 Dharwar ....................... 1 548 872 .. 324 275 273 Hooblee* ..................... 1 1,115 1,353 .. 238 595 520 Kolapoor ...................... 1 1,701 1,860 .. 159 890 811 Rutnagherry ................. 1 431 987 .. 556 251 180 Vingorla ................... .. 542 238 304 .. 293 249 Honore ......................... 1 222 547 .. 325 117 105 Dispensary (Belgaum)*. 1 339 .. .. .. 217 122 Total.... 7 5,636 6,546 .. 910 3,050 2,586 5 SIND .............................. Kurrachee ...................... 1 3,114 1,964 1,150 .. 2,071 1,043 Hydrabad ....................... 1 1,478 812 666 .. 836 642 Shikarpoor ..................... 1 1,379 1,358 21 .. 719 660 Kotree* .......................... 1 844 426 418 .. 563 281 Dispensaries .................. .. 3,471 3,828 .. 357 1,953 1,518 Total.... 4 10,286 8,388 1,898 .. 6,142 4,144 6 ADEN ............................. Aden .............................. 1 323 446 .. 123 204 119 7 PERSIAN GULF .. Bushire.......................... .. 188 .. .. .. 90 98 Total.... 1 511 446 65 .. 294 217 Grand Total.. 24 32,326 33,194 .. 868 18,430 13,896 * Municipal
vii No. III. SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. 1, for the year 1865. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under One Year. Above One Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 75 11 13 5 5 25 84 100 6 3 91.7 109 4 .. .. .. 5 2 7 6 2 1 66.6 .... 50 9 22 3 2 14 72 3 38 45 3.5 .... 22 12 33 1 .. 29 39 42 12 14 61.8 .... 192 66 9 .. 4 43 228 226 20 25 83.4 .... 343 98 77 9 16 113 430 377 78 88 69.4 109 1,261 236 32 8 .. 480 1,057 1,229 131 177 79.9 1,537 1,338 128 12 2 .. 769 711 1,183 186 111 79.9 1,480 827 68 17 .. 2 545 369 786 39 89 85.9 914 910 691 1 .. 367 686 1,283 1,532 236 201 77.8 1,969 587 100 7 .. 125 619 200 763 13 43 93.1 819 593 62 11 .. 90 504 252 602 30 124 79.6 756 5,516 1,285 80 10 584 3,603 3,872 6,095 635 745 81.5 1,246 3,636 605 11 19 .. 2,792 1,479 4,183 31 57 98.0 4,271 515 52 4 .. 6 491 86 492 11 74 85.3 577 1,223 220 11 31 43 707 821 1,407 42 79 92.0 1,528 672 243 1 79 8 521 482 927 14 62 92.4 1,003 323 160 2 4 7 243 253 439 48 9 88.5 496 6,369 1,280 29 133 64 4,754 3,121 7,448 146 281 94.6 1,575 589 138 7 4 .. 433 305 700 29 9 94.8 738 361 176 11 .. .. 165 383 461 68 19 84.1 548 909 196 .. .. 10 232 883 984 85 46 88.2 1,115 1,689 10 2 .. .. 469 1,232 1,687 7 7 99.1 1,701 424 4 3 .. .. 101 330 339 43 49 78.6 431 519 18 5 .. .. 59 483 518 9 15 95.5 .... 157 5 60 .. .. 25 197 177 16 29 79.7 222 276 54 9 .. .. 149 190 324 8 7 95.9 339 4,924 601 97 4 10 1,633 4,003 5,190 265 181 92.8 728 536 2,440 78 14 46 1,129 1,985 2,800 151 163 89.9 3,114 755 635 36 .. 52 998 480 1,205 139 134 81.5 1,478 876 501 1 1 .. 1,336 43 1,323 35 21 95.9 1,379 65 761 14 .. 4 261 583 667 76 101 79.0 844 1,746 1,524 5 .. 196 1,275 2,196 3,081 190 200 88.8 .... 3,978 5,861 134 15 298 4,999 5,287 9,076 591 619 88.2 1,704 53 47 5 .. 218 60 263 180 140 3 55.7 323 .. 172 .. .. 16 123 65 188 .. .. 100.0 .... 53 219 5 .. 234 183 328 368 140 3 72.0 323 21,183 9,344 422 171 1,206 15,285 17,041 28,554 1,855 1,917 88.3 1,154 Vaccination.
viii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1864. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. No. 1, Vaccination under Superintendents in British Territory ......................................................................... 261,182 235,306 25,876 .... 140,380 120,802 No 2, Ditto ditto and others in Native Territory. 64,670 64,394 276 .... 34,700 29,970 No 3, Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c. ................ 32,326 33,194 .... 868 18,430 13,896 Total.... 358,178 332,894 25,284 .... 193,510 164,668
ix No. IV. FOR THE YEAR 1865. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of successful to number vaccinated. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes Under One year. Above One year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 181,573 63,144 1,300 673 14,492 85,212 175,970 244,085 6,731 10,366 93.4 56,308 5,962 72 6 2,322 25,582 088 59,537 3,222 1,911 92.0 21,183 9,344 422 171 1,206 15,285 17,041 28,554 1,855 1,017 88.3 2,59,064 78,450 1,794 850 18,020 126,079 232,099 332,176 11,808 14,194 92.7 v 6
x TABLE No. V. TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1865, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS, &C. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under One Year. Above One Year. Under. Above. I.xi TABLE No. VI. EMPLOYMENT RETURN OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1865. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.xii SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.xiii KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.xv No. 804. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 21st April 1866. RESOLUTION.xvi 6. The large extension of Municipal Vaccination noticed in Dr. Stovell's 29th and 30th paragraphs, is highly satisfactory. 7. The Secretary of State should, for the reasons given by Dr. Stovell, be requested to forward the next supply of lymph solely in tubes. 8. The modification of the system in force at the Presidency, and the reorganization of the Department, described in Dr. Stovell's concluding para- graphs, will doubtless conduce to a still larger measure of success. 9. The assistance rendered by Civil and Political Officers, the services of Superintendents, especially of Drs. Plumptre and Pinkerton, and the conduct of Vaccinators, merit the commendation and acknowledgments of Government. F. C. CHAPMAN, Chief Secretary to Government. BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1866. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] BOMBAY: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1867.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1866. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1867.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1866. No. 1038 OF 1867. From the INSPECTOR GENERAL, Medical Department, To the CHIEF SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) Parsee medical gentleman not in the service. In the Central Circle, Assistant Surgeon Turnbull was acting Civil Surgeon at Ahmednuggur from the 2nd of April to the 29th of December, during which time no active superintendence of work was carried on. In the Southern Circle Assistant Surgeon Plumptre proceeded to Europe on furlough in March, the appointment was at once filled up by Surgeon H. Day. The Western Circle was, throughout the year, without the presence of its Superintendent, Assistant Surgeon Blanc, still absent on special duty in Abyssinia; the southern portion of this Circle is somewhat im- portant in a vaccination point of view, for it affords a large number of the recruits for the Native Army and for the Bombay Police force, it also sends annually a large proportion of the labouring classes to the various works in and around Bombay. It extends from Bancote to the Sawunt Warree State in the south, and was under the charge of the Superintendent Southern Circle. The northern part extends from Rewadunda to the Portuguese Settlement of Damaun in the north, and was under the charge of the Superintendent of the Central Circle. The want of superintendence has been felt in this division. In the Kattiawar Circle, Dr. Butler was obliged to proceed home on Medical Certificate in August. Several officers successively held charge of the office, pending the arrival of Assistant Surgeon Bloomfield, who was appointed to act. No active super- intendence was performed during the period. 6. At the termination of the year the Superintendents were( v ) general result, for though there were eighteen additional hands at work, their vaccinations did not number so much as half the above increment. For the five years antecedent to 1866 the amount of operations was as follows:( vi ) To these causes may be added that of a decrease of superintendence necessitated by the requirements of the service. 12. The operations performed during the year, as shown in the returns, give a mean percentage of success of 92.7, the maximum being 99.3 at Kolapoor, and the minimum 56.1 at Bandora, under the Sub-Assistant Surgeon there. Out of the total vaccinations, 351,935 were entered as successful. The Superintendents pronounce favourably on the accuracy of the returns as verified by them in their tours. A few exceptions only to their truthfulness were ascertained, and these were followed by dismissal of the vaccinators concerned. Under watchful superintendence, regular checking of the vaccinators' registers, the timely assist- ance rendered to them by the native district authorities in the general progress of their work, and the knowledge that dismissal follows detection, the practice of falsification of returns has much decreased. 13. The proportion of males to females vaccinated is much the same as it was in former years. There were 205,156 males and 174,341 females. 14. The vaccinations of the year, arranged according to caste, are as follows:( vii ) in the Northern Division and the Rewa Kanta 60.3 in the former and 62.3 per- cent. in the latter. This bears out the remark of Dr. Dick who, in the year 1863, stated &quot; that the unwillingness to submit young infants to vaccination, which is observed elsewhere, is rarely met with in Guzerat.&quot; 17. The immense utility of successful vaccination in infancy, cannot be too much impressed on the minds of the people. One Superintendent (Northern Division, Guzerat) has remarked, &quot;one is struck at once with the general freedom, from the marks of small-pox and other deformities, produced by theis disease, among the young population, while among the old inhabitants are seen the scarred, blind and the otherwise horribly deformed by this loathsome scourge.&quot; In the city of Shikarpore under Mr. Ffolliott, Civil Surgeon, who has paid particular attention to the perfect vaccination of the place, there were vaccinated 98 per cent. under one year. It is greatly to be regretted that in Bombay itself vaccination under one year is not more extensively carried on, 40.5 per cent. only being vaccinated below one year of age. Character of lymph. 18. The lymph, or vaccine virus, has been ascertained by the Superin- tendents and officers in charge to have been generally of good quality. A few exceptions were, however reported. Dr. Cook, in the Northern Circle, observed in two or three cases that the vesicles were not so good as he could have desired. In the Southern Circle Dr. Day found some vaccinators working with doubtful lymph, and the same in the Western Circle. In only one instance in Sind did Dr. Pinkerton ascertain deterioration. In all these cases the lymph was replaced. Supply of lymph. 19. In paragraphs 33 and 34 of the report forwarded by the Principal In- spector General for the year 1865, it was pointed out that much difficulty existed in Bombay in keeping up the supply of fresh lymph. In Bombay arm to arm vaccination becomes every day more and more difficult, as will be observed in the extract from the Superin- tendent's report, indeed the unwillingness of the people to permit of direct vacci- nation is the worst enemy the prophylactic possesses and frequently causes the stoppage of the work. 20. To obviate somewhat this difficulty, and at the same time to give fresh vaccine matter to the country, the Government addressed the Secretary of State for India on the subject and, in communication with the National Vaccine In- stitution, lymph was forwarded in December 1865 and 1866. The greater part of the last supply, somewhat small for the purpose, was on ivory points, a mode
( viii ) of transmission in which no confidence can be placed. It was immediately distri- buted to the Officers of the various Circles, as follows:( ix ) a population of about 3 millions, the death rate from small-pox was in 1864, 0.18 per mille. In Bombay in the same year it was 2.05. 25. The practice of inoculation of small-pox has not been very prominent or much noticed during the year. Sind appears to be the only Circle where an overt act of inoculation occurred. It was a single case, fully proved. The operator was taken before a Magistrate, and punishment awarded, but as the law cannot take cognizance in this country of this as an offence, the Magistrate's decision was overruled by the Sudder Court of Sind. The wise measures however adopted by the Commissioner rendered the apparent victory of no avail to the inoculator and his class. Dr. Pinkerton narrates a little incident of vacci- nation and inoculation which is interesting. The child of one of the Ameers in Sind had been vaccinated, doubts and fears however lingered in the breasts of the family, and the inoculator was at last called in; there was considerable anxiety displayed as to the issue of this crucial experiment. The vaccination however stood the test to the satisfaction of the Ameer, who bestowed a gift on the vaccinator. 26. The necessity for suppressing inoculation must always be kept in view, and in the absence of legal measures it can only be accomplished by vaccination being always at hand. It slumbers so long as the young population are guarded by vaccination. Any laxity of superintendence however, or want of general energy in the Department, would assuredly cause its re-appearance more perhaps to provide for a want than for any love to an operation which is sometimes followed by such sad results as great mortality and spread of the disease. 27. The aid afforded to the Superintendents by the Civil and Political autho- rities, and by the Native officials to the working men in their progress is fully and warmly acknowledged, there is no doubt that without the assistance thus given the vaccinators' returns would be infinitely smaller. Another kind of aid is that rendered by the Chiefs of Native States being brought to view the prophy- lactic in its proper light, and as a consequence setting up small establishments to the great good of their people. Some Native States are however backward, and that of &quot;the Hubshee,&quot; in close vicinity to Bombay, is one of these. Municipali- ties too aid in the march of vaccination, and will, it is to be hoped, add to their utility year by year. There have been seven added during the year under record. It gives me much pleasure to express my acknowledgments to the Superin- tendents during the year, their intelligent and earnest work has been highly satis- factory. 2 vac
( x ) The establishments, and many vaccinators individually, have been favourably noticed by their Superintendents, and it appears to me that the liberality of Go- vernment, already extended to these hard working men, has been productive of good. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, F. S. ARNOTT, M.D.,C.B., Inspector General, Medical Department. Bombay, 31st March 1867.
VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 3. That the first of these causes existed will be apparent as soon as the Annual Return of small-pox is submitted. During my tour in Khandeish and Ahmednuggur, in the beginning of the year, I neither heard of nor saw a single case, and the Monthly Returns of the vaccinators show that very few cases came under their observation. 4. Any one who has any practical acquaintance with vaccination, as carried on in this country, is aware of the immense effect which an epidemic of small-pox has upon its people and how they then seek the protection of the prophylactic ; and also, he is aware how indifferent they are to vaccination in the absence of such influence. 5. During the year 1864, small-pox was very prevalent throughout this Circle, and while in 1865 only a few sporadic cases occurred, the past year has been remark- able for all but its entire absence. The influence the occurrences of these years had on vaccination is shown in the following figures showing the numbers operated on in each year:3 8. Now mark the influence this opposition had on the returns of these vaccina- tors as compared with the year preceding. Their respective numbers were4 now paid to this subject, and I am of opinion that the registers are more accurately kept than formerly. But while such is the result with regard to infantile vaccination, it is most interesting to note that several cases of re-vaccination in grown up persons have come under my observation during the year, and if any sign that the people are beginning to appreciate vaccination was wanted, what could be better than this. Would that the practice was more general. Result. 13. The percentage of success is almost the same as it was in 1865, there being a difference of 1/10 of a per cent. only. Not a single false name was discovered during the year. The vaccine lymph has been generally active and the vesicles normal, though in some cases not so well developed as they ought to have been. Vaccination in Collectorates. 14. The following table will show sufficiently and clearly the progress of vacci- nation in the several collectorates comprised in this Circle, with regard to their population :5 a vaccinator of its own. He is not assisted in any way and receives no compensation, as all other Municipal servants do, for dearness of grain. He get Rs. 10 per month. Small-pox. 17. As already stated in paragraph 3, not a single case of small-pox came under my observation, and very few have been reported to me during the past year. Whether this is a sign of a good and effectual protection time alone can tell; but in the meantime it appears satis- factory. Returns of small-pox will, as soon as received from the several collectorates, be forwarded in the usual collective form. Inoculation. 18. No case of fresh inoculation has been reported to me during the year, but instances have been communicated in which marked traces were observable of the inoculator having been (though not very recently) carrying on his dangerous occupation. For instance, the vaccinator (General No. 58) employed in the Mahim talooka of the collectorate of Tanna, (General No. 40) employed in the Mawul talooka of the collectorate of Poona, and (General No. 13) also the vaccinator employed in the Trimbuk Petta of the Nassick talooka of the Nuggur Zilla, reported such cases. The two latter talookas are close on the borders of the Tanna collectorate, just above the Ghauts. The inhabitants are principally coolies and take to vaccination or any thing else recommended to them, quite kindly. The children of the villages visited by these vaccinators bore undoubted marks of inoculation as well as deep pitting from small-pox. Inoculation had been resorted to during the absence of the vaccinator from the talooka. Indeed this appears to be nearly always the case, these men not daring to show their faces when there is a vaccinator in the neighbourhood, the only man who will report him. The whole work is carried on with the connivance, if not the assistance, of the village officials, who receive a moiety of the fees obtained and are consequently interested individuals. As there is not a vaccinator for each talooka, and as the inoculator always carries on his dangerous occupation in the absence of one, and also as it is always carried on with the connivance of the village officers, I beg to suggest that patels and koolkoornees be held responsible, under some penalty or other, that no inoculator follows his occupation within the limits of their respective villages without reporting the case at once to the nearest Magistrate. Something must be done ; these are dangerous centres of a loathsome and virulent disease which may or may not spread over the whole country, causing death and devastation on its track, and are I believe, in nine cases out of ten, the cause of at least local outbreaks of small-pox. 19. The vaccinators generally have conducted their duties in a satisfactory manner ; of course there have been exceptions as the following statement will show:6 The following have been entertained vice the above :7 dated 29th January 1866. From Virdul I then crossed the Taptee into the Thalner or Seerpoor talooka. General No. 214 was here employed, but his work being indifferently performed I placed him under tuition. He also is a young man. His lymph was not good. After examining the work in this talooka I recrossed the Taptee and visited the Betwud Petta and Amulnair talooka in which last a young Apprentice, General No. 272 Venaik Bappoojee, was employed. The whole of his work was most carefully performed. His lymph excellent, the vesicles large and well formed, and the records neatly kept. He is a very promising vaccinator. Hav- ing instructed him in the methods of filling and sealing tubes and of transmitting them by post, he for some months sent me regular supplies which were useful in enabling me to supply the demands for lymph by persons both within and beyond the limits of the Presidency. From Amulnair I proceeded northwards to the Patoonde Petta and examined old work of General No. 140. Thereafter I again crossed the Taptee river and entered the Chopra talooka, where General No. 110 was then employed, and where he had been for nearly two years. After examining 1,608 children of 25 villages very minutely, I am happy to report that his work was in every respect good and nearly every child in the villages I visited was protected. I then went eastwards to Yawul (where I inspected old work by General No. 60) thence via Bhosawul to Wurrungaum, where I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Ashburner the Collector. Here I may be allowed to express my thanks to Mr. Ashburner for the valuable assistance I received from him during the time I was in Khandeish, and I am sure that the measures taken by him have been and will be the means of promoting vaccination in the province over which he so ably presides. From Wurrun- gaum I turned westward, and visited and inspected the work of General No. 140 Gunesh Martund, son of the late most excellent head vaccinator of this Circle. His lymph was good and active. His records well kept and altogether had my approval. Here I again saw General No. 214, who having been instructed in the art was trans- ferred to the neighbouring talooka (Burgaum). Travelling through the Burgaum and Chalisgaum talookas, inspecting old work, I left the collectorate of Khandeish for that of Ahmednuggur, and as the shortest way to it cut across the territories of His Highness the Nizam to Koppurgaum. On arrival there I received intimation that I had been appointed to act as Civil Surgeon at Ahmednuggur. This was on the 24th of March. Assistant Vaccinator General No. 160 Ramjee Bappoojee, was here employed. His lymph was active, vesicles well developed, and he was performing his duties with much tact and ability. I filled a number of tubes and distributed them to the vaccinators who I thought most required the lymph. Leaving the Koppurgaum talooka I went, according to directions, direct to Ahmednuggur, where I arrived on the 2nd of April, and where I remained (acting as Civil Surgeon) till the 29th December, when I was relieved by Mr. Dann. During the three months I was moving in the districts, I travelled 618 miles, visited 154 villages and inspected 8,310 vaccinated children, giving an average of 206 miles, 51 villages, and 2,770 vaccinated children monthly.
8 Vaccination in Native States during the year 1866. The Return shows a decrease of 962 operations as compared with last year. The cause of this is clearly traceable to the change of vaccinators. Both the vaccinators have been newly entertained during the past year. Akulkote was, I regret to say, without one for some months, and ultimately I was obliged to entertain a man in whom I had not very much confidence. The Raja not only pays them badly and irregularly, but gives them no assistance whatever. In fact his officials appear to take delight in obstructing instead of assisting him. The vaccinator of last year refused to remain any longer in the Raja's service, and I appointed him to the vaccinatorship under the Municipality of Beejapore. In the Peint State a new and trustworthy man has been entertained, vice the former one deceased. This is one of the most unhealthy districts in the Circle. Malaria, bad water, &c., make fearful inroads on the health of the vaccinators. Last year the vaccinator died: this year the new one was on sick leave for several months, and on recovery, was induced to return to work only by the promise of higher pay. On my recommendation the Revenue Commissioner increased his pay from that of an apprentice to that of an assistant vaccinator, and allowed him Rupee one lymph allowance. He is now working successfully. Service in the Pient Districts is limited to one year at a time in the Revenue and Police Department. SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.9 It is satisfactory in this my first annual return to be able to report an increase in the number of cases of 2,019, and also to show that the proportion of successful cases is greater than in the preceding year. This year two extra permanent vaccinators have been appointed, viz. in the Jagheers of Serole and Kurrunwar, and a third tem- porary one who did duty at Seeren for two months and who was paid out of the fine fund. Of these the Serole man returns 149 cases, the other man of Kurrunwar has not yet sent any returns; and the temporary vaccinator operated on 467 cases, so that to view matters in the same light as in 1865 it is necessary in considering the increase of vaccination in the Southern Circle to deduct 616 cases from the total increase of 2,019, leaving 1,403 to represent the increased work of the establisment as it existed prior to this year. It will be seen that the number of cases returned by the Govern- ment vaccinators shows a decrease of 1,038 ; this is unsatisfactory. The decrease has occurred chiefly in the Rutnagherry Zilla, where I found two men working with very indifferent lymph, and to whom I supplied fresh. I think that this decrease may be accounted for by the increased vigilance of the Civil authorities in our territories in taking care that returns shall be genuine. With reference to the quality of lymph employed, I think I may, on the whole, speak favourably of it, I have however in the course of my tour found six vaccinators working with lymph of a very doubtful quality. I think it must be considered an interesting question how this degenerated lymph acts. I believe however there is little doubt that the protective influence of it must be very small, as the perfect vaccine vesicles must be considered only as an index of a disease which has passed through the system of the patient; it would have seemed more probable to expect no effect from bad or indifferent lymph at all at the site of the puncture, so that some sort of constitutional effect evidently takes place although not a completely protecting one. During the year new lymph from England of excellent quality has been intro- duced, and I shall multiply it and spread it as much as possible. I particulary enjoin all vaccinators I visit to be very careful about the quality of the lymph they use. Having found six men in the course of my tour working with doubtful lymph, I fear that all the cases reported as successful, cannot be accepted as such without considerable qualification. This shows the necessity of frequent inspection to be very great, I fear that in such an immense area as the Southern Circle the attempts on the part of the Superintendent to check fraud must at the best only be imperfect, but I look upon the duty of inspecting the quality of the lymph used as being of the greatest importance. In the Rutnagherry Zilla and the Sawuntwaree State I found three men work- ing with very doubtful lymph. This part of the country forms part of the Western Circle, the Superintendent of which has not been able to take up his appointment, consequently it has been but little inspected of late years, it is particularly difficult of access, there being no roads, travelling can only be carried on at great incon- venience to the inhabitants, by means of bigarries, who do not willingly come for- ward to act as coolies. v 2
10 To enable me to find out if vaccinators remain too long in one place, and also to enable me to find them more easily, and so visit them unexpectedly, I have made them send me fortnightly statements of the name of the place they are at and when they will go to a new place ; these reports I find of great assistance to me in my tour of inspection. I am inclined, speaking generally, to think that there is no very active dislike to the operation, and in villages and towns where the authorities encourage it the parents have their children vaccinated readily. I have found the vaccinators rather fond of making too numerous punctures in the cases they operate on ; this I believe acts in some measure in preventing people bringing their children to be vaccinated; certainly to see, as is too often the case, a child's arm almost covered with sores from the shoulder to the elbow does not tend to make the parents of others to wish for the same condition to be present in their own children, and the child being rendered fretful and troublesome by the unnecessary irritative fever present, the inconvenience to the parents must be very considerable ; this state of the arm is not brought about by the bad quality of the lymph, but by dirt and neglect on the part of the parents. I have ordered every vaccinator I have visited only to make two punctures on each arm. I was much gratified when visiting the village of Serole, in the Jagheer of Kurun- war, to find the people have become alive to the benefits of vaccination. One of the villagers told me that about twenty children had died from small-pox, and that those who had been vaccinated escaped ; this was the most pleasing visit I have made to any town or village. On the whole I think I may say that I have been satisfied with the conduct of the men under my orders; I have found it necessary to recommend the dismissal of one. man, a Government vaccinator, and he has been dismissed. I have sent circulars round to inform the others of this, so that the warning effect of this punishment should not be lost; if not for this precaution, from their isolated position in different parts of the country, they would probably have heard nothing about it. Dr. Plumptre speaks favourably of the introduction of peons to assist the vac- cinators in obtaining the children, and I am inclined to think they do give great assistance, but there will be some difficulty in preventing their degenerating into mere servants of the vaccinators. Great delay occurs in obtaining the reports of the Jagheerdars' vaccinators, owing to their being sent first to the Political Agent of the Southern Maratha Country ; if the Political Agents were stationary the delay would not be so considerable. If in the high schools the masters were to say a few words to the boys about the history of vaccination (and such a remarkable discovery might well form part of any lesson on western civilization), I think it would be very beneficial to the cause. The Southern Circle, excluding North Canara but including Sawuntwaree and Rutnagherry, contains an area of 33,825 square miles, and a population of 47,17,513
11 inhabitants. The number of cases vaccinated in these districts during the year was 60,938, consequently 1.2 per cent. have been vaccinated during the year. These statistics are, I fear, only approximative, as there has not I believe been a trustworthy census yet obtained. In the Lancet of September 22nd, 1866, 588,361 are the num- ber of cases reported as vaccinated during the year in England, being an increase of 51,149. I have unfortunately not the means of reference at hand to obtain the number of inhabitants in England, so I cannot compare the work. Since joining the appointment in April last I have travelled 1,109 miles, the rainy season being included in this period. NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent12 2. I have had charge of the duties of Superintendent of Vaccination for only the last five weeks of the expired year. My predecessor, Dr. Cook, who discharged the duties of Superintendent for nearly the whole of the year, was working at its com- mencement at Gogo, and during the first month he travelled from Gogo to Bhow- nuggur, Ranpore, Dhundooka, and Dholera, visiting 23 villages and inspecting the work of General Nos. 52,170 and 91. In February he was engaged in examining the work of General Nos. 91, 177, 273, 56, and 154, and travelled from Dholera to Dholka, Ahmedabad and Prantage, visiting 27 villages. In March, the work of four General Nos. 270,173,111, and 41, was examined, and the Superintendent travelled from Prantage to Morasa, Kupperwunj, Thasra, and Moondha, visiting 32 villages. In April the travelling extended from Moondha to Kaira, Neriad, Annund and Borsud. 25 villages were visited, and the work of General Nos. 127, 63, 188, 221, and 128 was examined. In May the work of four, General Nos. 128, 96, 190, and 235, was seen, and the Superintendent travelled from Borsud to Jumboosur, A mode, Wagra and Broach, visiting 25 villages. In June the work of General No. 293 was examined; 3 villages were visited, and the Superintendent travelled from Broach to Memoodabad and from thence to Kaira, where he quartered for the monsoon. In October, in con- sequence of being ordered to proceed to Baroda to take charge of regimental duties, the proper work of inspection was not commenced till I took charge of the work on November 23rd, from which day up to the end of the year, I travelled from Baroda to Memoodabad by rail, and from thence vi Jeytulpoor to Sanund, Veerungaum, Sewamee and Rhadunpoor, and examined the work of General Nos. 127,63, 20, 31 and 56, visiting 53 villages. During the whole year the travelling has extended over 1,634 miles, 188 villages have been visited, 7,475 children have been inspected, and the work of 30 vaccinators examined. 3. As I have been for so short a time in my present employment, I am unable to make any observations regarding the work of the vaccinators employed in this Circle, but Dr. Cook, on giving me charge of this office, was good enough to furnish me with a memorandum of his views on some of the important points connected with the working of this department, from which it appears that &quot; with a few exceptions the vaccinators have performed their work during the past year with considerable zeal and activity. They have been well supported and assisted by their peons and village officials. I may here mention the readiness with which the assistance of the different Collectors and Political Agents in this Circle was given, and the trouble they have taken to remove obstructions and opposition to the spread of vaccination throughout their respective charges.&quot; There has been a considerable increase in the vaccination throughout the Native States, and the conduct of the vaccinators there has been for the most part very good. 4. During the past year a few changes occurred in the Staff of the Establish- ment. One vaccinator, Pestonjee Dhunjeebhoy, General No. 14, died on 6th April. In September Dulputram Munchoram, General No. 1, retired from the service on pension, and about the end of November, one Motilal Hurgovundass, General No,
13 249, was discharged the service on account of bad conduct. The vacancies thus produced have been duly filled up. From sickness and other causes about eight vaccinators were incapacitated for more or less lengthened periods from performing their work efficiently. To this, perhaps, and to the loss of lymph during the monsoon, mentioned in paragraph 12 of this Report, may be attributed the slight decrease in the number of children vaccinated. 5. Demands for lymph from various medical men in this Circle have been met with by the supply of capillary tubes charged with fresh lymph, and in conformity with Principal Inspector General's Order, No. 334, this department has regularly forwarded every fortnight two lymph tubes to the Local Superintendent of Vaccina- tion at Bombay. 6. Next to seeing good normal vesicles containing clear lymph, the best proof of the good quality of such lymph would be its effect upon an unprotected constitu- tion. Hence it would be valuable information to this department to know that the vaccine lymph of different localities supplied to others is efficacious or otherwise, for this reason, whenever lymph is forwarded to any Officer, it is invariably requested of him to report the result of vaccination from such source. 7. During the year two supplies of lymph from England were received for trial; one at the commencement and one towards its close ; the lymph in both instances produced no good results. 8. In paragraph 4 of last year's Report mention was made of the existence of the practice of inoculation in the district of Bugwara. In the districts travelled through in the year under report, Dr. Cook states : &quot;I could find no single case of inoculation in any of the villages examined, nor did I hear of it in any talooka visited though I made special enquiry concerning it.&quot; 9. Municipal vaccination has not much progressed. In paragraph 13 of last Report, it was mentioned that the Municipality of Dakore in the Kaira Zilla was the only one in this Circle that supported a separate vaccinator. But in consequence of smallness of population, that Municipality has given up entertaining a separate vaccinator. In the whole of this Circle there are at present only two vaccinators employed by the Municipalities of Veerungaum and Dholka. Municipal vaccinators are not under the control of this department, and do not report their work ; the Superintendent of Vaccination, when he happens to be in a place where a Municipal Vaccinator may be working, examines his work only. 10. In the month of July, small-pox prevailed in Sagbara, a village 45 miles from Mandvee. The Thakore of the village, through the Mamlutdar of Mandvee, asked the assistance of a vaccinator, whereupon the Mandvee vaccinator, General No. 248, was directed to proceed to Sagbara and carry on vaccination there. It was not till the 6th September that actual operations were commenced; in one month 106 children were vaccinated and the result was so satisfactory that the epidemic soon ceased, and the services of the vaccinator and the peon accompanying him were
14 so highly appreciated that they were handsomely rewarded by the Thakore of the village. 11. In the month of November, Dr. Cook addressed a circular letter to all the vaccinators in this Division, desiring them to report on the different castes of people in their districts who object to vaccination. From the replies to this circular it appears that some of the Kusbatee Mahomedans, the Parsees of the seashore villages of Surat Zilla, a few castes of Hindoos, and fisherman generally still entertain some prejudices regarding this beneficent operation. Dr. Cook states that &quot;with a few exceptions the inhabitants of this Circle generally seem year by year to become more convinced of the benefits of vaccination, and as a rule they are anxious to have their children vaccinated.&quot; In many cases also I have known adults voluntarily submit themselves to the operation, though the cases amongst adults in which vaccination would be available or requisite are comparatively rare, for most of them have either been vaccinated when young or suffered from small-pox. There can be no more striking proof of the benefits conferred on the people by this beneficent operation than is displayed by a visit to any of the villages in this district. One is struck at once with the general freedom from the marks of small-pox and other deformities produced by this disease among the young population, while the old inhabitants are scarred, blind, and otherwise horribly deformed by this horrible and loathsome scourge. 12. As regards the quality of the lymph of this circle, the late Superintendent, whose observations extended over 11 months, states that &quot; the lymph has been good throughout the year with one or two exceptions, in those cases in which the vesicles did not seem so good as they should have been, its use was immediately stopped and a fresh supply obtained from those vaccinators who possessed the best lymph.&quot; Dur- ing the monsoon several vaccinators lost their lymph, but a fresh supply was im- mediately obtained from their nearest neighbours. Owing to the heavy rains and floods I think the loss was to be anticipated, and was not to be attributed to laziness or want of zeal on their part.
15 SIND DIVISION. Superintendent16 2. Previous to the past year the history of vaccination in Sind does not show a single instance of a native of any position whatsoever, high or low, having made an application for the service of a vaccinator, except in a few instances, made under the dread of the actual existence of small-pox in an epidemic form, in the neighbour- hood of the applicants, and under the belief that inoculation was illegal. This is not an encouraging statement after twenty years' practice of vaccination, though it is modified by the fact that vaccination was carried out to a very limited extent up to the period when my predecessor, Surgeon Martin, was appointed Superintendent of Vaccination in Sind ten years ago. Since then vaccination has greatly progressed, and again in the last two years it has been still further and more completely spread by the assistance of the local vaccinators. There seems now to be a change in favour of vaccination, indicating that its benefits are becoming more appreciated by the leaders of the people, for during the past year I received applications from the following places for the service of a vaccinator, viz : talookas of Kusmore, Meerpoor Khas, Kotree, Alliyar-ka-Tanda, Bola Khan's Thana, Meerpoor Matelo, Buddeen, Bage-ka-Tanda, and Doaba. The requests emanated from zemindars, native officials, and others. Their requests were made through revenue officials and vaccinators, a few were also made direct to myself. It is quite certain that all were not made under the dread of the actual presence of small-pox. It is impossible for me to say whether all or any of the applicants would have preferred inoculation to vaccination, but one application con- tained a request that if a vaccinator could not be given, they might be allowed &quot; to inoculate in their own way.&quot; It is encouraging to see the leaders of the people coming forward in this way and I hope the feeling in favour of vaccination will gra- dually spread throughout the mass of the population : but the day is still probably far distant when the humble and illiterate Sindhi mother will look forward to the vaccinating of her child, as a duty to herself, her child, and to the State. 3. Another thing I would notice in reference to the gradual effect which the spread of vaccination has produced, and it may be considered very strong evidence of the Sindhis knowing well what the advantages of vaccination are. It is this : in the tappi- darate of Jurruck, when Lalloo was vaccinating there last September, there was a disease among horned cattle, which the people considered to be &quot; mata &quot; (cow-pox) and they asked that vaccinator to operate on their beasts. I did not hear of this until the disease had abated, but I told Lalloo he might gratify their wish, though from the description of the disease I do not think it was cow-pox, at least I could not get any information regarding the existence of pocks on any part of the bodies of the affected animals. I think in all this there is good reason to infer that vaccination is beginning to be more appreciated than heretofore among the better off and better informed part of the people. 4. The fact is still only too evident that thousands of people submit their children to be vaccinated merely because it is the wish of Government that they should do so, for their faith is very strong in Government doing every thing for their good ; on account of this faith it is seldom that the vaccinators meet with any opposition, and
17 seldom indeed with persistent opposition any where in carrying on their operations, though they have a thankless office to perform, and one which requires the exercise of a good deal of persuasion: to persuade the ignorant is often no easy matter, especially when they have something of their own, inoculation,18 vaccinator vaccinated 541 males and 431 females, being 55.48 and 44.51 respectively in every 100. These three establishments differ so very slightly in regard to the relative proportion of the sexes that one would be inclined on that evidence, to believe that the vaccinators have given the correct relative numbers of the male and female children vaccinated by them, but the fact is that the relative proportion is not correct, for I have during my inspections repeatedly found female children entered in the male column, but I have never found a male child entered in the female column.- On this account I believe these figures are not entirely correct, not with standing the strong evidence of their correctness. I think that the chief reason why there are always so many more males than females is that there are very few of the latter vaccinated after the age of six years, because many females of that age are not allowed to go out in public, especially among Hindoos, whereas there is no such hindrance to males-- The late Dr. Ritchie drew my attention to this circumstance as the likeliest reason for the disparity, and I think now that he was correct, still the fact is known to me that female children are entered occasionally in the male column, and there are certainly no objections to vaccinate young female children, and I often see adult Hindoo as well as Mussulman women who have submitted themselves to be vaccinated. 9. There were six Christians (in Kotree), 7,251 Hindoos, 56,620 Mussulmans, and 4,818 other castes (all Shikaris) vaccinated. The relative number of Hindoos to Mussulmans I think is very slightly below what the relative number of Hindoos to Mussulmans is in the general population of the province. No less than 2,584 of the 4,818 Shikaris were vaccinated in the Thur and Parkur Political Superintendency. The vaccinators seldom do any work in the European stations, hence there are so few Christians. 10. There were vaccinated 15,601 under one year old and 53,094 above that age, being 22.71 under and 77.28 above one year old in every 100. I am sorry to say that I consider the columns of ages untrustworthy, and the impression left on my mind after inspecting nearly 8,000 vaccinated children last year is that the number vaccinated under one year old ought to have been very much larger in the vaccinators' returns, probably nearly double what has been reported. In several registers the number of mistakes clearly show that the vaccinators do not give proper attention to the subject of ages. I hope they will be more careful during 1867. I will again issue a circular letter on this subject to all the vaccinators. 11. The result of the operations is here shewn :19 From the above table it appears that of those whom the vaccinators saw after vaccination there were 4.99 unsuccessful, of the 7,919 vaccinated children whom I inspected 98.38 percent were successfully vaccinated. It is only reasonable to suppose that a large number of the 4,365 doubtful cases were also successfully vaccinated, although the fact is not known, because the great majority of them were not seen by the vaccinators after the operations. I consider the vaccinators reports, in regard to the result of those vaccinated, as correct as they can be practically; there must always be a small amount of error in the vaccinators reports showing rather more unsuccessful than really exists, because the result of re-vaccinations is often unknown at the time the vaccinators send in their monthly reports, hence the per- centage of success has always been greater in my inspection table than in the annual report. 12. The lymph every where has been good. In one instance only did I see bad lymph, and that was in Shahbunder districts, in the hottest time of the year, but even there it was only one day's lymph, the next day's lymph was good. I received a few tubes containing lymph from, I think the local Superintendent of Vaccination, Bombay Circle, I am not sure though, beceause I could not read the frank and there was no letter with it. Hassah Mull used it, and I afterwards saw the vesicles, they were very good indeed. In December I received one tube containing lymph from the Principal Inspector General Medical Department, which had come from England and also at the same time a few ivory points charged with dry lymph. I used both the fluid lymph in the tube and the dry lymph on the ivory points myself on young children, who had never had any kind of eruptive disease, so that there could be no doubt about their being unprotected, and yet the lymph was quite inert. 13. From the month of January to July of 1866 the existence of small-pox was reported from several talookas, generally the disease seems to have been in a mild form, and subsequent enquiries have shown that in some instances it was only chicken-pox, measles, or both. These two infantile diseases were very prevalent in several widely separated parts of Sind during the first half of the past year. It would be very interesting to know how many were attacked and died of small-pox, and of these how many had been vaccinated, but such information cannot be obtained By the commendable industry of Hassah Mull, 1 st Assistant Superintendent of Vaccina- tion, I am in a position to give the particulars of an outbreak of small-pox in the village of Jadoo Khan Lagari in the tappidarate of Alliyar-ka-Tanda. It appears that Chanderam, local vaccinator in the talooka of Alliyar-ka-Tanda, wanted to vacci- nate all the unprotected children in the village of Jadoo Khan Lagari in the month of August last ; he did vaccinate a number of Mussulmans, but the Hindoos obstinately and persistently refused to have their children operated on. Small-pox attacked nineteen unprotected Hindoo children in November, and of these five died, one became blind of one eye, and another totally blind ; this gives the frightful percentage of 25.8 deaths to attacks, and this in a village surrounded by a cordon of vaccinated villages. One stands aghast to contemplate what the awful loss of life would be in
20 an unprotected population under a wide-spread epidemic of such virulence ; truly Small-pox maintains the awful fatal character ascribed to it by the writers of the last century. De la Condamine estimated that &quot;small-pox destroys, maims, or disfigures the fourth part of mankind.&quot; (Memoire sur Pinoculation de la petite verole, 1754). Here in Sind we have more than realized this estimate in a single and an isolated village. The Mukhi, who would not assist with his influence or example to get these children vaccinated, must have an easy conscience, if he feel no remorse for his conduct; no doubt he soothes his own and his friends' afflictions with the balm that it was the will of matadeo. I feel well convinced that had there not been so many protected children, and had there not been so many vaccinators in Sind, we should have had a severe epidemic of small-pox in several districts during the early months of the year. With my present strength of vaccinators I was able to surround small-pox, wherever it made its appearance, with a wall of vaccinated children, and so prevented the circumfusion of the disease. I think I am not saying too much for my establish- ment by asserting my belief that the activity of the vaccinators saved many young lives to the State. 14. In my report for 1864 I stated my opinion, that with sufficient vaccina- tors, the very name of an inoculator would disappear from the province. At that time, I, in common with most people, was under the belief that inoculation was ille- gal, the opinion of the High Court of Bombay in the matter of the Tanna inocula- tor has set me right. Since then only one inoculator has been known to practise, and that was last year in the talooka of Buddeen. I still believe that the Native Sindhi inoculator will disappear completely, because be has no chance of making a decent living in competition with so many vaccinators. The man who practised last year in the Buddeen talooka, by name Boodhoo, was reported to me by local vaccinator Ram Chund, I endorsed his report to Captain Gillespie, then Deputy Collector of Maho- med Khan's Tanda district, who had Boodhoo arrested, tried and convicted by the subordinate Magistrate of the talooka, and sentenced to pay a fine of Rupees twenty- five, or in default to go to prison for a month. This sentence was reversed by the Sudder Court of Sind because inoculation is not illegal. Mr. Mansfield considers that &quot; there is no necessity for special legislation to render the practice of inoculation in Sind penal&quot; and &quot; that the influence of the Magistrates and their Deputies is quite sufficient to stop it altogether&quot;. And he has instructed the Judicial Commissioner in Sind &quot; to issue a circular to the Magistrates and their Deputies to assemble the people of any village in which a case of inoculation is reported, and to point out to them the danger the whole community is exposed to by the practice, and also to hold the head men responsible that a case does not occur again.&quot; When I recom- mended that inoculation should be made penal, I was under the belief that an inocu- lator could legally carry on his deadly work in the face of all authority ; this impres- sion I derived from the Judicial Commissioner's letter No. 2053 of 28th November last to the Magistrates of Hydrabad, in reference to the case of Boodhoo ; hence my strong recommendation that it should be made penal. I think Mr. Mansfield's
21 action will have the effect of suppression of inoculation, especially as I know that no inoculator can practice long without the vaccinators reporting it to me. Since the time when Mr. Mansfield drew the attention of the Magistrates to the suppres- sion of inoculation22 taken in conjunction with the great number of his vaccinations. He vaccinated nearly 6,000 children last year in the Rohree districts. Proceeding towards the frontier of Bahawulpoor State, I examined the work of local vaccinator Hazari Mull in Oobaora talooka, as he had only recently been sent there, at the time of my visit he had not done very much work. I saw 196 vaccinated children in 10 villages- His lymph was excellent, there was not a single unsuccessful case among the whole of the children, nor a single error in his register. Having completed my inspection in the Rohree districts, I crossed the river and entered the Upper Sind Frontier district of Jacobabad, marched by Kushmore and along the old line of outposts, to Meerpoor. Here I received in January, from the Principal Inspector General Me- dical Department, five ivory points charged with vaccine virus, which had been sent from England by the Secretary of State for India. I vaccinated two children with them carefully and according to directions sent with them, but the lymph was quite inert. At the same time I vaccinated two other children with tube lymph, which I had by me, and this took well and produced good vesicles. On the day of vac- cinating these children a number of people brought their children to my camp to be also vaccinated, but I desired them to wait until the following week ; so that they might be vaccinated from arm to arm. Nobody had ever before been vaccinated in Meerpoor, and the fact of two being unsuccessful out of four, made the people very shy of submitting their children when the lymph became ready; that is to say, eight days after the four were vaccinated, whereas on the day of operating the whole of the children in the place would have been freely offered. However, on explaining; the whole circumstance to a few of the principal inhabitants, they understood the matter, and removed the fears of the rest of the people, who then submitted all their children. In this talooka (Sarhad) I examined over 300 children recently vaccinated by General No. 114, Assoo Mull, in 9 villages, and of the same vaccinator's work, 561 children were examined in 9 villages of Shikarpoor talooka. I consider this man's work very satisfactory indeed. After he had gone over Shikarpoor talooka I ordered him to take his lymph across the Bigari Canal and work in Sarhad talooka of Jacobabad district, not expecting that he would be able to do very much work, but to my surprise I found him doing abundance and getting on pleasantly with the inhabitants. He said he had to do a good deal of talking to explain the benefits of vaccination, and that be was very much indebted to the Mookhtiarkar of Sarhad for assisting him in explaining the advantages of vaccination to the zemindars of the talooka. In the Jacobabad talooka I examined the work of General No. 27 Luchmon ; 227 childern were seen in 19 villages, his returns were quite correct, the vesicles were rather small, attributable to Luchmon using glass lymph, because the people were very averse to carrying their children from their own to other villages. I had instructed him to deal very gently with the inhabitants, in order that nothing should stand in the way of their submitting their children to be operated on. The population of this talooka is much thinner than that of Sarhad, hence Luchmon had done fewer operations per mensem than Assoo Mull, but on the whole
23 I consider he had done very good work under the eircumstances. He was in the habit of vaccinating one day a week at the Hospital of the 2nd Regiment of Sind Horse, all children voluntarily brought from the lines, in addition to carrying on his own duties outside among the villages. In the same talooka the work of local vaccinator Kisher Chand was examined in the Cutchee, 480 children were seen in 31 villages. I consider his work very well done, his records were true, neatly kept, and his general behaviour was every thing I could desire. From Jacobabad district I passed into Larkhana district, and in the talooka of Kumber examined 250 children in 19 villages, who had been vaccinated by General No. 247, Shankat Rai. His work was pretty well done, his records true and lymph good. He was suffering from bad health; he subsequently got six months' sick leave, during which he died. In the Nusseerabad talooka the work of local vaccinator Jani Mull was examined and found satisfactory. From the district of Larkhana I marched to Mehur, with the intention of inspecting the work of General No. 230 Allah Buksh in the talooka of Mchur, but found him dying in the Hospital there : he died a few hours after my arrival. Thence passed on to Tigr talooka to inspect local vaccinator Hasso Mull's work, but on examining his records, I saw that they were in a measure falsified, I bluntly accused him of falsification and pointed out from his own weekly reports that his register could not be correct. I believe his faults chiefly arose from laziness and carelessness ; I dismissed him from the local establishment. He had only been employed in a talooka by himself four months. From Mehur district I passed down into Sehwan district, and in the talookas of Sehwan and Dadoo examined the work of local vaccinator Rughu Mull, with which I was tolerably well satisfied ; his lymph was good but his records contained some errors in the sexes and ages columns regarding which I cautioned him ; they were of a very minor description and such as a little more care could have prevented. I also examined some work in the talookas of General No. 77, Jettah Mull, and found it satisfactory. In the month of April I received temporary charge of the duties of Civil Surgeon at Kotree from Assistant Surgeon McConneli, and handed them over to Assistant Surgeon Colvill in May ; during the month I did all I could to further vaccination in the town and neighbourhood of Kotree. In April and May I examined the work of General No. 148, Lalloo, in Doaba talooka of Hydrabad collectorate and also in Kotree talooka. This vaccinator carried on work on both sides of the river for a few months on account of my having received a report of the existence of small-pox in and about Kotree, at a time when the Municipal vaccinator had been dismissed by the Municipality, but on my arrival in Kotree I only found measles and chicken-pox. I found Lalloo's work, as it always has been, in every way highly satisfactory. Towards the end of May in the Jurruck districts the work of local vaccinator Choteer Mull was examined ; it was not so well done as it might have been ; this man's house is in the town of Tatta, and he was in the habit of going too often to it to the neglect of his duty. He has since been dismissed for losing his lymph and not exerting himself to obtain other lymph
24 from the vaccinator on the other side of the Indus, within a few miles of his working ground. From Jurruck district I crossed into Shahbunder district. In the Beyla talooka the work of local vaccinator Nubby Bux was inspected. One day's lymph was bad, next day's good : there was a strong hot wind blowing at the time, which Nubby Bux said was the cause of the deterioration of his lymph, but I observed that such a general cause would have made both day's equally bad. The fact was he had vaccinated one village in the heat of the day, under a strong hot wind, and the other in the cool of the early morning. In the hot months the operations should all be performed in the cool of the early morning, or the probabilities will be many against the vesicles being good and well developed. I ordered him to vaccinate in the early morning only throughout the hot season. During June and July I saw about 360 vaccinated children in 28 villages, the work of Lalloo, the Municipality of Kotree's vaccinator, Majlis Rai, and local vaccinator Ramzan in the Doaba and Kotree talookas. In these months several new hands were trained to vaccinate under Lalloo. In the month of August I went to Kurrachee, with the object of inspecting work on both sides of the Mulleer, which had been performed by local vaccinator Ram Chund. A day or two after I reached Kurrachee, the floods rendered it impossible to inspect any villages near the Mulleer. I returned to Kotree by the first passenger carrying steamer which left Kurrachee. En route I ex- amined the vaccination records at Khetty Bunder dispensary. The Hospital Assistant there said there were no children left in the place to vaccinate, except a very few who were suffering from ague. In September and October I again saw some work which had been performed by Laloo, Majlis Rai, and Ramzan. In October Hassah Mull, 1st Assistant Superintendent, charged a number of capillary tubes, which were distributed to the dispensaries. During September and October Lalloo, assisted by several new hands, did a good deal of work beyond the Nai Barran, where the people of the plains graze their cattle during the inundation months. I saw some excellent work in the hills there. In November I examined some work of General No. 77, Jettah Mull, in Kotree and Manjhandah talookas, and found that it had been very satisfactorily performed ; although from ill-health he had not been able to do as much as usual. After examining the work of Jettah Mull I proceeded to Sehwan and in the talooka of that name examined the work of Rughu Mull. I found his lymph very good and his vaccinations very carefully performed; but had again to find fault with him for making mistakes in the columns of ages, several children were entered in the column &quot;above one year&quot; old who were under that age. In other respects his records were quite correct and very neatly kept, so on the whole I was satisfied with him. From the Sehwan district I entered Mehur district and in Kukkur talooka inspected the work of local vaccinator Chellah Ram, with which I was very well pleased. From thence passed into Mehur talooka where I examined the work of local vaccinator Ramzan, which was also found very well done. Thence entered Larkhana district and en route saw a few children who were vaccinated in the preceding year by (then local vaccinator) General No. 294, Jani Mull, in the talooka of Nusseerabad.
25 The marks were very good. I observed that there was a considerable number of children still remaining unprotected in the villages along my route, from which I fear that the talooka of Nussecrabad was gone over too quickly. Several people brought their children for me to vaccinate; I have never known of people doing this in any other collectorate than this of Shikarpoor. 19. I tested closely the work of six Government and nine local vaccinators, and also examined, without testing the records, some work of three more Govern- ment vaccinators, one Municipal vaccinator, and one apothecary in charge of a dis- pensary ; in all nineteen individuals' work has been examined by myself. Their work was spread over the Kurrachee and Shikarpoor Collectorates and Upper Sind Frontier district. I did scarcely any work in Hydrabad Collectorate and Thur and Parkur Poli- tical Superintendency. Hassah Mull, 1st Assistant Superintendent, has superin- tended and tested the work of the vaccinators there, and all his reports have been very satisfactory. He examined the work of local vaccinators Chandiram, Soomar and Ram Chund, and of Government vaccinators General Nos. 165,142, 199, 195, 246 and 250. He pursued the same method as myself, viz., calling the names of the vaccinated children over from the registers. He also inspected the condition of the lymph in use at the dispensaries of Alliyar-ka-Tanda, Halla, Oomcrcote, Nuggur Parkur, Mittee and Mahomed Khan's Tanda, and frequently supplied them with lymph. I examined 7,919 vaccinated children in 377 villages. During the year I travelled 1,452 miles between encampments. Assoo Mull, 2nd Assistant Superintendent, examined in the Kurrachee Collectorate the work of local vaccinators Chotecr Mull, Nubby Bux, and Sookanund. He also inspected the lymph at Jurruck dispensary and started work by means of tubes at the dispensaries of Bola Khan's Thana and Meerpoor Buttora- Altogether fifteen Government and thirteen local vaccinators' work has been inspected during the past year; in short, every man's except one. To give an idea of the ground gone over in inspecting and superintending the work of the vaccinators, it is necccssary to say that one man's work was examined at the extreme end of the Thur and Parkur district, another's on the Jeysulmeer boundary beyond Kessrah, a third's in Oobaora talooka on the Bhawulpoor boundary, a fourth's near the Murree hills, a fifth's in the Cutchee between Jacobabad and the hills to the west of that station, and a sixth's in Kohistan. I can say that neither myself nor Hassah Mull have spared any trouble or labour in trying to spread vaccination to the utmost limits of this province, and by inspecting the work in such remote talookas we have shown the vaccinators that their remoteness will not protect them from detection should they falsify their records or do any other wrong thing. 20. When I was in the Jacobabad district, Mr. Bolton called a meeting of the Zemindars, Mukhis, and other influential residents of the Sarhad talooka ; it was held in one of his tents on the 29th of January 1866, at the village of Thoul. The meeting was well attended by the Zemindars, Mukhis, and Patels of villages. Mr. Bolton and I spoke to the meeting on the subjects of vaccination, inoculation, v4
26 and small-pox ; they appeared to be highly interested, freely asked questions about vaccination, and appeared quite ready to accept it, which they have since done. 21. Before my arrival in Jacobabad district, Lieutenant Colonel Malcolm Green, Acting Political Superintendent of that frontier, had very kindly given a purwana to Luchmon, and Mr. Bolton had given one to Kishen Chund. At the time of writing my last Annual Report I was ignorant of these purwanas having been granted, and as the people of Sarhad talooka had asked for Assoo Mull's authority to vaccinate, I considered it advisable to recommend that a Sindhi Circular should be issued to all Zemindars, Native officials and other influential persons, setting forth all the advantages of vaccination. Mr. Mansfield, on receiving my recommendation, was pleased to give instructions for such a Circular to be issued, and it was so, with, I have reason to believe, satisfaction to the people and benefit to the vaccinators. It is very pleasing to be able to say that nearly the whole of the Jacobabad district has been once gone over in less than two years, after remaining all but untouched for nearly twenty years, and that not a single complaint has been made against the vaccinators by any one. 22, With only two exceptions, the conduct of the vaccinators has been very good, and they have carried on their duties in a creditable manner. The two exceptions were Wuttun Mull and Chellah Ram, regarding whom I received from the Mookhtiarkar of Methe a complaint of their taking children with vesicles on their arms for the purpose of vaccinating from them from their own to other villages in an uncourteous and rude manner. I requested Major Tyrwhitt to do me the favour of investigating into the circumstances; he very kindly did so, and informed me that those two vaccinators had been rather zealous and inconsiderate, but he did not consider them deserving of dismissal from the service. Major Tyrwhitt subsequently did me the favour to inform me that he had looked at some of Chellah Ram's work in the Nuggur Parkur talooka and that be considered it well done. Under these favorable circumstances I merely cautioned those two men to be extremely careful that their conduct be always courteous, that they pay parents fully for their loss of time. I am very much indebted to Major Tyrwhitt for the active interest he takes in the progress of vaccination in his Political Superintendency and for the aid he is at all times so ready and willing to give me. The Head Vaccinator, Hassah Mull, who is also 1st Assistant Superintendent in the local establishment, has done remarkably good service throughout the year in superintending the work of the vaccinators employed in Hydrabad collectorate and in the Thur and Parkur districts. 23. The practice of begging &quot; Murad&quot; still obtains with the majority of my men, though I have reason to think that it is now done in a much more delicate way than it was before I took notice of it, and several of the vaccinators affirm that they have completely abandoned the practice. I am very happy to say that during the past year no complaint on this score reached me. Mr. Mansfield, in his memorandum No. 35, dated 21st April 1866, submitting the Annual Report of Vaccination in Sind for 1865, for the information of Government, was pleased to
27 state in its 11th paragraph, with reference to this habit of begging &quot; Murad&quot; from the parents of vaccinated children that &quot; the most effectual method of preventing it would appear to be increased supervision. He has one Assistant Superintendent, if three or four more were appointed the proceedings of vaccinators would be thoroughly supervised.&quot; Beyond a doubt the want of Native Assistant Superin- tendents is the one defect in the now famous Bombay system of vaccination, for it stands an evident impossibility that either I or any other Superintendent can so closely supervise vaccinators spread over fifty or sixty thousand square miles, as to prevent occasional misconduct; systematic falsification of returns can be prevented by calling over a few thousand names in the course of the year, but there are many things which should be attended to more closely than they have ever yet been. I have now. through the liberality of the Commissioner in Sind, two Assistants, but it would pro- bably be better if I had one for each collectorate, or rather one for Kurrachee collec- torate including Kohistan, one for Hydrabad collectorate and Thur and Parkur Poli- tical Superintendency, and one for Shikarpoor collectorate and Upper Sind Frontier Political Superintendency, that is to say, one more than I have at present; such an addition to my establishment would involve an additional expenditure of Rupees two hundred and forty per annum, and I believe it would be money very well spent, because the quality of the vaccinations is of infinitely more importance than the number of them. If this suggestion of Mr. Mansfield be adopted, it would leave hardly a thing to wish for as far as supervising the work of the vaccinators and con- trolling their conduct is concerned. KATTYWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.28 The returns which accompany this report exhibit a total number of vaccinations in the Kattywar Circle during the past year of 33,322, an increase of 6,303 on the number vaccinated in the preceding year. Of the total number vaccinated, 6,563 (a decrease of 377) were vaccinated by the Government establishment, and 26,759 (an increase of 6,680) by the Native Chiefs' establishment. The per-centage of success reported by the Government vaccinators is 97.77 (an increase of 1.9 on preceding year) ; and by Native Chiefs' vaccinators 92.97 (an increase of about 1.) I am unable to explain why the Government vaccinators have been less success- ful in 1866 than in 1865. The increase observable in the returns furnished by the Native Chiefs' establish- ment is to be explained in the following manner:29 Having only assumed charge of the duties of Superintendent on the 20th De- cember, I am not in a position to report with any approach to accuracy on the con- duct of the vaccinators in the Circle. Some of them have been negligent in sending in their monthly returns. The impossibility of inspecting the work of the vaccinators in their districts (since the departure of Dr. Butler in July) by the gentlemen who have successively had charge of the office, viz., Mr. Burrows, Mr. Dann, Dr. Williams, and myself, has doubtless operated prejudicially on the vaccinators, who appear to need a continuous surveillance to keep them to their work. This may account for the decrease in vaccinations performed by the Government vaccinators- REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent.30 His lymph was always good, and the result of his operations most satisfactory. Ge- neral No. 254, at Godra, is next on the list as regards numbers. He had travelled over a greater extent of ground than any of the others, and his work was also satis- factory and truthful. In the month of September, however, his lymph degenerated and until fresh lymph was introduced from Dohud the proportion of doubtful and unsuccessful cases was understated in his returns. At Kalole the work performed by General No. 255 was extremely good, the vesicles and cicatrices being large and well formed. General No. 262 at Halole was not so successful as the above vaccina- tors. His returns, however, were correct, with the exception of the proportion of suc- cessful operations, which were greatly exaggerated. He was cautioned to be more careful in future, and fresh lymph was introduced into his district. As regards General No. 279 at Jahalode two or three fictitious entries were found in one of his returns, but as the date of his appointment was comparatively recent, and as the false entries were made under peculiar circumstances, he was simply fined, and allowed to retain his appointment on further trial. Although there has been an increase of vaccination in all the five Native States in the Rewa Kanta, the performance of the work has not been satisfactory. During the past year, as was the case in all previous years, the two vaccinators in Rajpeepla per- formed a very large proportion of the total number of operations. At an early period of the year, the other three vaccinators were dismissed, one for theft, another for inefficiency, and the third for insubordination. In their stead a vaccinator (pre- viously discharged from this Circle) was appointed to the vacancy in Ballasindoor, and Loonawara, and candidates from the Northern Circle were appointed to Chota Oodeypoor and to Barriah. The conduct of the former has been remarkably good, but the two latter turned out so untrustworthy that they were dismissed before the termination of the year. The assistant at Chota Oodeypoor did not increase the number of entries in his returns by making false ones, but the Barriah assistant in one return had no less than forty-one fictitious and only six truthful entries. He was heavily fined before dismissal, but should a similar case occur again the offender will be handed over to the Police authorities for punishment. The superintendent's tour extended over Dohud, Godra, Kalole, Halole, Chota Oodeypoor, and Barriah, the time allowed being only three months. The method of inspection adopted was that described by Dr. Turnbull of the Central Circle, in his report for the year 1864, all previous attempts to carry into effect Government Reso- lution No. 1100, of 25th June 1864 having failed, as Tulatces in this Circle are few and far between, and Patels as a rule unable to write. Considerable time was spent in visiting the parts of Halole, Barriah, and Chota Oodeypoor, where opposition is strong- est, and in endeavouring to convince the people of the benefits to be derived from the operation. Those who objected could give no reason for doing so, and persever- ance on the part of the vaccinators will ultimately meet with success. A slight epidemic of small-pox occurred in Dohud in the months of April and May, and a few cases were also met with in some of the villages of Barriah and
31 Halole ; with these exceptions this Circle appears to have been free from epidemic disease. The Civil authorities in the Punch Mahals and in the Rewa Kanta gave consider- able assistance to the vaccinators, as well as to the Superintendent. The appointment of a head vaccinator for general duty, and of one or two apprentices, would be of great benefit, as it is extremely difficult to get suitable men to accept the appoint- ment of assistant vaccinator. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent32 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS TANNA. One Vaccinator (Municipality) under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon II. ATKINS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Succesfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 109 .. .. 100 91.7 1866 ....... 202 93 .. 195 96.5 During the past year 202 persons have been vaccinated by the vaccinator employed by the Municipality, of whom 137 were males, and 65 females, 58 being under one year of age. An increase of 93 operations over last year is thus shown. Vaccination was carried on for the whole year, excepting during the month of October, when it failed, and I was not able to restore it till November. The lymph has been good, and the vesicles well formed. The vaccinator seems willing and diligent, but complains of the difficulties he has to contend with from the opposition and aversion of the inhabitants ; I hope that by tact and perseverance it may be over come. ________________ POONA. Three Vaccinators under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon T. B. BEATTY, A.B., M.D. (Acting). One Vaccinator (Government). Two Vaccinators (Municipality). ESTABLISHMENT. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. Government.. 1865 1,537 .... .... 1,229 79.9 1866 1,699 162 .... 1,378 81.1 Municipal .. 1865 .... .... .... .... .... 1866 1,389 1,389 .... 1,090 78.5
33 There has been an increase in the total number vaccinated during the past year compared with the previous one. At present there are four vaccinators for the Poona City and Cantonment, two of these have lately been engaged by the Municipality for the use of the residents in the City only. The vaccinator attached to this Hos- pital also finds employment there, but the entertainment of his services would appear now to be superfluous. The 4th vaccinator is employed under the Staff Surgeon and his duties are confined to the inhabitants of the Cantonment only. AHMEDNUGGUR. Two Vaccinators under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. T. DANN, B.A. (Acting). One Vaccinator (Government). One Vaccinator (Municipality). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ............ 1,480 .. .. 1,183 79.9 1866 Civil 1,080 1,646 166 .. 1,431 86.9 Muni- cipal 566 It may be observed by a comparision of the accompanying returns with those of the year 1865, that the number of vaccinations effected this year has been in excess of the preceding annual period by one hundred and sixty-six. Small-pox was entirely absent, and the necessity for vaccination not so con- stantly before the eyes of the public. As to sexes, 993 were males and 653 females ; 844 were under one year and 802 above that age. SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. V. CARTER, M.D. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 914 .. .. 786 85.9 1,611 697 .. 1,536 95.3 v 5
34 A considerable increase in the number vaccinated during this year, as compared with the previous year, is the chief feature in the appended return. This increase amounts to 697, or upwards of 75 per cent. on the total of 1865. Another satisfactory result is the increase of percentage of success which amounts to 95.34 as compared with 85.9 in the year 1865. I know of no reason to doubt the correctness of the first named datum, it is certainly a very good result to obtain. From both causes, enumerated above, there have been very nearly twice as many persons successfully vaccinated in the year under report, as in the previous year. The explanation of the vaccinator is simply to the effect that many more children were brought this year to the Civil Hospital than previously. Ryots from a dis- tance will seldom bring an infant under 12 months of age, and those with a family will bring several children together, hence in some years the number of children from the district is small. It is evident that the common inducement, viz. prevalence of small- pox, can have had little influence, inasmuch as that disease was happily rare in and around Sattara during the year in question. Except in the months of August and September the vesicles and lymph have been noted as &quot; good,&quot; in those months as &quot;fairly good;&quot; the former being rather small. Latterly I have seen very good vesicles, and in conclusion consider that the efficiency of this small establishment con- tinues to be good. SHOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. F. OGILVIE, M. D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 1,969 .. .. 1,532 77.8 1866 ........ 2,241 272 .. 1,753 78.2 During the past year, the number of persons vaccinated was 2,241, of these 1,140 were males, and 1,101 were females ; 832 were children under one year, and 1,409 were above that age; 1,753 were succesful, 238 doubtful, and 250 were un- successful. I regret to state, that although I have taken great interest in the work during a residence of nearly five years at this station, the successful operations amount only to 78.2 per-cent., and including those returned as doubtful, only to about 89 per-
35 cent. There is, however, a slight increase in the percentage of success this year as compared with the previous one. The fault is not to be attributed to the lymph, as every operation I have personally performed has been successful. It may be in the want of care in selecting the subjects for the operation ; but a very great deal in my opinion depends upon the apathy manifested by the parents. They seem yet not to appreciate the blessings of this almost certain preventive against small-pox. Were it otherwise, the number of operations upon children under one year would be many more than at present ; but I hope if I am here another year, to be able to report upon this work more favourably than I have hitherto been able to do. DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. E. CATES. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 819 .. .. 763 93.1 1866 ........ 792 .. 27 694 87.6 Of the 792 persons vaccinated during the year 1866, 416 were males and 376 females, 638 were under 1 year, and 154 above that age, 694 were successful cases, 52 unsuccessful, and 46 doubtful. These numbers show a decrease, as compared with the previous year both in the number vaccinated and in the percentage of success, but not to any great extent. I have found considerable difficulty in persuading parents to bring their children for vaccination, and still greater difficulty with regard to their bringing them for inspection after vaccination, especially in the case of those not residing in the town itself. The native civil authorities are very lukewarm as a general rule in the cause. The lymph has been usually of good quality, the vesicles in all cases returned as successful have been characteristic, and the percentage of successful vaccinations would, I think, have been large, had all the children been brought for subsequent inspection, a large number of the cases returned as doubtful having been those which were not seen again after vaccination.
36 NASSICK. One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. SUMMERS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ...... 756 .. .. 602 79.6 1866 ...... 763 7 .. 621 81.4 I have to report upon the result of vaccination performed at the Civil Hospital and in the Town of Nassick for the past year in a more favourable manner than the preceding. Out of the 763 cases operated upon 621 were successful, twenty-one by the monthly returns were unsuccessful, some of these were re-vaccinated successfully after- wards, 121 are shown in the return as doubtful cases, these being children whose parents, residing in the neighbouring villages, did not bring them after vaccination, owing to their disinclination to have the vaccine lymph taken from the successfully developed pustules. BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major G. G. W. MAITLAND. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ....... 738 .. .. 700 94.8 1866 ....... 612 .. 126 595 97.2 The present annual return of persons vaccinated by the Government vaccinator in the town of Belgaum, as shown in the above table, exhibits a decrease of 126 compared with the preceding year. This result I do not consider attributable to any want of zeal on the part of the Government vaccinator, but from the fact, that during the period under review there have been two vaccinators at work in the town of
37 Belgaum, and that their joint labours raise the total of vaccinations to 1,335, an amount of vaccination much greater than has ever been performed in one year in this town, but still, less than might reasonably be expected among a population of 19,000. The Lyngayet portion of the community are still very averse to vaccination, particu- larly the weaver class. And as small-pox has now appeared in an epidemic form in their quarter of the town, the subject has been brought to the notice of the civil authorities. Referring to the work performed by the Government vaccinator, the result is as follows : successfully vaccinated 595, unsuccessful 8, doubtful 9, percentage of success 97. He has also vaccinated 102 children living in the Cantonment Bazar and Fort, making a total of 714 persons during the year. Until within the last month there has been no small-pox in the town, and I trust the measures now being taken will effectually arrest the epidemic and prevent a like occurrence for the future. DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon M. M. MACKENZIE (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 543 .. .. 461 84.1 1866 ....... 597 49 .. 491 82.3 The above shows a satisfactory increase of 49 over that of the preceding year, and an increase of 30 successful over that for 1865. The greatest number vaccinated in any one month was 72 in March, then 67 in February and January 1865. The percentage successful has been 82.2, while for 1865 it was 84.1. Hindoos give 446 cases, 132 Mussulmans, and 19 Christians ; 301 were males and 296 females. The vaccinator meets with little or no obstruction, but rather the reverse, in the carrying out of his duties. Vaccine matter has been sent to Carwar, Nusscerabad, Sevinoor and most of the Dharwar districts. It has been, in almost every case, of excellent quality, and held well. The vaccinator is a diligent, careful and trustworthy man, and seems to possess the confidence of the natives.
38 KOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon WAMON WASSOODEO. YEARS. Total. Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 1,701 .. .. 1,687 99.1 1866 ........ 1,674 .. 27 1,662 99.3 During the past year the number of vaccinations performed by the station vaccinator in the City of Kolapoor and a few villages of the Petas of Kurveer, Punalla, and Sherole was 1,674, which is less than that of the year previous by 27, and less than the average of the five preceding years by 793. Of the total number vacci- nated in the year under report 862 were males and 812 females; 425 were children under one year, and the remaining 1,249 were above that age. The percentage of the successful cases has been 99.3. The monthly average number of vaccinations has been 139.5, but during the months of July, August, and September, when cholera prevailed in the city and neighbouring districts with considerable mortality, it was slightly decreased, being only 115. During the year a few isolated cases of small-pox occurred in the districts of Punalla, but the disease was never reported to have shown itself in the epedimic form. The lymph in use has always been of good quality, and its supply has been kept up throughout the year. Lymph was supplied as usual to the Camp and to some of the vaccinators serving under the Superintendent of Vaccination, S. C., when required. Dr. Day, Superin- tendent of Vaccination, Southern Circle, while at this station on his tour of inspection, vaccinated three or four children at the Civil Hospital with the lymph which he had just received from England, probably with a view to examine its quality. The new and fresh lymph thus obtained and introduced has been ordered to be kept up.
39 RUTNAGHERRY. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. JOHNSON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 431 .. .. 339 78.6 1860 ....... 273 .. 158 217 79.5 The total number of children vaccinated during the year I regret to find is less by 122 than the number vaccinated during the previous year; this may be accounted for very much in the same way as in the report of the foregoing year, viz., from the fact that the town and neighbourhood of Rutnagherry has been comparatively free from small-pox compared with most years, and partly owing to the difficulty experienced by the vaccinator in obtaining help from the authorities. Shortly after I received charge of the duties of Civil Surgeon here, I wrote strongly on the subject to the Collector and Magistrate of the district, and I think matters in this particular are now improved. During the rains, great difficulty was experienced in keeping up a supply of lymph, owing at times to the lymph being of inferior quality, and again to there being a difficulty in getting children. The number vaccinated is less than last year ; but taking all circumstances into consideration, and the difficulties experienced, it is, I think, fair. VINGORLA. Senior Apothecary S. HANSON. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 542 .. .. 518 95.5 1866 ........ 119 .. 423 104 87.4
40 The total number vaccinated during the year has been 119, while that for the preceding year was 542, showing a decrease of 423. The principal cause for this fall- ing off is the lack of children to be operated on, which may be accounted for from the fact that an unusually large number were vaccinated during the past year, when small-pox visited this station. There is also another cause for the decrease, which is, that during the months of May, June and November last, vaccination was not kept up by the Hospital Assistants then in temporary medical charge of the Station. Of the 119 vaccinated 74 were male and 45 female children, 22 were under one year, and 97 above that age. The successful vaccinations have been 104 or 87.3 per cent. on the total number vaccinated. The lymph and vesicles were good. No case of small-pox came under observation during the year. AHMEDABAD. Two Vaccinators under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major D. WYLLIE, M.D. One Vaccinator (Government.) One Vaccinator (Municipality.) YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 .......... 4,271 .. .. 4,183 98.0 1866 Civil 2,927 5,689 1,418 .. 5,505 96.8 Muni- cipal 2,762 The very satisfactory increase above shown of 1,418 operations in the work of the year, as compared with results in 1865, is due to the circumstance of two vaccinators having been employed, whereas formerly the city vaccination was confided to a single subordinate. In respect of sex, 3,003 males were operated on and 2,686 females. There has ever been a majority of males, but of late years this preponderance has been gradually lessening, and it is a hopeful sign as indicative of increasing solicitude for female offspring that in the present returns they show as high a percentage as 47.21 on the total vaccinations. There were 3,485 operations under one year and 2,204 over that age. The difference has been in the same direction since 1859, but for the past two years it
41 has been somewhat less conspicuous, probably because there has since been a con- siderable immigration from the neighbouring Native States. As to results, the ratio of successful cases was 96.8, a lower figure than ordinary, but adequately accounted for in the fact that one of the vaccinators was new to the work, and that infantile sick- ness was prevalent during the autumnal months. The failures however only average 1.8 and that of doubtful cases 1.4, the latter altogether lost sight of, it being no un- common thing for parents purposely to remove or conceal their children after opera- tion to avoid thereby any chance of the prophylactic being propagated from them, there being some prejudice that removal of lymph impairs protective efficacy. The lymph continued good throughout and the resulting vesicles were well- formed and typical, although somewhat smaller during the rains than in the other season. Supplies were repeatedly sent to neighbouring stations and dispensaries, as well as to troops on the line of march. Small-pox was present in the city from January to July, but the cases were few compared with the previous year, and the deaths from this cause during the period were only 10. Inoculation has long since been put a stop to in this district, and as regards the city, vaccination is in no way obstructed, the community at large being so far sensible of the benefit extended as to accept it willingly when brought to their doors and at a time to suit their convenience. I have no suggestion to offer, the existing arrangements appearing to me adequate at present for the end in view. Both vac- cinators have been industrious and attentive in discharging their duties as results, checked by weekly inspections, sufficiently prove. KAIRA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon II. COOK, M. D. (Acting.) YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 577 .. .. 592 85.3 1866 ........ 668 91 .. 590 88.3 The total number of cases vaccinated during the year has been 668, showing an increase over the number in the preceding year of 91 ; of these, all but 75 have been under one year old; 387 were males, 281 females. With reference to caste, 564 were Hindoos, 73 Mussulmans, 2 Parsees, and 29 of other castes. The vaccinator's opera- v 6
42 tions are not confined to the town of Kaira, as he works in two or three of the neigh- bouring villages. The total number of cases is very small when compared with the population of the town, but as they are nearly all among children under one year old, it will be seen that the operation is almost restricted to the recently born children. There is frequently considerable difficulty in finding out the recently born or unpro- tected children in a large town, as there does not seem to be any register of births available for the use of the. vaccinator. When here last year as Superintendent of Vaccination, I examined this vacci- nator's work in the surrounding villages, and found that it had been satisfactorily per- formed by him, and that the children therein were well protected. The lymph has been of average quality and the vesicles of normal size and development. The supply of lymph has been regular and continuous, and the number of unsuccessful operations have been small. The inhabitants of the town and country seem now tolerably well aware of the beneficial effects of vaccination, and all but the most careless willingly bring their children to the vaccinator or allow him to vac- cinate them. There has been no epidemic of small-pox for some considerable time, though occasional cases occur here and there at lengthened intervals. The inhabitants generally are too well protected, either by the disease itself or vaccination to allow the disease to become epidemic except through their own culpable neglect. SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. J. GANE (Acting.) YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centnge of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 1,528 .. .. 1,407 92.0 1866 ........ 1,967 439 .. 1,535 78.0 During the past year 1,967 children have been vaccinated; of this number 369 were doubtful and 63 unsuccessful cases. This great increase goes far to prove that the Natives have no objection to have ther children vaccinated. The vaccinator, with the assistance of the Hospital peon, visits different parts of the city and induces the Natives to bring their children to the Civil Hospital for vaccination, There has been no epidemic of small-pox during the past year.
43 BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon W. P. PARTRIDGE, (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 1,003 .... .... 927 92.4 1866 ....... 974 .... 29 894 91.8 The number of persons vaccinated during the past year, is slightly less than that of the preceding year : but as it is only less by twenty-nine the difference is not of much improtance. I have myself of course had but little opportunity of seeing how the work is carried on. Vaccination is practised continually in the city, and once a week the children, whose vesicles are mature, are brought to the Civil Hospital; at the same time many unvaccinated children attend, and are vaccinated at the Hospital. In all the cases which have come under my observation the vesicles have been well developed and the lymph of good quality. During the year it has been found necessary to dismiss the vaccinator, owing to suspicion of neglecting his duty, taking bribes, and telling lies. A vaccinator has been appointed in his place, who had been formerly employed in this Hospital, but who had been dismissed in consequence of overstaying his leave. He is now giving every satisfaction as far as I can judge. RAJCOTE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon. Assistant Surgeon C. JOYNT, M. D., (Acting). YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centnge of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 . . . . . . . . 496 .. ... 439 88.5 1866 . . . . . . . . 1,646 1,150 .. 1,507 91.6
44 This return shows a very marked increase in the number vaccinated during the year, and also an increase in the number of successful cases. The station vaccinator limits his operations to the town of Rajcote and to the station, but children have been brought into the town from about 10 adjacent villages. Formerly these villages were visited by the vaccinator, but the aid then afforded to him has since been withdrawn; a vaccinator is employed for the villages by a Native Chief, but, from what I have been able to gather, his operations are on a very small scale. Since I have had charge of the vaccination, I have inspected the children vaccinated in the town and station of Rajcote, and in no instance found a failure. The vesicles were remarkably good. KURRACHEE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon J. BEAN. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865. . . . . . . . 3,114 .. .. 2,800 89.9 1866 . . . . . . . . 3,167 53 .. 2,988 94.3 During the past year, the number of persons vaccinated by the station vaccinator, exclusive of convicts in the Jail and Sepoys and their familes in the Police Corps, amounted to 3,167, an increase of 53 over the number vaccinated in the preceding year; of these operations 2,988 proved successful, 76 failed altogether, and 103 were doubtful. The ratio of successful cases amounted to 94.34 per-cent., a very large proportion being children under one year of age. The lymph has been kept up throughout the year, and the character of the pustules in the successful cases was very good.
45 HYDRABAD. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon N. HOPKINS. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 1,478 .. .. 1,205 81.5 1866 ........ 2,022 544 .. 1,881 93.0 This year's report contrasts very favourably with the last two years' returns, being an increase on 1865 by 544, and on 1864 by 1,210 ; still the number is below what I hope it will be at the end of the current year. I have little to add to my last year's report, beyond that I have established regular days for vaccinating at Giddoo-ka-Tanda, where no vaccination had been done before; the number of inha- bitants at Giddoo varies greatly at different seasons of the year,46 The total number vaccinated during the past year has amounted to 1,435, being an increase of 56 as compared with the preceding year ; 32 individuals over one year old have been vaccinated, and the total number of unsuccessful and doubtful cases has been 58 only. The quality of the lymph continues satisfactory, and supplies have as usual been furnished to the Civil Hospital at Jacobabad and the Establishment of the Superin- tendent of Vaccination working in the Shikarpoor districts. Measles was very prevalent throughout the spring and early summer months, and caused great mortality in consequence of the treatment adopted by the natives, who consider it a description of variola, and call it &quot; Chota Indi,&quot; but no case of small-pox has occurred during the year under report in the town or neighbourhood of Shikarpoor. KOTREE. One Vaccinator (Municipality's) under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. H. COLVILL. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 844 .. .. 667 79.0 1866 ........ 654 .. 190 548 83. 8 654 persons have been vaccinated during the past year, a decrease therefore of 190. This is probably attributable to the fact that the vaccinator engaged during the first quarter of the year, and afterwards dismissed, showed himself very indolent; 345 when vaccinated were under one year and 309 above that age. The lymph was tolerably good during the year.
47 KUTCH. Mr. SORABJEE HORMUSJEE, G.G.M.C. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated, Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 . . . . . . . . 606 .. .. 532 87.8 1866 . . . . . . . . 1,139 533 .. 944 82.9 Since January 1866 I was put in charge of the Bhooj Dispensary; I took up the task of vaccination myself, and conducted it throughout the whole year, with the exception of the rainy months, when the lymph had failed. I conducted the opera- tion by a new instrument, and the pustules observed were three or four times bigger than the vesicles ordinarily observed under the point of a lancet. Three vaccinators were engaged by His Highness the Rao of Kutch, and they went round vaccinating in different parts of Kutch, not however without great opposition from the people. 1,139 persons were vaccinated throughout the province, being in excess of the last year by 533. Lymph had failed in the rainy season both in Bhooj and the surrounding districts, but since November last vaccination was again conducted from a fresh supply, first at Bhooj and thence in different parts. ADEN. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. W. JAMES, M.D. YEARS. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Per-centage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1865 ........ 323 .... .... 180 55.7 1866 ........ 799 476 .... 610 76.3 The result of vaccination at this station during the past year has been highly satisfactory, for the returns show 799 persons vaccinated, out of which number 610
48 or 76.34 per cent. proved successful. This great increase is however partly attri- butable to a large number of slaves brought to this station by Her Majesty's Ship &quot;Highflyer&quot; during September and October, and as small-pox had broken out amongst them, every means, and vaccination was one, were taken to check the spread of the disease amongst these poor beings. The lymph employed has I understand been obtained direct from England, on points in hermetically sealed tubes and between glasses. Drs. Steinhaenser and Pitman in their monthly Reports from March to August, when I assumed medical charge, report the lymph as &quot;very good&quot; and &quot;good,&quot; and I must say I have every reason, judging from the results, to endorse their opinion. During the months of January and February, though 50 persons were operated on, not a single . case was successful; but the lymph then used was the same that had been obtained from Bombay and must have become deteriorated, and rendered inert in transit. Aden seems never to be free from small-pox ; except August, not a single month shows a clean Bill of health from this disease, but all these outbreaks can clearly be traced to importation, so that we can scarcely look upon this disease as endemic in Aden. The greatest number of admissions from small-pox occurred during the months of October and November, shortly after the arrival of the &quot;Highflyer,&quot; with the slaves, and the disease seemed to be confined to them, a few cases however occurred in some of the town people, but they happened to come in direct contact with the disease.
APPENDIX. v 7
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERIN Table showing the Number and Names of the Circles, and their Superintendents, the those of last Year, the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, the Average Number of Operations performed Number. CIRCLES. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vacci- nators attached. Total Number Vacci- nated. Compared with last year.. 1865. Increase. Decrease. 1 CENTRAL . . . . . . . . Assistant Surgeon P. S. Turnbull M. D. . . . . . . . . . . 36 61,543 63,251 .. 1,708 *1 213 .... 213 .. 2 SOUTHERN . . . . . . Assistant Surgeon H. Day, M. D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 40,948 41,986 .. 1,038 *10 7,229 5,052 2,177 .. 3 NORTHERN. . . Surgeon R. Dick, M.D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 69,085 70,212 .. 1,127 Assistant Surgeon II. Cook M.D. (Acting) . . . . Dr. Muncherjee Beramjee Colah, (Acting) . . . . *1 57 160 .. 103 4 SIND . . . . . . . . . . . . . Assistant Surgeon J. Pinkerton, M.D. . . . . . . . . . . 17 44,126 50,524 .. 6,398 iii No. I. TENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. Number of Vaccinators employed ; the Total Vaccinations performed and compared with Age, and Result ; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated ; and by each Vaccinator for the year 1866. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful Doubtful. 32,211 29,332 54,139 2,779 1,096 .. 3,529 15,340 46,203 57,847 1,708 1,898 94.0 1,710 130 83 165 48 .. .. .. 67 146 190 12 11 80.2 213 21,813 19,135 36,221 1,004 487 .. 2,336 6,820 34,119 38,961 993 994 95.1 1,412 3,875 3,354 6,534 571 1 2 110 2,776 4,451 6,655 326 248 92.1 723 36,786 32,299 58,569 5,255 29 133 5,105 41,694 27,391 65,463 1,184 2,438 94.8 2,093 28 29 56 1 .. .. .. 51 6 46 3 8 80.7 57 24,629 19,497 4,701 35,515 6 .. 3,904 10.293 33,828 40,970 491 2,665 92.8 2,596 13,105 10,489 2,213 20,498 .. .. 883 5,129 16,465 21,300 640 1,654 90.3 1,815 3,448 3,115 6,002 502 .. .. 59 3,100 3,463 6,417 94 52 97.8 820 3,071 2,762 5,023 636 .. .. 174 3,633 2,200 5,296 388 140 90.8 1,167 5,003 3,863 5,399 1,461 1,185 619 202 3,506 5,270 6,669 896 1,301 75.2 1,478 144,099 123,958 179016 69,170 2,815 754 16,302 92,515 175,542 249,814 6,825 11,418 93.2 1,686 iv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS Table of Vaccination through the Agency of Native Chiefs arranged according to for the Numbers. CIRCLES and STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of NativeVac- cinators attached. Total number vacci- nated. Compared with last year. 1865 Increase. Decrease. 1 CENRAL . . . . . . . . . Assistant Surgeon P. S. Turnbull, M.D. . . . . . . . 2 953 1,915 .. 962 2 SOUTHERN . . . . . . v No. II. AND OTHERS IN NATIVE TERRITORY. the Circles of Vaccination and Stations, and showing Details as in Table No. I., year 1866. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of suc- sessful to Number vaccinated. Average Number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 581 372 917 9 .. .. 27 341 612 786 72 95 82. 476 9,514 8,505 16,639 786 180 1 413 4,745 13,274 17,066 590 363 94.7 721 11,718 10,325 18,552 1,541 .. 1 1,949 11,750 10,293 19,986 1,067 990 90.7 2,004 541 434 337 607 .. .. 31 274 701 20 109 46 84.1 975 14,571 12,188 22,828 3,668 .. .. 263 11,089 15,670 24,878 1,163 718 93.0 892 2,529 2,326 4,466 282 .. 4 103 2,394 2,461 4,741 51 63 97.6 971 601 538 567 569 .. 3 .. 183 956 944 159 36 82.9 380 40,055 84,688 64,306 7,462 180 9 2,786 30,776 43,967 69,221 3,211 2,311 92.5 971
vi TABLE VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others arranged according Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATION . Number of Native Vaccinators attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1865. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY .... Tanna* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 202 109 93 .. 137 65 Alibaug. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 226 9 217 .. 143 83 Bandora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 93 86 12 .. 63 35 Coorla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 69 68 1 .. 42 27 Oorun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 58 271 .. 213 37 21 Cullian. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 .... 63 .. 40 23 Total . . . . 1 716 543 173 .. 462 254 2 POONA . . . . . . . . . Poona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,699 1,537 162 .. 1,086 61 * 2 1,389 .... 1,389 .. 953 436 Ahmednuggur* . . . . 1 1,080 1480 166 .. 616 464 1 566 377 189 Sattara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,611 914 697 .. 875 736 Sholapoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2,241 1,969 272 .. 1,140 1,101 Dhoolia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 792 819 .. 27 416 376 Nassick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 763 750 7 .. 414 349 Total.... 9 10,141 7,475 2,666 .. 5,877 4,264 3 NORTHERN . . . . . . Ahmedabad . . . . . . . 1 2,927 4,271 1,418 .. 1,570 1,357 * 1 2,762 1,433 1,329 Kaira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 638 577 91 .. 387 281 Surat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,967 1,528 439 .. 1,173 794 Broach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 974 1,093 .. 29 531 443 Rajcot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,646 496 1,150 .. 938 708 Dholka* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 513 .... 513 .. 289 224 Veerumgaum* . . . . . . . . . 1 495 .... 495 .. 252 243 Total.... 8 11,952 7,875 4,077 .. 6,573 5,379 4 SOUTHERN . . . . . . Belgaum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 612 738 .. 126 317 295 Dharwar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 597 548 49 .. 301 296 Kolapur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,674 1,701 .. 27 862 812 Rutnagherry . . . . . . . . . . . 1 273 431 .. 158 169 104 Vingoorla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 119 542 .. 423 74 45 Honore (Dispensary) .. .. 192 222 .. 30 107 85 Hooblee (Dispensary) .. .. .... 1,115 .. 1,115 .... .... Dispensary (Belgaum).. .. .... 339 .. 339 .... .... Total.... 4 3,487 5,636 .. 2,169 1,830 1,637 5 SIND . . . . . . . . . . . . Kurrachee . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 3,167 3,114 53 .. 2,012 1,155 Hydrabad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2,022 1,478 541 .. 1,150 872 Shikarpoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1,435 1,379 56 .. 640 795 Kotree* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 654 844 .. 190 441 213 Dispensary . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2,344 3,471 .. 1,127 1,382 962 Total.... 4 9,622 10,286 .. 664 5,625 3,997 6 ADEN . . . . . . . . . . . Aden 1 799 323 476 .. 635 164 Bushire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .... 188 .. 188 .... .... Total . . . . 1 799 511 288 .. 635 164 Grand Total . . . . 27 36,697 32,326 4,371 .. 21,002 15,695 * Municipal
vii No. III. SURGEONS AND OTHERS. to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. 1, for the year 1866. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Successful to Number Vacci- nated. Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. Caste. Age. Results. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under One Year. Above One Year. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. 151 24 26 1 .... 68 144 195 7 .. 96.5 202 189 2 1 .. 34 68 158 212 7 7 93.8 .... 46 31 21 .. .... 9 89 55 27 16 56.1 .... 23 7 37 2 .... 32 37 39 13 17 56.5 .... 38 16 2 2 ... . 19 39 40 6 12 69.0 .... 23 15 4 15 6 37 26 52 4 7 82.5 .... 470 95 91 20 40 223 493 593 64 59 82.8 202 1,371 287 35 6 .... 600 1,099 1,378 136 185 81.1 1,699 1,244 136 8 1 .... 797 592 1,090 228 71 78.5 694 938 114 25 3 .... 520 560 940 76 64 87.0 1,080 465 91 9 . . 1 324 242 491 44 31 86.7 566 1,454 67 17 1 72 736 875 1,536 17 58 95.3 1,611 942 852 2 .. 445 832 1,409 1,753 250 238 78.2 2,241 590 124 8 .. 70 638 154 694 52 46 87.6 792 630 38 28 .. 67 441 322 621 21 121 81.4 763 7,634 1,709 132 11 655 4,888 5,253 8,503 824 814 83.8 1,127 2,699 220 4 4 ... 1,876 1,051 2,846 37 44 97.2 2,927 2,048 686 12 15 1 1,609 1,153 2,659 G8 35 96.3 2,762 564 73 .. 2 29 593 75 590 28 50 88.3 668 1,665 180 16 49 57 787 1,180 1,535 63 369 78.0 1,967 756 165 3 50 .... 468 506 894 18 62 91.8 974 1,242 315 5 5 49 648 998 1,507 89 50 91.6 1,646 318 184 .. .. 11 352 161 502 10 1 97.8 513 396 99 .. .. .. 267 228 481 11 3 97.2 495 9,688 1,952 40 125 147 6,600 5,352 11,014 324 614 92.2 1,494 485 123 4 .. .... 248 364 595 8 9 97.2 612 446 132 19 .. .... 195 402 491 99 7 82.3 597 1,640 34 .. .. .... 425 1,249 1,662 12 .... 99.3 1,674 259 14 .. .. .... 92 181 217 30 26 79.5 273 106 6 7 .. .... 22 97 104 5 10 87.4 .... 133 2 52 .. 5 26 166 164 19 9 85.4 .... .... .... .. .. .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .. .. .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 3,069 311 82 .. 5 1,008 2,459 3,233 173 61 93.2 814 677 2,312 104 12 62 1,454 1,713 2,988 76 103 94.3 3,167 803 1,123 32 .. 64 1,283 739 1,881 92 49 93.0 2,022 897 510 1 .. 27 1,403 32 1,377 35 23 95.9 1,435 160 453 13 .. 28 345 309 548 79 27 83.8 654 1,108 1,215 2 3 16 1,141 1,203 2,153 128 63 91.9 .. 3,645 5,613 152 15 197 5,626 3,996 8,947 410 265 93.0 1,820 38 60 16 .. 685 59 740 610 189 .... 76.3 799 . ... .... .. .. .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... 38 60 16 .. 685 59 740 610 189 .... 76.3 799 24,544 9,740 513 171 1,729 18,404 18,293 32,900 1,984 1,813 89.7 1,209 Vaccination.
viii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1865. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. No. 1 Vaccination under Superintendents in British Territory by Government Establishment . . . . . . . 236,964 244,079 .... 7,115 126,961 110,003 Do. do. Local and Municipal Do. . . . . . . 31,093 17,103 13,990 .... 17,138 13,955 No. 2 ditto ditto and others in Native Territory .. 74,743 64,670 10,063 .... 40,055 34,688 No. 3 ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c* ........ 36,697 32,326 4,371 .... 21,002 15,695 Totals.... 379,497 358,178 21,819 .... 205,156 174,341 Seven Municipal Vaccinators.
ix No. IV. FOR THE YEAR 1866. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of successful to number vaccinated. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes Under One year. Above One year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 170,048 48,052 2,803 752 15,3J9 84,480 152,474 221,623 5,844 9,497 93.5 8,968 21,118 12 2 993 8,025 23,068 28,191 981 1,921 90.7 64,306 7,462 180 9 2,786 30,776 43,967 69,221 3,211 2,311 92.5 24,544 9,740 513 171 1,720 18,404 18,293 32,900 1,984 1,813 89.7 267,866 86,372 3,508 934 20,817 141,695 237,802 351,035 12,0520 15,512 92.7 work is shown under this. v 8
x TABLE No. V. TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1866, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS, &C AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under one Year. Above one Year. Under. Above. I.xi TABLE No. VI. EMPLOYMENT RETURN OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1866. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.xii SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendents.xiii KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendents. XV No. 986. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 27th May 1867. Number vaccinated in 1866.. .. 379,497 Number vaccinated in 1865.. .. 358,178 Increase. . . . . . . 21,319 Letter from the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, No. 1465, dated 3rd May 1867, submitting his Annual Report on Vaccination in the Bom- bay Presidency, including Sind, for 1866. RESOLUTION.xvi worthy returns cannot be overrated, and Government trust that the subject will always be kept in prominent view by the Superintendents of Vaccination. Mea- sures have recently been taken to ensure this information being accurately and punctually furnished by the several village Officers. 4. The facts stated by Dr. Arnott in paragraphs 15 to 17 of his report re- garding infantile vaccination are encouraging. In some parts the percentage has risen higher than during the preceding season. In the city of Shikarpoor the rate was 98 per cent., the highest rate ever before recorded ; for which satisfactory result great credit is due to Dr. Ffolliott, the Civil Surgeon of that place. 5. It is to be regretted, however, that in the Town and Island of Bombay infantile vaccination is not progressing so satisfactorily as could be wished. The number of children vaccinated under one year of age amounted to 40  per cent. only during the year. 6. Government also regret to observe the increase in deaths from small-pox in Bombay, the casualties being nearly double those in the preceding year. Dr. Arnott should be particularly requested to give his best and early consideration to the subject. 7. The question as to the advisability or otherwise of making inoculation penal, is now engaging the attention of Government. 8. The Secretary of State will be requested to forward an increased supply of lymph, and that in tubes only, as requested in paragraph 21 of the report. 9. The Right Honorable the Governor in Council has much pleasure in re- cording his sense of the praiseworthy exertions of the Native Chiefs and of the several Municipalities noticed by Dr. Arnott. 10. The services of the Superintendents, especially of Dr. Ffolliot, and the assistance rendered by the other Officers of Government, also deserve the ac- knowledgments of Government. (Signed) H. E. JACOMB, For Acting Chief Secretary to Government. To The INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1867. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1868.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1867. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1868.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1867. No. 1406 OF 1868. Bombay, 27th April 1868. From the INSPECTOR GENERAL, Indian Medical Department, To the CHIEF SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,( iv ) Excellency the Commander-in-Chief for employment in Abyssinia. The Regiment to which he was appointed did not proceed during the year, but, being under orders, his active superintendence ceased with his appointment to military duty. 5. In Sind Surgeon Pinkerton, who has been Superintendent since 1863, was required in March to take up temporarily the duties of Civil Surgeon at Kotree. This did not, however, much interfere with his superintendence in the province, as the interruption was not of long duration. 6. In the Northern Circle nothing interfered to arrest the progress of superintendence throughout the year. 7. In the Western Circle, as mentioned in previous Reports, the super- vision was divided between the Central and Southern Circles, and was almost ineffective throughout the year. The appointment was given, in 1865, to Assistant Surgeon Blanc while in Abyssinia, but since his nomination to it the superintendence has not been of an active character, as Doctors Day and Turnbull have had as much or more than they could attend to in traversing their own Circles. The Western Circle has a long tract of sea-coast, dotted with numerous ports, and it is undoubtedly important that, as soon as medical officers are available, there should be a Superintendent working in its districts. Situated in this Circle, in the Southern Concan, is the territory of the &quot; Hubshee&quot; to which I alluded in my last Report, and which I again mention as there is no vaccination carried on in it; and it is close to Bombay, with which city there is constant intercourse. Small-pox is known to be frequent in Hubshan. 8. In the Northern Concan is a Native State named &quot; Jowar&quot;, the Raja of which, I am glad to state, has desired that a Vaccinator may be sent to him. 9. In the Rewa Kanta and Punch Mahals the supervision extends over only four months of each year : it was complete for that time. 10. In Kattiawar it was incomplete. Assistant Surgeon Blomfield carried it on with activity for four months. 11. At the Presidency itself the superintendence by the Local Superin- tendent was unbroken. Remarks on the superin- tendence. 12. It will be observed from the above that the vaccination superinten- dence has not been so active and close as could be desired. As this is the essential part of a system, which has proved itself to be the best suited to the requirements of the country, it is to be regretted that it should over be weak
( v ) ened in consequence of the emergencies of the general service. Being fully convinced of the positive good done by Superintendents, and the necessity there always is for active and unbroken supervision, I cannot but hope that in future no need will exist for withdrawing these officers from their duties. Circles of vaccination. 13. The Circles of Vaccination throughout the Presidency at the end of the year, with their Superintendents, were as follows:( vi ) remain about four hundred and ten thousand to be vaccinated ; so that if the present rate was continued there would probably not be more than twenty thousand who year by year would go unvaccinated in this Presidency. It is true that the number has only gradually risen to the amount shown, so that a considerable number are arrears from former years ; nevertheless, there can be no doubt the general results are most satisfactory, and would be more so could the actual state of population be ascertained, and more Vaccinators employed where shown to be required. Cost of vaccination. 16. As far as can be ascertained, the average cost of each successful vaccination to Government, in Government Circles, is five annas and seven pies; increased vaccination will bring this down still further, except in the city of Bombay, where, should compulsory vaccination be introduced, the private practitioners should be re- munerated, as in England and Scotland, for each certified successful case. 17. During the last seven years the number of Vaccinators employed, and the amount of work, have steadily, and pro rata, increased, as the follow- ing table will show :( vii ) In the Presidency City there was a very satisfactory increase of upwards of 2,000 persons vaccinated; an increase in part due to operations being carried on amongst the followers of the Abyssinian Expedition, but chiefly to the increased exertions of the establishment. The increase, commend- able though it undoubtedly is, is very far indeed from what must yet be looked for. In the other Government Circles there has been a decrease more or less:-( viii ) Under Native Chiefs. 22. Vaccination under Native Chiefs shows a total numerical increase on the previous year of 8,094. This improvement in numbers is shown to have occurred in the territories of certain Chiefs in Kattiawar, Sind, Rewa Kanta, the Deccan, and Southern Circle. In Kattiawar, under the Thakoors of Jhusdun, Wallah, Bhownuggur, Luktur, and Goondul, Jam of Nowanuggur, Chiefs of Jaitpoor, Mangrole, and Bantwa, Rana of Porebundur, and Nawab of Joona- ghur. In Sind, in the territories of His Highness Meer Ali Morad. In Rewa Kanta, under the Nawab of Ballasindore, and Rajas of Chota Oodeypoor and Soonth. In the Deccan, in the country of Raja of Aukulkote and Begum of Peint. In the Southern Circle, under the State of Kolapoor and Sawunt Warree, Nawab of Sawunnore, and in the Jagheers of Echulkurunjee, Kagul, Bowrah, Torgul, Moodhul, Ramdroog and Jamkhundee. Decreased work is shown to have taken place in the Northern Circle, in the Mahee Kanta, and territories of the Dewan of Palunpoor, Thakores of Kakraj and Bhabhur, and Nawab of Rhadumpoor, and at Bhooj : in the former amounting to 1,490, and 434 in the latter. The work at Bhooj, by 4 Vaccinators employed by His Highness, is deficient in the extreme : it averages 176 vaccinations per man per annum. 23. Examination of the reports of Superintendents points out how very advisable it is that the subject of vaccination should be more fully im- pressed on the Native Chiefs of this Presidency. They frequently, and I believe most willingly, employ Vaccinators, but their assistance to them in various ways, in some cases, is deficient. There is, to begin with, apathy and want of interest in the success of the men; in some, pay is irregular, and perhaps small; in others, they are allowed to employ themselves, or are employed in other work ; in others again, they are left pretty much to them- selves to get on in their very difficult occupation utterly unassisted. 24. Kattiawar may be instanced as a country of great extent, where the Chiefs employ a large number of Vaccinators; yet there is no territory where, it appears from the annual Report, less reliance can be placed in the work performed, or where small-pox has been more prevalent and destructive. Mr. Blomfield's Report shows how frequently he was disappointed, on his tour, at the appearance of the work and at the conduct of the Vaccinators. This officer, in a letter on the subject of altering the present system in Kattiawar, says : &quot; The Vaccinators perform their work so carelessly that in many of the villages I inspected not more than ten or fifteen per cent. of the cases operated on could be termed successful vaccinations, also that many villages
( ix ) are not visited at all During the months of March and April, I found few villages free from small-pox, and in some the mortality had been very large.&quot; 25. The Political Agent was, I believe, about to bring the subject before Government, and I trusted that ere this it would have been considered. I deem it most advisable that all the Native Chiefs' Vaccinators should, if possible, be placed under the Superintendents through the Political Agents or chief Civil Officers, that they should look up to the Superintendents as their masters, receive regularly a fair pay on their certificates, and a thorough assistance from the authorities. Such arrangements would be sufficient to ensure the employment of good men, who would desire to retain employment, and consequently endeavour to perform good work. 26. I here give a list of the Native Chiefs in this Presidency who employ Vaccinators; and I would earnestly submit that this part of the system of Vaccination, which has never yet been brought properly within the line of Superintendent's work, may meet with the consideration it merits. List showing the Native Chiefs who have employed Vaccinators in their Territories. CIRCLE ...... Raja of Aukulkote. Begum of Peint. NORTHERN CIRCLE .... Dewan of Pahlunpoor and Dhanera. Thakore of Wao and Thurrad. Ditto Kakrij and Bhabhur. Ditto Warye,Morwara,Seogaum, Deodur,&c. Nawab of Rhadunpoor. Maharaja of Edur and Amnugger. Thakore of Paseena, Danta, and Subur Kanta. Ditto Rehwur Zilla and Pal Pole. Ditto Kuttosun, Baveesee, and Watruk Kanta. Nawab of Cambay. KATTIAWAR CIRCLE .... Thakore of Jhusdun. Jam of Noanuggur. Thakore of Morebee. Ditto Limree. Chiefs of Jaitpoor. Rana of Porebunder. Thakore of Wullah. 2 vac
( x ) KATTIAWAR CIRCLE( xi ) Work of Municipalities. * Tanna .......... 1 Poona .......... 2 Ahmednuggur .... 1 Sholapoor ........ 1 Barsee .......... 1 Pundherpoor ...... 1 Beejapoor ........ 1 Baramuttee ...... 1 Oorun ............ 1 Vingorla ........ 1 Ahmedabad ...... 2 Veerungaum...... 1 Dholka .......... 1 Khanapora ........ 1 Moon ............ 1 Kurrad ........ 1 Koregaum and Waee 1 Walwa .......... 1 Gudduk and Belgere 1 Belgaum .......... 1 Hooblee .......... 1 Gokak ............ 1 Kotree ........ 1 25 27. It will be satisfactory to His Excellency in Council to observe that from the period when the Municipalities of this Presidency commenced the entertainment of Vacci- nators the system has been gradually meeting with appreciation. In 1863 the Municipality of Hooblee set the example; it was followed by those of Kotree, Sattara, Tanna, and Belgaum; and in 1865 there were vaccinated by them 7,619 children. Sub- sequently Poona, Ahmednuggur, Dholka, Veerun- gaum, Barsee, and others, adopted the plan. There were in 1867 twenty-five Vaccinators kept up by Municipalities, whose work amounted to 18,391 vaccinated children. The Municipalities who are thus &quot; identifying themselves with efforts to render the protective system of vaccination more extended, efficient, and complete,&quot; deserve to be recorded, and are here entered.* The extension of this system is much to be desired, as it is one which, under proper superintendence, must prove of undoubted good. 28. No general rule exists as to the superin- tendence of the work of these men. Those employ- ed by Municipalities, where there are Civil Surgeons, are under their superintendence; those in towns and districts at a distance from stations are under the Superintendents of Vaccination, in the matter of supervision of their work. Local. 29. The local establishment of vaccination at present only exists in Sind. It numbers thirteen, and these are paid out of local funds. The establishment under the superin- tendence of Dr. Pinkerton continues to uphold its character for utility. The number vaccinated by its members was very considerable during the year 1867, but less than in the previous year by 1,740. Successful operations. 30. Out of the total number of children operated on 365,275 were pro- nounced successful vaccinations, and 26,140 unsuc- cessful or doubtful, giving a result of only 7.16 per cent. of the latter. There is an improvement here on former years, for the percentage of unsucessful and doubtful cases was in( xii ) 1862 .................... 10.57 1863 .................... 11.70 1864 .................... 8.60 1865 .................... 7.83 1866 .................... 7.83 1867 .................... 7.10 Accuracy of returns. 31. Superintendents have generally pronounced in a very favourable manner on the accuracy of the returns of vaccination. In the Northern Circle and in Sind, where the super- vision was most perfect, the reports are highly satisfactory. In the former Circle only one instance of false returns was discovered; in Sind, none. In Kattiwar a case was found by the Superintendent; none others are men- tioned. Capillary tubes. 32. A great aid in favour of the decrease of this crime, of preparing false returns of vaccination, exists in the use of Hus- band's capillary tubes by the working Vaccinators, every one of whom should be most carefully instructed in the correct mode of charging them. Vaccine lymph can be carried in these tubes with far more surety than by any other known method, and with these in possession the Vaccinator can 'go on his way without fearing the difficulties, which not unfrequently occur, in obtaining fresh lymph from village to village, or from those which arise from obstinate delays on the part of the people, or want of success. All these were formerly prolific causes of false returns: the Vaccinator dreading to report his misadventure to his Superintendent, pre- ferred to trust the result to chance. A Superintendent, when visiting a Vaccinator, should never leave him without being certain of his ability to guard himself against these serious troubles attending his work. Sex. 33. There were 210,378 males and 181,037 females vaccinated, or 54 of the former to 46 of the latter. This is about the usual proportion observed. Infantile vaccination. 34. 159,575 children under one year were operated on, and 231,840 above one year, giving a proportion of 41.00 of the former to 59.00 of the latter. This is an improve- ment on the general return over former years, for in 1865 it was 35, in 1866 it was 37, and is a satisfactory indication that vaccination is more ap- preciated. It appears, however, as has been stated in previous reports, that the subject of infantile vaccination is more favourably received in some districts than in others; and unless the ages are entered incorrectly by the Vaccinators and of this there is not much evidence( xiii ) manifest the frequently shown aversion to it in the Southern Circle. The highest percentage is still maintained in the Northern Circle (Gujerat). The proportion in various Circles is here shown :( xiv ) 38. In Kattiawar the disease prevailed to a great extent. The Superin- tendent states that some of the cases he saw were measles, which also creates great havoc amongst the children. The system of vaccination, to which I before alluded, is here at fault, and the superintendence weak. Thirty-eight Vaccinators are employed in this country,( xv ) Race or Caste. 1867. Total. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Boodhist, ( xvi ) Table showing the Mortality from Small-pox in the City of Surat, from the 1st of February to the 29th of March 1868. CITY OF SURAT. Deaths from Small-pox. Age. Months. Years. Districts. From 1 to 6 From 6 to 12. From 1 to 3. From 3 to 5. From 5 to 9. From 9 to 12. From 12 to 15. Above 15. Total. Maidhaspoora ...................... 5 4 7 3 1 .. .. .. 20 Haiderpoora ........................ 3 5 2 4 .. 1 .. .. 15 Sayethpoora ........................ 6 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 10 Sudrampoora .................... 7 4 3 2 .. 1 .. .. 17 Beggampoora .................... 2 1 6 .. 4 .. .. .. 13 Nawapoora ........................ 25 17 12 7 3 1 .. .. 65 Sullabathpoora .................... .. 4 2 .. .. .. .. .. 6 Singadiawaur .................... 1 .. 2 1 .. .. .. .. 4 Naunpoora ........................ 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 Chouk Bazar .................... .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Goppipoora .................... .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Moolaka Chakla ................ 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 3 Waddee Kullia .................... 2 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 3 Total.... 54 41 36 20 8 3 .. .. 162 The disease occurred in Surat in two months of the present year, and 162 children died in this city in the period named, 95 of whom were under one year of age; of these, 54 were under 6 months. Vaccinators were present, but their assistance was refused.
( xvii ) Value of infantile vac- cination. The Superintendent of Vaccination in Sind, in his report has some remarks on this subject. The susceptibility to small-pox, and consequently the susceptibility to the more certain action of vaccination, are argued on to the conclusion that vaccination in infancy, i. e., under one year, need not be much insisted on. 40. The above tables of deaths at Bombay, and recent outbreaks at Surat and Pahlunpoor, show when the susceptibility in this country is greatest; and the conclusion is that, if vaccination is to be prophylactic, it must be performed under one year, and somewhat before the period of greatest susceptibility to small-pox. 41. It is the duty of Superintendents and their establishments to do all in their power to foster this opinion in the minds of the people, for, especially in a system of vaccination like that of this Presidency, the un- vaccinated must be operated on in the progress of the work, regardless, to a certain extent, of age. Registration. 42. The Superintendents of Vaccination have not hitherto been able to obtain reliable returns and reports of small-pox in their districts from the various authorities ; but in future, the Resolution of Government in Financial Department, No. 535, dated 10th May 1867, requires the registration of births and deaths, and it is pre- sumed the causes of the latter, to be kept in every village. 43. In Bombay the registration of births, under the Municipal Act, gives no idea of what the vaccination requirements are. Taking it, however, as a reference, we find that the registered births for the year 1867 were 5,115, and that the vaccinations performed under one year were 5,072. This would be a most gratifying result, but the registration shows that the rate of births to population is only about 7 per thousand; whereas the acknowledged rate to population is about 30 to 33 per thousand. As, however, Bombay is peculiarly situated, with reference to what may be called its floating population, I am of opinion that twenty, perhaps even less than that, should be taken as the rate of births per 1,000, which would give about 308 births to be registered weekly, and, allowing for decreasing causes, between thirteen and fourteen thousand to be vaccinated under one year in Bombay per an- num. From the foregoing, it may be observed that the registration of births in Bombay under the present system cannot be taken as a guide to correct vaccination. 3 v a c
( xviii ) 44. It is at the same time evident that, from the constant presence of small-pox, there is a great necessity for the spread of vaccination in the city and outskirts of Bombay. In the Resolution of Government, No. 986, dated 27th May 1867, on my. last Annual Report of Vaccination for 1866, it is directed that early attention should be given to the subject of increasing deaths from small-pox. A year has elapsed since then, deaths from small- pox have been much as they were, notwithstanding the earnest endeavours of the Department; and the only and best means I can, after much considera- tion on the subject, recommend, is a system of compulsory vaccination. In stating this it does not appear to me that much is required to be said in addition to the foregoing remarks; but it may be as well to bring to the notice of Government, briefly, the system of vaccination which was inaugurated in 1858. The old system of domiciliary vaccination, its abuses being many, was changed in this year under the recommendation of Dr. Peet, the then Honorary Inspector of Vaccination in Bombay : a paid Superintendent was appointed with a small number of Vaccinators under him; there were six public stations for vaccination, and the Superintendent himself vaccinated at each of these in course; the Vaccinators were employed in searching out children for vaccination ; in endeavouring, after the operations, to ascertain results, and bring as many forward for inspection as possible. This system is at pre- sent in existence, and is one which leaves so very much to the people them- selves, that it is wonderful to see so many avail themselves of it. Such a system, however, is utterly unsuited to altered times, and to a world port like Bombay, where every exertion should be used to place it in sanitary equality with, and even in advance of, other towns and cities. 45. The details of what should be the working of a system of compulsory vaccination cannot be entered upon in this Report; but the employment of all medical practitioners, including those qualified by the University of Bombay, or by the original examination of Grant Medical College, should be one essential part of it, and the continuation of public vaccination stations another. 46. The local Superintendent of Vaccination in Bombay, a Brahmin, graduate Grant Medical College, of much intelligence and long experience, reports on this point:( xix ) &quot; Such of the Abyssinian Force as were vaccinated gave us abundance of fresh lymph, with which we could vaccinate all who applied during the last months of the year, but so soon as that source of supply was exhausted we were as badly off for vaccine lymph as ever,( xx ) ously vaccinated,( xxi ) English vaccine lymph. 53. Vaccine lymph sent from England on ivory points and on glasses is, as has been previously stated, almost invariably useless, while tube lymph is generally successful. I would submit that the quantity sent out in tubes is still insufficient, as it is desirable that fresh English lymph should be as frequently as possible distributed throughout the Presidency, particularly in Bombay itself. 54. When vaccine lymph is observed to deteriorate it is at once changed, for no greater blow to vaccination can be dealt than continuing to vaccinate with unsound lymph. Complete supervision, close checks, ability to renew lymph from tubes, more frequent supplies from England, and encouragement to frequent intercourse between the Vaccinators themselves, aid in keeping down any tendency to such incorrect vaccination. Assistance from the Civil authorities. 55. The support given by the Civil and Political authorities is warmly acknowledged by the Superintendents. It is this intelligent aid that gives confidence alike to Vacci- nators and to people; for in some parts, &quot; without it,&quot; as stated by one Superintendent, &quot; my utmost exertions would be of little avail.&quot; Superintendents. 56. The services of Superintendents have during the year met with my approval ; and I beg to record my opinion of the satisfactory manner in which their work has been performed. The zeal of Doctors Pinkerton and Turnbull, Mr. Blomfield, and Dr. Muncherjec Byramjee Colah, has been prominent. 57. The establishments have been favourably mentioned by the Superintendents. During the year the Wukeel of His Highness the Khan of Khelat asked for the temporary services of a Vaccinator. This was sanc- tioned by Mr. Mansfield, as the introduction of vaccination into the heart of Belochistan, under such favourable circumstances, was not to be neglected. An experienced Vaccinator was sent in April with carefully charged capillary tubes. The Vaccinator who was accredited to His Highness the Khan, did his work well ; there was no objection raised to vaccination itself: they were glad, indeed, to have it; but His Highness was unwilling to force his subjects to allow lymph to be taken from the vesicles. The objections of the people were strong against this; in fact, they were &quot; insurmountable.&quot; The conse- quence was the Vaccinator could not keep his lymph going. The Superin- tendent of Vaccination, Sind, says, and I trust that what he says will prove correct, that the &quot; result of the few hundreds vaccinated may yet induce His Highness to entertain Vaccinators of his own.&quot; The good conduct and
( xxii ) zeal of Kishen Chand, local Vaccinator in Sind, who thus carried vaccination into the territories of His Highness the Khan of Khelat, were much appre- ciated by His Highness ; and Sir H. Green, Commanding the Frontier, brought his conduct most favourably to attention, in the hope &quot; that his successful exertions to introduce the blessings of vaccination into the wild countries be- yond our border might be deemed by Government worthy of some notice.&quot; Suggestions. 58. In paragraph 4 of this Report I have alluded to the injury done to vaccination by incomplete superintendence. I must now state that such inducements as are avail- able should, in my opinion, be given to Officers employed as Superintendents, to make them desirous of retaining such appointments; for the good to be done by a Superintendent who knows, and is known in, his Division is incalculable. The inducement which appears to me the most reasonable refers to the pay of these Officers, and to point out my meaning I must extract from the G. O. G. I. No. 370, dated 4th April 1867 :( xxiii ) laid down for the medical charge of Native Regiments; and I feel sure that, if the appointments in the Department meet with this consideration, it will prove of infinite advantage, by keeping in it Officers who are interested in the success of the work,( xxiv ) 63. The Vaccinators might either draw a fixed monthly allowance according to the rates laid down for persons in the Revenue and other Depart- ments, of like pay and standing with Vaccinators, or draw the amount expended monthly in contingent bills. The former appears to me most suited to the class of persons. 64. The second point is the establishment of Native Assistant Superin- tendents in each Circle. This has been a subject of much consideration with me ; and I have come to the conclusion that they would be most useful aids to the Superintendents, and be of immense service to the truthfulness of the work. 65. I will on this subject quote from the annual Report of Dr. Pinkerton, the Superintendent of longest experience in this Presidency, and who speaks from experience :( xxv ) whom they work. In concluding this subject, I would beg to recommend that a grade of Native Superintendents to assist the European Officers be made in all establishments. It is worthy of note that when Surgeon Pearson, some years ago, adopted the Bombay system of Vaccination in the North- Western Provinces, he did not fail to strike the one blot in our system, and he included in his establishments a grade of Native Assistant Superinten- dents.&quot; 66. I agree with all that Dr. Pinkerton has written on this matter, and think that it is one which claims, together with that of batta to the Vaccinators, the earnest attention of Government. 67. The appointments of Assistant Superintendents would not have any effect on the active movements of the Superintendents through their Districts; but as such appointments would decrease the operative power of the estab- lishments, it would involve an increase to each of two Apprentice Vaccinators. Both the above arrangements have been carried out for some time in Sind, and have worked well. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, F. S. ARNOTT, M.D., C.B., Inspector General, Indian Medical Department. 4 vac
VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 &quot; 3. I am unable to state whether there has been a decrease in the number of cases of small-pox over that of the year previous, as the returns enabling me to effect this have as yet not reached my Office. &quot; 4. Not one case of inoculation has been reported during the past year. &quot; 5. Vaccination in Collectorates. Collectorate. 1866. 1867. Compared with 1866. Increase. Decrease. Poona ....................... 15,195 12,358 .... 2,837 Ahmednuggur .......... 10,684 18,748 8,064 .... Khandesh ................. 13,524 15,056 1,532 .... Kulladghee .............. 5,535 6,300 765 .... Tanna ....................... 16,605 18,575 1,970 .... The above table shows an increase in Ahmednuggur, Khandesh, Kulladghee, and Tanna, and a decrease in Poona. In the collectorate of Poona during the past year, the Municipal Commissioners of Sholapoor, Pundhurpoor, Barsee, Burumuttee, Sun- jorla, and in Poona itself, have entertained Vaccinators. Last year (1866) Beejapoor was the only town which entertained a Vaccinator. &quot;6. The Vaccinators have conducted their duties most satisfactorily. One Vac- cinator was dismissed the Service for bad conduct. The largest number of vaccinations in the Tanna Zilla was performed by General No. 157 (Ballajee Chalka), and in the Central Circle by General No. 237 (Dhoondoo Chintaman). Dr. Turnbull was much pleased with the work which these men performed. &quot; 7. Husband's capillary tubes have been generally employed for conveying lymph from place to place ; the quality of the lymph thus transported has generally on trial proved good. &quot; 8. Of the total number, 36,366 or 51.1 were males, and 34,671 or 48.8 were females : this shows that the males still preponderate. &quot;9. The following table will show the proportions percent. of each caste vac- cinated during the past year as compared with the preceding year; it shows very little change, except as regards Hindoos :3 &quot; 10.The number of infants operated on is much greater this year than it has been for any previous period; 28.8 or 20,496 of the operations were on children under one year of age. &quot;11. The percentage of success has been much greater. In 1866 it was 93.9, in the present year (1867) 95.9. Not a single false name, I am informed, was discovered during the year. The lymph has generally been active, producing vesicles well developed. &quot; 12. Before concluding my Report, I beg most respectfully to call to notice the 23rd paragraph of Dr. Turnbull's Report for 1866, in which he points out the almost absolute necessity of granting travelling batta to Vaccinators.&quot; Native States. A great increase in the operations, as shown' by the table at the heading of this Report, as compared with former years has taken place during the past year. In 1866 953 or 82.4, in 1867 1,668 or 84.9. The Chief of Jowar has expressed a wish to the Collector of Tanna for a Vaccinator to be sent to carry out vaccination in his territory, all expenses incurred by this laudable undertaking to be defrayed by the Native Chief. A Vaccinator, a man upon whose experience and judgment I can place full reliance, shall be deputed to carry out this work as soon as possible. SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.4 The above Report shows that vaccination has been slightly progressive in the Southern and Western Circles during the year, and the increase is most marked in the number of cases reported as successfully vaccinated. 2. There has been no change in the number of Vaccinators employed. It will be seen that there is a large increase in the number of cases reported by the Vaccinators of the Native States, and this is the more satisfactory as it shows that the benefits of the operation are being more fully believed in by persons least under the influence of Government. 3. I think that the increase of successfully vaccinated cases is to be attributed to the new lymph introduced last year and spread about the country as much as possible. 4. The decrease of vaccination is rather large in the Rutnagherry Zilla ; it appears that there has been some difficulty in getting children in that zilla, small-pox not having been so prevalent as in the year 1866. 5. The decrease in Dharwar has also been large : fever has prevailed to a large extent in that zilla. 6. In Sattara there is only a difference of 235, but it is on the wrong side. 7. Belgaum shows a very satisfactory increase of 1,238 cases. 8. During the year, I have visited the Sattara Districts, the Kolapoor State, and some of the jagheers of the Southern Maratha Country, also the zillas of North Canara and Dharwar. 9. I found the people of North Canara to be a fever-stricken population, scattered about in junglee villages very difficult to get at, and but little alive to the dangers of small-pox, which will account for the falling off of 208 cases. 10. At the village of Kulghutgee, zilla of Dharwar, I found the people fully alive to the benefits of vaccination : for small-pox having visited the village, only one case among 18 vaccinated children occurred. 11. I have been satisfied on the whole with the conduct of the Vaccinators, and I have only had to recommend the dismissal of one man, viz., the Vaccinator of the Jagheerdar of Jhutt. I found it necessary to fine the Vaccinator of Sircy for having lost his lymph, since which time he has been doing better. 12. All demands for lymph made upon me I have satisfied as speedily as possible, and in my travels always carried about a few tubes to supply Vaccinators with, when I thought a renewal of their lymph advisable. 13. I am still of opinion, as stated in my letters No. 56 and 62 of 1867, that it would be a highly desirable measure to employ men educated in the vernacular class of the Grant College in this department, but I fear that the expenses of the department would be largely increased thereby: but vaccination, of all things, to be beneficial, should be &quot; thorough.&quot;
5 Comparative Table of Work performed in each Zilla of the Southern Circle of Vac- cination by the Government Establishment for the year 1867, contrasted with 1866. Belgaum, 11th February 1868. No. Names of Zillas. Number of Vaccina- tors em- ployed. Total Vac- cinated in 1867. Average of Operations to each. Success- fully Vac- cinated. Per- centage of Suc- cess. Total in 1866. In- crease. De- crease. REMARKS. 1 Belgaum .... 6 7,479 1246.1 7,160 95.1 6,241 1,238 .. 2 Rutnagherry. 7 18,546 2649.3 17,886 96.2 19,611 .. 1,065 3 Sattara...... 6 5,931 988.1 5,521 93.9 6,166 .. 235 4 Dharwar.... 3 2,519 839.2 2,361 93.1 3,672 .. 1,153 5 North Canara. 5 5,050 1010.0 4,817 95.2 5,258 .. 208 Total .... 27 39,525 .. 37,754 .. 40,948 1,238 2,661 Return of the Vaccinators employed by the Municipalities of the Southern Circle for the year 1867. Belgaum, 11th February 1868. Number. Month of year. Sattara Zilla. Poona Zilla. Dharwar Zilla. Belgaum Zilla. REMARKS. Khanapoor. Moan. Walwa. Waee and Ko- ragaum. Kurrar. Punderpoor. Gud- duck and Betti- gerry. Hooblee. Belgaum. Gokak. 1 January 1867 80 125 51 83 42 42 54 171 74 .. 2 February 6 NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.7 to unavoidable breaks in vaccination which occurred in purgunna Dhundooka (Ahmedabad Districts) in March and April, and again in October and November, in consequence of the illness of the Vaccinators employed there (General Nos. 91 and 170), and to partial suspension of vaccination in purgunna Bardolee (Surat Districts) during July, August, and September, in consequence of the Vaccinator losing lymph and not promptly replacing it. The decrease in the Native States of Pahlunpoor and Mahee Kanta is also attributable to similar causes. Vaccination was not carried on at Rhadunpoor for five months (from April to August inclusive). In Deodur Talooka no work was done in November, as the Vaccinator was on leave. One Vaccinator of Mahee Kanta lost his lymph during the rains ; a fresh supply was sent from Surat, but nearly one month was lost before he could commence work again. 4. Notwithstanding this decrease, it appears that vaccination is progressing satis- factorily in this Circle, for there is a steady increase each year in the number of children vaccinated under one year of age, as is seen from the following table :8 7. Only one supply of fresh lymph from England was received, towards the close of the year ; it was tried on two young and unprotected children, but the result was unsuccessful. 8. Among the Vaccinators of this establishment the following changes occurred : the Vaccinator of Rhadunpoor was dismissed on account of inefficiency and misconduct; Apprentice Vaccinator Bhikumbhai Bholoobhai (General No. 270), of Morasa, was also dismissed, on account of sending false entries ; Apprentice Vaccinator Peerkhan Mahomedkhan (General No. 273), of Gogo, resigned the Service of his own accord; and Assistant Vaccinator Venaik Janardhun (General No. 47), of Oolpar, was allowed to retire from the Service. All the vacancies were filled up in due time, with the exception of the Rhadunpoor Vaccinatorship, to fill which a young man of industrious habits was sent, but His Excellency the Nawab of Rhadunpoor objected to confirm him. Much time was lost (nearly five months) in correspondence on this subject, and ultimately the then Political Superintendent of Pahlunpoor took upon himself the responsibility of filling up the vacancy. 9. As regards the conduct of the Vaccinators of the whole Circle, I am glad to state that the majority of them are hardworking and industrious ; there are a few men of bad character and indolent habits : these are being gradually weeded out. 10. During the year under report small-pox prevailed in nearly all the Divisions of this Circle. Whilst I was in the Pahlunpoor States, in the commencement of the year, I accidentally came to know of the breaking out of small-pox in Tehrwara (talooka Deodur) and the neighbouring villages. Within a few days 140 deaths were reported to have occurred, yet no intimation of the prevalence of this disease was given by the Thakore or the other village officials to the Vaccinator in charge of the district, or to the Political Superintendent himself. The Vaccinator of the talooka was able soon to introduce lymph into Tehrwara and commence operations; but the mis- chief was already done, for he could find only a small number of children to vaccinate. The negligence of the village officials was brought to the notice of the Political Super- intendent of Pahlunpoor. In Mahee Kanta it prevailed in the hot months of the year in many talookas; difficulty was felt in sending our men to all the places where it prevailed, in consequence of there being only four Vaccinators in the whole zilla. This was represented to the Political Agent, who readily assented to the addition of a fifth Vaccinator. The new man commenced work in October last. At Patree and Mundal, two remote portions of talooka Veerumgaum, it broke out suddenly in the month of May; no time was to be lost, for all at once reports reached me of its outbreak from the Collector, from the Mamlutdars, as well as from our Vaccinators, who asked for an extra hand. The nearest Vaccinator of Sanund promptly obeyed orders, and with two working men the outbreak soon subsided. In the Kaira Districts it prevailed to a very small extent, and in the Broach and Surat Districts reports of its existence were received from such places as were chiefly inhabited by Kolies (fishermen).
9 11. With small-pox measles also prevailed as an epidemic in almost all parts of this Division, and in some places it was so very fatal, from secondary chest affections and dysenteric purging, that the inhabitants devoutly wished the Sirkar (Government) would find out some remedy for Ooree (measles) as it has done for Devi Matta (small-pox). 12. In the Mahee Kanta States, whilst inspecting the Malpoor Talooka, I noticed that in many villages the people dreaded mine and the Vaccinators' approach, and oftentimes hours were lost before the children could be collected for inspection or vaccination. In one village, making myself particularly familiar with the villagers, I learnt that the Thakore of Malpoor had about a year ago levied a sort of vaccination cess on all inhabitants equally, from the Patel to the Dhera, at the rate of a rupee and a quarter for every child. The villagers believed that this was done by the desire of the Sadra Sirkar. As much as I could, I explained to them that what was done was improper, and without any one's sanction, and that such a thing would not be permitted again ; at the same time the Political Agent was informed of the circumstances, and requested to take such measures as might prevent a repetition of the same in future. 13. In paragraph 9 of last year's Report it was stated that Municipal Vaccinators in this Circle were not under the control of the Superintendent. In the month of October last the Collector of Ahmedabad, through the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals, Northern Division of the Army, expressed a wish to place the Municipal Vaccinators in that zilla under the immediate control of this Office. As there are only two Municipal Vaccinators in the Ahmedabad Districts (one at Veerumgaum and one at Dholka), the inspection of whose work would not entail additional travelling, I readily assented to taking them under my care. 14. Mention was made, in paragraph 11 of last Report, of (the castes of people who still entertain a dislike to vaccination. The little knowledge I have since derived enables me to state, that, with the single exception of one portion of this Circle, the whole is alive to the advantages derived from vaccination. There is no actual opposi- tion anywhere, and from the Pahlunpoor and Mahee Kanta territories in the north to the Broach Districts in the south our Vaccinators have merely to contend against the passive indifference of the people. 15. The exception alluded to in the preceding paragraph is the southernmost part of this Division, viz., the Surat Districts. Our Vaccinators here have to contend against several difficulties : the extreine apathy of the village Patels, who do not give our men that assistance which it is in their power to give10 16. It must not be understood, however, that the above remarks apply to all parts of the Surat Zilla11 particular inquiries regarding the prevalence of small-pox. For this reason the Collector of Surat was requested to favour me with the original village returns of the talookas of Chowrasee and Unklesur, and similarly the Broach Sub-Collector was requested to send the village returns of all the four talookas of Broach. 3. From the Collector of Surat, the village returns of talooka Unklesur only were sent to me, and these reached me very late, after I had left Surat for the Broach Districts, so that I had no opportunity of making any inquiries regarding them; and with reference to the returns of talooka Chowrasee, I was informed that &quot; the Mamlut- dar of Chowrasee does not receive nominal returns of small-pox from the Tullatees of the several villages, but merely verbal statements, which they again receive from the Vaccinators.&quot; 4. The Sub-Collector of Broach directed all the Mamlutdars under him to forward to me the returns required. In obedience to such orders, I received village returns of the Broach, Wagra, and Jumboosur Talookas; the Mamlutdar of Amode stated his inability to send any village returns of his talooka, as none such existed. 5. On a comparison of village returns, received as above, with the English return, one very important discrepancy was observed in ' the headings of the two. The heading in the third column of the English return is &quot; Total number of cases of Small-pox during the year 1866 ;&quot; whereas in the village returns of the talookas of Wagra and Jumboosur (from which the English returns were partly made up), the heading in the third column is &quot; Total number of cases of Small-pox and Vacci- nation during the year 1866.&quot; And in the Gujarati returns of the villages of Unklesur Talooka, there is this additional difference, that they are stated to be for the year 1866-67, whilst the return made up from these in English is shown as a return for 1866. 6. Granting the figures put in the third column of the Gujarati returns to be correct, there would be, then, this important correction to be made in the English return; viz., to deduct from the total in the third column (17,268) the total of the fourth and fifth columns (11,378+4,661). This will give 1,229* as the correct number of cases of small-pox during the year. 7. But the question is, are the village returns made up from such sources as could be relied upon ? With reference, at least, to the making up of one talooka return (of Chowrasee), I have, in paragraph 3 of this letter, quoted the Collector of Surat's statement on this point; and from the inquiries I made in the different talookas of Broach, I find that this statement is in the main correct. The village returns of the other talookas are principally made up from the oral statements of different parties. There is no register kept in any village, containing information on the various points of the small-pox return. * This includes 213 cases of small-pox which are said to have occurred in the City of Broach, vaccination in which is not under this department, but under the superintendency of the Civil Surgeon of that place.
12 8. I will now state briefly the result of my inquiries in the Broach Districts. I visited all such villages of the Broach and Wagra Talookas in which, according to the Tullatees' returns, small-pox was said to have occurred in children some time after being vaccinated, and some deaths said to have resulted therefrom. I collected the children of such villages that were vaccinated during the year 1866, and examined them, one after another, according as their names were entered in the Vaccinator's register-book. In none of these could I find a single child with marks of small-pox, or any child that was said to have had small-pox at all, however mild. A few children in some of the villages had died subsequent to vaccination, and, on inquiry of the parents of such children, the cause of death was made out to be fever, pneumonia, diarrh13 12. The more one inquires into this subject the more it becomes clear that small-pox breaks'out only in such villages as have hitherto resisted the introduction of vaccination in to them. Even at so recent a date as December last, it broke out in two large villages of the Jumboosur Talooka, viz., Sarode and Kavee,14 local establishments would exceed 60,000 per annum ; for the first two years after the creation of the local establishment, viz., 1865 and 1866, the total vaccinations did considerably exceed that number, being respectively 62,415 and 67,720; but the arrears of unprotected children in the province have been worked up faster than I anticipated, as is shown by the decrease in the past year. The chief cause of the decrease, then, is the reduced number of unprotected persons in the province ; but there is also another reason which deserves notice: it is that many thinly-populated parts of this Circle have been more carefully gone over than it was formerly possible to do with the inadequate number of Vaccinators in the Government establishment, and the men employed in those parts have done much less work than in former years. Still I am not quite satisfied with the amount of work done by the Government establishment, and think a few of the Government Vaccinators could have done more work by a little more exertion. I shall endeavour to stimulate them to exert themselves more during the present year. I am quite satisfied with the quantity of work done by the members of the local establishment. 2. I think it worth while to say something here on the subject of the numbers which, I think, may be annually available for vaccination in Sind in future years. I may say that this question has engaged my best attention, and during the last five years I have been gathering information to arrive at a conclusion on this subject; but to enable me to give a correct answer to it, I should require much more precise information than is at present obtainable from any source whatsoever; in fact, precise information does not exist. However, my own knowledge of the province is now considerable, and I have received such information as the Revenue and Political Officers are able to give me. To start with then, I estimate the population of Sind, including the Khyr- poor State, at 2,500,000. But the populations of the Sudder Stations are not vacci- nated by my men; there is a Vaccinator under each Civil Surgeon, who provides for the wants of his station; the medical subordinates in charge of Dispensaries vaccinate in the towns where they are stationed. His Highness Meer Ali Murad has his own Vaccinator ; the Kotree Municipality maintains a Vaccinator for Kotree and its environs, and there are some vaccinations done at the Civil Hospital of Jacobabad ; these com- bined provided for about 500,000 of the population, thus leaving 2,000,000 to be pro- vided for by my Vaccinators. The annual births in a population of 2,000,000, taking the birth-rate at 1 in 30 per annum, should be 66,666. But it is quite impossible to vaccinate all who are born, because there are (a) still-births ; (b) deaths which occur in (say) two years, that is about the space of time which should elapse between the visits of the Vaccinator ; (c) children protected by natural small-pox ; and (d) children who from various causes do not come under the influence of the Vaccinators. I do not think I over-estimate these at ten per cent.; thus reducing the available children for my establishments to 60,000 per annum: and now that the arrears have been worked off, it is probable that this is the maximum average number that can be annu- ally, for any given series of years, vaccinated by the men under me. And, arguing in the same way, the average maximum total of vaccinations, from all sources, in the
15 province should be 75,000 per annum. But I do not expect that the maximum will be constantly obtained in future years, for it never has been in years past. The area of Sind, by recent returns obtained from the Revenue and Political Officers, is shown to be 52,555 square miles ; and, taking its population at 2,500,000, it has an average of 47.5 persons to the square mile. The mass of the population, however, is located within twenty miles of the river Indus, on both banks, so that the talookas at a distance of more than twenty miles from the river are much less populous than the average above mentioned : for instance, the Thur and Parkur Talookas contain about 15,000 square miles, and have only a population of about 200,000, or 13 persons to the square mile : again, in Kohistan there are 2,693 square miles, and 2,645 inha- bitants, or less than one person to the square mile : and in the Kurrachee Talooka, there are 1,292 square miles, and, exclusive of Kurrachee town, only 7,199 inhabitants, or 5.5 to the square mile. If we exclude these very thinly populated parts from the averages, the rest of Sind has about 70 persons to the square mile. To work steadily over the province I have thirty Vaccinators ; they can go over it in about two years or there- abouts. I do not think it would be advisable to go over even the more populous part, oftener than every eighteen months, because, in such a thinly populated country, it would, in many places, be difficult for Vaccinators to keep good lymph going, on account of the number of vaccinated children being too limited to ensure always vaccinating from good typical vesicles; I think, indeed, that two years is about the space of time which should be allowed to elapse, at present, between the visits of the Vaccinator. When the population shall have reached 4,000,000, then it may become advisable to go over the more densely populated parts of the province every year. It appears, then, that the annual births in the talookas gone over by my Vaccinators may be estimated at about 66,666 ; but this number is diminished by the unknown quantities,16 annum. But, as I have already said, we can hardly expect the Vaccinators to reach the maximium: it is more probable that the general average will be something less than 2,000. From these calculations, it appears that twenty-seven regular working Vacci- nators are sufficient for Sind with its present population. The Government establish- ment consists of seventeen, and the local establishment of thirteen, making a total of thirty Vaccinators : but two are employed superintending the others, in addition to their ordinary duty, and are not, therefore, attached to any particular talookas; they moreover, go over the whole of a collectorate. Excluding them, there is still one more than the requisite twenty-seven ; but as the junior Vaccinator is nearly always only a beginner, I cannot calculate on his having charge of a talooka. The joint establish- ment then is, I think, as far as the number of Vaccinators is concerned, sufficient for the province at present. But I am of opinion that a third Assistant Superintendent would add to the efficiency of both establishments, as it would enable me to have one Assistant for the Kurrachee Collectorate, including Kohistan, another for the Hydra- bad Collectorate and the Thurr and Parkur Political Superintendency, and a third for the Shikarpoor Collectorate and the Frontier of Upper Sind Political Super- intendency. The more I see of our system of vaccination the more am I convinced that Sir George Clerk's idea, of employing Native Deputy Superintendents to assist the Euro- pean Superintendents, was wise and correct; and the carrying of it into practice would, I believe, bring the several vaccination establishments to a degree of efficiency never yet reached even in the Bombay Presidency, where so much has been effected without their assistance. It seems a waste of time to argue in favour of Native Assistant Superintendents, for the thing stands self-evident, that no single unaided European Officer can exercise a continuous watch over men scattered over fifty or sixty thousand square miles. And here I may be permitted to say, in advocating the employment of Native Assistant Superintendents, that Sir George Clerk's idea, although a wise one, was marred, and ultimately rendered futile by employing Sub-Assistant Surgeons as Deputy Superintendents. Native medical gentlemen are the last men whom I should choose for Assistant Superintendents of Vaccination ; they would probably be fitter for the place of Superintendents : anyhow Sir George Clerk's plan, of solely employing Sub-Assistant Surgeons, signally and completely failed. Still this failure by no means implies that a plan for employing other natives would also fail. Head Vaccinator Hassah Mull has been three years, and Vaccinator Assoo Mull has been nearly two years, my Assistant; and I am happy to say that I have found them useful to a degree I had not even anticipated. I may be permitted then to say, that I think Native Assistant Superintendents should be employed in all Circles of Vaccination, and that good men, chosen from among the Vaccinators themselves, should be pro- moted to Assistant Superintendentships ; this would open up careers for young men entering the Vaccination Department, and would do more than anything else I know of to stimulate Vaccinators to work well, to render honest returns, and to maintain their integrity in all relations with the people among whom they work. In conclu-
17 ding this subject, I would beg to recommend that a grade of Native Superintendents to assist the European Officer be made in all establishments. It is worthy of note that when Surgeon Pearson, some years ago, adopted the Bombay system of Vaccination in the North-Western Provinces, he did not fail to strike the one blot in our system, and he included in his establishments a grade of Native Assistant Superintendents. 4. In the opening paragraph of my Report on the progress of Vaccination in Sind for the year 1866, I mentioned that only one small part of the province then remained a virgin field for the Vaccinator ; that part was Veerow. I am happy to be able to say that Assistant Vaccinator Lulloo (a Mussulman), when sent there last September, found no difficulty in persuading the Koso Beloochees to accept vacci- nation, and he vaccinated a considerable number of persons in the hills and dells about Veerow, although Assistant Vaccinator Jettah Mull (a Hindoo) had a few months previously been unable to succeed among those Koso Beloochees. No part of Sind now remains unvaccinated. 5. It is again my pleasing duty to report that I and the Vaccinators have, throughout the past year, received every assistance from the Revenue and Political Officers in the province. I had particular occasion to call on Captain Bolton, the Deputy Collector of Mahomed Khan's Tanda District, to use his influence to suppress the practice of inoculation in his district. I would beg to express my thanks to him for the kindly manner in which he responded to my request. Nothing could exceed the great interest which Major Tyrwhitt takes in the spread of vaccination in the Thurr and Parkur; and I can only thank him again for the attention he gives to the subject, and for the assistance he has so often and so effectually given me. Nearly all the Revenue and Political Officers are either my superiors or equals in rank, and I may not presume to praise their conduct; but I heartily thank them for their ready help, without which my utmost exertions would indeed be of little avail. 6. In the month of April last, Colonel Sir Henry Green asked me to lend a Vacci- nator to His Highness the Khan of Khelat. On submitting the request to the late Commissioner Mr. Mansfield, he gave me his sanction to lend a local Vaccinator to His Highness. Accordingly, Kishen Chand was sent by Sir Henry Green to Khelat, where he was employed for some time; but he found the people there object so strongly to his taking lymph from the vesicles, wherewith to vaccinate other children, that he could not keep his lymph going, and it appears that His Highness the Khan was unwilling to force his subjects to allow lymph to be taken from the vesicles. Kishen Chand informed me that there were no objections to vaccination; that, in fact, they were glad to have it; but that the objection to allow the lymph to be taken from the vesicles was insurmountable. Colonel Sir Henry Green considered it a good opportunity for showing the benefits of vaccination to the people of Khelat, and for introducing the practice among them. It may be hoped that the benefit derived by the few hundreds whom Kishen Chand vaccinated may yet induce His Highness to entertain Vaccinators of his own. If I thought my presence in Khelat could 3v
18 influence His Highness to keep up Vaccinators, I would most willingly go there, and try what I could do; but after the recent trial, I fear some time must elapse before I could do much good. 7. The following are a few causes of the decrease in the number of vaccinations performed by some of the Government Vaccinators : 1st. Jettah Mull, Wuttun Mull, and Nubby Bux were employed in thinly populated talookas; 2nd. One Assistant Vaccinator was dismissed the Service for being absent from his talooka without leave; 3rd. Thackoordass lost one month's work by being prevented from returning to his talooka from privilege leave during the time intercourse was forbidden with Upper Sind on account of the prevalence of cholera there. But the chief reason of the decrease is, as already stated in the opening paragraph of this Report, the diminished number of unprotected persons in the province. 8. The Government Vaccinators vaccinated 18,661 males and 15,160 females, being 55.17 and 44.82 per cent., respectively. The local Vaccinators vaccinated 12,020 males and 9,834 females, or 55.0 and 44.99, respectively, in each hundred. The Khyrpoor Vaccinator vaccinated 1,409 males and 1,120 females, or 55.71 of the former and 44.28 of the latter in every hundred. On the total, the percentage of males is 55.29, and of females 44.69. This is nearly the same proportion as the sexes bore to each other in the Report for 1866 ; the difference being only 0.40 less of males, and the same fraction more of females, this year in every hundred. 9. The following shows the percentages of the castes vaccinated by three Establishments :19 young child with confluent small-pox in a bunyia's house in the midst of the town of Kotree ; the child was in a pingah (a kind of swinging cradle), and in the same cradle there were two other children who had never suffered from small-pox, nor had ever been vaccinated. The father and mother only submitted the two unprotected, children to the Vaccinator on my bringing the case to the notice of the Magistrate. Again, a few days ago, my 1st Assistant brought to my notice that local Vaccinator Ramzan had received eight annas from each of two bunyias to let off their two children from being vaccinated, when he was vaccinating in their village of Meeranshah, in the Mehur Talooka. 10. There were 19,027 persons vaccinated under one year old, and 39,177 above that age. This gives 31.2 per cent. of the former and 68.7 of the latter, being 8.5 per cent. more under one year old than 1866. It is unquestionably of great import- ance that children be vaccinated early in life ; but it seems to me that the importance of vaccinating children under one year old has been too much advocated, and it is not without very strong reasons and much thought on the subject that I put forward this opinion, opposed as it is to the best authorities in England, and to the views again and again expressed by the Heads of my Department in their annual reports on Vaccina- tion ; but my experience has led me to the belief, which was arrived at sixty years ago in some parts of Germany, that children under one year old are less susceptible to small-pox and vaccination than children over that age. In Bavaria, this belief has in a measure regulated the period of life, stipulated by law, at which vaccination must be practised. The law in that country since 1807 (Bavaria was the first country in which vaccination was made compulsory) compels all children to be vaccinated be- tween the 1st of May and end of July who were born in the previous calendar year ; i. e., excepting such as are ill and unfit for vaccination ; there must, therefore, be a large number vaccinated above one year old. In the &quot;blue book&quot; on the history and prac- tice of vaccination, presented to both Houses of Parliament in 1857, Mr. Simon, in a note at page XXXII., thinks that the full susceptibility to small-pox is developed most in the second and third years of life ; and I presume that susceptibility to vac- cination is also greatest at the same time. But I am absolutely certain that the susceptibility to vaccination increases from birth to three years of age. When I examine on the eighth day after vaccination the children of a village among whom there is a number of infants under one year old, there is certain to be a considerable proportion of them requiring re-vaccination, whereas those above one year old seldom fail to be successful on the first vaccination. Again, the &quot;insertion success&quot; is very much less among very young infants than among children of two or three years old. Take, for instance, twenty children under one year old20 this date) the vesicles, or their cicatrices, on the arms of nearly fifty thousand persons ; and as I have invariably made it a rule to see several days' lymph of each Vaccinator when I have been examining his work, I have seen in the fifty thousand a large number with the vesicles on the arms on the eighth day after vaccination. During this experience, I have often noticed that infants of only a few months old are less susceptible of vaccinatian than older children ; taking this in conjunction with the lesser susceptibility to small-pox also, it appears to me to be unnecessary to urge very strongly the vaccination of infants under one year old. As a rule, in Sind the people do object, though not much, to vaccinate very young infants, except when small-pox is present, and then they bring them readily to be vaccinated, although only a few days old. For statistical purposes, I am of opinion that our present Vaccination Form should have three columns of ages,21 Government and local Vaccinators, in whose returns there is a percentage of 1.17 unsuccessful. Nothing which I could write in praise of the care with which the Vaccinators operate could add to this. In no part of the world is it excelled by more than a fraction of percentage, and in few parts of it equalled. The very high rate of success which has obtained in Sind for the last ten or eleven years is, I consider, due to,22 on glass, has often struck me as being unusually great. I have noticed in Lower Sind that, immediately the sea breeze gets soft in the hot months of July, August, and September, when the wind blows from the sea, the difficulty is much lessened, and in the cold months it entirely disappears. 14. Small-pox was spread and kept going for some months in the Mahomed Khan's Tanda District by several inoculators, and there is some reason to believe that it was propagated in another district. Among the rural part of the population there was very little small-pox. In several towns, the larger portion of whose inhabitants are Hindoos, there were severe outbreaks; for instance, in the towns of Manjanda and Nowshera. The first information which I received of the existence of small-pox in Manjanda was on the 24th ultimo, and three days afterwards Jettah Mull com- menced vaccinating there. He has informed me that the disease has existed for the last eight months in that town; that there had been 182 attacks and 44 deaths, or 24.2 deaths in every 100 attacks ; and that not one of the hundred and odd children whom he vaccinated there last year had been attacked. I will not comment on the carelessness or indifference of the Mooktiakar, in not reporting to me the exist- ence of small-pox at the commencement of the outbreak. I could then, as easily as eight months later, have sent a Vaccinator at once to Manjanda ; but while I will not comment on such apathy, I may, and do, regret the frightful waste of human life resulting from it, and I regret it the more the more I think of the thinnesss of our population. The inhabitants of Manjanda are chifly Hindoos, and are undoubtedly themselves chiefly to be blamed, for had they chosen they could all have been vacci- nated last year when Jettah Mull was working there. In the town of Nowshera, whose inhabitants are also chiefly Hindoos, there has been a good deal of small-pox, and it is still difficult to get the inhabitants to submit their children to vaccination. In both towns the disease is reported as having disappeared. I have just received information of a considerable outbreak of small-pox in Larkhana District, in which I have four men at present, who at once commenced operations at the several places where the disease has appeared. The affliction of the contumacious Hindoos is still a living evidence of what this province would suffer from small-pox, were it not for the bene- ficent protection of vaccination enjoyed by the vast majority of the population under fifteen years of age. The following shows the number of monthly returns in which small-pox was reported in the districts named:23 Larkhana, 2 months. Broke out in November, chiefly in the town of Larkhana. Sukkur, 2 do. Chiefly in the town of Sukkur. Thurr and Parkur, 1 do. Very few cases. It may seem strange that, with so many Vaccinators, small-pox should have existed so long in a few districts ; but the difficulty of getting Hindoos in the larger towns to vaccinate their children, is the sole reason of the disease continuing so long in Nowshera, and in Mahomed Khan's Tanda it was kept up by variolous inoculators. I would also notice that I have now more certain information of the disease than formerly, as I have more Vaccinators to give it in their weekly and monthly reports. As soon as ever a Vaccinator knows of the existence of small-pox any where in his talooka, he goes at once to vaccinate at its seat. On the whole, then, I do not think there was more small-pox in the province last year than there generally has been in years preceding it. To enable me to take immediate measures to prevent small-pox from spreading, I would beg to suggest that a proclamation be issued from the office of the Commissioner in Sind, directing all Revenue and Political Officials, from the highest down to the tappidars, to communicate direct, and at once, any outbreak of small-pox to the Superintendent of Vaccination. I would also beg that a sufficient number24 &quot; also reported that inoculation had also been practised in the villages of Khuda Bux &quot; Gharro, Juro Wasan, Mitto Koso, Rawut Koso, Mussoo, Kashkeli, and Moobarak &quot; Koso. After seeing the inoculated children in these villages, Kowrah Mull request- &quot; ed the Mooktiakar to stop the inoculators from inoculating. On receiving Kowrah &quot; Mull's report, I directed the Head Vaccinator to proceed to Mahomed Khan's &quot; Tanda District to investigate into the affair thoroughly, and to report to the District &quot; Office as well as to me. He went to Mahomed Khan's Tanda District, and, after &quot; making full inquiries, reported that no less than seven men had been inoculating &quot; in that district; he further informed me that some vaccinated children had been inocu- &quot; lated with small-pox virus without any effect, and even some unvaccinated children &quot; did not take small-pox after being variolously inoculated. In the village of Phar- &quot; kara, the Patel told the Head Vaccinator that they preferred vaccination to inocula- &quot; tion, and that for six years they had no cases of small-pox until the inoculators were &quot; brought by Allahdad Nizamoni and Shukul Koso, when they were driven to inoculate &quot; for fear of their children catching the disease naturally from those who had been vac- &quot; cinated, and they have since written to me to get inoculation prohibited. The names &quot;of the inoculators are Kaki Mashakhpots, resident of Yusuf Mashakhpots ; Ibrahim, &quot; Tahir, Ahsan, and Yusuf, all of the same caste and village ; Bachel, already men- &quot; tioned and Mahomed Khan Lagari, resident of Lall Buksh Lagari. The seven &quot; inoculators inoculated children in the following villages : Gayandar Koso, Umeed Ali &quot; Thine, Adreez Hallapots, Abdoola Thejo, Lall Buksh Lagari, Kyro Dal, Wassee &quot; Wasan, Mitto Wasan, Meer Mahomed Nizamoni, Kyro Talpoor, Pharkara, Bachel &quot; Hallapot, Shukul Koso, and in some other villlages which the Head Vaccinator did &quot; not visit. On receiving Hassah Mull's reports, I sent the whole of the papers to the &quot; Deputy Collector of Mahomed Khan's Tanda, with a request that he would put a stop &quot; to inoculation (but previous to this the Mooktiakar, at Hassah Mull's request, called &quot; these inoculators before him and admonished them). He put a stop to the practice, &quot; and took the permission to carry arms away from Allahdad, Jagheerdar, for encourag- &quot; ing the practice of inoculation in his jagheer ; and he explained to the inoculators &quot; that Government could not permit of the dangerous practice of inoculation being con- &quot; tinued.&quot; I can add nothing to the foregoing, except to say that I can see no good reason against making inoculation penal in Sind, seeing there are now plenty of Vac- cinators to protect the people by vaccinations. The only real difference which I can see between a death caused directly or indirectly by inoculation and one caused by an assassin, is, in the former case, the absence of intention to kill. I believe the penal code takes intention and malice into greater account than the actual result of an act. This, no doubt, is the correct moral view, and is the general principle on which criminal codes are formed ; but in the case of inoculation, the maintenance of this principle is so inex- pedient, that the common sense of Europe has comdemned it, and, if I am not mistaken, inoculation has been made penal in some other parts of India. I would only just observe further, that it was in Mahomed Khan's Tanda District that a man, by name Boodhoo, was convicted and punished for inoculating in 1866, but the conviction was
25 quashed by the Sudder Court on the ground of illegality. To the release of Boodhoo I attribute the boldness of the inoculators in the same districts in 1867. 16. My annual tours seem so much alike that I feel half disposed to omit writing a resum of last year's ; but I feel that it is due to my establishment to do so, for without it I cannot well show how I appreciate the work of the individual Vacci- nators whose vaccinations have been inspected. With this excuse I proceed, and will be as brief as possible. At the opening of the year under report I was in the Larkhana District ; there I examined the work of General No. 27 (Luchmon) in three tappidarates of the talooka of Larkhana, and in one tappidarate of the Lubdarya Talooka, and found it very satisfactory; his lymph was good, and records were true. Some work of Peer Bux was also seen, which he did when learning his work under Luchmon. Luchmon has been longer than any other man in the establishment,26 was, at the time of my visit, employed in Oobaoro Talooka, his work was more particu- larly tested in three tappidarates of that talooka. I find in my notes that &quot; he has done excellent work, and the marks are exceedingly good. The Oobaoro Talooka was gone over last year (1866) by General No. 285, so that there are few children to vaccinate, and nearly all under one year old. There have been some cases of small-pox in the town of Oobaoro. I saw one case. I dare say this influenced the people to have so many very young children vaccinated. I have told Allah Bux to vaccinate the town of Oobaoro, sharp, to prevent the disease from spreading.&quot; His records were true, and I had every reason to be satisfied with such good work by so young a Vaccinator. In the same talooka, some old work of General Nos. 165 and 285 was looked at, and the marks found to be very good. In the talookas of Gotekee, Syudport, and Roree, General No. 79 (Suroop Sing's) vaccinations were found to be excellent in every respect. In the town of Roree I saw two children with good vesicles, who had been vaccinated at the Dispensary. Here I saw His Highness the Meer of Khyrpoor's Vaccinator, who in- formed me that vaccination is progressing most favourably in his His Highness' territory. Leaving the Roree District I passed through the Khyrpoor State, and on the 1st of March encamped at the boundary town of Kotree in the Khandiara Talooka, in Nowshera District. Here the recent vaccinations of General No. 108 (Mehur Chand) were examined, and his records tested in the usual way, by calling over the names from the nominal roll; his lymph was good, records true, and work satisfactory. Some old work of General No. 114 was also looked at, and the marks were excellent ; twenty-four children who had been vaccinated by Purtab Rai in a village were also seen to have good marks. When at Hallani on the 2nd March, I received instructions to stand towards Kotree, to be in readiness to relieve Assistant Surgeon Colvill of the Civil Surjeoncy there. I accordingly marched down as rapidly as possible, and received temporary charge of the duties of Civil Surgeon at Kotree from Assistant Surgeon Morton, who in the meantime had relieved Mr. Colvill. I took charge on the 11th March, and after about two months delivered over charge to Dr. Williams. About the end of March I went down the railway to Joongsbaie, to meet the Commissioner, to speak to him about the inoculators in Mahomed Khan's Tanda. During the month of April, the Kotree Municipality's Vaccinator's lymph deteriorated so much that I had it replaced. In May I examined some work of General No. 142 (Chellah Ram) in Fazl Khan's Tanda Tappidarate, in Doaba Talooka; the lymph was good, but there were a few errors in his register; for instance, one name entered twice. I informed him that such errors must not occur. In the month of June the work of General No. 77 was examined in the Bheem Tappidarate of the Kotree Talooka, and his lymph, notwithstanding the heat, was as good as I ever saw in my life. Jettah Mull is an old Vaccinator, and, under all circum- stances, always has good lymph and well formed vesicles. He has in my time often been found fault with ; but I will say, that, as a Vaccinator, he is unsurpassed, or even equalled, by very few. I was much satisfied with his work, and his records were true. In the month of July I examined General No. 148 (Lalloo's) work in
27 the tappidarate of Muthari, in Halla Talooka, and in the tappidarate of Mussoo Tanda, and found it well done, his lymph good, and records true. This Vaccinator's work is always excellently done, and wherever there is any difficulty to get over, I have only to send Lalloo to overcome it. He ingratiates himself with the people wherever he goes, and is always hailed by the villagers among whom he works, with every expression of good-will and friendship, although only an humble and illiterate man as compared with the Amils (Hindoo Moonshees) of my establishment; still I look on him as the type of what a Vaccinator ought to be,28 very good, and his records correct. After completing the examination of Mehur Chand's work in the Sukkrund Talooka, I proceeded to Nowshera Talooka to inspect the work of Purtab Rai, which I found very unsatisfactory: his lymph was all deteriorated; I made him abandon it, and ordered him to go over again, after getting good lymph, the whole of the preceding month's work, to re-vaccinate all children whose marks he should find imperfect. Taking Purtab Rai with me, I crossed the Indus and entered Sehwan Districts, and in the Dadoo Talooka inspected the work of General No. 250 (Wuttun Mull). This Vaccinator, about three weeks before my visit, had taken lymph from Purtab Rai, and, as a matter of course, it was also deteriorated, yet it was better than Purtab Rai's ; in fact, one day's was tolerably good. Without delay, I went on to Sehwan, and there inspected the lymph of Rughu Mull, and found it excellent; from it I gave Purtab Rai a good supply of lymph in vesicles on a boy's arms, which he took across to Nowshera District. I also charged some capillary tubes from it, and sent them by Rughu Mull to Dadoo, to start good lymph for Wuttun Mull. I was very much displeased with Wuttun Mull for not reporting the deteriorated condition of Purtab Rai's lymph. Rughu Mull's work was very satis- factory, and his records correct. At the town of Sehwan I saw two children who had been vaccinated by Mr. Apothecary Pollard. He said that he had great difficulty in get- ting the Hindoos to submit their children to be vaccinated. Rughu Mull had vaccinated sixteen children in the town of Sehwan, and he confirmed Mr. Pollard's statement regarding the difficulty of getting children to operate on in the town. From Sehwan I again crossed the Indus, and came into Nowshera District, where some more recent work of General No. 108 (Mehur Chand) was examined, and found to be everything I could desire. Returning to Old Halla, I saw there a few children who had been vaccinated at the Dispensary by Hospital Assistant Daniel since my previous visit. 17. During the year under report the work of General Nos. 27, 294,286, 285, 79, 108, 142, 77, 148, 199, 250, and of local Vaccinators Peer Bux, Kishen Chand, Allah Bux, Purtab Rai, Chandiram, and Rughu Mull was closely examined, and their records were closely tested. The work of General Nos. 114, 165, and 78 was examined, but records were not tested ; as also was the work at the Dispensaries of Roree, Alliyar- ka-Tanda, Sehwan, and Halla: total, 20 Vaccinators, 4 Subordinates in charge of Dispensaries, and one Municipality's Vaccinator's work was examined by myself. Hassah Mull, 1st Assistant Superintendent, examined the work and tested the records of General Nos. 165, 142, 195, 77, and of local Vaccinators Chandiram, Rughu Mull, Chellah Ram, and Ramzan: total 9 Vaccinators' work. He also inspected the lymph at Mahomed Khan's Tanda, Alliyar-ka-Tanda, and Sehwan Dispensaries. He travelled 1,200 miles, and examined 1,400 recently vaccinated persons in 87 villages. Assoo Mull, 2nd Assistant Superintendent, examined the work and tested the records of General Nos. 246, 295, 165, and of local Vaccinators Tejoo Mull, &quot;Walliram, Sookanund, Rughu Mull, Rama Chund, and Sotaldas : total 9 Vaccinators' work in- spected. He also inspected the lymph at Tatta and Meerpoor Buttora Dispensaries. He travelled 2,088 miles, and examined 2,453 vaccinated persons in 273 villages. Thus
29 myself and Assistant have travelled 5,441 miles and inspected 12,464 vaccinated persons in 695 villages during the past year. Every Vaccinator's work has been examined except one, and the work of several Vaccinators has been examined more than once. 18. Neither myself nor the two Assistants discovered a single instance of falsifi- cation of records, although 8,671 names were called from the Vaccinators' Registers. 19. The means of obtaining statistics regarding small-pox do not at present exist in this province: without a system of village registration, or perhaps a system of registration in each Deh, it will be impossible to get any thing like even approximately correct statistics of births and deaths, or of any diseases. However, as I said in my Report for 1863,I may say more emphatically again, that the faces of the younger part of the population are living proofs of the benefits of vaccination ; and the pitted faces, the blind, the halt, and the lame among the older, affords ample evidence of how small-pox ravaged the country in years gone by. And again, the remarks which I have made on the outbreak of small-pox in the Hindoo town of Manjanda, where there died about 25 per cent. of the people attacked, still show how deadly small-pox is. 20. The conduct of the Vaccinators has been generally very good ; still I have had to find fault with two for working with deteriorated lymph. One was dismissed the service for being absent from his talooka without leave. No complaints were made against any Vaccinator during the past year, except one ; and as Major Trywhitt has not yet completed the investigation into it, I will only say that it refers to a Vaccinator not having paid enough to the parents of two children taken for vaccination purposes from their own to other villages. The foregoing gives, I trust, a fair account of the progress of vaccination, and of the working of the Government and Local Vaccination Establishments, in Sind. KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.30 1. Three Government Vaccinators were dismissed during the year for misconduct ; the places of these have been filled up by men who have been instructed under my personal superintendence. 2. One acts as Carkoon to the Superintendent, a duty which he performs remark- ably well. He has taught himself English, never having been to school, and he reads and writes it well. He has the entire conduct of the Gujerathi correspondence, which is very considerable, and requires an intimate acquaintance with the various districts of the province. He receives no remuneration beyond his pay of 20 rupees per month, with which he is obliged to support his family, and keep a tattoo, which is absolutely necessary for him when accompanying me on a tour of inspection. 3. The other seven Government Vaccinators have performed 7,829 operations, which is 1,200 in excess of last year, but still falls far short of what they ought to perform. I see in last year's Report that the average of vaccinations performed by each man in Sind is more than double that done in this district, but there I believe each man gets batta when travelling, while here they get no allowance beyond their their monthly pay, which is not sufficient to make them care much about the Service. 4. The percentage of success is put at much too high a figure. I have never seen any work so good except that of the Station Vaccinator, who only brings the successful cases for my inspection. I have endeavoured to impress on them the fact that a case cannot be considered successful unless two well-marked cicatrices at least remain. 5. Five of them have been instructed in filling capillary tubes, and the other two have been summoned to Rajkote for the same purpose. 6. Chiefs' Vaccinators.31 to have this effected previous to his departure, and had called upon many of them to appoint Vaccinators. In a letter which I addressed to Colonel Keatinge in May, on the subject of Vaccination, I proposed that a general fund should be established to which every Chief should subscribe, and the payment and entire control of the Vaccinators should be intrusted to the Superintendent; to this, however, the principal Chiefs would not consent. They agreed to appoint as many Vaccinators as were necessary, and to give the control of them to the Superintendent, but they must be the Chiefs' servants, and paid by them. Still I think that my proposition might be carried out with regard to the petty Chiefs, most of whom now pay nothing ; every Chief pos- sessing fifty villages might be called upon to appoint a Vaccinator, while those with less could pay a subscription according to the extent of their territory. 12. With regard to the superintendence of these men, Colonel Keatinge sug- gested that four Assistant Superintendents should be appointed, each on a salary of Rupees 50 per month, to be paid by Government, and the Government Vaccinators now employed to be discharged. This plan would no doubt increase the returns considerably, which would look very well on paper, but I question if real vaccination would be much advanced by it, owing to the difficulty of finding really trustworthy men to fill the office of Assistant Superintendent; and I believe that nothing can supply the place of personal inspection by the Superintendent, who, if he takes an interest in the subject, and is well supported by the Political Agent, will be able to inspect the work of almost every Vaccinator in the course of the year. 13. There are three principal States in Kattiawar; of these Bhownuggur employs eight Vaccinators, one of them called a Superintendent. I have not yet been able to visit any of these districts ; I was on my way there in November when recalled to camp. To judge from the monthly returns, the work is not carried on with diligence ; but I believe the Durbar has every wish that it should be so, and will give every assistance. 14. Joonaghur employs three. I cannot report favourably of the work done by these men, one of whom was formerly in Government employ, and is now infirm from paralysis, and unfit for much work. The Durbar has never given me any assistance, but, on the contrary, the Karbaree at Joonaghur refused to help me at all when on my tour of inspection in April, and said it was not the custom to have the children inspected ; and the head man at Kotiana, another large town, would not assist me at all. The consequence is, that the Vaccinators do much as they choose, and I have very little control over them. This would doubtless have been remedied had Colonel Keatinge remained. 15. Nuggur formerly employed two Vaccinators, but, at the request of Colonel Keatinge, arrangements were made to increase the number to five, which is almost too small a number to carry on the work properly. At an interview which I had with the Chief, in company with Captain Hebbert, Assistant Political Agent, in the month of
32 May, it was agreed that four new men should be entertained, and they were to be sent to Rajkote for instruction in the monsoon, the Chief expressing his willingness to do everything in his power to have the process thoroughly carried out in his territory. I accordingly wrote for the men in June, but they did not come until November ; this delay was caused by the principal Karbaree, Bhugwanjee Kurrumjee, 33 being successful. Having received orders to take charge of the 17th Regiment N. I., I returned to camp on the 28th. My tour of inspection has thus been confined to little more than four months, the greater part of that in the hot weather; I have therefore been able to inspect only a very small part of the province. 17. The lymph that is at present in use was introduced from England in January 1867, on points ; one small vesicle resulted, from which the lymph has been propagated and distributed to all the Vaccinators. I have twice received tubes and points sent for by myself, and once, in December, from Government; all these have failed. A small vesicle rose from that supplied in December, but the lymph was not of a good character, and has not been used. 18. Small-pox has prevailed to a great extent in the past year, principally in the earlier part, but many of the cases that I was shown were not small-pox at all; the majority of the children in the villages suffer during the hot weather from some form or other of eruptive disease. Nevertheless the disease has undoubtedly committed great ravages during the year. REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent.34 detect any fictitious names. There were many errors, however, both as regards the age of the children and result of the operation. In future returns, I have no doubt, the age and result will be more accurately recorded. The percentage of children vaccinated in the Punch Mahals last year, under one year of age, was rather more than 62, but this year the returns only show a per- centage of little more than 53. This number is exaggerated, however, as, from notes taken by me while on tour, I found that only 47 or 48 per cent. of children were under one year at the time of vaccination. The figures, of course, vary in the differ- ent districts, so that by leaving out the work done by the assistant at Jahalad, they rise to nearly 60 per cent. of operations under one year of age. The assistant at Kalole (who is one of the best Vaccinators), according to his returns, operated on 89 per cent. under one year, but the errors in his returns amounted to 12 per cent. The real percentage therefore is only 77, which, however, is very creditable, considering the district in which he has to work. As the Patels and Talatees, under instructions from Mr. Propert, Agent to the Governor, are now keeping lists of the children, and in other ways assisting the Vaccinators, the people in the more civilised parts of this Circle seldom object to their children being vaccinated in infancy. In Dohud, as vaccination from door to door completely failed this year, the work was solely carried on by means of the Talatees' list, and in that way almost all the children vaccinated (about 200 in number) were operated on when three months of age. In the large towns these lists are very imperfect, and always will be so until some attempt is made to register the births. The number of successful cases was exaggerated, but not to any great extent. In February, I inspected the work of the assistants in Jahalode and Loonawara. After inspecting the work of Jethalal Gunputram (General No. 253), Dohud, who always works well and diligently, I resumed my tour in November. Owing to the difficulties encountered by the assistant in Soonth, I was under the necessity of going there instead of proceeding in the opposite direction as I had intended, and on the way again spent some time in Jahalode with Pursotum Dayaram (General No. 279). He had been working well, and the result was everything that could be desired. From Soonth I went to Loonawara, and after examining the work of assistant Vaccinator Chuggun Roopchund in that State, I proceeded to Ballasindore, and inspected his work there. His lymph and cicatrices were, on the whole, good. I next examined the work of Balajee Purbharam (General No. 254), Godra, who is a very hardworking man, and was much pleased with the excellency of both vesicles and cicatrices. The work of Mahashunkur Cassiram (General No. 255), Kalole, was next inspected, and, as usual, was very good. At the close of the year I was in Halole examining the work of Gunputrow Ramchunder (General No. 262) : some of the cicatrices were very good, but others were indifferent. Fresh lymph was introduced. The conduct of all Vaccinators, with one exception, has been satisfactory. Purbha sunker Jeewunram, assistant in Barriah, after giving much annoyance and trouble,
35 sent in his resignation in the month of September. Mahasook Kudoojee, a candidate from the Northern Circle, was appointed to the vacancy, and joined in November. A few cases of small-pox occurred in the Dohud Districts during May and June, and in July one or two cases in Chota Oodeypoor were also reported. I met with no case of inoculation. The lymph throughout the year has generally been very good. Most of the Vaccinators have now learned to charge Husband's capillary tubes, and to vaccinate with the lymph thus preserved. The civil authorities have, as in former years, taken great interest in vaccination, and given every assistance in their power. PRESIDENCY DIVISION. Local Superintendent.36 Such of the Force as were vaccinated here gave us abundance of fresh vaccine lymph, with which we could vaccinate every one that applied for vaccination during some of the last months of the past year, but so soon as that source of supply was exhausted we were as badly off for lymph as ever, and it was the greater pity as this want occurred at the very time it was most needed, when, on account of the setting in of the small-pox season, the number of applicants for the operation began to increase. Nothing short of legislative enactment can meet this kind of emergency, and, in my humble opinion, it behoves the superior authorities to take the subject into their serious consideration. I am fully persuaded that if an enactment making it compulsory to get one's child vaccinated, and, when successfully vaccinated, to allow lymph from it, is passed, it will not meet with any serious opposition from any portion of the commu- nity on the score of religion, and this, in my humble opinion, is the only thing worth paying any attention to. My experience, and the experience of every officer of the Vaccine Department, has shown us, beyond any possibility of being deceived, the great eagerness and anxiety shown by almost all classes of the community to get their children vaccinated. The only drawback is in the insufficiency of good lymph wherewith to carry on the operations. Inconvenience and trouble are the only things that could at all seriously be pleaded by anybody against allowing lymph to be taken ; and, as matters at present stand, the rich and well-to-do people receive, as they consider it, as a matter of right all the advantages of vaccination without in the least partici- pating in the troubles and inconveniences necessarily attending upon it; for, secure in the knowledge of their being beyond the reach of any molestation from the Vaccinators, they can afford to laugh at their impotent attempts at securing a supply of lymph from the arms of their children. Should the poorer people be vaccinated in preference to these rich folks, they know that they have but to represent the matter to the superior authorities, who, they believe, cannot but take notice of what, appa- rently, is a great dereliction of duty on the part of the Superintendent. As it is, the richer and upper classes of the community have it all their own way, reaping all the advantages of vaccination at the expense of the poorer and lower classes. I do not see why the convenience of the rich, well-to-do upper classes should be respected more than that of the poorer, lower classes ; and as legislative enactment would go far to equalise matters and bring all to a level, it would establish vaccination on a sounder basis, which could not fail soon to extend its benefits over the entire length and breadth, not only of the City of Bombay, but of the whole Presidency; thus holding completely under sway, if not quite eradicating, the fell disease small-pox, which now annually numbers its victims by thousands, notwithstanding the best efforts of the superior authorities. During the past year we received from the different Superintendents of Vaccina- tion 144 charged capillary tubes, and had, in our turn, to supply lymph to different persons, the Abyssinian Field Force included, to the extent of 484 charged ivory points, 4 pairs of glasses, 121 capillary tubes, and 4 scabs. The subordinates have all steadily worked on during the period under report.
37 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. TANNA. One Vaccinator (Municipality's) under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. ATKINS. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........... 202 .... .... 195 96.5 1867 ........... 176 .... 26 103 58.5 Since last Report there has been a diminution of the number vaccinated by 26, caused by the Vaccinator being wanting in diligence and perseverance, so necessary in a town like Tanna, where there is much opposition. In June, in consequence of the small number vaccinated, the monthly numbers, never amounting to more than 20, and frequently being as low as 10, coupled with a large number of failures in those who were brought to me for examination, I was obliged to represent the conduct of the Vaccinator to the Inspector General, with the view to his being dismissed. Since that time no children were vaccinated till November last. The failures (10) this year have been caused in a great measure by the want of care in the selection of typical vesicles to vaccinate from, and also a large proportion (53) are reckoned amongst the &quot; doubtful,&quot; as they were not brought for inspection. Those vaccinated in the Police Corps have been included, as before, in the Civil Return. In January and February the lymph was very inferior, and new lymph had to be supplied from Bombay ; since then it has continued good, the vesicles well formed, running their natural course. It has had to be frequently renewed, on account of the habit of the natives scratching off the vesicles to prevent their being vaccinated from. Lately I have kept a supply in capillary tubes, which in my experience rarely fails. I have a Maratha learning to vaccinate ; he has begun to do it himself, and as soon as he commands average success I intend making him the Civil Vaccinator. He appears to be a willing lad, and one who I think is able to combat the prejudices of the natives.
38 Small-pox was prevalent in the months of November and December, which has made the Mussulman, Parsee, and Christian inhabitants more alive to protective influence; the Hindoos are still much opposed to it. RUTNAGHERRY. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. JOHNSON. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ......... 273 .... .... 217 79.5 1867 ......... 1,302 1,029 .... 1,008 77.4 I am glad to be able to report an increase in the number of children vaccinated during the past year, amounting to 1,029, over those of the previous year. This is to be attributed to the great zeal and activity exhibited by the Vaccinator, who has been unremitting in his attention to his duties, and has visited several villages within reach of Rutnagherry, and carried on his labours in those places until all the children have been protected. I have great pleasure in acknowledging the great assistance I have received from the Superintendent of Police, Major Johnstone, in getting the people to come forward to have their children protected, and in assisting to make the people aware of the advantages of having their children vaccinated. There seems to be a tendency towards the better appreciation of the good effects of vaccination among the people generally, and I have no doubt that, now it has been fairly started, it will become more popular every year. I consider the increase in the number of children vaccinated most satisfactory for the present, but at the same time think that the number ought to increase steadily year by year for some years to come, and have no doubt such will be the case as the people become more enlightened. I have no reason to complain of want of assistance from the authorities now; on the contrary, I have received every help I could expect, and the result is shown by the return. The Vaccinator has been most painstaking and diligent, and has shown more zeal and atttention to his work than is often witnessed.
39 VINGORLA. Senior Apothecary S. HANSON. Years. Total Vaccinated Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........... 119 .... .... 104 87.4 1867 ........... 151 32 .... 137 90.7 The total number vaccinated during the year 1867 was 151, being an increase of 32 on that of the previous year. Of these, 84 were male and 67 female children ; 23 were under one year, and 128 above that age. The successful vaccinations have been 137, or 90.7 per cent. on the total number vaccinated. The lymph and vesicles were good. No case of small-pox came under observation during the year. KARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. DAVIES. Years. Total Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........ .... .... .... .... .... 1867 ........ 308 308 .... 277 89.9 The above result dates from the 1st of April, as previous to that date no Vacci- nator was appointed under me ; occasional visits were made by a Vaccinator under the Superintendent in 1865 and 1866. Out of the total number vaccinated, 181 were males and 127 females ; 24 were under one year and 284 over one year of age. The number under one year is exceedingly low, and is accounted for by the fact that the parents object to the operation within the first year. I am glad to be able to state that the natives generally have not the aversion to vaccination that they showed a year or two ago, but there still remains a strong pre- judice in some classes, especially the Bhundarries. Considering this is the first start, and the population so scattered, as well as the general apathy of the natives, I think the work done is very fair. The quality of the lymph has been excellent, and the vesicles very charac- teristic.
40 SURAT. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. J. GANE (Acting). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........ 1,697 .... .... 1,535 78 1867 ........ 1,631 .... 336 1,395 85.5 During the year ending on the 31st of December 1867, 1,631 children of Surat were vaccinated, being a decrease of 336 compared with the last year : 871 were male and 760 were female children, of which 12 were Christians, 1,279 Hindoos, 244 Mussulmans, 35 Parsees, and 61 other castes. Under one year there were 891, and above one year 740 ; the total successfully vaccinated being 1,395, unsuccessful 84, and doubtful 152 ; the percentage of successful being 35.85. A large portion of the natives have a great objection to have their children vaccinated unless they are induced to do so by Police assistance ; some few bring their children for vaccination. I therefore beg to recommend that a permanent Police Peon may be sanctioned. BROACH. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon T. B. W. P. JOHNSTON (Acting). Years. Total. Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........... 974 .... .... 894 91.8 1867 ........... 1,226 252 .... 1,094 89.2 The number of vaccinations performed during the last year amounts to 1,226, showing an increase of 252 over that of the previous year. Vaccination is constantly carried on in the City and surrounding neighbour- hood, and the Vaccinator informs me that the people generally appear anxious to have it performed. As far as I am able to judge, the Vaccinator appears attentive to his duties, and the lymph is of good quality.
41 POONA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major R. G. LORD, M.D. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ......... 1,699 .... .... 1,378 81.1 1867 ......... 2,022 323 .... 1,736 85.8 The Returns show an improvement, both in numbers and percentage of success, over the preceding year. &quot; The City of Poona was, in communication with the Municipal and Police author- ities, divided in February 1865 into three vaccinating charges, the smallest of which, in the immediate vicinity of the Civil Hospital, was given to the Civil Station Vaccinator, the other two being provided for by Vaccinators employed and paid by the Munici- pality. &quot;The population of the Peits or Wards (six in number) intrusted to the Civil Vaccinator is, according to the Mamlutdar's return, 12,323, in addition to which the Vaccinator also works in the Civil limits, and, when required, attends at the houses of officers and others in Civil departments residing in the Military lines. He does not carry on vaccination in the Sudder Bazar, or among camp followers living within Cantonment limits, that being the duty of the Vaccinator under the Military Staff Surgeon. &quot; The numbers of vaccinations performed by the Civil Station Vaccinator according to last three annual Reports, completed to 31st December each year, were42 AHMEDNUGGUR. Two Vaccinators under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. T. DANN, B. A., (Acting), one under Government, and one under the Municipality. Establishment. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease, Government .... 1866...... 1,080 .... .... 940 87.0 1867...... 993 .... 87 90S 91.4 Municipal ...... 1866...... 566 .... .... 491 86.8 1867....... 735 169 .... 669 91.0 It affords me much pleasure to indicate, what may be observed from the returns, a considerable increase (166) in the number of vaccinations during the year 1866 over those of 1865, and an increase of 182 in the number of operations in the year 1867 as compared with the preceding year. It is also noteworthy that the percentage of suc- cessful cases of vaccination has gone on. steadily increasing, being 79.9 in 1865, 86.9 in 1866, and 91.2 in 1867. There is a considerable increase in the number of vaccinations effected by the Municipality Vaccinator this year as compared with last year's return, 566 vaccinations having been effected by him in 1866 as compared with 735 during the year 1867, thus showing an increase of 169 in the latter year. It is obvious that he is becoming better known and liked by the inhabitants. There has been a decrease of 87 in the number of vaccinations effected by the Civil Surgeon's Vaccinator during 1867 as compared with 1866 ; the employment of two labourers in a field where there was formerly only one may help to explain the decrease. At the Civil Hospitals the number of cases, 126, showed an increase of 5 as contrasted with the preceding year, while the number of cases vaccinated among the Police and in the Jail show an increase respectively of 63 and 33, the gross total for the year 1866 being 1,817, while that for 1867 was 1,950, thus indicating an increase for 1867 of 133 cases. In the month of January seven cases of small-pox occurred in the Police Lines, four of whom had been previously vaccinated ; all the cases were mild ones, and all recovered. During the month of January small-pox was epidemic ; cases occurred at Bhingar and at Nuggur. Vaccination was actively carried on at both places, as also among the Police, when the disease broke out. Towards the end of the month of November three cases having occurred in the Lines of the 3rd Dragoon Guards' camp followers, and one case in the Lines of the 16th, I instituted a house-to-house visitation by Vaccinators, and had every unprotected person within Cantonments vaccinated. Those vaccinations are included in the above, and were effected by the Civil Surgeon's and the Munici- pality's Vaccinators. I have much pleasure in testifying to their ability, industry, and energy.
43 SATTARA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. V. CARTER, M.D. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........ 1,611 .... .... 1,536 95.3 1867 ........ 1,344 .... 267 1,270 94.5 During the year under review a decrease in the number of operations as com- pared with the previous year, 1866, is observed, but many more children were vaccinated than in 1865. In the Report for this last-named year reasons were given which appeared to explain the sudden diminution of operations then noticeable ; these being, first, the establishment of District Vaccinators (Municipal) ; and next, the non- prevalence of small-pox. It is satisfactory to state that, notwithstanding the continued operation of these two influences, the numbers vaccinated in Sattara are still consider- able,* thus evincing efficiency of this establishment, and probably a more enlightened disposition amongst the people. There has again been a singular absence in 1867 of the scourge small-pox amongst the inhabitants of this neighbourhood (as well as of cholera) ; hence a powerful stimulus to the extension of vaccination has been in a measure wanting. Yet the people are probably beginning to think and act for the future, seeing that by far the majority of vaccinations at the Civil Hospital are practised on children brought from a distance of many miles, sometimes twenty- five or thirty, and that not under the impulse of fear. * In 1865 . . . . . . 914. 44 and yet without something like entreaty many parents will not bring their children ; and they have often to be directly induced to carry out their promise to do so. In fact, the Peon is indispensable, and if not soon replaced here the number of vaccina- tions must necessarily diminish. SHOLAPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon C. F. OGILVIE, M.D. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866.......... 2,241 .... .... 1.753 78.2 1867.......... 1,655 .... 586 1,229 74.3 During the year under report the number of persons vaccinated was 1,655, of whom 887 were males, and 768 were females ; 666 were children under one year of age, and 989 were above that age ; 1,229 were successful, 185 doubtful, and 241 were unsuccessful. There is a considerable falling off in the number of operations, as compared with the previous year, when 2,241 children were vaccinated. This is owing to the Vac- cinator having been sentenced in the month of August to six months' rigorous impri- sonment in the Criminal Jail at Sholapoor for rioting; since that date the duties have been carried on by the Vaccinator attached to the Sholapoor Charitable Dispensary. During a residence of nearly six years at this station I have taken very great interest in this work, and it is therefore with much regret that I find the percentage of successful operations during the year under report amounts only to 74.3, and, including the cases returned as doubtful, to 85.4. This low percentage of success may be attributed to the want of care by the Vaccinator in selecting subjects for the operation; but, whatever is the reason, I am sure it is not attributable to the quality of the lymph, for in every instance, without any exception, where I have performed the operation, whether upon European or Native, it has been successful. There is, however, very little doubt that the natives here do not, as a rule, ap- preciate the blessing of this almost certain preventive against small-pox, otherwise the number of operations upon children under one year of age would be much greater than it now is ; and I feel convinced that until vaccination be made compulsory by law, as it is in England, upon children before a certain age, much more favourable results will not be attained.
45 DHOOLIA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon G. BAINBRIDGE (Acting). Year. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ............... 792 .... .... 694 87.6 1867 ............... 808 16 .... 710 87.9 My predecessor, Dr. Cates, has drawn up a Report upon the results of vaccination at this station during the first eleven months of the year. The total number vaccinated during the year is 808, of which 710 were success- ful and 59 unsuccessful, 39 doubtful and re-vaccinated; 630 of the total number of persons vaccinated were under one year old, and 178 above one year. The increase of cases vaccinated as compared with the previous year's results is 16, and the percentage of successful cases 87.9 ; of the persons vaccinated, 445 were males and 363 females. There is a great want of readiness among the inhabitants to submit their children to vaccination, and this unwillingness appears to exist chiefly among the higher castes. These people do not absolutely refuse to have their infants vaccinated, nor do they offer any argument against the operation, but they constantly procrastinate, and tell the Vaccinator that the next day and the next their children shall be produced, and sometimes go so far as to say that they have no children requiring vaccination, when such is not the case ; others refuse to allow lymph to be taken from their children's arms. I have written officially to Mr. Sheppard, the Collector and Magistrate of Khandeish, requesting him to cause a register of births and deaths in this town to be instituted, and to furnish me with a copy of the same each month. I believe such a register would assist in bringing under our notice the infants requiring vaccination. The assistance at the disposal of the Assistant Vaccinator to help him in collect- ing the cases under treatment is totally inadequate, and I have no doubt that were we to have permanent servants to assist us, a large number of people would be brought forward for vaccination. Shaik Emam, the Vaccinator, has been most assiduous in the performance of his duties, and has given complete satisfaction. Vaccination Report for 11 months, from 1st January to 30th November 1867. &quot;Being about to leave the station, and the year having nearly expired, it becomes my duty to draw up a brief Report of Vaccination, during the period already elapsed,
46 for the information of my successor and for embodiment in his annual Report. During the eleven months under review the total number of persons vaccinated has been 739. Of these, 402 were males and 337 females; 587 were under one year old, and 152 above that age ; 647 are returned as successful, 55 unsuccessful, and 37 as doubtful, showing a percentage of successful cases of 8.75, which is almost identical with that for the whole year of 1866. &quot; As regards these results, though there is no falling off as compared with the pre- vious year, yet I cannot look upon them as quite satisfactory in a large town like Dhoolia. The same difficulty has been experienced in collecting children, and afterwards getting them brought for inspection, as was alluded to in my last Report; and the difficulty is now likely to be enhanced, in consequence of the Vaccinator, in accordance with a late Resolution of Government, having lately lost the services of the Peon who formerly assisted him. I have written, through Dr. Wright, to the Inspector General on this subject, so I need not enter into it again here. A great desideratum, in my opinion, is some efficient system of registration of births in the town, a copy of which register, if kept, might be sent monthly to the Civil Surgeon for his information for vaccination purposes, and it was my intention to have addressed the Collector officially on this subject. &quot; The lymph has been of good quality, producing characteristic vesicles, and has been several times supplied to neighbouring stations. &quot; The Vaccinator, Shaik Emam, has given me entire satisfaction in the perform- ance of his duties.&quot; NASSICK. One Vaccinator under Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. SUMMERS. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........ 763 .... .... 621 81.4 1867 ........ 1,079 316 .... 3,029 95.3 I have the gratification of reporting very favourably upon vaccination carried on during the year just expired. The return exhibits a very large increase in the number operated upon, namely, 1,079, an increase of 316 compared with the previous year. Of the numbers operated upon, 584 were males and 495 females, and the result was
47 1,029 successful cases, 32 unsuccessful, and 18 doubtful. This result was brought about from a Peon being detached throughout the year to assist in this operation, enabling the Assistant Vaccinator to operate more frequently and more extensively in the town, and seeing almost every case operated upon, even those from neighbouring villages, who generally attended at the Civil Hospital. I reported last year that small-pox and measles prevailed for three months in 1866 amongst the African children at the Sharanpoor Institution. I am happy to report that during the past year both it and the town of Nassick enjoyed an immunity from epidemic in any form. I feel it my duty to bear testimony in a highly favourable manner to the zealous attention to his duties evinced by the Assistant Vaccinator during the past year; his operations, carried on more extensively, showed a praiseworthy result. BELGAUM. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. C. THORP, M.D. (Acting). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ............. 612 .... .... 595 97.2 1867 ............. 803 191 .... 759 94.5 There are two Vaccinators in this town, both able men ; the one paid by the Municipality,* and the other by Government. By the above Report the Government Vaccinator has operated on 803 individuals during the past year, and the Municipal Vaccinator, by the Dispensary Report, on 746. Thus in this town, and the surrounding villages of the township and Shapoor, 1,549 persons have availed themselves of the pro- phylactic in the past year. By the annual return for 1866 of my predecessor the total number vaccinated was 1,335 ; the increase of 214 is satisfactory, and proves that the prophylactic is appreciated. The Government Vaccinator has, besides the above, vaccinated in the Sudder and Cantonment Bazaar 130, and in the Lines of the Garrison and detail 55, making a total of 1,734 vaccinated by these operators during the year 1867. * This Vaccinator's work is shown by the Superintendent of Vaccination, Southern Circle, along with that of other Municipal Vaccinators under him.
48 DHARWAR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon M. M. MACKENZIE. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 .......... 597 .... .... 491 82.3 1867 .......... 635 38 .... 548 86.3 The accompanying Return of vaccination for the year 1867 shows the number to have been 635, or an increase of 38 over that of the preceding year; the percentage of success being 86.3, while the preceding year it stood at 82.3 : of the whole 635 548 proved successful. The greatest number vaccinated in any one month was 74, in February; then followed March, April, and May, giving respectively 63, 61, and 56. As to caste, 462 were Hindoos, 160 Mussulmans, 11 Christians, 1 Parsee, and 1 of other caste. Sex.49 During the past year the number of vaccinations performed by the Station Vaccinator in the City of Kolapoor, with the whole of the villages of the Petta Kurveer, amounts to 1,751, which is more than that of the year preceding by 77, and less than the average of the 5 preceding years by 476. Of the total number vaccinated in the year under report 880 were males and 871 females; 401 were children under one year, and the remaining 1,350 were above that age. The percentage of the successful cases has been 99.3. The monthly average number of vaccinations performed has been 145.9. The average for the previous five years gives a decrease of 476 cases, whereas that exhibited in the previous year under this head amounted to 793, thus showing that there has been a considerable improvement in the state of vaccination for the year under report. During the year a few isolated cases of small-pox occurred in four villages of the Kurveer Petta, namely, Kulumba, Negwa, Nundgaum, and Kunary, but the disease was never reported to have shown itself in an epidemic form. The lymph in use has been of good quality, and has not failed. Lymph was supplied, as usual, to the Camp, and to some of the Vaccinators serving under the Superintendent of Vaccination, Southern Circle, when required. The Station Vaccinator was diligent and attentive to his duties, and his conduct, on the whole, has been satisfactory. The annual Vaccination Return of the Dispensary is also annexed, from which it will be seen that 246 cases vaccinated during the year have proved successful; this number is greater than that exhibited in the previous year's return by 21 cases. The vesicles have always presented the normal character of the vaccine pock. AHMEDABAD. Two Vaccinators under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major J. PIRIE, M.D. (Acting). Two Vaccinators under the Municipality. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ........ 5,619 .... .... 5,505 96.8 1867 ........ 4,273 .... 1,416 4,153 97.2 Compared with the previous year, there has been a considerable decrease in the total number of vaccinations for the year that has just closed, in which 4,273 were performed, and in the preceding year 5,689, showing a diminution of 1,416. But 7 v
50 though there has been this unexpected falling off, the results have been more favour- able, as the percentage of success was 97.2, and for the previous year 96.8. The failures were 81, and 39 doubtful. So that in respect of protective influence the work done has been a fair average. The total operations of each of the two Vaccinators for the year respectively were 1,883 and 2,390, exhibiting a difference of 507, which is to be attributed to the circumstance that in the district of one Vaccinator small-pox was prevalent, and there- fore the inhabitants of that part of the city were awakened to the prophylactic benefits of vaccination. As regards sex, 2,235 were in males and 2,038 in females, and, as Dr. Wyllie observed, this preponderance in females is a hopeful sign of the increasing care for the protection of female offspring. In respect of age, 2,804 were under one year and 1,469 over one year. In each caste there has not been much difference in the total vaccinated, but there has been an increase in the Parsee section. The greatest number of vaccinations were effected in the months of April, May, June, and July, when numerous cases of small-pox occurred, which doubtless caused the people to seek for the protective power of vaccination; as, on the other hand, when fever, bowel com- plaints, and chest affections prevail, parents are averse to submit their children for operation, though the Vaccinators visit the dwellings to meet their convenience. The least number vaccinated in one month was 302, in September, and the highest 423, in June. The lymph has continued good and efficient, the vesicles well formed, clean, and distinctive, and supplies have been kept up and furnished to the Cantonment and out- stations. Small-pox and measles were frequent in March, April, and May, and a few isolated cases in January, July, and September ; 50 deaths were reported. As the population of this large city is fluctuating, and sometimes there is a large immigration from the neighbouring States, small-pox is no doubt imported, and but for the agency of the Municipal vaccine establishment the disease would widely spread and the mortality be great. Inoculation has been discontinued altogether in Ahmedabad; and, except that the people are backward in bringing forward their children, no obstruction to the propa- gation of vaccination appears to exist. After being operated on, parents frequently con- ceal their children, as they imagine that taking lymph from the vesicles impairs the successful result. Though the work done by the Vaccinators has fallen considerably below that of the previous year, Dr. Wyllie bears testimony to their industry and zeal. I regret I am unable to give a fuller report from personal observation of the vaccination for the past year, as I only received charge of the Civil medical duties in the early part of December last.
51 KAIRA. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. COOK, M.D. (Acting). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ......... 668 .... .... 590 88.3 1867 ......... 867 199 .... 764 81.1 The total number of cases of vaccination for the past year has been 867, show- ing, I am happy to say, an increase of 199 over the total number of operations during the preceding year ; of this total all but 76 have been among children under one year old ; 521 were males, 346 females. The great majority of cases were necessarily among the Hindoo population, among whom 782 operations were performed, 57 cases were among the Mussulmans, 27 among unspecified castes, and one among the Christian community. No Parsee individual was submitted to the operation ; but this section of the community is exceedingly limited in Kaira, and they are, as a rule, exceedingly averse to the operation. With regard to the result, that has, I consider, been very fair, the return showing only 26 unsuccessful cases, while 77 are set down as doubtful. A great deal of want of success is attributable to the carelessness of the parents, who do not take sufficient care of the vesicle while it is being developed, as they take little trouble to guard it from irritation, or prevent the child from destroying it altogether. The work of the Vaccinator is, of course principally performed in the town of Kaira, but it is not absolutely limited to it, as he goes to villages in the immediate neighbourhood when subjects in the town itself are scarce ; and in this way he is fre- quently able to maintain the supply of lymph, when he would otherwise be almost sure to lose it if confined to the town alone. Some improvements have been introduced in his system of work. One hindrance which formerly existed has now been removed: formerly when he went to the town on his business he was given a Peon at random by the Municipality to assist in collecting the children, and this was found to cause serious delay and difficulty ; but now, by an arrangement made with the Collector, it is ordered that the same Peon should attend him always; consequently he knows where to find the recently vaccinated and the unvaccinated children without delay.
52 The character of the lymph and vesicles has been very good throughout the year, and the vaccination has been satisfactorily performed. The supply of lymph has been continuous and abundant. The children vaccinated have been inspected at intervals of about a month's duration throughout the year, and the result was in all cases satisfac- tory. The inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood are now well acquainted with the benefits of vaccination, and willingly submit themselves or their children to it, and, with the exception perhaps of the Parsees, I do not think that there is any con- siderable number who entertain any serious objections to the operation on the ground of caste or similar prejudices. As to the beneficial results of the operation, I may say that there has been no epidemic small-pox here for a long time; and although I have no doubt isolated cases do occur here and there, they cannot be very numerous, as I have never had to prescribe for one, nor have I seen one during my residence here ; and, as well as my memory serves me, I do not think I have seen during the past year a single case where any one has borne the recent marks of the disease. I do not think that inoculation is now ever practised here, as I have never heard of a case, though I have frequently made inquiries on the subject. RAJCOTE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon A. M. BLOMFIELD (Acting). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ............. 1,646 .... .... 1,507 91.6 1867 ............ 999 .... 647 940 94.1 Of the number entered in this return the greater part have been vaccinated in the town of Rajcote and in villages. These will in future be kept separate, under the head of Chief's Vaccinators. The percentage of successful cases is much higher than anything I have inspected, and I question if more than two out of three are really successful in the first vaccina- tion.
53 KURRACHEE. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon N. HOPKINS (Acting). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 .......... 3,167 .... .... 2,988 94.3 1867 .......... 3,411 244 .... 3,265 95.6 From the above table it it will be seen that there is an increase of 244 people vac- cinated during the last year over 1866, and of 297 over 1865, and of 1,447 over 1864, which is a fair criterion that vaccination is increasing, and that the prejudice against it is in a great measure overcome in Sind; and I think that most of those parents who leave their children to grow up unprotected do so from indifference, and from no particular prejudice against it. Of the number vaccinated most were quite children54 The results of the past year show a decrease of 320 compared with the previous year. This is owing to the work of the Assistant Vaccinator being now confined to the town of Hydrabad, Giddoo-ka-Tanda and Fullellee being provided for by the Super- intendent of Vaccination. Vaccination is performed in my presence at the Charitable Dispensary twice a week, but some people refuse to send their children there, and the Vaccinator is in such cases allowed to vaccinate at their own houses. Three cases of variola were admitted to the Civil Hospital during the year ; but the disease has not been prevalent, and these patients were adults over twenty-five years of age. SHIKARPOOR. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon S. DUCKERING (Acting). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866.......... 1,435 .... .... 1,377 95.9 1867.......... 1,490 55 .... 1,434 96.2 A few cases of small-pox were admitted into the Civil Hospital and the Dispensary: the disease was of a mild character. A few cases also occurred in the town. The lymph continues very good. KOTREE. One Vaccinator (Municipality's) under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. WILLIAMS, M.D. (Acting). Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 .......... 654 .... .... 548 83.8 1867 ......... 893 239 .... 810 90.7 Of the above 893 cases 420 were vaccinated in the town of Kotree, and 473 in the Kotree District, where vaccination is also carried on under the Superintendent of Vaccination for Sind. There are 36 doubtful cases ; i. e., cases that were not in-
55 spected after the operation. If the doubtful cases be divided in proportion to the successful and unsuccessful ones, the percentage of successful cases will be raised to 94.5, which perhaps would be nearer the truth than 90.7. The lymph had to be changed once or twice during the year. The Vaccinator seems very zealous in his work, but complains of the reluctance of the people to allow their children to be vaccinated, and that he is not at times assisted by Peons or Police Officers. I have represented this to the authorities, who promise that every assistance shall be given. There are rumours occasionally of small-pox, but we have great difficulty in ascertaining the truth, for whenever inquiry is made concerning the existence of small-pox the inhabitants invariably deny it, apparently from fear of vaccination being enforced upon them. Once in the hot season there occurred a few cases of small-pox in Kotree, but I have not seen any since, excepting in a Sowar of the 3rd Sind Horse, who was admitted into hospital with small-pox when the regiment was marching through Kotree. KUTCH. DORABJEE HORMUSJEE, G.G.M.C. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 .......... 1,139 .... .... 944 82.9 1867 ........... 705 .... 434 592 83.1 During the last year 705 vaccinations were performed at the Dispensary and in the district of Kutch. It shows a falling off of 434 operations when compared with those of the year 1866, but still an excess by 99 over those of 1865. Of the 705 subjects, 344 were males and 361 females; of which 254 were under one year of age, and the rest (451) above it; 590 were successful, 87 unsuccessful, and 28 doubtful. Vaccination during the last year was not conducted at all satisfactorily, in consequence of great opposition experienced both from the people of Bhooj as well as those from the districts. For the last two months vaccination could not be carried on at the Dispensary, as the lymph was not kept up, in consequence of the few cases that were available at a time, and even those not being able to preserve the vesicles intact. In the case of those that were vaccinated it was only with much trouble and difficulty. In the districts belonging to His Highness the Rao, the Vaccinators every now and then met with great opposition, but this was removed by orders from His Highness bringing them to their right senses; but in the districts belonging to the Bhyats vaccinating was
56 altogether out of question, as the greatest opposition was met therein. With the exception of one caste, the Borahs, the people generally are averse to vaccination, but are greatly in favour of inoculation; for I observed, during the epidemic of small-pox that broke out last year, that numbers of them flocked to the inoculators, even at the sacri- fice of some money, but none of them, except the Borahs, of their own accord resorted either to the Dispensary or to the Vaccinators. I have received similar reports from the Vaccinators in the districts. The people are impressed with the idea that of those inoculated not one ever dies from small-pox; hence they are found ready to have their children inoculated. but show great opposition to vaccination. They cannot be made to understand that by inoculation they are carrying the contagion to their very doors, and placing those who are unprotected in even greater danger. I have no doubt that the epidemic raged very violently because inoculation was practised to a great extent. Unless, therefore, inoculation be made criminal or punishable by law, and vaccination be made compulsory to some extent, it is not unlikely that another epidemic may break out with equal violence. ADEN. One Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. W. JAMES, M.D. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1866 ......... 799 .... .... 610 76.3 1867.......... 628 .... 171 416 66.2 The returns for the last year show a decrease of 171 in the number vaccinated as compared with 1866, and for this three causes are to be assigned ; viz., a smaller number of liberated slaves brought to Aden by Her Majesty's Ship &quot; Highflyer &quot;; the absence of any epidemic of small-pox, the sole incentive that prompts the apathetic inhabitants to submit to vaccination; the failure in the supply of lymph during a part of the year. Her Majesty's Ship &quot; Highflyer&quot;, during the end of the year, was the only vessel that came to Aden for adjudication of captured slaves. She had only a small number of slaves, and I am glad to say that they were free from variola. 42 cases of epidemic small-pox were admitted between January and August, the greatest number (10) occurring in March. The type, though confluent, was not so
57 virulent as last year, the mortality being only 26.6 per cent. of the number treated in the Small-pox Hospital. The supply of lymph was well kept up till the end of May, when it failed. On the 22nd of May 5 children were vaccinated, but of these three were taken away to the inte- rior, after the parents had satisfied themselves, on the fifth day at the Hospital, that the vaccination had succeeded; from the fourth the parents refused to allow the lymph to be taken; and the fifth was unsuccessful. On the 29 th, 6 more children were vaccinated from lymph that had been kept between glasses and points, but they did not succeed. In July, however, fresh lymph from England in tubes was employed successfully, and at the date of this Report it continued in use. The character of the lymph was good. Vaccination from child to child is the only certain way to ensure success in a climate like Aden. The conduct of the Vaccinator has been good. Statistics of Small-pox during the year 1867. Number. Total number of cases of small-pox during the year .................. 45 Of the total number were vaccinated .................. In infancy .. .. In after-life .. .. Of this died of small-pox when vaccinated .......... In infancy .. .. In after-life .. .. Of the total number were unprotected ........................... 45 Of this died of small-pox ........................................ 12 Total deaths from small-pox out of the total number of cases ............... 12 8 v
APPENDIX.
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERIN Table showing the Number and Names of the Circles, and their Superintendents; the with those of last Year ; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste Number of Operations performed by Number. CIRCLES. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vaccina- tors attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. 1866. Increase. Decrease. 1 CENTRAL ....... Assistant Surgeon P. S. Turnbull, M.D ...... 36 71,037 61,543 9,494 .. Assistant Surgeon E.H.R. Langley, A..B.(Actg.) *9 4,120 213 3,907 .. 2 SOUTHERN ........ Surgeon H.Day, M.D. ............................ 29 39,525 40,948 .. 1,423 *9 6,941 7,229 .. 288 3 NORTHERN...... Dr. Muncherjee Byramjee Colah (Acting) .... 33 68,282 69,085 .. 803 *2 1,253 57 1,196 .. 4 SIND .............. Surgeon J.Pinkerton, M.D. ................... 17 33,821 44,126 .. 10,305 iii No. I. TENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. Number of Vaccinators employed; the Total Vaccinations performed and compared Age, and Result; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated ; and the Average each Vaccinator, for the year 1867. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Successful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussalmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 36,366 34,671 64,033 2,966 21 11 4,006 20,496 50,541 68,130 1,488 1,419 95.9 1,973 2,359 1,761 3,608 430 6 1 75 1,923 2,197 3,508 331 281 85.1 458 21,040 18,485 34,401 2,198 227 .. 2,699 6,310 33,215 37,754 809 962 95.5 1,363 3,753 3,188 6,156 652 16 2 115 2,267 4,674 6,477 291 173 93.3 771 36,539 31,743 58,301 5,409 6 232 4,334 45,527 22,755 63,293 1,820 3,169 92.7 2,069 656 597 917 307 .. .. 29 799 454 1,176 48 29 93.9 626 18,661 15,160 4,522 26,456 1 .. 2,842 11,572 22,249 32,353 353 1,110 95.6 1,989 12,020 9,834 2,422 18,100 1 .. 1,331 6,642 15,212 21,022 297 535 96.2 1,681 4,202 3,627 6,954 681 .. .. 194 3,107 4,722 7,550 186 93 96.4 978 4,031 3,936 7,487 380 .. 3 97 4,231 3,736 7,373 374 220 92.5 1,593 6,279 4,706 7,402 1,617 966 766 234 5,072 5,913 8,428 1,179 1,378 76.7 1,831 145,906 127,708 196,203 59,196 1,244 1,015 15,956 107,946 165,668 257,064 7,181 9,369 94.0 1,638 Local Vaccination.
iv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS Table of Vaccination through the Agency of Native Chiefs, arranged according to for the Number. CIRCLES and STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vaccina- tors attached. Total number Vaccinated, Compared with last year. 1866. Increase. Decrease. 1 CENTRAL ....... Assistant Surgeon P. S. Turnbull, M.D. ........ 2 1,668 953 715 .. V No. II. AND OTHERS IN NATIVE TERRITORY. the Circles of Vaccination and Stations, and showing Details as in Table No. 1., year 1867. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Successful to Number vaccinated. Average number of Persons vaccinated by each Vac- cinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 977 691 1,617 42 .. .. 9 831 837 1,417 123 128 84.9 834 10,641 9,331 18,436 1,020 151 .. 365 5,407 14,565 19,033 553 386 95.3 799 10,857 9,696 17,379 1,475 .. .. 1,699 11,424 9,129 18,376 1,221 956 89.4 1,713 1,409 1,120 560 1,924 1 .. 44 813 1,716 2,297 191 41 90.8 2,529 17,470 14,576 27,160 4,646 .. .. 240 11,513 20,533 29,807 1,494 745 93.0 1,068 2,696 2,663 5,016 264 .. 5 74 2,318 3,041 5,054 216 89 94.3 893 344 361 361 344 .. .. .. 254 451 590 87 28 83.7 235 44,394 38,438 70,529 9,715 152 5 2,431 32,560 50,272 76,574 3,885 2,373 92.4 1,049
vi TABLE VACCINATIONS UNDER Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according to Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vaccina- tors attached. Total number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1866. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1 PRESIDENCY ........ Tanna ...................... * 1 176 202 .. 26 91 85 Rutnagherry .............. 1 1,302 273 1,029 .. 795 507 Carwar .................... 1 308 .... 308 .. 181 127 Vingorla ................... .. 151 119 32 .. 84 67 Surat ..................... 1 1,631 1,967 .. 336 871 760 Broach ................. 1 1,226 974 252 .. 747 479 Alibaugh .................. .. 200 226 .. 26 125 75 Bandora .................. .. 93 98 .. 5 58 35 Coorla ..................... .. 77 69 8 .. 42 35 Oorun ..................... .. 102 58 44 .. 70 32 Callian .................. .. 104 63 41 .. 60 44 Bhewndy ............. .. 78 .... 78 .. 47 31 Dapoolie.............. .. 123 .... 123 .. 71 52 Sawunt Warree........ .. 58 .... 58 .. 52 6 Honore .......... .. 59 192 .. 133 39 20 Total ................. 5 5,688 4,241 1,447 .. 3,333 2,355 2 POONA ................. Poona .................. 1 2,022 1,699 323 .. 1,289 733 *1,389 .. 1,389 Ahmednuggur ....... 1 993 1,080 .. 87 640 353 * 1 735 566 169 .. 452 283 Sattara ................ 1 1,344 1,611 .. 267 767 577 Sholapoor .................... 1 1,655 2,241 .. 586 887 768 Dhoolia .............. 1 808 792 16 .. 445 363 Nassick ..................... 1 1,079 763 316 .. 584 495 Belgaum ........................ 1 803 612 191 .. 459 344 Dharwar ..................... 1 635 597 38 .. 360 275 Kolapoor .................... 1 1,751 1,674 77 .. 880 871 Total ............... 10 11,825 13,024 .. 1,199 6,763 5,062 3 NORTHERN ...... Ahmedabad .............. * 2 4,273 5,689 .. 1,416 2,235 2,038 Kaira .................... 1 867 668 199 .. 521 346 Rajcote .................. 1 999 1,646 .. 647 584 415 Dholka .............. .. .... 513 .. 513 .... .... Veerungaum.......... .. .... 495 .. 495 .... .... Ahmedabad (Dispensary) .. 8 .... 8 .. 5 3 Total ...... 4 6,147 9,011 .. 2,864 3,345 2,802 * Municipal
vii No. III. CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. Division, and showing the Details as in Table No. I, for the year 1867. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Success- ful to number Vaccinated. Number of Persons vacci- nated by each Vaccinator. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Caste. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 124 7 37 7 1 54 122 103 20 53 58.5 176 1,296 6 .. .... .... 564 738 1,008 117 177 77.4 1,302 160 50 95 2 1 24 284 277 27 4 89.9 308 136 8 7 .... .... 23 128 137 9 5 90.7 .... 1,279 244 12 35 61 891 740 1,395 84 152 85.5 1,631 803 361 1 61 .... 569 657 1,094 19 113 89.2 1,226 113 64 3 .... 20 75 125 180 13 7 90.0 .... 56 15 22 .... .... 10 83 64 16 13 68.8 .... 19 17 33 8 .... 45 32 35 24 18 45.5 .... 68 25 2 6 1 28 74 70 7 19 74.5 .... 39 40 7 8 10 51 53 88 5 11 84.6 .... 28 38 .. 6 6 46 32 38 23 17 48.7 .... 86 35 2 .... .... 35 88 123 .... .... 100.0 .... 24 30 4 .... .... 6 52 46 11 1 79.3 .... 43 2 14 .... .... 12 47 51 6 2 86.4 .... 4,274 942 239 133 100 2,433 3,255 4,715 381 592 82.9 929 1,556 330 58 78 .... 1,368 654 1,736 119 167 85.8 2,022 715 185 30 3 60 654 339 908 51 34 91.4 993 609 91 7 .... 28 364 371 669 39 27 91.0 735 1,244 62 12 .... 26 553 791 1,270 15 59 94.5 1,344 839 544 6 .... 260 666 989 1,229 241 185 74.3 1,655 603 86 2 .... 117 630 178 710 59 39 87.9 808 858 51 25 .... 145 619 460 1,029 32 18 95.3 1,079 633 164 6 .... .... 338 465 759 24 20 94.5 893 462 160 11 1 1 255 380 548 74 13 86.3 635 1,707 44 .. .... .... 401 1,350 1,740 6 5 99.3 1,751 9,226 1,717 157 82 643 5,848 5,977 10,598 660 567 89.6 1,183 3,412 819 15 24 3 2,804 1,469 4,153 81 39 97.2 2,136 782 57 1 .... 27 791 76 764 26 77 88.1 867 784 197 .. 5 13 435 564 940 39 20 94.1 999 .... .... .. .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .... .. .... .... .... .... .... .... ..... .... .... 5 .... 2 .... 1 2 6 8 .... .... 100.0 .... 4,983 1,073 18 29 44 4,032 2,115 5,865 146 136 95.4 1,000 Vaccination. 9 v
viii TABLE Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vacci- nators attached. Total number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1866. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 4 SIND ............ Kurrachee ............ 1 3,411 3,167 244 .. 2,024 1,38 Hydrabad ............ 1 1,702 2,022 .. 320 917 78 Shikarpoor ........... 1 1,490 1,435 55 .. 805 68 Kootree ............. * 1 893 654 239 .. 516 37 Kurrachee (Dispensary). .. 116 2,344 841 .. 67 49 Sukkur ix No. III.x TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATED DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Number of Vaccinators. Total number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1866. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. No. 1. Vaccination under Superintendents in British Territory by Government Establishment .... 134 239,446 236,964 2,482 .. 127,118 113,328 Do. do. Local and Municipal Do.... * 33 34,168 31,093 3,075 .. 18,788 15,380 No. 2. Ditto ditto and others in Native Territory 79 82,832 74,743 8,089 .. 44,394 38,438 No. 3. Ditto under Civil Surgeons, &c., &c...... xi No. IV. FOR THE YEAR 1867. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Successful to Number vaccinated. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 183,100 39,707 1,221 1,012 14,406 96,315 143,131 224,881 6,214 8,351 93.9 13,103 19,489 23 3 1,550 11,631 22,537 32,183 967 1,018 94.2 70,529 9,715 152 5 2,431 32,560 50,272 76,574 3,885 2,373 92.4 20,557 7,833 434 282 1,625 17,218 13,513 27,872 1,464 1,395 90.7 1,907 2,147 98 39 47 1,851 2,387 3,765 246 227 88.8 289,196 78,891 1,928 1,341 20,059 159,575 231,840 365,275 12,776 13,364 93.3 and twenty Municipal Vaccinators. Municipal Vaccinators.
xii TABLE No. V. TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1867, arranged according to Ages, whether performed under or above One Year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under one year. Above one year. Under. Above. I.xiii ESTABLISHMENTS. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under one year. Above one year. Under. Above. III.xiv TABLE No. VI. EMPLOYMENT RETURN OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1867. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendents. Assistant Surgeon P. S. TURNBULL, M.D. xv SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Spuerintendent.xvi KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendents. Surgeon E. R. BUTLER, M.D. (Absent in Europe). Assistant Surgeon A. M. BLOMFIELD, M.D. MONTHS. Number of Stations visited. Distance travelled. Number of travelling days. Number of Children inspected. SUMMARY OF REMARKS. January . . . . .... .... .... .... February . . . . .... .... .... .... March . . . . 2 88 5 266 6 Villages visited and inspected. April . . . . . 12 158 20 1,190 28 do. do. May . . . . . . 12 180 18 721 16 do. do. June . . . . . . 6 89 9 369 9 do. do. July . . . . . . ..... .... .... .... Monsoon. August . . . . .... .... .... .... September . . .... .... .... .... October . . . . 6 89 11 437 12 do. do. November . . 8 134 17 531 22 do. do. December . . .... .... ..... .... Total . . 46 738 80 3,524 REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent.xvii TABLE No. VII. CASTES IN WHICH VACCINATION WAS PERFORMED. Castes. Number Vac- cinated. Christian . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,928 Hindoo . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289,196 Mussulman . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78,891 Parsee . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,341 Other Castes . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20,059 Total . . . . 391,415 BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA.
( xix ) No. 1813. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 30th September 1868. Letter from the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, No. 1739, dated 25th May 1868( xx ) performed on children under one year, viz., 159,575, and that on children above one year, viz., 231,840, is nearly as 41 to 59, which also indicates some improvement over the preceding year, when the ratio between the respective numbers of children under and above one year operated on was as 37 to 63. The number of males vaccinated being 210,378, and that of females 181,037, the relative proportion between the sexes, which in round numbers is 54 of the former to 46 of the latter, appears to have been much the same as usual. 3. From paragraphs 3 to 12 of the report, Government observe that, owing to the withdrawal of some of the Superintendents in consequence of the exigencies of the service, the supervision in some parts was not as com- plete as might be wished. But His Excellency in Council acknowledges with satisfaction the good progress made notwithstanding these difficulties. At the same time Government agree with the Inspector General in &quot; the necessity there always is for active and unbroken supervision.&quot; 4. The results given in paragraphs 15 and 16* of the report are very interesting. Number vaccinated. * 15. Exclusive of vaccination performed in military cantonments, the total numberoperated on during the year amounted to 391,415, being an increase over the previous year of 11,918. This must be deemed most satisfactory ; for if the vaccination of the Bombay Presidency is practised in a population of about sixteen millions, it may be computed that the births annually may average four hundred and eighty thousand. If, however, of these one-seventh die before the period when vaccination is performed, there will remain about four hundred and ten thousand to be vaccinated; so that if the present rate was continued there would probably not be more than twenty thousand who year by year would go unvaccinated in this Presidency. It is true that the number has only gradually risen to the amount shown, so that a considerable number are arrears from former years ; nevertheless, there can be no doubt the general results are most satisfactory, and would be more so could the actual state of population be ascertained, and more Vaccinators employed where shown to be required. Cost of vaccination. 16. As far as can be ascertained, the average cost of each successful vaccination to Govern- ment, in Government Circles, is five annas and seven pies ; increased vaccination will bring this down still further, except in the city of Bombay, where, should compulsory vaccination be introduced, the private practitioners should be remunerated, as in England and Scotland, for each certified successful case.
( xxi ) 5. In paragraph 17* of the report the average number of operations performed by each Vaccinator during the year is stated to be about 1,827. This does not appear to be correct. The number of Vaccinators employed in 1867 being 270, and the total number of operations performed 391,415, the proportion performed by each Vaccinator cannot exceed 1,450 in round numbers. Increase. Decrease. Central . . . . . . 9,494 Sind . . . . . . . . 10,305 Kattiwar . . . . 1,266 Southern . . . . 1,423 Rewa Kanta . . 2,134 Northern . . . . 803 Presidency . . 2,119 15,013 12,531 Net increase.. 2,482 15,013 6. The greatest fluctuations in 1867 are observable in the Central and Sind Circles. The Governor in Council has read the report from the Central Circle with much inter- est, and the satisfactory result ex- hibited therein is creditable to the Officers concerned. From the report of the Superintendent in Sind, it appears that the total decrease in the British territory is 12,045, made up of that in the Government return, viz., 10,305, and in the local return 1,740, against which there is a partial set off in the increase in the Khyrpoor return, which is 1,554. The net decrease in the whole Province is reduced to 10,491. This consi- derable decline is to be regretted. 7. The returns of vaccination in the territories of Native Chiefs show an increase on the previous year of upwards of 8,000. This is, on the whole, satisfactory; but the Governor in Council observes that in Cutch the num- ber of operations performed in the year by each Vaccinator amounted to only 176. The Inspector General, however, urges, in paragraphs 23 and 24 of his report, that the general system under the Native States requires * 17. During the last seven years the number of Vaccinators employed and the amount of work have steadily, and pro rata, increased, as the following table will show :( xxii ) considerable amendment, and, as the course necessary for perfecting the existing system, recommends (paragraph 25) that the Vaccinators employed by all the Native Chiefs should, if possible, be placed under the control of the Superintendents of Vaccination, and receive there pay on the Super- intendent's certificates. In paragraph 26 the Inspector General shows the distribution of these States into the several Circles of superintendence. Be- fore passing any decision on this proposal, the opinion of the local Politi- cal Officers should be obtained, through the Political Department. With regard to the concluding portion of paragraph 7, the attention of His Highness the Khan of Junjeera must be directed, by the Political Depart- ment, to the advantages of vaccination, with an intimation that a Vacci- nator will be sent to his State, should he desire it. 8. Government observe with much satisfaction that twenty-five Vacci- nators were maintained by Municipalities. The progress made in this respect is gratifying, and the Right Honourable the Governor in Council trusts that the extension of the system will receive the countenance and support of all public Officers interested in Municipalities. 9. Government also observe that Vaccinators are paid out of Local Funds only in Sind, where they seem to render good service. This example might be more generally followed, and the Governor in Council requests that the Revenue Commissioners will draw the attention of the Local Funds Committees to the advantages of increasing the number of Vaccinators. 10. The remarks in paragraph 31 of Dr. Arnott's report on the accuracy of the returns are satisfactory. The attention of Superintendents should be drawn to those contained in paragraph 32. 11. Government observe with regret that in the Southern Circle the vaccination of infants makes so little progress. 12. The remarks of the Inspector General regarding the character of the Vaccine Lymph sent out from England are of great importance, and will be communicated to the Secretary of State, whose attention will be drawn to the fact that the Lymph sent out in tubes has alone been found to be useful. The quantity sent out is reported to be still insufficient, and the Inspector General should be asked to report what quantity has been received in the last three years, and how much will be required.
( xxiii ) 13. The Governor in Council notices with pleasure that the services of the Superintendents have met with the approval of the Inspector General. It is also satisfactory to see that the Vaccination Establishments meet with the support of the Civil and Political Authorities. 14. The services of Kishenchund, a local Vaccinator in Sind, who was sent to Khelat, seem to deserve the commendation bestowed on him in paragraph 57 of the Inspector General's report. It is to be hoped that the Khan may be induced to take further steps in the matter. 15. In paragraph 59 the Inspector General recommends that, in the absence of a system of compulsory vaccination throughout the country, certificates of successful vaccination should, when there is no evidence of protection by small-pox, be exacted from all candidates for Government employment; and states that this arrangement has been for some time carried out in Madras, and has recently been adopted in the North-Western Pro- vinces. Before passing any orders on this subject, the Governments of Madras and North-Western Provinces should be requested to favour this Government with copies of their proceedings in the matter, and the Com- missioner in Sind and Revenue Commissioners should be requested to favour Government with their opinion and that of the Collectors on the proposal. 16. The subjects brought forward in paragraphs 58 and 60 to 67 of the report, viz., raising the scale of the pay of Vaccination Superintendents to a par with that received by Officers in Medical charge of Native Regiments, the grant of travelling batta to the Vaccinators, and the appointment of Assistant Superintendents selected from among the Vaccinators themselves, should be separately submitted. 17. The report for 1868 will be submitted by the newly appointed Superintendent General of Vaccination. (Signed) M. J. SHAW STEWART, Acting Chief Secretary to Government.
No. 3811 OF 1868. To the SECRETARY to GOVERNMENT, General Department. SIR,am not aware whether Mr. Marson of the National Vaccine Institution, London, practices this precautionary test before supplying tubes to India, but I know that it is practised by Doctor Husband of the Royal Dispensary in Edinburgh. I think one lot of fifty tubes should leave England about the middle of October, and a second lot of fifty should leave England by the 15th December. These dates would enable the new lymph to be propa- gated in the cold season. 3. I would beg to suggest that one-half of each supply be obtained from the National Vaccine Establishment in London, and the other half from Doctor Husband of Edinburgh ; and I would further beg to suggest that each supply from London be divided into two por- tions, one to be sent in the ice box of the Peninsular and Oriental Company's steamer, and the other by post, and that the Edinburgh lymph be treated in the same way. 4. If these suggestions be acted on we will find outher Mr. Marson of the National Vaccine Institution, London, practices test before supplying tubes to India, but I know that it is practised by the Royal Dispensary in Edinburgh. I think one lot of fifty tubes and about the middle of October, and a second lot of fifty should leave th December. These dates would enable the new lymph to be propa- eason. eg to suggest that one-half of each supply be obtained from the National rent in London, and the other half from Doctor Husband of Edinburgh ; r beg to suggest that each supply from London be divided into two por- t in the ice box of the Peninsular and Oriental Company's steamer, and and that the Edinburgh lymph be treated in the same way. ggestions be acted on we will find outREPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1868 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1869.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1868. Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1869.
No. 2664 OF 27TH JULY 1869. From The INSPECTOR GENERAL, Indian. Medical Department, To The SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department. Sir,2 5. The highly satisfactory state of vaccination in the State of Sawunt Waree, as alluded to in paras. 6 and 19, shows how much the individual interest of an Officer can accomplish with even the smallest means. The success of Vaccination in this district must be most gratifying to Colonel Schneider, and commends itself to the notice of Government. 6. Dr. Pinkerton pronounces in para. 24 very favourably on the general truthfulness of the returns, and there can be no doubt that malpractices of this kind are now becoming rarer, owing to the searching tests employed by Superintendents and others, to the interest taken in the success of Vac- cination by the Civil authorities, and the general improvement which has taken place in the working portion of the Department. 7. It is impossible at the present day to speak with any accuracy as to the mortality arising from small-pox throughout the various districts of the presidency. In para. 25, this disease is shown to have visited, sporadi- cally or in the epidemic form, all the Circles, except in the Kattyawar Coun- try, where, apparently, the dread of the disease, which prevailed in the previous year, appears to have had the effect of causing parents to seek the aid of the Vaccinators. 8. Inoculation is reported to have been practised not only in Sind, but also, I regret to say, much closer to us, namely, in the Surat Zillah, where it is stated (para. 27) to be &quot;almost continually practised.&quot; The two Native States of Bunsda and Dhurmpoor are noticed as never having had a Vaccinator within their boundaries. It is stated that from these two States the Inoculators enter the Zillah. The remedy here would appear to be to interest these Chiefs in the subject, to have some of the Inoculators, if pos- sible, taught Vaccination, and then to entertain them as Vaccinators. 9. The prevalence of small-pox in the City of Bombay has been fre- quently noticed, and the introduction of a Vaccination Act is certainly most plainly called for; the subject of such an Act has been frequently before Government, and may be said to be now under advanced consideration. 10. The addition of five Vaccinators under Native States, namely, two by the Jam of Nownuggur, two by the Nawab of Joonagur, and one in the Sunkeira Mewas in the Rewa Kanta, and seven entertained by Municipa- lities, namely, Sangolee, Nassick, Indapoor, Bagulkote, Kulladgee, Panwell, and Malseerus is a most pleasing feature of the Report. I venture to think that an acknowledgment to the Chiefs and Municipalities, who have thus come forward, would be advantageous to the interests of Vaccination.
3 11.Vaccination paid for by Local Funds in Sind, calls for considera- tion, so successful has it proved; and I consider the Superintendent General's suggestions, as set forth in his para. 23, as worthy of consideration, when the Local Fund Act is brought into operation. 12.The state of the lymph in use throughout the Presidency is favoura- bly reported on. Supplies have been received in Bombay and Aden from England. At the latter place, Vaccination has progressed satisfactorily, and numbers of manumitted slaves have enabled the Medical Superintendent there to keep up a full supply. 13.The change recommended by Dr. Pinkerton in his para. 36, namely, that on the 1st of next January, the Sattara Zillah should be trans- ferred to the Central Circle (Mahratta-speaking,) from the Southern (Canarese-speaking,) and Kulladgee Zillah to the Southern Circle from the Central, to which it at present belongs, should in my opinion be carried out. 14.I would beg to state in conclusion that this, the first report of the Superintendent General, gives evidence that his appointment will be fol- lowed by much good in the Department, and I cordially endorse his commendatory remarks on the several Medical Officers mentioned in his para. 35. Since the Report was penned, I regret to state that the death of one of these, described as a most promising officer, (Assistant Surgeon Ffolliott) has been reported. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. WRIGHT, Inspector General, Indian Medical Department.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1868. This is the first Annual Report submitted by the Superintendent General of Vaccination. 2. The report consists of( iv ) dated 18th November 1863, and again confirmed in their Resolution No. 3378, dated 31st October 1868. The office establishment of the Superintendent General was sanctioned by the Government of India's Resolution, No. 2924, dated 20th October 1868. The pay of the Peons has been raised in the Presidency Circle from Rs. 7 to Rs. 10, and in the other Circle by one Rupee per mensem, pending the revision of the Vaccination Department, the proposal for which is now before the Government of India.* Superintendence. 5. The superintendence has been a good deal interfered with on account of the exigencies of the service, promotion, and sickness, as shown in the table below:( v ) Circles. Superintendents. REMARKS. No. Name. Rank. Name. 5 Sind.......... Assistant Sur- geon. J. Ffolliott ......... Took charge on the 25th August. Surgeon ............ J. Pinkerton, M.D. Held charge from the 1st January to 22nd May. Surgeon Major. J. Gilbert ......... Officiated from 22nd May to 7th August. Do. M. Style ......... Do. from 7th to 25th August 6 Kattiawar ... Surgeon ........... E. R. Butler, M.D. In charge the whole year. 7 Rewa Kanta. Assistant Sur- geon. J. T. Welsh, M.D. Do. 8 Presidency.. Sub-Assistant Surgeon. Anunta Chan- droba. Do. 6. In the Central Circle the Superintendent, Dr. Turnbull, for the first half of the year was on military duty with the army in Abyssinia, and in his absence Assistant Surgeon Langley carried on the office work, and also inspected some work done in the neighbourhood of Poona; he could not do more, as he held charge of H. M.'s 24th Regiment N. I., and could not absent himself from Poona camp. On returning from Abyssinia, Dr. Turnbull again took up his appointment on the 1st July, and carried on active superintendence until November, when he was compelled to proceed to Europe on account of ill-health, and the office duties were conducted by Dr. T. Miller, H. M.'s 4th (Rifles) N. I., until relieved by Assistant Surgeon Gordon on the 26th January 1869. 7. In the Southern Circle Surgeon Day resigned the appointment of Superintendent of Vaccination late in 1867, but continued to carry on the office work for the first three months of 1868. On his Regiment, 5th N. L. I., proceeding to Abyssinia, he handed over charge of the office to Surgeon Major Pitman, who officiated for about four months and a-half, until relieved by Assistant Surgeon Raby, who was appointed Superintendent on the 19th August. There was no active superintendence in this Circle until November
( vi ) Neither Dr. Day nor Surgeon Major Pitman could travel in the districts, as they each held charge of a Regiment in Belgaum. In consequence of the number of Jagheerdars' and Municipalities' Vaccinators, no Circle demands closer or more energetic and systematic superintendence than the Southern. 8. In the Western Circle there was no active superintendence until Assistant Surgeon Cody took up his acting appointment. For some years past this Circle was divided between the Superintendents of the Central and Southern Circles, and as regards regular superintendence has been almost entirely neglected, except as regards the State of Sawunt Waree, which forms a part of this Circle. In it the Political Superintendent, Lieutenant Colonel Schneider, has taken great pains to spread vaccination, and under his foster- ing care, vaccination has made great progress. When I was in the State, I examined two large schools, and this is the result:( vii ) August. Mr. Ffolliott took up the appointment on the 25th August, and commenced active superintendence about the middle of September. 11. In Kattiwar, Rewa Kanta, and Presidency Circles, the superintend- ence was uninterrupted. 12. The success of the Bombay system of vaccination depends in a great measure on steady and active superintendence. I know that the changes which occurred during last year were unavoidable, and I need do no more than express a hope that Superintendents will not be withdrawn from their vac- cination duties except under very pressing emergencies : and when, from any cause, a Superintendent has to leave his appointment, I trust his place will be filled up as soon as possible. Recommendations for improving the Department which were laid before Government during the year. 13. Since I was appointed Superintendent General of Vaccination, the Inspector General Indian Medical Department directed me to draw up in separate papers, for submission to Government, several recommen- dations for the improvement of the Vaccination Department, which had been previously laid by Dr. Arnott before Government in the last report, and which I may here put on record:( viii ) tors who have never before been well paid, will, I feel well assured, be grateful for the increase of pay, and will now value their places too well to carelessly risk the loss of them; previously many of them looked on dis- missal from the service as little or no punishment at all. The pay of the Peons having now been put on the same footing as that of Peons in the Revenue department, they also will remain content and not constantly seek to leave the Department. In some of the Circles it was becoming difficult to get Peons on the old rate of pay. I no longer apprehend any difficulty in obtaining good men to fill the places of Peons. I can scarcely express how great a satisfaction it is to myself and the Superintendents that Government has so liberally and readily granted the above boons, and I trust the Department will show by results that the liber- ality of Government is duly and thankfully appreciated. Number Vaccinated. 14. Notwithstanding the broken and irregular supervision by Superin- tendents, there was again an increase in the number vaccinated by the Circle Vaccinators in 1868, as compared with 1867, or any preceding year. This I consider very satisfactory. Working in Government Circles. 15. There has been an increase in the numbers vaccinated by Govern- ment Vaccinators in the Central, Southern, Northern, Sind, and Kattiawar Circles, and a decrease in the Western, Rewa Kanta, and Presidency. The increase and decrease in each Circle is here shown :( ix ) This increase is valuable, as it shows that the Government Vaccinators try to maintain and even exceed the amount they have hitherto annually done, and I hope it also shows that vaccination is being more appreciated. The number of the Government Vaccinators was the same as in the preceding year. The greatest increase was obtained by the Native Chiefs' Vaccinators, as shown below, in their Circles :( x ) Causes of decrease. 17. The decrease in the Rewa Kanta (460) and Presidency Circles (228) is too small to be attributed to any par- ticular reason; on the other hand the decrease in the Western Circle is large, 4,779, and is explained by the Superintendent in this way :( xi ) Name of Circle. Name of Chief. Number of Vaccinators maintained in 1868. Total. Central............... Raja of Aukulkote ........................................ 1 ( xii ) Name of Circle. Name of Chief. Number of Vaccinators maintained in 1868. Total. Brought over...... 22 39 Kattiawar( xiii ) Brought over ...... 10 CENTRAL CIRCLE( xiv ) Local establishment. 23. The local establishment of vaccination in Sind has maintained its position for usefulness. There was an increase of 1,758 in 1868, which is about the number of the decrease in the year preceding. The establishment consists of 13 Vac- cinators, and is the only one paid out of local funds. As soon as the new Local Fund Act comes into operation, I think it would be advisable for each collectorate to give an annual grant to increase the number of Vaccinators, and in other ways increase the efficiency of the Department, by the appoint- ment of Native Assistant Superintendents, to aid the European officers in guiding, supervising, testing, and controlling the work of the Vaccinators. Truthfulness of returns. 24. It affords me great pleasure to be able to state that the Superin- tendents have pronounced the returns to be generally free from any false names; some other kinds of errors have been, in several instances, noticed: as was stated in last annual report, one reason for no longer finding false names is the facilities afforded by capillary tubes for commencing work: but I am inclined to think the chief and best reason is that the Superintendents test Vac- cinators' work closely by calling over, from the registers, in the villages, the names of vaccinated children ; falsification cannot escape such a test. Only one Vaccinator was discovered in falsifying his returns, and he was in Kattiawar Circle, but the Superintendent does not say whether he was a Government or Chiefs' Vaccinator. Small-pox. 25. Small-pox occurred both sporadically and epidemically in all Circles except in Kattiawar, and the reason why Kat- tiawar escaped, may be owing to the prevalence of the disease in that Province in 1867. I have no exact information before me on the subject of small-pox, nor do I believe that such information is obtainable from any source whatsoever at the present time; years hence, when registration shall have been continued regularly, we may hope to obtain exact information. All the information I have is of the most general kind, and is of such little use that I think it barely worth recording. Still in order to complete, as far as I can, this report, I will briefly summarize the information contained in the reports received from Superintendents and others. In the Central Circle there were 47,236 cases of small-pox reported, of whom 1,848 had been previously vaccinated; of the vaccinated 8.7 and of the unvaccinated 9.5 died; but I apprehend that these figures are of little or no value, as other eruptive diseases must have been included, for such a low death rate among the unprotected is quite unknown, where exact information has been ob- tained. In those instances in which I have myself collected information, the
( xv ) death rate among unprotected has been from 20 to 25 per centum, and here it is only 9.5. In the Southern Circle the disease was epidemic in Beedee talooka in Belgaum collectorate, regarding which the Superintendent, from personal observation, says that the introduction of vaccination into Beedee talooka &quot; is attended with the greatest difficulty, owing to the prejudices and non-belief in its efficacy.&quot; The disease was also epidemic in some parts of Canara collectorate, but &quot;was not of long duration, nor has the mortality been reported as any way severe.&quot; Assistant Surgeon Raby, in his report, gives an instance where the inhabitants of a village noticed the protecting power of vaccination and eagerly brought their children to be vaccinated. He desired the inhabitants to mention the circumstances to all their neighbouring villagers. In the Northern Circle epidemic small-pox broke out at the end of 1867, and continued till the following rains. There is a table in the Superinten- dent's report showing when and where the disease existed, from which it ap- pears that this Circle was only free of small-pox during the months of August and October. It appears from reports that the disease did not pre- vail to any great extent except in the collectorate of Surat, and the Super- intendent attributes its continued prevalence there to the ignorant opposi- tion of the people to vaccination, and to the continued practice of variolous inoculation. He thinks small-pox not at all an evil, inasmuch as an outbreak of it does more to convince the people of the good of vaccination than anything else, and he gives the following instance in point. The town of Sarode is divided by a deep ravine, one side of which is inhabitated by Mussulmans, who had never accepted vaccination ; the other side is inhabited by Hindoos, who had availed themselves of it. When the disease appeared the unpro- tected Mussulmans suffered severely, while the protected Hindoos did not; this opened their eyes and the Mussulmans eagerly sought for vaccination, but so troublesome were they, that they would seldom allow of an inspection of the vesicles on the eighth day, or permit lymph to be taken from them. In Sind the disease has been sporadic throughout the year, but except in the towns of Roree and Sukkur it has not spread or caused much mortality. The disease was introduced into Roree from Bahawulpoor territory, and it appears that it was propagated in and around Roree by inoculation. The total cases were 300, and the deaths 31. It is very probable that a consider- able portion of the 300 were protected by vaccination, as vaccination has been steadily practised for 10 or 12 years back in both Roree and Sukkur, hence the small mortality. Dr. Butler, Superintendent of the Kattiawar Circle, says : &quot;I have neither heard of nor seen an outbreak of small-pox, although I have travelled 1,110 miles, and visited 132 villages;&quot; but he saw two children who
( xvi ) had been well vaccinated and had both subsequently suffered from severe small-pox a few years ago. Had they not been vaccinated, they would pro- bably not have lived for him to see them. In Rewa Kanta Circle an epidemic occurred in Halole in October and November, which caused several deaths. The disease was brought from the Guicowar's territory, where it was then prevalent. In the city of Bombay small-pox is always prevalent, and I can see no help for this while vaccination is not compulsory. In such a large city, into which strangers from all parts of Asia and Africa come, it must in the very nature of things exist as a permanent evil. Small-pox existed more or less at the following Civil Stations :( xvii ) would be unbecoming of me to again urge on the Government the advisa- bility of making inoculation penal, so shortly after their recent decision on the subject. In the Native States of Bansda and Dhurmpoor to the south of the Northern Circle, vaccination has never been regularly introduced, nor are any Vaccinators kept up in them. From these States inoculators enter the Surat collectorate and carry on their deadly work. Endeavours will be made to induce these States to employ Vaccinators. I have already communicated with the Governor's Agent on the subject, and perhaps he may be able to prevent inoculators intruding themselves into our territory, as well as be able to convince these two small States that it would be better to maintain Vac- cinators than foster inoculators. Total Vaccinations. 28. The number of vaccinations in civil life was ............. 426,253 and in the Army ................... 5,931 Total in Bombay Presidency... 432,184 but I will omit the army returns from the following calculations, as I have no previous returns to compare with those now submitted. Success. 29. There is an increase of 34,838 vaccinations in civil life as compared with the year 1867; this I consider highly satis- factory, and it is very creditable to the whole department. Of the 426,253 operations 398,988 were successful, 12,789 unsuccessful, and 14,476 doubtful,or in other words, 93.5 per cent. of successful, and 6.5 of unsuccessful and doubtful; this is about the same as last year. Sex. 30. There were 230,343 of males and 195,910 of females vaccinated, or 56 of the former to 44 of the latter. This dis- parity of the sexes exists in all Circles, and is about the same as in previous years. It is difficult to explain why the dis- parity is so great, and it is certain that the actual disparity of the sexes in the general population cannot be so great. I trust Superintendents, when test- ing records, will see that no errors are made in the columns for the sexes. Caste. 31. In table VII. the number of each caste shown and expressed in percentages is 0.5 Christians, 73.7 Hindoos, 20.5 Mussulmans, 0.3 Parsees, and 4.9 other castes. Age. 32 There were 177,276 under one year old and 243,978 above one year old vaccinated, or 41.1 of the former to 58.9 of the latter. This is nearly the same as 3 vac
( xviii ) in the previous year. It is of much importance to vaccinate as early in life as possible, but I do not think that a much higher proportion of infantile vaccinations than this can be obtained. It is probable that about 70 in every hundred persons vaccinated were under two years old. Cost. 33. I make out the total cost of vaccination in civil life to be in 1868 about Rupees 1,11,524, which gives Annas 4 and Pies 2 for each vaccination. In next report the expenditure will probably be larger, because Superintendents have in the current year held their appointments and the pay of the Vaccinators has been increased. In 1867 the average cost of each vaccination was stated to be Annas 5 and Pies 7, or 1 Anna and 5 Pies more than in 1868; this expenditure includes all establishments, Government, Native States, Local, and Municipal. Assistance from Civil Authorities. 34. The Superintendents warmly acknowledge the assistance that they and the Vaccinators have received from the Civil authorities, and to their aid is due in a great measure the increase of operations in the past year. 35. I think there is every reason to be pleased with the result of the year's operations. I would beg to commend to the favourable notice of Govern- ment the zealous exertions of Drs. Butler and Colah, and although Assistant Surgeons Ffolliott and Raby have not been long in the department, yet their exertions are also very praiseworthy. Mr. Anunta Chandroba has also been most active and zealous at the Presidency, where he has many difficulties to contend with. I regret the temporary loss of the able services of the Senior Superintendent, Dr. Turnbull, who has been obliged to go to Europe for the benefit of his health. 36. With reference to myself, I have not much to say. During the rains I was in Bombay employed in revising the pay, &c. of the depart- ment, which though not difficult, was laborious. At the commencement of the cold season I visited Sattara, with the view of making inquiries in re- ference to a recommendation made by Dr. Turnbull to transfer Sattara Zillah to the Central Circle, and Kulladghee Zillah to the Southern Circle. On my tour I went through both Zillahs, and I met the Acting Collector of Sattara, Mr. Bosanquet, and also Mr. Havelock, Acting Revenue Commis- sioner Southern Division, who both agree with Dr. Turnbull's geographical and lingual reasons for recommending the transfer. The people of Sattara Zillah speak the language of the Central Circle, Maratha; the greater portion of the people in Kulladghee Zillah speak Canarese like a greater portion of the Southern Circle. The position of Sattara Zillah connects it closer with
( xix ) the Central than the Southern Circle, and the position of Kulladghee Zillah is closer to the Southern than the Central Circle. Dr. Turnbull says that the language alone should be a sufficient reason for the transfer, because it is unknown to himself and his office people, and documents have to be often translated by the Collector of Kulladghee into English or Maratha. After having visited both Zillahs and having seen the Superintendents of both Cir- cles, I would beg to recommend that on the 1st of next January, Sattara Zillah be tranferred from the Southern to the Central Circle, and that Kullad- ghee Zillah be transferred from the Central to the Southern Circle. 37. I marched through Sattara Zillah to Sholapoor, and on my way I examined the village registers at all my camping places, and saw some vac- cinated children here and there. These registers are of immense use in show- ing the Vaccinators where there are unprotected children, and their usefulness will increase year by year. Dr. Turnbull in his report shows how he makes use of them ; I commend his example to the other Superintendents. When at Sholapoor, I met Dr. Turnbull, who was laid up there with fever, which has since compelled him to proceed to Europe. From Sholapoor I marched through Kulladghee to Belgaum, where I met Mr. Raby, Superintendent of the Southern Circle, and there saw some vaccinations in the neighbourhood. Here the year closed, and I will, I hope, in my next annual report, be able to give a better account of my travels. I may say I had only two travelling months in 1868. 38. During the rains I occasionally visited the vaccine stations in Bom- bay, and 1 feel satisfied that nothing short of a Vaccination Act will ever do much to improve the state of vaccination in Bombay, but I need not say more on this subject, as it has already been laid before Government. 39. In table VIII. I have shown the number of vaccinations in the Bombay Army for 1868, for which information I am indebted to the Secre- tary to the Inspector General Indian Medical Department. This is the first time they have ever been incorporated with the annual report; hitherto an annual return has been submitted to the Commander-in-Chief only. There was somewhat less vaccination in Regiments, Lines and Depart- ments, but an increase in the operations in Cantonments and Bazaars. J. PINKERTON, M.D., Surgeon, Superintendent General of Vaccination, Bombay Presidency. Bombay, 17th May 1869.
INDEX TO THE FOLLOWING REPORTS. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. PAGE PAGE Central Circle ......................... 1 Sind Circle.............................. 32 Southern do. ............................. 7 Kattiawar do. .......................... 36 Western do. ........................ 16 Rewa Kanta do. ................... 43 Northern do. ........................... 20 Presidency Division .................. 46 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. PAGE PAGE Tanna ............................... 48 Ahmedabad ........................... 65 Bandora ........................... 48 Khaira ............................... 66 Alibagh ............................ 49 Rajkote ........ ......................... C8 Bhewndy ........................... 50 Veerumgaum ....................... 68 Rutnagherry .......................... 51 Dhurrumgaum........................ 69 Vingorla ............................. 52 Dakore ................................ 70 Karwar ................................ 53 Kurrachee.............................. 70 Surat ................................... 53 Hydrabad.............................. 72 Broach ............................... 54 Shikarpoor ........................... 73 Poona .................................. 55 Kotree ................................. 73 Dapoolee ............................. 56 Shewan................................. 74 Ahmednuggur ........................... 57 Jacobabad............................ 75 Sattara ................................ 58 Sukkur ................................ 75 Sholapoor ............................. 59 Boola Khan's Tanda.................. 76 Dhoolia ................................ 60 Tatta.................................... 76 Nassick ................................. 61 Kulladghee ......................... 77 Belgaum ............................... 62 Bagulkote.............................. 78 Dharwar ............................. 62 ..................................... 79 Hooblee ................................ 63 Aden ...................................... 79 Kolapoor ................................ 64 APPENDIX. Vaccination under Superintendents in British Territory ................... Table No. 1 Vaccination under Superintendents and others in Native Territory ....... VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 Central to the Western Circle. Under the Municipalities there is an increase of 4 Vaccinators; 1 for Nassick, 1 for Kulladghee, 1 for Bhagulkote, and 1 for Indapoor. The Native States remain as last year, 2. 3. The percentage of success, as will also be seen from the table, is increased in the Government establishment, being 961, against 95.5 per centum for 1867 ; in Native States 93.3 per centum, against 84.9 for 1867 ; and in Municipalities 87.3, against 85.1 per centum for 1867. 4. Small-pox.3 6. So far as I know the Vaccinators have conducted their duties satisfactorily The Vaccinator who has performed the largest number of operations was (General No. 40) Keshew Sudeshew, Assistant Vaccinator. 7. Capillary tubes have been in general use for conveying lymph from place to place and supplying Vaccinators, and have generally proved successful. 8. Of the total number, 27,753, or 52.4 per centum, were males; and 25,204, or 47.6 per centum, females. 9. The following table will show the percentage of each caste vaccinated during the year, as compared with the preceding one : 4 12. NATIVE STATES.5 aware of the whereabouts of the unprotected children, and by a glance at it, knows that by going to a certain village, he will meet with a certain number of subjects for operation. &quot;3. In some large towns it is especially valuable ; in the town of Parolla, for instance, in the Collectorate of Khandeish, a return recently received showed the names of over 1,200 children requiring vaccination. I might mention other instances, but it is difficult to do so from memory. &quot; 4. To the use of this amended form I attribute, in great part, the very great increase in the number of vaccine operations during the past two years, not only the increase in the total number of operations, but also in the vaccinations performed on infants ; and in addition to this, the Vaccinators report, unanimously, that but for the amended form of return, their labours would be much greater, and the results less satisfactory. &quot; 5. Above I have shown an increase in the number of operations performed by the Government establishment, but taking the Circle as a whole, the returns show a still more satisfactory result. Compared with the same period (ten months) of the preceding year, the following gives the result : Establishment. Vaccinated in 1867. Vaccinated in 1868. Total. Successful. Under one year. Total. Successful. Under one year. Government.......... 43,469 41,697 11,732 43,621 41,954 16,337 Municipal ............ 3,143 2,709 1,357 4,776 4,177 1,982 Native States ........ 1,467 1,235 723 1,163 1,075 548 Grand Total... 48,079 45,641 13,812 49,560 47,206 18,867 &quot; This table shows that a total increase in the Circle, of 1,481 has occurred ; which, considering that the increase shown in 1867 over 1866, was more than 9,000 operations, is very satisfactory. Infantile vaccination has been during the last four years steadily increasing. The above return shows an increase over the preceding year of no less than 5,055 operations; and a reference to the returns for ten months of 1864 will show that it is 12,000 more than were operated on in the same period of that year. &quot; 6.6 &quot; 7.7 assist him, on a monthly pay of Rupees 6. I also had a meeting at each of the schools, at the library, &c., and on each occasion took the opportunity of explaining vaccination to the assembled people. At the library meeting, which was held in the large school- house, several essays were read in the vernacular in favour of vaccination. At the termi- nation I suggested that a paper be circulated in the meeting for subscription in aid of the library, which was done, and the result was satisfactory; Rupees 52 were subscribed on the spot, and one gentleman promised to supply a newspaper weekly. If the difficulties were great in the town, they were no less so in the villages of the Barsee talooka. I visited a large number of villages, and collected a great number of village officers, and explained the orders and wishes of Government on the subject of vaccination. But on the 11th November further work was stopped by an attack of remittent fever, which totally incapacitated me for work, and I was conveyed to Sholapore, where I gave over charge of the office to Dr. Miller, 4th Rifles, on the 21st November. 9. During the last ten months every assistance has been given by the Magis- trates for the extension of vaccination, but especially by Mr. Bell, 1st Assistant Collec- tor, Poona, whose aid has enabled the vaccinators to carry on operations much more smoothly, extensively, and satisfactorily than formerly.&quot; SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.8 In submitting the Report on Vaccination for the year 1868, it is necessary to premise that the state of supervision, as mentioned in the 4th paragraph of the Inspector General Indian Medical Department's letter, No. 1406 of the 27th April 1868, in his report on vaccination throughout the Bombay Presidency for the year 1867, obtained till near September 1868, when I took over charge of the Department from Surgeon Major Pitman, who, in consequence of his holding a regimental charge, in addition to that of Acting Superintendent of Vaccination, was pre- cluded from exercising any active supervision in the districts; so that during the year under review, and a great portion of the preceding one, the work of a few Vac- cinators only has been inspected. Bearing this in mind, in commencing my tour, I deemed it expedient to visit as many of the Vaccinators as practicable, and examine the lymph in use, rather than make long sojourns in the talookas as testing their old work, and being then prevented seeing as many as I otherwise have done; and I believe this course has been fully justified by the results, which will be hereafter noted. I have, however, always carefully tested some months' work of each Vaccinator in a few villages, and had there been any great errors, or falsifications, I cannot but believe that I should have, at some time, met with them. In the above comparative table there is a considerable increase of vaccinations over that of any former year, from which it may be inferred that the natives are becoming more alive to the benefits of vaccination, 2. Before, however, this table can be easily understood, it is requisite to notice the changes that have taken place in this Circle during the year, necessitating, in order to compare the actual results with the year, an alteration of the number reported vacci- nated, in the various establishments in 1867. In October last, Rutnagherry and Sawant Warree districts were constituted a part of the &quot; Western Circle,&quot; hence it becomes necessary to deduct the total vaccinations performed in them for the year 1867, from the totals of that year. Also, this is required in comparing the work done under the Municipalities; for instance, in 1867 the number vaccinated under them was 6,941, deducting those vaccinated in Punderpore, which is not now in this Circle, 316, gives 6,625 as the correct number for comparison. Excluding, then, Rutnagherry, the total vaccinations of the Government establish- ment in 1867, were 20,979, against 23,962 in the present year under report, thus ex- hibiting an increase of 2,983. The total vaccinations performed in this Circle exclusive of all establishments, is 54,000 ; of these 51,571 are reported as successful, giving a percentage of success of 95.5, the exact rate which obtained in the Government establishment in 1867. Deducting the number of operations performed, as above explained, in Rutna- gherry, Sawant Warree, and Punderpore, from the total of 1867, there will be shown the true number for that year vacccinated in this Circle, as at present constituted, viz : 41,270 ; of which 39,179 were successful, or a percentage of 94.9 ; comparing this with the total 54,000 of the present year, there is exhibited an increase of 12,730, as also an increase in the percentage of successfully vaccinated.
9 3.10 Comparative Table showing the work performed by each Vaccinator entertained by the Chiefs of the Southern Mahratta Jagheers, and the area and population of each. No. Names of Jagheers. Number of Vaccina- tors. Area in Miles. Population. Total Vaccinated in 1868. Success- fully Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success. Total in 1867. Increase. Decrease. 1 Sanglee ........ 1 1,73,383 741 704 95.0 668 73 ... 2 Meeruz 1st ... 1 70,779 636 616 96.8 641 95 ... 3 Do. 2nd ... 1 47,060 338 296 87.5 289 49 ... 4 Koorundwar Elder 1st ...... 1 29,786 482 467 96.8 322 160 ... 5 Koorundwar Younger 2nd 1 22,890 404 358 86.1 254 150 ... 6 Moodhole ...... 1 49,829 450 438 97.3 564 ... 114 7 Ramdroog ...... 1 33,000 1,022 970 94.9 439 583 ... 8 Jumkhundee ... 1 1,20,051 423 408 94.4 359 64 ... 9 Bhore ............ 1 1,11,729 676 667 98.6 642 34 ... 10 Attapadee ...... 1 58,980 466 465 99.8 440 26 ... 11 Jhut ............... 1 56,845 880 824 93.6 280 600 ... 12 Pulton ........ 1 49,314 913 857 93.8 851 62 ... 13 Savanoor ........ 1 8,977 ...... ...... ...... 157 ...... 157 13 8,32,623 7,431 7,070 95.1 5,906 1,896 271 Comparative Table showing the work performed by each Vaccinator entertained in Kolapore State. No. Names of Jagheers. Number of Vaccinators. Area in miles. Popula- tion. Total Vaccina- ted in 1868. Success- fullyVac- cinated. Percen- tage of Success. Total in 1867. Increase Decrease. 1 Veeshalghur ...... 1 14,748 1,890 1,843 97.5 928 962 ...... 2 Echulkurnjee ... 1 43,543 633 613 96.9 979 ...... 346 8 Kagul ............... 1 31,287 749 734 97.9 741 8 ... 4 Gudhinglaz ...... 1 73,393 1,001 956 95.5 319 682 ...... 5 Bowrah ............ 1 29,845 1,262 1,197 95.0 1,392 ...... 130 6 Panala ............ 1 66,463 1,117 1,087 93.9 948 169 ...... 7 Bhooderghur .... 1 54,794 1,343 1,323 98.5 1,047 296 ...... 8 Seerole ............ 1 1,05,022 652 610 90.4 523 129 ...... 9 Torgul ............ 1 21,653 504 470 93.2 883 ...... 379 10 Auzara ............ 1 ...... 1,201 1,165 97.0 ...... 1,201 ...... Total of Kolapore State ............ 10 4,40,748 10,352 9,998 96.5 7,760 3,447 855 Grand Total ...... 23 1,273,371 17,783 17,068 95.9 13,666 5,343 1,126
11 Municipalities Vaccination Return for 1868. No. Months. Khana- pore. Moon. Kurrar. Kora- gaum. Malwa. Gud- duck. Bel- gaum. Hooblee. Malsee- rus. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 January ............ 98 116 63 83 65 61 68 129 ... 683 2 February ......... 109 118 61 85 60 72 82 120 ... 707 3 March ......... 175 123 62 96 60 ... 94 112 ... 722 4 April ......... 60 189 117 200 60 190 65 163 ... 1,044 5 May ......... 89 65 195 261 62 100 57 111 ... 940 6 June ......... ... 84 79 311 61 93 42 70 ... 740 7 July ............... 113 113 68 251 61 90 62 75 ... 833 8 August ......... 97 111 88 88 68 88 63 125 ... 728 9 September ...... 183 101 118 83 66 95 78 154 ... 878 10 October ............ 184 93 61 81 50 ... 72 121 42 704 11 November......... 69 61 67 81 66 ... 78 217 99 738 12 December......... 79 72 66 81 75 ... 69 200 104 746 Total 1868, ...... 1,256 1,246 1,045 1,701 754 789 830 1,597 245 9,463 Total for 1867....... 716 937 589 985 564 657 746 1,375 ... 6,569 8. In accounting for the increase of vaccinations during the year, it is incumbent on me to show first the changes, and additions, which have occurred in the different establishments throughout the year, and to deduct such additions which have tended to promote the efficiency of the Department, giving to each their due share of impor- tance, numerically considered, by which the actual result of operations performed by the establishments as they existed in 1867 will be seen contrasted with 1858. The additions, then, which have been included in the above return, and which were not in existence in 1867, or rather were not incorporated in the returns of the Southern Circle, are12 The cause of the increase in the Government establishment, I consider, in a great measure due13 fact, as has been stated by former Superintendents, of a great portion of his districts lying below the Ghauts, where no, or very little, opposition is met with. In contrast to the above statement respecting the increase of pay to the Meeruz Vaccinator, I regret to have to record that the Chief of Bhore has thought fit to reduce his Vaccinator's pay by Rs. 3. The Sanglee Vaccinator is paid a higher rate than any Vaccinator, either in Government or other establishment, I wish I could add his work proportionately cor- responded in point of numbers. 10. Prevalence of Small-pox. No regular returns of small-pox are received. It has been reported from time to time as prevailing sporadically in all the Collectorates of the Circle, and in an epide- mic form in the talooka of Beedee, in the Belgaum Collectorate, where, in passing, I beg to state, from personal observation, the introduction of vaccination is attended with the greatest difficulty, owing to the prejudices and non-belief of the people in its efficacy; also in parts of Dharwar and North Canara. From Dharwar, the Collector represented its prevalence to the then Acting Superintendent, Dr. Pitman, who, in consequence of epidemic small-pox raging at the same time in Canara and Beedee, where the Vaccinators were fully employed, was prevented despatching Vaccinators to the infected localities as quickly as otherwise would have been the case. The epi- demic was not of long duration, nor has the mortality been reported as any way severe. In inspecting a village of the Kolapore State I found a sporadic case of small-pox of the 15th day's duration in a child aged about 18 months. There were two other children in the same house who had been recently vaccinated, as well as others in the adjoining houses to these. At the time of my visit the disease had not extended. The inhabitants of the village, noting the circumstance, were so struck with the benefit of the prophylactic, that they eagerly offered their children for operation, but in other neighbouring villages little work had been done. Considering this a good opportunity of actively interesting the heads of the village, and others in the work, I endeavoured to show them how much assistance they might render to their neighbouring villagers by showing them the efficacy of vaccination, an instance of which, it is scarcely too much to say, they had just witnessed. 11. In commencing my tour I bore in mind the districts that had been more par- ticularly reported as being infected with small-pox of a severe form, and to these I repaired. In November I visited nearly all the talookas of the Dharwar Collectorate, from whence reports of variola had been received. Having inspected the vaccinations in Kuljhutjee, and parts adjoining, where the people appeared anxious for vaccination, I proceeded to Hooblee, and on to Gudduck, examining several villages on the road, in which the state of vaccination could not be worse. Very few children had been vaccinated, merely a small minority, and those that were, I was unable in most of the villages to get collected for inspection, though orders had been sent the day previously, so that I could not test any returns. I have represented this to the Collector, with
14 what result I am, as yet, unacquainted. At Gudduck I found matters in an extremely unsatisfactory condition. The Municipal Vaccinator was doing little or no work. In Betgherree, a large town near Gudduck, affairs were still worse, as regards vaccination. On the morning after my arrival I had appointed to inspect children in Betgherree. On my road I was told it was no use going there, as no children had been collected, nor would the people consent to vaccination. These two places, it is necessary to men- tion, are the great centres of small-pox, especially Betgherree, one or the other is sel- dom free of the- disease, frequently it rages in an epidemic form, and from whence I am informed it spreads throughout the talookas. On inquiry into this state of things, I found, as had been represented to me, that the Vaccinator was irregularly paid, occa- sionally being kept in arrears for over three months, and, as he said, he was not sure that he should be paid at all. The Municipality promised amendment, and I was led to believe such would not again occur but up to the date of this report, notwithstand- ing my representations to the Collector, it still obtains. From Gudduck I proceed- ed to Dumbull, into which vaccination had never been successfully introduced, and it was with considerable difficulty I could procure a few children for vaccination, so as to make a commencement. I have since been informed that the natives do not so much object now; their objection at first arising principally, as I conjectured, from fear. Next I travelled to Roan, into which a Vaccinator had also never made his appearance with any degree of success, and the natives plainly admitted they had no desire that he should. The Gokak Mamlutdar, with whom I had before come in contact, happened to be temporarily in charge here, and he readily promised his assist- ance to the Vaccinator, whom I subsequently ordered to proceed there. From this I traversed the talooka of Nowlgoond and Nurgoond, back to Dharwar. From thence through parts of Beedee, on to Chickoree and Baghwanee, in the Kolapore State, and, with the exception of Baghwanee, there is little more than ordinary deserving of mention. Having previously heard of the. opposition I should be likely to meet at Baghwanee, the talooka Vaccinator was ordered to accompany me. At first I could not obtain a single child for operation, but after some explanation, ten presented themselves, and were vaccinated. At the end of the year I was at Kolapore, and had inspected the work of 14 Vaccinators, most of whose lymph was very good. The Meeruz Vaccinator, employed by &quot; Anna Sahib,&quot; was working with lymph of a very suspicious character. The vesicles were small and ill-formed, and the average success of his operations very small. After examining the work of the Sanglee Vaccinator, in whose returns I found two names had been entered as successful, which in reality were not so, the vesicles had not even risen, as the phrase is ; I represented this to the Political Agent. I desired the Meeruz Vaccinator, abovementioned, to accompany me to Tasgaon, and take lymph from (General No. 88) Trimbuck Annunt, on whose lymph, as I had anticipated, I could rely. I also saw that this Vaccinator wasconversant with the manner of charging tubes. From thence I traversed the talookas of Khanapoor, Kore- gaum, Khatan, and Moon, of the Sattara district, inspecting and examining the work of the Municipal and other Vaccinators. Here the subject of the Municipal Vaccina-
15 tors requires more than a passing notice, under, as they are, the able and active control of the Deputy Collector, Sattara. These Vaccinators are paid out of the combined Municipalities' funds, each town or village of any size contributing its item to the general fund; they have consequently a kind of claim on the services of the Vaccina- tor, and it is most satisfactory to be able to state that, as far as I have been able to judge, they look after the Vaccinator's returns so minutely that they refuse not infrequently to pay him, till they receive the confirmation. I explained to many of them that I did not wish in the slightest degree to test work more than to see that it was satisfactory, and informed them that I implicitly relied on them for this part; but in many places an anxiety was evinced that I should thoroughly test the correctness of the returns. They in fact appeared proud of having a Vaccinator, whom they could in some sense call their own ; and in Dehwarree complained that they could not have another, as one was insufficient for the two talookas; and I am now able to state that another Vaccinator is to be appointed permanently in those talookas. In the town of Mahi- mangurh, where formerly considerable opposition was experienced, the natives were so pleased with their Vaccinator's work (having as they said freed the town of small-pox) that they gave me a petition to the effect that, if I was satisfied with his work, they were willing, as his pay was so small, Rs. 15 per month, to increase it to Rs. 20. I have forwarded the petition, with my recommendation, to the Collector, but the Deputy Collector informs me he fears the funds will not as yet permit of this increase. Subsequently I inspected the work of the Phulton and Bhore Jagheer Vaccinators, both of whose lymph was so deteriorated that I at once ordered them, through the karbarree, to suspend work, and directed them to procure lymph from the Koregaon Vaccinator, who was working near those Jagheers, and whose lymph I had only a few days previ- ously examined in all its stages. Reviewing then this statement of my tour, it will be observed, that in many parts the greatest obstacles, almost insurmountable, to the diffu- sion of vaccination are encountered, not only by a Vaccinator, but frequently by a Super- intendent himself, and from many villages supplies of food even are with difficulty ob- tained, so much so as occasionally to necessitate a reference to the authorities. In how far the increase of vaccination is brought about by the countenance or otherwise afforded by the authorities, especially Europeans, in a district, is a question to be somewhat considered ; and the good effects resulting from an official authority interesting himself in the work is witnessed in the parts of the Sattara Collectorate, above referred to. In one or two places in the Sattara Collectorate, Kodowree and Mahimangurh, for example, I inquired how it happened that in these towns, where formerly no Vaccina- tor had been able to make progress, so little opposition was now experienced ; they replied that the Assistant Collectors and others when visiting the districts, had invari- ably instituted inquiries about the Vaccinator's work, and the Deputy Collector had in one village himself tested the accuracy of the returns of the Vaccinator only a few days before my arrival; and they added, we now see the good effects arising from vac- cination. In the Sattara Collectorate I have met with little difficulty, as a rule, in getting children collected in the different villages for inspection.
16 WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent17 4. The following shows the number of each caste vaccinated during the past, as compared with the preceding year :18 8. The total number of vaccinations performed by both men only reach 410, and are arranged below, according to caste, &c.:19 13. The first work I examined was that of General No. 58, Mahdew Vaniek, in the talooka of Bassein. The town of Bassein, with a large number of villages in its neighbourhood, came first in order. I found the work here very well done, that is to say, what I saw of it, and the returns quite correct. I regret to say that small- pox prevailed there at that time to some extent. It was principally confined to a temporary village, erected and inhabited by the fishermen with their families, during the dry season, for their greater convenience in pursuit of their daily avocations. Its site is generally under water during the monsoon, and seems to be composed of mud caked by the sun's rays. It certainly seemed a most likely place to foster or beget an epidemic disease, for a more frightful stench I never experienced than assailed me on every side from the quantities of animal matter that were strewn about in every conceiv- able stage of decay. The people, too, I found were any thing but willing or anxious to have their children vaccinated ; they readily enough produced the old operations for inspection, but were tardy, or rather unwilling, to have new ones done, though small- pox at the time was making its ravages amongst them. This, I think, may be attri- buted to the extra care and attention a child who has been vaccinated would be likely to entail on them, at this their busiest part of the year, rather than to any real objection they have to the operation itself. 14. The other portions of the talooka which I visited were I found comparatively free from this disease ; the people were much more alive also to the benefits to be derived from vaccination, and showed me in comparison a far greater number of opera- tions, all of which seemed well and carefully performed. 15. I next examined the work of General No. 296, Kondajee Mukumdrow. His returns I found correct, but his lymph was exceedingly bad. I renewed it for him with some points of English lymph I received from the Superintendent General of Vaccination for trial, and warned him to be more careful for the future. I must here mention the difficulty I found in collecting children for inspection in the towns of Bhewndy and Callian. The officials were eager enough to render every assistance in their power, but such good intentions were frustrated by the indifference of the people. In the smaller towns and villages I found it easy enough to see all, or nearly all, the operations the Vaccinator had performed, and was consequently in a position to satisfy myself as to the quality of his work ; but in the larger towns I could not do this so easily. 16. During my tour I am sure I saw just as many children unprotected as were vaccinated. A good many of them no doubt were protected by small-pox and in a few rare instances I saw marks of inoculation, but this was propagating the evil that vac- cination is intended to guard against. Looking at the. fewness of the Vaccinators in such a large Collectorate as Tanna, it is impossible that it should be otherwise. There are only six men to meet the requirements of a district nearly 10,000 square miles in area, and having a population of nearly one million.
20 NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent21 prevalence of small-pox during the year bringing out many children for vaccination, who otherwise would have been kept out of the Vaccinator's reach ; to a certain extent also, it may be attributed to the increased energy of the Vaccinators. 3. To this report is annexed a table which gives a comparative view of the work performed during the years 1867 and 1868, with some other particulars. From this table it appears that the majority of the Vaccinators have performed more work in the expired year than in 1867. 4. The total number of operations performed by the three establishments is 96,458 ; of this 60,212 were children under one year of age, and 36,246 above that age. This gives 62.4 per centum of the former, and 37.5 of the latter. Taking the sexes, the operations in males exceeds females, the percentage being 53.5 in males, and 46.4 in females. 5. As regards the general result, the percentage of success in the Government (91.8) and Native States' establishments (90.7) is almost the same as in last year. In the Municipal establishment it is 91.9, being two per centum lower than in the previous year. But I think the percentage is actually much greater, vaccinated children leaving their villages before the week day, or concealed by their parents through fear of lymph being taken from them, are entered as doubtful. In the greater part of the doubtful cases the result, according to my experience, is successful. 6. The lymph in use in this Circle is to all appearances good; the resulting vesicles are normal in size and appearance. It is not, however, so good as it was in past years, because the cicatrices are not so large, and in the course of two or three years they become very indistinct. 7. Three supplies of English lymph were received in the year under report. The first supply in capillary tubes was successfully used in Cambay in the month of Febru- ary. The second supply was on ivory points ; it was received in August; and on trial, failed entirely. The last supply, received almost at the close of the year, was partly in tubes and partly on ivory points ; it was used at Mundul, and failed entirely. Supplies of English lymph, even when found successful, do not produce results equal to the lymph in general use, and are therefore not of any use. It is very desirable that endeavours be made here for procuring cow-lymph, and, if successful, the replace- ment of the ordinary lymph now in use by such fresh cow-lymph, would be very beneficial. 8. During the year supplies of lymph in capillary tubes were sent to the Staff Surgeons of Nusseerabad and Aboo Sanitarium, the Superintendent of Rajpootana Dis- pensaries and Vaccination, the Civil Surgeon, Kaira, the Medical Officer in charge of the 14th Regiment N. I., Mhow, to the Local Superintendent of Vaccination, Bombay, and to the Dispensaries of Dakore and Gogo. 9. The year was marked by the prevalence of a severe epidemic of small-pox. This disease made its appearance in December 1867 in this Circle. For the first two
22 months of 1868 it was not much known, but on the approach of the hot weather, it began to spread with marked vigour ; and it was not till the rains set in that its virulence abated. It must not be understood that it has disappeared, for it is still lingering in some parts, and may again appear to a more or less extent during the hot months. 10. Epidemics of small-pox, though in their result very disastrous, are not with- out some advantages. If no human persuasion and example can teach a person the benefits of vaccination, a visit of small-pox in his family teaches him thoroughly. Hence each epidemic of small-pox establishes the advantages of, and makes many con- verts to vaccination. 11. In the last epidemic, and I believe it must have been the same in previous ones, the greatest prevalence of small-pox was in places which had resisted vaccination. In December 1867 it prevailed to a considerable extent in two populous villages of Jumbooseer talooka, viz.; in Sarode and Kavee. I took my camp to Sarode shortly after (in the early part of January 1868), and learnt the following particulars : Sarode is a large village, divided into two parts by a deep ravine; one part is called Tulput, and is chiefly inhabited by Mahomedan agriculturists and others; the other part, called Wanta, is inhabited by Hindoos, Kolies, &c. This latter, the Wanta portion, had admit- ted vaccination in former years, but the Tulput portion had baffled all the efforts of the Vaccinator, who seems to have been dismayed, and to have not visited the village again for the last three years. During the late outbreak most small-pox prevailed in the Tulput portion, and many deaths occurred there. On the breaking out of the disease, vaccination was eagerly sought after, and, before the Vaccinator could commence work, some of the villagers took their children to Broach for vaccination. Even during the last epidemic, whenever they got their children readily vaccinated, they were so annoying and troublesome, as not to show their children on the week-day following, but closed up their doors as soon as the Vaccinator was known to be in the street. 12. During epidemic seasons the greatest mischief always is found to occur in Kusba towns and cities, and it is in such places that, on the breaking out of the disease, people shake off their apathy, and admit vaccination. Occasional instances are known where the prejudice is so great as to make the people believe in the occurrence of small-pox as a divine dispensation. Such people oppose vaccination even during epi- demic seasons, and to the entreaties of our vaccinators are said to have replied &quot; Jao Jee, kia toom Allah se bhi burrah ho ke ? &quot; (Are you mightier than the Almighty God: go your way). 13. As an instance of extreme reluctance to vaccination, I would mention one case which occurred in this Circle. Small-pox broke out in Pahlunpore, a large and populous Kusba, about 18 miles from the important military cantonment of Deesa. There is a Vaccinator attached to this place, in charge of the Kusba and surrounding villages. He was working in Pahlunpore at the time of the outbreak, but with the view of checking the epidemic, the Government Vaccinator of Deesa Cantonment was
23 ordered to Pahlunpore. Both together commenced operations, but their combined efforts were successful to only a limited extent; for, working three days in a week in the Kusba, they could only get sixty children for Vaccination. The Mahomedan population resisted even during the epidemic. The Vaccinator of Pahlunpore, Dana Bhava, is now of twenty years' standing in the service. From my personal observation of this man, borne out by the testimony of another medical officer now high in the service, but who was for a length of time Superintendent of Vaccination of this Circle, I can say of him that in industry and zeal in popularizing himself and his art, in his personal demeanour to all, there is now no equal to him among the Native States' Vaccinators. Yet strange to say, at the time of the above occurrence, fault was found with him. From information, which must have been entirely incorrect, he was said to be inefficient, and not fit for the post, and his removal was desired. The loss would have been felt nowhere more than in Pahlunpore. I was able to make a satisfactory representation on the subject, and was allowed to retain this man in his post. 14. Though the carrying on of vaccination in a place infected with small-pox is beneficial, yet among ignorant people, such a proceeding is often more or less hazardous, inasmuch as it may bring discredit on vaccination by children already infected with the contagion of small-pox being vaccinated during or about the close of the period of incubation of the disease, and thereafter both diseases, variola and vaccinia, breaking out on the children, and it may so happen that a child, after being thus vaccinated, may have small-pox very severely and die. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance for this Department that it may receive all possible assistance from high influential quarters during quiet times, when no epidemic influence prevails, instead of such assist- ance being rendered to it in epidemic seasons only. 15. As to the extent to which small-pox prevailed in the different parts and towns of this Circle during the year, with the exception of reports received from our Vaccinators, I have no other good source of information. The following table con- tains the information thus collected:24 Months. Ahmedabad Zillah. Kaira Zillah. Broach Zillah. Surat Zillah. Native States of Pahlunpore. Native States of Mahee Konta. April ............ Rampoor. Mhoonda. ...... Olpar, Chicklee, Bulsar, Mandvee, Bugwara, Pardee. Deesa, Phalunpore. ...... May ............ ...... Mhoonda. ...... Chowrasee, Chicklee, Mandvee, Olpar. ...... ...... June ............ ...... ...... ...... Chowrasee, Mandvee, Olpar. ...... ...... July ............ ...... ...... ...... Mandvee, Pardee. ...... ...... August ............ ...... ...... ...... ........ ...... ...... September ... ...... ...... ...... Mandvee. ...... ...... October .......... ...... ...... ...... ...... ........ ...... November ...... ...... ...... ...... Chowrasee, Mandvee. ...... Baid. December ...... ...... ...... ...... Chowrasee, Mandvee. Rahdunpoor Districts. ...... The above is not a complete list. I believe, in addition to the places mentioned, small-pox must have prevailed in many other localities. 16. From what is reported, it appears that whereas small-pox prevailed in the other districts of this Circle to a limited extent, its occurrence in Surat districts was general. It is therefore of some importance to know what is the state and progress of vaccination in these districts. Of the Vaccinators I may say that they are as good and efficient as in the other Zillah ; many of them are old and experienced hands. That they are not inactive, and that vaccination in their districts is progressing, will appear from the following statistics of the past eight years :25 It must be stated here that, comparing Surat with other Zillahs of this Circle, vaccination in it is attended with a great many difficulties, some of which were men- tioned in paragraph 15 of my Report for 1867. But for the ignorant opposition of the people in many parts, the work each year would have been greater. 17. Notwithstanding all the efforts of this establishment to push on vaccination in the Surat districts, still there is always some amount of small-pox prevailing in these parts. And this is principally due to inoculation being still in favour with the people. There is no doubt that from year to year this injurious custom is practised, and I believe this keeps small-pox going. In epidemic seasons the contagion spreads easily, and the inoculators also getting more work in these times, become the principal agents for the propagation and diffusion of small-pox virus. During the past year two reports at short intervals were received from the Vaccinator of Chicklee regarding the carrying on of inoculation in the villages of Ranveree, Rankoova, and Tulaochora. These were, without loss of time, submitted to the Collector of Surat. Reports were also received from Bulsar; but these came very late (in September) after all the mischief was over. 18. In the whole of Guzerat, from Mount Aboo in the north, to Bugwarra in the south, and from Kutch and Kattiawar in the west, to the extensive territories in the east of His Highness the Guicowar, and the Political Agency of Rewa Kanta and Rajpeepla, vaccination is now being carried on steadily. 19. But there are two small territories in the southernmost part of Guzerat where vaccination is unknown. These lie to the east of the Chicklee, Bulsar, and Bugwarra talookas, and are the territories of the Rajahs of Bansda and Dhurrumpoor. They are surrounded on all sides by vaccinated districts. Their western boundary is already mentioned; to the north of the Bansda State is Guicowary territory lying very near to Walor of Bardolee talooka ; to the east of the Bansda and Dhurumpoor States lie the Solgana and Peint States, in which last vaccination is carried on by the establishment of the Central Circle. To the east of Solgana and Peint States lie Khandeish districts. In these territories of the Rajahs of Bansda and Dhurrumpoor, which are not blessed with Vaccinators, reside the inoculators, who each year infest our territories, and do a great deal of mischief, by carrying on inoculation. Whilst I was in Surat, during the last rains, I called upon the Collector, who is also Agent for the Governor, and as such is the medium of communication with these States; I suggested to him the desirability of addressing the Durbars of the two States, to check the inoculators from coming into our territory. 20. To introduce vaccination in these Native States would not, I believe, be difficult. During the last epidemic the Vaccinator of Bulsar, being at the time very near Dhurrumpoor, was sent for by the Rajah, who had some of his children vaccinated. This is a hopeful sign. Endeavours will be made during the current year to make an advance in this quarter. 21. But it is my strong belief that a simple extension of vaccination in the quarter abovementioned will not result in the abatement, much less the suppression 4 v
26 of inoculation in the Surat districts. At present there is, I believe, a strong prohibitory order on every Patel of a village not to allow inoculation ; nevertheless, it is being permitted ; and when found out, and the case investigated, the invariable rule for the Patel and the people inoculated, is to state that the subjects of inoculation had gone to friends or relations in the neighbouring villages of the Bansda or Dhurrumpoor States, and were there inoculated. There will always be some inoculators prejudicing the minds of ignorant people, practising their injurious vocation, and thereby keeping up the poison of variola to activity. Nothing short, therefore, of making inoculation criminal, and prohibiting it by law, will meet the necessity of the case. Towards the suppression of what greater evil can Government interfere for the welfare of the people ? Is not small-pox more highly contagious and more certainly destructive to the people than syphilis ? and yet Government have passed an Act to prevent syphilis. 22. As regards this subject of inoculation, and the measures necessary for the more effectual spread of vaccination, I would quote here paragraph 3rd of my letter, No. 300 of 2nd October last, addressed to the Superintendent General of Vaccina- tion, Bombay Presidency :27 &quot; (c) Legislative help to Vaccination.28 has to do a work upon the proper performance of which will in a great measure depend the life of a human being. And he must also possess an unusual amount of patience and energy to quietly work his way over the prejudices of the people, and the tact to gain their confidence. With industrious and energetic habits, a conciliatory disposition is essential. It is not likely that men possessed of such qualities could be found to serve for very low wages. Up to May last the majority of the Vaccinators (Apprentices and Assistants) received Rs. 15 and Rs. 17 per month, and the Peons Rs. 7. This was low enough, but since May they have been receiving Rs. 12 and Rs. 14, and the Peons Rs. 5. Upon such scanty pay it is impossible for these people to maintain themselves and their families. It is very necessary that for the efficacious performance of vaccination, the scale of pay of the Vaccinators be sufficiently high to secure good men, and to keep them above the necessity of begging gratuities from people. The subject of the revision of the salaries of the vaccination establishment is now under the consideration of Govern- ment, and the Vaccinators are anxiously awaiting to know the result. 24. To ensure efficacious performance of work, it is necessary that the super- vision of the establishment be perfect. The experience of two years in this Circle has convinced me of the extreme necessity of better supervision of its Vaccinators. The Circle ought to be only so extensive as to enable a Superintendent to examine the lymph of the different Vaccinators every year, or at most every year and a half; whereas, this Circle is so very extensive as to require nearly three working seasons to complete an inspection of the work of all Vaccinators. 25. The extent of this Circle is shown in the following Statement, which contains the names of the different Zillahs taken from north to south, together with the area in square miles and population of each :29 Establishments. Total number vaccinated. Total expenditure during the year. Cost of each vaccina- tion. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Government..................... 71,203 15,224 8 0 0 3 5 Native Chiefs ................. 23,080 3,072 0 0 0 2 1 Municipal ....................... 2,165 438 0 0 0 3 2 Calculated as above, it appears that the cost of each vaccination in the Govern- ment establishment is greater than the others, but the chief expenditure in the Govern- ment establishment, viz., that of supervision, ought to be borne by all, inasmuch as all are placed under one Superintendent. Taking the three establishments together, the cost of each vaccination is 3 Annas and 2 Pies. Total Vaccinations. Total Cost. Cost of Each. 96,458. Rupees 18,734.8 Rs. 0 3 2. 27. To give a brief rsum of my tour : I was at the commencement of the year working at Ahmode, in Broach Zillah. My stay at Amode and at the next station, Jambooseer, was more prolonged than usual in the examination of the work of General Nos. 190 and 96. Finishing my work in Broach districts, I arrived at Karalee, and, crossing the Mhye, reached Salol on the other side of the river, and from thence travelled to the Native State of Cambay, and examined the work of its Vaccinator, Goolab Jumiet. Travelling from Cambay northwards, I encamped at Khanpore, in Kaira Zillah, for three days, and inspected most of the fresh work of the Cambay Vaccinator, as well as of General No. 127. Crossing the Saburmuttee by Boroo Mottee, I entered Ahmeda- bad districts, and travelled to Dhollera, Dhundooka, Rampore, and Dholka, inspecting work of several Vaccinators of the talookas named, (General Nos. 91, 170, 177 and 52). When I finished my work at Dholka it was quite the close of March, and as I had to be present at the Sessions Court in Broach in the first week of April, to give my evi- dence in a legal proceeding against a Vaccinator of this establishment, I closed work at Dholka, marched to Ahmedabad, and went down to Broach by rail, where I was detained only two or three days. I next took my camp to Unclesur, and commenced the exami- nation of the Surat districts. The work of General No. 293 was thoroughly inspected from Unclesur, Panolee, Hansote, and Elao, which last place I left at the close of April for Mandvee talooka. From Turkesur, Jhamp, and Tursada, the work of Gene- ral No. 248 was fully examined. From Tursada I travelled to Bardolee, from which place, and from Surbhon, the work of General No. 193 was thoroughly examined. Travelling southwards I entered Soopa talooka in the early part of June, and before the proper setting in of the monsoon had time enough to satisfy myself of the work of General No. 275. On the 15th June I was in Surat, my usual monsoon station, and occasionally went to some of the villages of Chowrassee talooka to inspect the lymph of General No. 19, and to take lymph for supplying the different Vaccinators of the Circle. I left Surat for the districts again nearly at the close of October, and
30 by the end of the year was able to inspect the work of General No. 309, in charge of Olpar talooka ; of General No. 287 of Broach talooka, and of General Nos. 56, 20, 31, and 296 of Duskroe, Sanund, Veerungaum, and Mundul talookas, of Ahmedabad Zillah. To sum up, I inspected, in all, the work of twenty-two persons ; of these 18 belonged to the Government establishment, one was a Native State Vaccinator, and two Municipal Vaccinators, of Dholka and Veerungaum, at which last place the vaccina- tions carried on at the Dispensary were examined. My travelling extended over 2,309 miles, 323 villages have been visited, and 11,716 children examined. 28. Of the twenty-two Vaccinators whose work was examined, the lymph of fourteen was found to be good; six Vaccinators were working with deteriorated lymph, which did not produce quite satisfactory vesicles, and one was working with very bad lymph. In every instance the lymph was discontinued directly, and replaced by good matter from neighbouring Vaccinators. 29. There have been in all five dismissals during the year, and these were necessitated by the following circumstances :31 he was somewhat well, but no sooner had he returned to his work, than he took again very ill, and died in November. He was one of the best men next to Dana Bhava, of Pahlunpore, and I therefore regret his loss. As early information of his death was received by me, I was able to make arrangements for the carrying on of work in Kakhrej talooka, and vaccination there has again been going on since the end of November. 31. There were many breaks in vaccination during the year ; more than what is usual. The majority of these occurred after unusually heavy rains, and the consequent high floods in all parts of this Circle. Some of the Vaccinators were prevented from going to their week's work in consequence of their stations being surrounded by water; these lost their lymph entirely. Others were out on their week's work in villages, and were there weather-bound; these lost their lymph partially. The following is a list of places where lymph was lost, in consequence of the above-mentioned cause :32 ments, the loss amounts to the work of two Vaccinators for eight months of the year. But for these breaks, the increase in the year's work would have been very consider- able. 34. Of the Vaccinators of this Circle I may say, with the exception of a couple or so who are decidedly idle, nearly all are industrious. They have met my demands for increased work to their utmost capability, and their general conduct, as far as it has come under my observation, has been very exemplary. 35. In paragraph 29 of this Report I mentioned the circumstance of the dis- missal of two Vaccinators for the misappropriation of money to their own use, instead of giving it to parents of children, carried for vaccine purposes from one village to another. My attention was drawn to the getting up of &quot;remuneration putrucks&quot; and of Forms V. 2, of all Vaccinators, and I found that the village Patels, whose business it was to attest the truthfulness of the forms, and thereby be a check on the Vaccinators, were in the loose habit of putting their signatures on them anyhow, even on blank forms, without ascertaining in the least to what statement their signature was re- quired : thus the object for which these forms were introduced was lost. To remedy this evil, I addressed the four Collectors in this Circle, requesting them to make it known to all the Patels, through the Mamlutdars of talookas, that in no instance were they to sign blank forms, and that their duty was to acquaint themselves fully with what was written on the forms, and to refuse putting their signature to anything that was not true. This has now been done, and as much good as could result by making the object of the putrucks known is, I believe, now derived. Independently of this, a certain method is adopted of filling up these forms, and of checking the monthly returns, which now leaves very little room for exercising dishonesty. 36. From October last, in accordance with instructions contained in Circular No. 2,990, dated 27th August 1868, of the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, the Vaccination Returns of three of the Dispensaries (Dholka, Veerumgaum, and Dokar) in this Circle were received by me. These are incorporated in the yearly returns. Two Hospital Assistants only, viz., of Dholka and Veerumgaum, sent their annual remarks, which I beg to append in original. SIND CIRCLE. Superintendent33 Establishment. Years. Total Vac- cinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. Government .... 1867 33,821 .... .... 32,353 95.6 1868 38,859 5,038 .... 38,053 97.9 Local ................. 1867 21,854 .... .... 21,022 96.2 1868 23,612 1,758 .... 22,966 97.2 Dispensaries .... 1867 3,069 .... .... .... 87.3 1868 3,365 296 .... 3,144 90.0 Native Chiefs .. 1867 2,529 .... .... 2,297 90.8 1868 2,105 .... 424 1,891 88.7 The results of vaccination in the Sind Circle during the past and preceding years are exhibited in the above table, from which it will be seen that there has been an increase in the Imperial and local returns of 7,092, as compared with the year 1867, and a decrease of 424 in the returns from the Khyrpoor State. 2. Deducting the work done in Dispensaries, which was not previously included in the returns from the Superintendent of Vaccination, the net total increase is 6,668 over the total number vaccinated in 1867. 3. The aggregate number vaccinated during the year 1868, has amounted to 67,941, of which 66,054, or 98 per cent. nearly, have been successful. These results are satisfactory ; but we do not hope to show so large a number year by year until the population increases considerably. If the population of Sind (inclusive of the Khyr- poor State) is only 2,500,000, the number of children available annually for vaccination should be 60,000 only for some years to come. The past year has been exceptional, as in addition to sporadic small-pox which kept the Vaccinators constantly working hard to check it, a large influx of emigrants from the famine districts of Hindustan has fur- nished several thousand children for vaccination. These emigrants, even if they remain in the country, will not give the Vaccinators much additional work for some years hence, and the returns are likely to fall considerably below the numbers vaccinated in 1868. Arranged according to Sex, there were 37,470 males, or 54.4 per-centum. 34 the cost of administration, it is of course considerably the highest ; but taken in the aggregate, the cost of each successful operation is 5 Annas and 2 Pies only. Another table is appended, showing the cost of all operations, successful or otherwise. 5. Number successfully vaccinated by Imperial Establishment .... 38,053 cost each 6 Annas 4 Pies. Local ................................. 22,966 35 Marseilles epidemic of 1828 reduced to an uniform scale of 15,00036 15.October and November were spent in office work, and inspection of work in the neighbourhood of Meanee and Muttari. There is a bigoted Mussulman population in these parts, as well as in the town of Muttari, but it is almost completely protected by vaccination, to which they make no objection whatever. Part of the Halla districts were also inspected in November. 16.The month of December was employed in the Nowshera districts and visit- ing a few towns in the Khyrpoor State ; and my 1st Assistant accompanied me in all my inspections until we arrived at Sukkurund, where I detached him to test some villages in the neighbourhood of Shadadpoor, where the amount of work appeared to be unusually large. In no case has any falsification of returns been detected; but I have been obliged to fine one Vaccinator Rupees 10 for extorting money in payment of vaccination, and withholding gratuities from the parents of lymph children. 17.Small-pox has prevailed extensively in the bordering Native States (with the exception of that of His Highness Meer Ali Murad, who employs a Vaccinator), and though it has been introduced at many points in Sind, it has remained sporadic, and attacked the unprotected only. KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.37 and they object to the Vaccinators of other Chiefs coming to their villages, for fear that in the event of the Chief who entertains the Vaccinators laying claim to a part or the whole of the village, the very act of the Vaccinator going there and vaccinating would, help to. prove the claim. This is one great reason that prevents an equal distri- bution of labour. The second reason is this: (but I must first go back a few years :) When I came to Kattiawar it was the custom, on a vacancy occurring, that the Super- intendent of Vaccination should appoint the Vaccinator, independent of the Durbar or Chief to whom he was then sent. I found this did not work ; numerous complaints came in from the Assistant Vaccinators that the village people would not supply them with food, or assist them. At last I had to report the circumstance to the Political Agent, who, in the end, had to fine the village ; but all to no purpose. I then pro- posed that the system should be changed. Every Durbar should send their own men, and if approved of by the Superintendent of Vaccination in respect to health, knowledge of writing, reading, and keeping records, and after being properly instructed in their vaccination duties, they should be appointed ; this plan answered the purpose for which it was intended, but from it arose one great evil, the Assistant Vaccinators spent most of their time about the villages near their own homes ; in spite of this the new system was a great improvement on the former, for now work was done much better than before. Besides, the Chiefs immediately began to increase the number of their Vacci- nators. 2nd reason38 occurred illustrative of this. The Mangrole Chief engaged a Vaccinator ; after two or three months, I received no returns from him ; I wrote three months successively for his returns, and getting only evasive answers, and no returns, I sent a man to act, and ordered the Mangrole Vaccinator into Rajkote. He came, accompanied by the Mangrole Wukeel. They made a complaint that the Joonaghur Durbar had withheld the returns, because they had not been transmitted through them. I asked the Wukeel &quot;Who paid the Vaccinator?&quot; He, answered: &quot;the Mangrole Durbar.&quot; Then I said, &quot; Send one return to me, and one to the Joonaghur Durbar.&quot; They were quite satisfied, but Joonaghur was not. The head Karbaree of that State came to me, and said, &quot; If this were done, it would be a proof that the Mangrole Chief owed Joona- ghur no allegiance,&quot; and requested that the whole correspondence might be forwarded to the Political Agent for his decision, who gave it in favour of Joonaghur. In conse- quence of this, the Mangrole Chief refused to give the Vaccinator his salary. During the dispute no work has been carried on ; Joonaghur, however, is willing to pay the Vaccinator. 3. The Inspector General also states that &quot; the superintendence is weak.&quot; For nearly one year, during the time I was away on sick leave, there was no practical superintendence whatever ; there was virtually no Superintendent of Vaccination in Kattiawar ; the duties were carried on by the medical officer in charge of the regiment at Rajkote. Besides which, there is no vaccination office establishment. The senior Vaccinator writes the official correspondence, and travels about with the Superintendent, who has to find him a tent, and pay for fodder for his horse ; for he certainly could not do either on rupees 20 per month, which is all the pay he gets, and he must have some means of getting about. During the greater part of 1867 Dr. Blomfield was Acting Superintendent of Vaccination, but on account of his being ordered to take charge of the 17th Regi- ment N. I. and station at Rajkote, he was only able to travel eighty days ; so that for nearly two years there was no practical supervision, except those eighty days. 4.The disturbed state of Kattiawar has also been a serious obstacle to vacci- nation being properly and efficiently carried on in some parts of the province. 5.The returns for the year 1868 show a considerable increase on the total for 1867, greater in proportion than the increase of 1867, above the total for 1866. I thought last year the number had nearly reached the maximum ; the great increase is therefore more satisfactory than I had any reason to expect, as from the best computation I can make, 50,000 subjects yearly are all that can be estimated as available for vaccination. I have not made this calculation altogether from the annual birth rate, as it is so very difficult to estimate that correctly, on account of the migratory habits of the people; but have taken into consideration the large number of strangers that visit Kattiawar yearly.
39 6.In the commencement of my report I mentioned that the population of Kat- tiawar was, according to the last census, 1,880,240 ; this includes the inhabitants of the Guickwar's territories, which are not under my superintendence, and the population of which is estimated at upwards of 300,000. If this estimate is correct, little or no increase can be expected in the returns for 1869. I have not commenced this part of my Report till to-day (January 5th), in hopes that most of the returns for the month of December might have arrived, but as only one Government Vaccinator's report has yet come to hand, and very few from the Chiefs' Vaccinators, I cannot put it off longer, and must therefore only take eleven months of the year, and compare them with the corresponding eleven months of the year 1867. 7.The total vaccinated from January to November in 1867 was 35,860; the total for the corresponding months 1868 is 44,440 ; showing an increase of 8,580. There has been no tendency to increase in the latter months of the year, as in former returns, but the monthly average from January has been pretty equal, with one exception, the month of May ; the large number returned for that month was the result of one of the Government Vaccinators being sent to the talooka of Wankaneer, where there had never been a resident Vaccinator before. Of course the cold weather months show a greater average than the hot and rainy, but the difference is not nearly so great as might be expected, because vaccination can be carried on all the year round in Kat- tiawar, the change of temperature during the different seasons not being very marked. The steady monthly average is, I think, another proof that the maximum has been reached. 8.Altogether, the number of Vaccinators employed during the year has been 42, 34 Chiefs', and 8 Government. There are nine Government Vaccinators in all ; but one travels about with the Superintendent, and writes the official correspondence ; an- other is the station Vaccinator, and his returns go in separately. Although there are 34 Chiefs' Vaccinators, on paper, the number for all practical purposes is much less ; for example, the Jam of Nowanuggur entertains four Vaccinators, but generally only two are properly employed. It is not the Vaccinators' fault, but the Durbar's, who will not assist them. Then there are always two or three who are utterly incompetent for their work. The Mallia Vaccinator is an instance of this ; he has become so since he was appointed. I have requested his removal; but I will mention the Vaccinators in detail, when reporting on their work. Four additional Vaccinators have been appointed during the year ; two in January by the Jam of Nowanuggur, and two in March by the Nawab of Joonaghur, making thirty-four in all, four more than in 1867. 9.The Chief of Bhownuggur has for some years past made one of his Vaccina- tors do duty as a Native Superintendent, having increased his pay to Rs. 20 per month. I have not found that the work is carried on any better for the extra super- intendence ; indeed, the returns do not come in as regularly as before ; but I highly approve of the appointment nevertheless, as being something for the other Vaccinators
40 to look forward to, especially if given, as in this case, to the most deserving. The Nawab of Joonaghur is desirous of making a similar appointment. The late Political Agent, Colonel Keatinge, recommended that there should be four Native Superintendents, each on Rs. 50 per mensem, and that the Government Vaccinators should be withdrawn. This would be a good arrangement if either of the systems as above were inaugurated ; but trustworthy men could not be got for Rs. 50 a month, every thing is so dear in Kattiawar; a horse alone costs Rs. 30 a month to keep; besides, Kattiawar would lose the services of eight Government Vaccinators whom the Superintendent can order off at a moment's notice, and who are generally employed where no Vaccina- tor would be kept, except at the Government expense. Two or three of the Chiefs who now have the use of Government men, can well afford to keep Vaccinators ; these might be withdrawn. There has been no change amongst the Government Vaccinators ; one man was fined 4 Rs. for losing lancets ; otherwise no punishment has been inflicted on any of them. 10.During the year one Chief's Vaccinator died; he was very old, almost pastdoing his work, and should have given up work some years since, but had no pension to retire on; otherwise I would have got him invalided long ago. If Native Chiefs' Vaccinators had a pension to depend on, we could get a better class of men, who would prove much more efficient; because it would be a real punishment to be discharged ; now they do not object, as the pay they get is not sufficient to keep them. Two Chiefs' Vaccina- tors took their own discharge on getting better employment; one was discharged for laziness ; three were fined for the same reason, and for not forwarding their returns regularly. 11.The Government Vaccinators have worked well during the year. Those whose work I have inspected are most of them deserving of praise ; in particular, I may mention 1 st Assistant Vaccinator Runchore Munguldass (General No. 32), also Chotalal Bhoyjee, (General No. 308), whose returns show the greatest total, for the year, of any of the Vaccinators, Government's or Chiefs'. I am particularly pleased with this man, because he has been frequently transferred from one place to another, and always goes so willingly, and does his work as if he took a real interest in it. The returns of Pragjee Anundjee (General No. 277) and Rewashunker Sookaram (General No. 305), for the year each show a small total; but the former was absent from his station for three months (two on leave, and one on duty in Rajkote), and the latter was ill two months. The greater number of the Chiefs' Vaccinators have not done well during the year. I particularly allude to those whose work I inspected. The Gondul, Nowanuggur, and Jafferabad Vaccinators have all reported that they cannot do their work properly, because they get no assistance, that is to say, no horse, no sepoy or puttawalla. (I know- it to be true as far as Nowanuggur is concerned.) The Jafferabad man is paid for by three Chiefs, Joonaghur, Jafferabad, and Deedan, (the Joonaghur Durbar keeps other six Vaccinators besides this man); he states that the other two Durbars give him
41 proper assistance, but that Jafferabad will give him no help whatever. Three of the Joonaghur Vaccinators, Hurrelal, Pranlal, and Kesoram Visvanath, deserve praise for the quantity of work they have done ; but the two first-mentioned are very careless ; some of the children have marks inside, and some out-side the arm; some of the cicatrices are large and well defined, others small, and yet all from the same lymph. Two other Vaccinators belonging to the Joonaghur Durbar are almost useless, viz., Mallia and Puttun. Dossoo Ramutalla, one of the Nowanuggur Vaccinators, and the Limree Chief's Vaccinator, deserve mentioning; their work, as to quantity and quality, is good. The work done by the Gondul men is small in quantity, and bad in quality ; so I am inclined to think they are as much to blame as the Durbars. Toolsee Geega of Bhownuggur has vaccinated the largest number of all the Chiefs' Vaccina- tors ; but as I have not inspected his work, I cannot report on it. On my way to join I passed through Bhownuggur, inspected the children in several villages, and found the work well done. This does not appear in my report, because I had not then taken over charge of my appointment. I commenced my inspection tour on the 25th March, very soon after my return from sick leave. I might have commenced a few days sooner, but was detained for want of tents. As soon as I could purchase one I started, and first of all visited the talooka of Gondul, one of the Vaccinators there having witten to say that the Durbar would not give him proper assistance. I had an interview with the Karbarree, who promised to do what was necessary, but from what I have since heard, I fear very little more help has been given. In April I examined the work done in six talookas by General Nos. 103 and 112, and four Chiefs' Vaccinators, viz., Wudwan, Seala, Luktur, and Bujjana. The work done by General Nos. 103 and 112 was satisfactory, the work of the Chiefs' Vaccinators done during the commencement of 1868 and end of 1867, was very satisfactory. In May, during the fourteen days I was travelling, I examined the work done in seven talookas, three of them being the same as I visited in April, the remaining four, Wunode, Moolee, Choteyla, and Sunkulpore. The work I inspected was all satisfactory (except that at Sunkulpore), and under the charge of some of the Vaccinators I mentioned in my last month's report; the only additional Vaccinators' work inspected was the Limree Chief's and the Rajkote Chief's ; the former was not satisfactory, but he said he had been ill, and since the appointment of the second Limree Vaccinator, there had been difficulties ; formerly there was only one Limree Vaccinator, now there are two. Part of this and a few days of last month I was detained at the Wudwan Government station Dispensary, operating, on several cases, lithotomy, and others. From the 20th May till 3rd October I was in Rajkote, performing my Civil duties. On the 3rd I commenced my tour. After getting some forty miles from that station, I got a letter from the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals, requesting me to be ready at a moment's notice to return to Rajkote, and take charge of that station, Dr. Blomfield, who was performing that duty, being ordered off in charge of the 17th Regiment Native Infantry. This order was eventually reversed, and I marched with the Regiment. 6 v
42 During the month of October I examined the work done in three talookas, Dhurrole, Nowanuggur, and Jallia, by General Nos. 186 and 307, and three Vacci- nators in the employment of the Chiefs of the above mentioned talookas. The work of General No. 307 was good; that done by General No. 186 was partly good, and partly bad. Most of the work done by the Nowanuggur man was good; in three or four villages it was bad. The greater part of the Nowanuggur talooka I travelled through had been without a Vaccinator for more than a year. Dr. Blomfield had discharged the man, because he did other work as well; this man had been located at Balumba. With the greatest difficulty, after many years of persuasion on the part of three Political Agents, a new man has been appointed, but has remained at the capital (Jamnuggur) ever since. I was on my way to Jamnuggur, to try to induce the Durbar to send him to his proper place, when I was ordered into Rajkote. During the month of November I examined the work done in nine talookas, viz.; Dhurrole, Gondul, Rajkote, Mangnee, Joonaghur, Porebunder, Bantwa, Kun- dorna, Dhorajee, and inspected the work of General Nos. 141, 186, 305, and 307, and the work done by the Rajkote, Gondul, Porebunder, Joonaghur and Bantwa Chiefs' Vaccinators. The work of the two Gondul Vaccinators which I examined was bad, they had vaccinated very few children, and the cicatrices were small; the work of the others was good. In the month of December I examined the work done in the talookas of Jaitpore, Mangrole, Joonaghur, and Bantwa, and inspected the children operated on by seven Vaccinators belonging to the above-mentioned Chiefs. Two of the Joona- ghur Vaccinators, the Bantwa, and Jaitpore, men's work was bad. The Joonaghur Vaccinator's work was bad, from beng carelessly done ; some of the children had marks inside, and some outside, the arm. Many of the children operated on by a third Joonaghur man had no marks at all. The Mangrole man's work was good in some villages, but bad in others, sheer carelessness from not propagating from good lymph, as he is a very able man. All the Durbars I have visited during my tour have treated me, individually, with the greatest kindness and courtesy, except that of Porebunder, where the Rana showed me no attention whatever ; for one whole day I could not get supplies of any kind, although I wrote twice, and sent four verbal mes- sages by different messengers. Nowanuggur and Gondul will not assist their Vaccina- tors as they ought to do ; they think as long as they pay them, they have done their duty. I have had to make the same complaint every year about them. Some of the smaller Durbars have given trouble, but it has generally been where four or more Chiefs con- jointly entertain one Vaccinator, and therefore very difficult to arrive at the truth. Joonaghur and Bhownuggur both employ a large staff of Vaccinators, and take much interest in the work. Some of the smaller Chiefs also take great interest in vaccination, but as there are upwards of 300 Chiefs, it is impossible to mention them all. 12. The percentage of success, as reported by the Vaccinators, is much too high; the highest percentage by the most careful Vaccinators whose work I have inspected might be put down at 92, and that done by some Vaccinators is as low as 75 per centum.
43 13.I have received lymph several times from England and from different parts of India, but it has all proved inert. I have neither heard of nor seen an outbreak of small-pox during my short tour, although I have travelled 1,110 miles, visited 132 villages, and inspected 5,051 children. I saw two children, each having been well vaccinated, as the marks bore evidence, who had suffered severely from small-pox, one five and the other three years ago ; this is the first time I have even seen a case in Kattiawar of small-pox following vaccination. The first case was attacked three days after the vesicles (vaccine) made its appearance. The lymph we are at present using has one peculiarity, it very frequently produces a sore with a deep excavation, which takes months to heal; I saw one child who had been vaccinated four months ago, and one of his arms was not then healed, this lymph was introduced from England in January 1867. 14.I found two false returns, both forwarded by the same man. 15.The Political Agent and his assistants have given me great assistance. 16.Colonel Anderson, the Political Agent, has for some months past ordered the vaccination returns to be printed in the Local Weekly Gazette ; it is not always done, for want of space, but, nevertheless, it has a good effect, as all the talookdars subscribe to the paper. REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent44 amounted to 9,534 ; whereas, in the years 1866,1867, and 1868, the number amounts to 21,301. Unvaccinated children are therefore less numerous than they were ; and I believe the Vaccinators worked harder during the past year than in any previous year. That they would have done more had they been entitled to travelling batta may be taken for granted. 2.The increase in the work done by the Vaccinators in the Native States is considerable this year, and is to a certain extent due to the appointment at Major Bar- ton's request of an additional Assistant Vaccinator, to carry on work in the Sunkeira Mewas. He joined his appointment in the month of September, during which and the following months he vaccinated 371 children. The Assistant Vaccinator in Soonth and Kuddana, who during the two months he was employed in 1867 only vaccinated 99 children, has this year performed 619 vaccinations. The Assistant Vaccinator in Barriah has also been very industrious ; the increase in the number of vaccinations performed by him being 539. As Barriah, Soonth, and Kuddana are about the most jungly and least civilized parts of the Circle, the success met with is the more pleasing. 3.The area of the Punch Mahals is 1,675 square miles, and the population is said to be 168,738. Taking the birth-rate at 30 per thousand, the annual addition to the population would be about 5,000, or in round numbers, some 2,000 less than the average number vaccinated yearly for the last three years. 4.The area of the Native States is 12,326 square miles. The country, with the exception of a portion of Rajpeepla, is hilly, jungly, and thinly populated. 5.In my report for the year 1867 I drew attention to the inaccuracy of the returns on the subject of infantile vaccination, and pointed out that the number of children vaccinated under one year of age was greatly exaggerated. In 1866 the per- centage of operations under one year of age in the Punch Mahals was 62, in 1867 it fell to 53, and in 1868 it is only 42, which, however, is still too high. In the Native States a similar change has taken place. If the ages had been as correctly noted during former years as they were during the last, I believe there would have been a large increase in the percentage instead of an apparent decrease. While on tour I always make parti- cular inquiries as to the age at the time of vaccination of each child inspected. From the following statements it will be seen that there has been little or no actual decrease in the number of children vaccinated during infancy. Punch Mahals. Year. Supposed annual number of births. Vaccinations. Under one year. Above one year. Percentage un- der one year. 1866 5,000 3,633 2,200 62 1867 .... 4,231 3,736 53 1868 .... 3,159 4,348 42
45 Native States. Years. Annual number of births. Vaccinations. Under one year. Above one year. Percentage un- der one year. 1866 Unknown. 2,394 2,461 49 1867 ............. 2,318 3,041 43 1868 ............ 2,334 4,749 32 6. The cost of each successful operation in the Punch Mahals was 4 Annas and 3 Pies, and in the Native States 4 Annas and 4 Pies. The latter sum was also about the cost of each successful case throughout the Circle. 7. The percentage of successful operations in the Punch Mahals is 94.4, and in the Native States 93.8. During my tour I took a note of the result in 3,310 of the children inspected, whose names were all called from the monthly returns, and found the percentage of success to be 88.7, which I considered very good work. Of the unsuccessful and doubtful operations 33.5 per centum were under one year of age, and 66.5 above it. 8. Of the total number of vaccinations 51.5 per centum were males, and 48.5 per centum females. 9. The pay of each of the five Government Vaccinators is Rs. 18 per month, and each has a Peon at a monthly pay of Rs. 6. In the Native States one Vacci- nator draws Rs. 20, one Rs. 18-6-0, one Rs. 14-14-0, and the remaining four Rs. 18 each per month. Four of these men have permanent Peons, who draw from Rs. 3-8-0 to Rs. 5 monthly. Major Barton, Polical Agent, is endeavouring to get the pay of all the Peons increased, and he also hopes in a short time, to be able to sanction the appointment of a third Vaccinator in Rajpeepla, and of a separate Vaccinator for each of the States of Ballasinore and Loonawara, instead of one man for both, as at present. Almost every Vaccinator finds it necessary to keep a pony, to convey himself, bedding, &c., from village to village. 10. All the Vaccinators are now able to use Husband's capillary tubes, and in the course of the year 578 tubes, charged by them, were forwarded to the Local Superintendent of the Presidency Circle. The preserved lymph, however, is very uncertain in its action, which possibly may to some extent be due to its not being taken from the arm until the eighth day, when, generally speaking, it has begun to degenerate. In future some of the tubes will be charged with seventh day lymph. 11. In October and November an epidemic of small-pox took place in Ramaisra (Halole) and surrounding villages, and several children died. The disease had been conveyed from the Guicowar's territory, where it was prevalent at that time. The
46 Vaccinator of the district, I regret to say, had been working very carelessly, and has since been discharged from the service. In the hot weather small-pox broke out in Jaitpoor, a village in the Oodeypoor district. On my visiting the village in November, the thanadar kindly collected for inspection as many children as he could, and the result was that of thirty children with good cicatrices on their arms, none had suffered from small-pox ; of five children with doubtful cicatrices three had suffered slightly ; of eight unsuccessfully vaccinated, three had been slightly attacked ; and of the unvaccinated, seven in number, all had suffered more or less severely from the disease. I am not aware that any other small-pox cases occurred during the year. 12.Inoculation is not practised in this Circle. 13.Within the last fourteen months I have examined the work of five of the Vaccinators twice, and that of the remaining seven, once. I was highly satisfied with the work of Jaithalal Gunputram (General No. 253), Ballajee Purbhooram (General No. 254), Mahasunker Cassiram (General No. 255), Fuckeer Mohamed Mullangbhoy, and Mahasook Kuddoojee : satisfied with the work of Pursotum Duyaram (General No. 279) Heeralal Wishoonath, Chuggon Roopchund, Wishoonath Oomyasunker, and Sobharam Sewuckram ; and was only disappointed with the work of two men, viz., Gunputrao Ramchunder (General No. 262), who has been dismissed for incompetency, and Ramsunker Cassiram, dismissed for entering false names in his return. 14.The lymph has generally been good, and vaccination has been carried on throughout the whole year by all the Vaccinators. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. Local Superintendent.47 2.Of these, 5,727 were males, and 5,030 females ; 7,170 Hindoos, 1,456 Maho- medans, 962 Christians, 949 Parsees, and 220 of other castes, chiefly Jews; 4,793 under and 5,964 above, one year of age. 3.Of the total operations 8,149, or a percentage of 75.75, were successful; in 1,033 they failed ; and in 1,575 the result could not be ascertained. 4.The lymph has been throughout of very good quality ; the success of the lymph received from Europe and the different Superintendents of Vaccination tending materially to this result. Want of lymph in sufficient quantities continues to harass us as badly as ever. I might say with truth, that this is the only obstacle in the way of the extensive spread of vaccination in Bombay worth paying any attention to. In my humble opinion, nothing short of legislative interference on the part of the authorities can meet and overcome this difficulty. The intelligent, well-to-do classes are much in our way. They one and all receive all the benefits of vaccination, as a matter of right, without, in the majority of instances, a farthing's expense; and as a return, not only do they not allow any matter to be taken from the arms of their children, but very often prevent us from taking lymph from the arms of children belonging to their servants, or their poor neighbours. How long, under the present circumstances, the department will be able to cope successfully with this difficulty, and keep vacci- nation going on, from day to day, all the year round, in spite of this difficulty, it would be vain of me to say. As a matter of fact, the poorer classes have long enter- tained the belief that the Government permits the forcible taking of lymph from a successfully vaccinated child ; and it is this belief that enables us to obtain fresh lymph ; once disabused of it, I need not say that one and all will absolutely refuse, and naturally so, to give any lymph ; and then vaccination, as a matter of course, must come to a stand still; and it is only a question of time for the poor to follow the rich in refusing lymph. To argue with the poor people is worse than useless, they are too ignorant and illiterate to be convinced of the absolute necessity of taking lymph from one child to vaccinate another, and of the harmlessness of the operation of removing a little lymph from a vesicle. Nor are they at all to blame for this, seeing that all the most intelligent and educated persons object to a drop of lymph being taken. It is absolutely necessary to legislate for this, and it cannot be done too soon, to do away with this anomalous state of things, and make it legal to require lymph from every successfully vaccinated child. 5. During the past year 426 tubes were received from the several Superintendents of Vaccination, and in our turn, we supplied 6 different outstations with 131 tubes, 356 points, 9 pairs of glasses and 9 crusts. 6. The population of Bombay, according to the last census of 1864 is 816,562. 7. During the year Rs. 6,620 were expended, comprising the salaries and allowance of the Superintendent, the Vaccinators, and the Peons; and the contingencies of the establishment, making the cost of each Vaccination, 9 Annas and 10 Pies. The subordinates have given every satisfaction.
48 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS. TANNA. One Municipal Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. ATKINS. Population, 10,581. Total cost, Rs. 213-5-6. Average cost of each Vaccination, 14 Annas and 8 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 176 .... .... 103 58.5 1868 232 56 .... 191 82.3 I an glad to report this year that there has been an increase in the numbers vacci- nated, attributable, in a great measure, to the diligence of the new Vaccinator appointed at the beginning of the year. Vaccination was carried on during the whole year excepting during the month of May, when it was discontinued on account of the lymph becoming so bad that it had to be obtained from Bombay. Great difficulty is found in keeping up the supply, from the dislike of the natives to allow their children to be vaccinated from, to obviate which they destroy the vesicles about the 6th day. Small-pox was prevalent from January to June, and one case came into hospital which was unprotected. BANDORA. Operations performed by Sub-Asistant Surgeon A. DESOUZA, in charge Dispen- sary. Population, 7,746. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 93 ....... ...... 64 68.8 1868 336 243 ...... 286 85.1
49 During the year ending 31st December 1868 the total number of children vac- cinated amounted to 336, which exceeds the number vaccinated in any previous year since 1856. Vaccination was introduced into the Catholic Orphanage here in March last, and a large number of children belonging to this institution were vaccinated, and it was subsequently kept up both at the Dispensary and the Orphanage, on every suc- ceeding Friday. The supply of lymph was obtained solely from the latter institution. It is owing to this circumstance that the increased number of operations appears in this year's return. The success was 85.1 per centum. Small-pox was not seen here, except in a sporadic form in March last. ALIBAUGH. Operations performed by GUNGAJEE RAMJEE (General No. 330), Hospital Assist- ant, in Medical charge Dispensary. Population50 vaccinated, with the exception of infants within four months old, who were not allowed to be vaccinated by their parents, and indeed great difficulty has been experienced in performing this operation amongst Hindoos, particulary the Kolees (fishermen). The largest numbers were vaccinated in the months of May, June, July, and August, and the least in January, February, April and November. Two Vaccinators were sent from Bombay in the month of May to vaccinate the children in Alibaugh districts, and it would appear that they have vaccinated a large number in the adjacent villages. Small-pox prevailed amongst the children of Kolees in Vursolee, about a mile and a half distant from this town, and slightly in Alibaugh among the Marathas at the end of the month of December. One Mussulman boy about 14 years old was admitted into hospital with small-pox in the month of May, and recovered. BHEWNDY. Operations performed by Sub-Assistant Surgeon SHAMRAO JAGHANATH, L.M., in charge Charitable Dispensary. Population51 RUTNAGHERRY. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon C. JOYNT, M.D. Population, 67,488. Total cost, Rs. 134-8-6. Average cost of each Vaccination, 1 Anna and 5 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,302 .... .... 1,008 77.4 1868 1,342 130 .... 1,080 75.4 The vaccinations performed during the past year exceeded those of the preced- ing year by 130, and those of the year 1866 by 1,159, and this increase appears, every thing considered, satisfactory. 2. Of the total number vaccinated, 596 were children under one year old, showing, both, absolutely and relatively, a greater number of infants operated on than in any preceding year. 3. The station Vaccinator extended his operations during the year to sixteen villages, besides Rutnagherry, and extending in a radius of 6 miles from the station. In these villages 1,190 children of various ages were vaccinated, and 242 in Rutna- gherry. In the different villages the vaccinations varied from 153 in Pomendee to 5 in Sewry, the difference depending doubtless on the population of the villages. 4. Since my arrival at this station, I have regularly inspected the work of the Vaccinator in the town of Rutnagherry, as well as in the village at the Fort about a mile from the town. In many cases I found the lymph to be very indifferent, but by a careful selection of good vesicles for the propagation of vaccine matter, an improve- ment in the quality of the lymph has been effected. 5. As I am unable to visit the different villages in which the Vaccinator per- forms his operations personally, I make him bring me every month a certificate from the village Fouzdar in verification of his return. 6. The operations of the Vaccinator are attended with some difficulty up to November, owing to the want of a Peon. A Peon was engaged on the 15th November 1868, and I trust that the amount of work done in 1869 will show that this assistance has not been unnecessary.
52 VINGORLA. Operations performed by the Apprentice, under Mr. Apothecary HANSON'S supervision. Population, 10,000. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 151 ...... ...... 137 90.7 1868 382 231 ...... 358 93.7 The number of the popuation among whom vaccination is carried on, is estimated at about 10,000. The total number vaccinated during the year was 382, being an in- crease of 231 over the preceding year ; 229 were male, and 153 female children; 65 were under one year, and 317 above that age. The successful vaccinations have been 358, or 93.7 per centum on the total number vaccinated. The lymp was good and the vesicles were in general characteristic. In some children, the vesicles were broken before the eighth day, and the lymph dried up into irregular crusts. Such cases were entered in the register as doubtful, and were afterwards either re-vaccinated, or allowed to wait for another time. In April, vaccination could not be kept going, owing to the loss of the lymph, which occurred by the removal of three children with the vaccine vesicles, to another part of the district. In May lymph was obtained on glasses from the Vaccinator at Malwan, but it did not take; it was subsequently taken from the arm of a child which had been brought from Sawunt Warree, and proved effective. Vaccination has since then been carried on regularly. There being no Vaccinator or Peon attached to this station, the only expense incurred on account of vaccination during the year is Rs. 1-12, being the value of two lancets and one lancet case, which were used in vaccinating the children ; this sum divided among 358 successful vaccinations, gives one pie nearly as the cost of each vaccination. Small-pox prevailed to a small extent in the town of Vingorla during the months of April and May last. The disease was confined chiefly to the Chumbars or Moochees, whose houses are situated in a separate part of the town. The cases, with one exception, were all of the discrete kind. All recovered ; 34 persons were attacked, of whom 17 were adults, and 17 chil- dren between the ages of three and ten years. It was stated, that, of those attacked 23 persons had previously been vaccinated, but on inspecting a few of their arms, no vaccine marks were visible.
53 KARWAR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assist. Surgeon J. DAVIES. Population, 5,000. Total cost, Rs. 135. Average cost of each Vaccination, 6 Annas. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 308 .... .... 277 89.9 1868 362 54 .... 306 84.5 The total number vaccinated is 54 more than in the previous year. Out of the total of 362, fifty-six only were vaccinated under one year of age, and 306 above that age. All classes here have still a great aversion to vaccination within the first year, above that age they acquiesce in the operation, but show no anxiety to have it done. Probably the absence of small-pox for some years back at Karwar and the adjacent villages renders them indifferent to vaccination. The quality of the lymph has been good and the vesicles are generally very well developed. SURAT. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon II. J. GANE, (Acting). Population, 85,000. Total cost, Rs. 172-1-0. Average cost of each Vaccination, 11 Pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,631 .... .... 1,395 85.5 1868 2,840 1,209 .... 2,370 83.4
54 2,8-10 children have been vaccinated during the year by the Native Vaccinator under my supervision, being an increase of 1,209, as compared with the previous year. 2,370 cases were successful, 112 were unsuccessful, and 358 were doubtful. The percentage of successful cases being 83.4. 1,566 were males, and 1,274 were females. 1,241 were under one year and 1,599 were above one year. 10 were Christians, 1,882 were Hindoos, 759 were Mussulmans, 105 were Parsees, and 84 were other castes. A good supply of lymph has been kept up, and the vesicles have been large and defined. The total cost of vaccination was Rs. 172-1-0. The average cost of each vaccination was 11 Pies. A large portion of Natives have a great objection to vaccination, but during the months of February, March, and April, when small-pox prevailed in the city, they readily brought their children to be vacci- nated. The number of deaths in the city from small-pox was 367, of these 354 were children, and 13 adults. BROACH. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon J. GLEN. Population, 30,755. Total cost, Rs. 160. Average cost of each Vaccination, 2 Annas. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,226 .... .... 1,094 89.2 1868 1,265 40 .... 1,018 80.4 Since receiving charge of the Broach Civil Hospital, three months ago, vaccination has been carried on steadily and efficiently. The numbers vaccinated have been some- what greater than in the previous year, but the number of the successful cases is considerably less. The number of inhabitants in the city amounts to 30,755. The total cost of vac- cination in 1868 amounted to Rs. 160, and the average cost of each vaccination 2 Annas.
55 POONA. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Major LORD, M.D. Population, 30,000. Total cost, Rs. 168. Average cost of each Vaccination, 1 Anna and 7 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 2,022 .... .... 1,736 85.8 1868 1,641 .... 381 1,387 84.5 There has been a decrease of 381 in the total number of persons vaccinated, which the tabular report shows to be divided over the different heads borne on the annual return, with the exception of Christian children, and those over one year of age, in both of which classes there has been an increase. The proportion of successful cases is 1.3 per cent. lower than in the preceding year. The Vaccinator formerly received assistance in collecting children for vaccination either from a Police Peon, or one supplied by the Municipality, but since 1867, all such aid has been withdrawn, and to this he attributes the decrease in the number of his operations. In paragraph 3 of Resolution of Govern- ment in the General Department, No. 895, dated the 13th May 1868, regarding revised subordinate Hospital Establishments, 3 Peons are stated to have been recommended by Mr. Peile for Hospitals which have a Vaccinator attached to them, and two for those without a Vaccinator, which Government considers to be a reasonable allotment; so, as but two Peons are at present allowed on the establishment of the Sassoon Hospital, a third, chiefly with the view of giving assistance to the Vaccinator, would probably be sanctioned if the matter were departmentally represented. The lymph has been kept in good condition by the Vaccinator, and his operations on European and other fair- skinned children have been very successful. There was a good deal of small-pox in and about Poona in the earlier months of the past year, which led to a correspondence originating with the Cantonment authori- ties as to the necessity for a small-pox hospital, which, so far as I am aware, was not attended with any decided result towards establishing so desirable an institution. This year we have had a few cases of the disease; in fact, seldom a cold season passes at Poona without its making its appearance in the City or Cantonment. It is thus especially desirable that vaccination should be encouraged, and I therefore hope the moderate aid of a Peon to the Vaccinator as above suggested, will not be denied. It may add slightly to expense, but the average rate at present is not high, being for the year under report between 1 Anna and 7 Pies, and 1 Anna 8 Pies for each opera- tion performed, or not quite 2d. English money.
56 The total cost of vaccination for the year was Rupees 168. There is but one Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, on a salary of 14 Rupees per mensem. There are no data from which to estimate the population in the Vaccinator's charge, which con- sists of57 No cases of small-pox occurred in the camp at Dapoolee during the period embraced in this Report. The number of the population among whom vaccination is carried on is about 5,949. There is no separate establishment for vaccination at Dapoolee. AHMEDNUGGUR. Two Vaccinators, one Government, and one Municipal, under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. T. DANN, B.A. Population, 39,000. Total cost, Rs. 242-8-0. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas 7 Pies. Establishment. Years. Total Vac- cinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. Government .... 1867 993 .... .... 908 91.4 1868 1,010 17 .... 914 90.5 Municipal ...... 1867 735 .... .... 669 91.0 1868 808 73 .... 713 88.2 I have much pleasure in being able again to report an increase of ninety in the number of vaccinations during the past year. The percentage of successful, however, is slightly less. The Municipality's Vaccinator has effected an increased number of vaccinations this year, as compared with the year 1867, viz. 808, as compared with 735 during the year preceding. The number of operations returned by the Civil Surgeon's Vaccinator is 903 in the city, being an increase of 112 over last year's return, and, although there has been a slight decrease in the number of vaccinations effected,within cantonment, yet the operations exceed by seventeen the return for the year 1867. The annual return of persons vaccinated at the Civil Hospital Ahmednuggur, shows a slight increase over last year, viz. 130 to 126 of the year preceding. No cases of small-pox were admitted into the Civil Hospital during the year. There were only 25 persons vaccinated in the Police Hospital during the year, as contrasted with 63 of the year preceding, but not a single case of small-pox occurred 8 v
58 in the Police force during the year 1868. Of six recruits who joined the Police corps during the year, three had had small-pox, and three had been vaccinated before they were enlisted. The largest percentage of unsuccessful cases was in the month of January 1868, and doubtful cases in the month of October 1868. The Vaccinators were both of them very attentive to their duties. SATTARA. One Government Vaccinator, under 'the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. V. CARTER, M.D. Population 24,257. Total cost, Rs. 300. Average cost of each Vaccination, 1 Anna and 6 Pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,344 .... .... 1,270 94.4 1868 3,177 1,833 .... 2,825 88.9 The above return shows a total vaccinated of 3,177, being an increase on the pre- vious year of 1833, and the highest number for any one of the last five years. That small-pox was prevalent in the districts around this city during the period under report may be one efficient reason why vaccination was sought after by the people more freely then than during the previous two years, when the disease did not generally appear. Of the total vaccinated 1,147 subjects were under one year of age. The month of April shows the highest monthly number, viz. 909 ; and it may readily be understood that the majority of the children operated on came from the districts, and not from the town or station to which the Vaccinator's operations are supposed to be chiefly con- fined. In fact, it may be inferred that the children in the city of Sattara are already largely protected by vaccination, from the circumstance that so few fatal cases have occurred in the city during the past year, notwithstanding free communication with infected districts. It is difficult to account for the smaller percentage of success during the past year than previously, since the lymph employed has always, when it succeeded, caused good vesicles, and shows no signs of deterioration of quality.
59 SHOLAPOOR. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon G. Y. HUNTER. Population 60,000. Total cost, Rs. 187-14-8. Average cost of each Vaccination, 4 Annas and 6 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfiilly Vaccinated. Percentage of Succese. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,655 .... .... 1,229 74.3 1868 671 .... 984 585 87.2 During the past year the number of persons vaccinated was 671, of whom 379 were males, and 292 were females ; 291 were children under one year of age, and 380 were above that age. 585 operations were successful, 43 doubtful, and 43 unsuccessful. There is a very great falling off in the number of operations, as compared with the previous year, when 1,229 children were vaccinated. This is probably owing to the fact, so far as I can gather from the Hospital records, that a new Vaccinator was em- ployed during the year 1868 in place of the late Vaccinator, Ramchunder Shreeput, who was sentenced and discharged for rioting during the year 1867. This new Vac- cinator was recommended and sent by the Superintendent of Vaccination, Central Circle, from Ahmednuggur; he was quite a stranger to this station, and besides for about the period of five months he had no Peon or Sepoy to assist him in procuring children for the operation. There is another reason to account for the falling off in the number of operations, viz. that another Vaccinator was employed at the Charitable Dispensary in Sholapoor, by the Municipality, since the year 1867, for the purpose of vaccinating in the city. The successful operations amount to 87.5 per cent. There is, I am happy to be able to state, a very decided increase this year in the percentage of success, as compared with the previous one, when the percentage of success was only 74.4. The quality of the lymph was very favourably reported on by my predecessors, during the year, and I can testify to the goodness of its quality now, from personal observation, on three distinct occasions since my arrival in the month of December last. I beg to state that, as I have only recently joined this appointment, I am unable to speak very positively of the system of vaccination established at this station ; but I have no doubt, with careful supervision, the good work will progress, and Natives will be persuaded to give their children the benefits of vaccination.
60 DHOOLIA. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon G. BAINBRIDGE. Population, 13,277. Total cost, Rs. 216-4-9. Average cost of each Vaccination 4 Annas. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 808 .... .... 710 87.9 1868 878 70 .... 796 90.7 It will be seen that the percentage of successful cases and the total number of cases vaccinated have somewhat increased during the past year ; and the total num- ber of vaccinations is in excess of the average number for the last five years. Con- siderable difficulty has been experienced in inducing the people to send their children for vaccination to the station where it is performed, not owing, I think, to any strong prejudice against the operation, but in most cases to ignorance, or indifference. I regret to say that the village authorities have been somewhat irregular in the per- formance of their duties of assisting the Vaccinator in collecting the children for vacci- nation, and have frequently required reminding of this work, which it is incumbent on them to aid. The difficulty of gathering together subjects for vaccination has however been in a great measure obviated since Government have sanctioned three Peons on the establishment of the Civil Hospital; one of these was appointed to assist the Vaccinator, and he being under my direct authority, is of more service than the Police Peons and other village servants, who have other duties to perform, and are consequently not always available. The duties of the Vaccinator being ex- tremely light, and the area of his work very small, confined as it is to the town of Dhoolia, I have directed that he shall personally visit the houses of those people who are unwilling to bring their children to the vaccine station, so that he may use per- suasion to induce them to submit to the operation. The Municipality of Dhoolia have had brought before their notice the question of entertaining a Vaccinator in their service, in lieu of the one at present who belongs to the Vaccination Department. The subject was discussed at a general meeting of the Commissioners, and they gave a unanimous decision against the proposal, on the ground that the expenses incurred in carrying out public vaccination were, they thought, properly debitable to Imperial funds as at present. I think that probably the influence of the Municipality might be productive of greater facility and success in the prosecution of vaccination; but seeing that a considerable number of the persons vaccinated are not inhabitants of the town, but only temporary residents, prisoners, or camp followers, and that the employ- ment of Vaccinators out of local or Municipal funds, is not yet uniformly adopted or
61 proposed, there does not appear to me to be any strong argument in favour of the expenses of vaccination in this station being borne by the Municipality. Two cases of variola were treated in the Civil Hospital during the year, one of them being a bad confluent case; both recovered. Two other cases were attended in the town, one of which recovered, and the other died, having been visited for the first time on the eighth day of the disease, which proved fatal on the tenth. Lymph was sent to several Vaccinators in the districts, and especially to Malli- gaum, where, for some reason, it was most frequently reported to have proved inert, though that which was sent was of uniformly good quality. Vaccination has been performed twice a week throughout the year, and the supply of lymph has been constant and productive of perfectly characteristic vesicles. The conduct of the Vaccinator during the past year has been good, and he has given me satisfaction in the performance of his duties. NASSICK. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Honorary Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. SUMMERS. Population, 21,855. Total cost, Rs. 204. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas 2 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,079 .... .... 1,029 95.3 1868 1,013 .... 66 956 94.3 During the year just expired there have been some changes in the establishment. A good old Vaccinator belonging to the Nassick Civil Hospital died on the 28 th of June, and on the 29th June Ballaje was appointed to fill his place. The first Vaccinator was well up to his work, and expert in its operations; his successor is wanting in the same zealous energy, and the result of last year's operations shows a decrease of 66 in the numbers operated upon, compared with the preceding year. Another feature in the changes for the past year was the employment of a Native Vaccinator at Rs. 12 per mensem by the town Municipality, for part of October and months of November and December ; the number operated upon by him is not shown in the Nassick Civil Hospital Vaccination Return, but it is noted here separately. Vaccination performed by the Municipal Vaccinator, total, 75 ; successful, 44 ; failed, 20; doubtful, 11. I am happy to state Nassick has enjoyed an immunity from small-pox, measles, &c.
62 BELGAUM. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. C. THORP, M.D. (Acting). Population, 27,242. Total cost, Rs 120. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas and 3 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 803 .... .... 759 94.0 1868 578 .... 225 566 97.9 During the year 1868 there has been a large decrease ; this is in a great measure to be attributed to the caste prejudices of the Lingayets and Marathas, also to the fact that two Vaccinators are working in the same district, in opposition, as it were, to each other. If the pay of one man were increased to Rupees (15) fifteen, and this sum given partly by Government, and partly by the Municipality, it would make the situation worth keeping; so the Vaccinator would be careful to give true reports and that there should be no shortcomings. In the Staff bazaar and lines 96 have been vaccinated in a population of 6,078, making a total of vaccinations 674, at a cost of 120 Rupees, being nearly at the rate of 2 Annas 10 Pies for each person vaccinated. DHARWAR. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon M. M. MACKENZIE. Population, 30,000. Total cost, Rs. 116-12-5. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas 1 Pie. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 635 .... .... 548 86.3 1868 661 26 .... 536 81.1
63 The Vaccination Return for the year 1868 shows an increase of 26 over that of the preceding year, being 661, of which 536 were successful, giving a little over 81 per cent. successful, or 5 per. cent less than that for the preceding year. The decrease may be accounted for by the disappearance of many of the vaccinated children, removed inten- tionally or otherwise by their parents, and to some extent, doubtless, the failing health and strength of the lately deceased Vaccinator prevented his seeing many of the cases personally after the operation. I have always been able to keep an ample stock of good healthy lymph ; the vesicles being round, full, and of ample size. The authorities have on all occasions given the Vaccinator every aid in his zealous endeavours ; and I much regret his death, which occurred on the 21 st December 1868. He had always proved himself a good, steady, quiet, and zealous servant of Government, and I had always every cause to be satisfied with him. HOOBLEE. One Municipal Vaccinator-under Sub-Assistant Surgeon WAMON WASSADEV, Medical charge of Dispensary. Population, 40,000. Total cost, Rs. 159-10-6. Average cost of each Vaccination, 1 Anna and 7 Pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,375 ...... ...... 1,287 93.6 1868 1,597 222 ...... 1,519 95.1 The total number of persons vaccinated during the last year is 1,597, being an increase of 222 over the number vaccinated during the year 1867. The increase is, in my opinion, greatly due to the efficient manner in which the Assistant Vaccinator performed his duties. Of the total number vaccinated 854 were males, 743 females, Mussulmans 236, Hindoos 1,375, and Christians 4. Of these 1,519 were successful, 15 doubtful, and the remaining 63 unsuccessful. The percentage of success is in excess of that of the previous year by 1.5. The condition of the lymph and vesicles has been good throughout the year. A few isolated cases of small-pox occurred during the month of January The increase in the number of vaccinations shows that the good effects of vac- cination are being better appreciated by the inhabitants.
64 KOLAPOOR. One Native State Vaccinator, under Mr. Apothecary ANDING, in Medical charge Civil duties. Population, 110,000. Total cost, Rs. 90. Average cost of each Vaccination, 1 Anna 6 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,751 .... .... 1,740 99.3 1868 2,028 277 .... 2,013 99.2 During the past year the number of vaccinations performed by the station Vaccina- tor in the city of Kolapoor, with the whole of the villages of the Petta Kurveer, amounts to 2,028, which is more than that of the year preceding by 277 cases. Of the total number vaccinated in the year under report, 1,068 were males, and 960 females, 395 were children under one year, and the remaining 2,013 were above that age. The percentage of successful cases has been 99.2, which is about the same as last year. During the year a few isolated cases of small-pox occurred in ten villages of the Kurveer Petta, namely, Boura, Kundulgaum, Balinga, Vulewda, Wassee, Singna- poor, Saverda, Beed, Padley and Kandgaum, but the disease was not reported to have shown itself in an epidemic form. The lymph in use has been of good quality, and has not failed, and was pronounced to be good by Dr. Dick, of H. M.'s 17th Regiment N. I., to whom lymph was supplied, as usual, for the camp, and also to some of the Vaccinators serving under the Superin- tendent of Vaccination Southern Circle, when required. The station Vaccinator was diligent and attentive to his duties, and his conduct on the whole has been satisfactory. The annual Vaccination Return at the Dispensary is also annexed, from which it will be seen that 328 cases, out of 334 vaccinated during the year, have proved success- ful, thus leaving but six unsuccessful and doubtful. The number vaccinated is greater than that exhibited in the previous year's return by 88 cases. The vesicles have always presented the normal character of the vaccine pock. The increase in the total number vaccinated during the year is partly to be attri- buted to the confidence the people are now acquiring in the benefits of vaccination. and partly to the circumstance of small-pox having prevailed to a greater extent this year than the last, as there were then only four villages affected, while in the year under report the disease prevailed in two, the names of which are given.
65 AHMEDABAD. Two Municipal Vaccinators, under the Acting Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major J. PIRIE, M.D. Population, 100,000. Total cost, Rs. 456-12-0. Average cost of each Vaccina- tion, 1 Anna and 7 Pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 4,273 ...... ...... 4,153 97.2 1868 4,604 331 ...... 4,489 97.5 The returns of vaccination for the year now under report exhibit an increase of 331 operations over the previous year, and the total number of vaccinations was 4,604. The work done by the two Vaccinators was 2,146 and 2,458 respectively, which gives a difference of 312 in the number of operations performed by each. Though the increase is due to the labours of the Mussulman Vaccinator, I do not attribute any want of zeal to the Hindoo lad, but to the greater apathy of the Hindoo community, particularly of the Banian section of it, to the advantages of the protection. There is no actual opposition made to vaccination by the people, but the difficulty the Vacci- nators have to contend against is the fact that the parents frequently conceal the children after being vaccinated, and will not allow the matured vesicles to be opened, for the propagation of the lymph, in the belief, that by taking the fresh lymph from the child's arm, the successful result is impaired. The Vaccinators state that the people are not unwilling to submit their children for protection, but object to the lymph of one child being taken to vaccinate several, whilst others are not used at all. In respect of sex, 2,357 were males, and 2,247 females, showing an increase of 122 cases in males, and 209 in females, indicative of an increasing regard for the protection of female offspring. In the preceding year a considerable increase in this respect was also recorded. In the age the excess was 247 under one year, and 84 above one year. In caste the rise was 128 in Hindoos, and 221 in Mussulmans ; the decrease was 11 in Christians, and 7 in Parsees. In result 4,489 were successful, 78 failed, and 37 were doubtful. The percentage of success was 97.5, showing a slight difference from the previous year. The quality of the lymph has been good and active throughout the year, and the resulting vesicles large, well-formed, and distinctive, leaving well marked cicatrices. During the monsoon the vesicles did not develope so well, were smaller, and the lymph not so clear, but no deterioration was reported, and supplies have regularly been fur- 9 v
66 nished to cantonment and distant stations. After the heavy rains in August last fever prevailed to a large extent, with secondary chest affections, and infantile diarrh67 will be alluded to presently ; of these cases 695 were among children under one year, the ages of 101 being above that amount, a greater number of the latter class being prison- ers who were vaccinated on admission into Jail, as a precautionary measure, when they did not present unequivocal signs of having had small-pox, or of having been vaccinated previously. With regard to sex, 492 were males, 304 females. 682 were Hindoos, 67 Mussulmans, 2 Christians, and 40 other castes. No Parsees were vaccinated, but there are very few in Kaira, and they seldom allow the operation to be performed. With reference to the result of the operations, it will be seen from the return, that 84 have been unsuccessful, and 74 doubtful, out of the total number. This is an unusually large number, but the great majority of the prisoners vaccinated were operated on, either without, or at least very doubtful, results, as might have been expected. The parents of the children operated on are very careless about preserving the vesicles intact until mature, and consequently the result is not as good as it would otherwise be. The work of the Vaccinator is principally confined to the town, but when there is, a scarcity of available subjects there, he vaccinates in the surrounding villages ; did he not do so, he would lose his lymph sometimes, from the difficulty of getting a continu- ous succession of suitable subjects. He also vaccinates, when he has an opportunity, strangers and their children, who come to the town on business, or reside here tempo- rarily. He is allowed a Peon by the Municipality to assist him in the search for and collection of children requiring the operation ; the same Peon now always accompany- ing him when at his work. The quality of the lymph and vesicles has been good throughout the year, and the Vaccinator has performed his work satisfactorily and diligently. In the months of August and September there was a failure in the supply of lymph, owing to floods cutting him off from children whom he had vaccinated, and on whom he was dependent for the continuance of the supply, and considerable difficulty was experienced in get- ting a fair supply in hand, owing to lymph sent in tubes having failed, and the diffi- culty of getting a child brought with good lymph from the district Vaccinator at that season. These difficulties were at last overcome, and there is now a full and continuous supply. From the above causes the numbers vaccinated during August and September were 44 and 17 respectively, a diminution which has told in the annual return. Vaccination inspections are held monthly, and the character of the lymph and the vaccination work generally thereby ascertained. The inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood seem to appreciate and understand the value of the operation, and as a rule do not object to have it performed on themselves or their children, though they are exceedingly slothful and careless about it, and require to be sought out for the purpose. The Parsees seem to have the greatest objection to the operation. The beneficial effects of the operation are well marked in preventing epidemic attacks of small-pox, and though sporadic cases are of constant occurrence, the great majority of the juvenile population are protected by vaccination, while the seniors have been
68 protected by the disease, but, it must be confessed, at a cost of a great deal of blindness and disfigurement; so there does not appear much danger of a serious epidemic from this cause. So far as I am aware, inoculation is not practised here ; I never heard of a case, though I have made frequent inquiries on the subject. The population among whom the vaccination work was performed numbers from 12,000 to 13,000, and the cost of each vaccination has been a little over 2 Annas and 7 Pies ; the pay drawn by the Vaccinator during the year was Rupees 130. RAJKOTE. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon A. M. BLOMFIELD, (Acting)- Population, 2,500 (Camp). Total cost, Rs. 120. Average cost of each Vaccina- tion, 6 Annas and 2 Pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 999 ...... ...... 940 94.0 1868 308 ...... 691 259 86.3 The decrease in the number vaccinated is owing to the operations being confined to the town and station of Rajkote, and its immediate neighbourhood. The few children that I have seen have been properly done ; a large number of those residing in the Sudder bazaar are unvaccinated. VEERUMGAUM. Operations performed by DOWLUT SING, 1st Class Hospital Assistant, in Medical charge of Dispensary. Population No cost. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase Decrease. 1867 .... .... .... .... .... 1868 122 122 .... 106 86.8
69 I arrived here on the evening of 24th January to join my appointment, and com- menced vaccination next day. Lymph was brought from Ahmedabad, and was used successfully till August, when I got some fresh lymph from the Municipal Vaccinator working here, who has been Vaccinator for nearly three years, and who vaccinates three times a week. The total number vaccinated by me in the Dispensary during the year 1868 was 122, of these 71 were male, and 51 female children; 61 under one year, and 61 above that age. The successful cases have been 106, or 86.8 per cent. on the total number vaccinated. The lymph and vesicles were good. No case of small-pox came under my obser- vation- DHURRUMGAUM. Operations performed by Mr. Apothecary W. WAITE, Khandeish Bheel Corps. Population No cost. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 .... .... .... .... .... 1868 108 108 .... 92 85.4 Vaccination has been carried on as usual, and with much better success, than during the previous year; 108 children were vaccinated. Of these 99 were of the Bheels, and 9 of followers. 92 cases proved successful, and 10 unsuccessful; the latter being re-vaccinated until the operation succeeded. The number of unsuccessful cases to successful appears great; being 14.6 per cent., and yet it is not so great as in the preceding year. It has been frequently observed that the vaccination of one batch of children will prove successful in almost every instance, while nearly half the cases in another batch operated upon at a different time, will fail without any visible cause, the same person having vaccinated both times, and the same care having been taken. There are, no doubt, some states of the atmosphere more favourable to vaccination than others. Should small-pox be prevalent in the village or in the districts (as was the case last year) but few failures appear in the children vaccinated, and the pocks are perfectly satisfactory ; while if small-pox is not heard of, vaccination is not generally so successful. That state of the atmosphere then most favourable to the prevalence of variola, seems equally propitious to the operations of the Vaccinators. The lymph supplied by the Native Vaccinator has generally been good and healthy.
70 Three cases of variola appeared during the month of May. All bore distinct marks of previous vaccination. The cases were mild, and recovered. They were children of one family ; their father is Subedar Major of the Khandeish Bheel Corps. During this month small-pox was rather prevalent at Dhurrumgaum and in the districts, where several cases are reported to have proved fatal. DAKORE. Operations performed by PURUSRAM NAGESH, General No. 721, Hospital Assistant, in charge of Dispensary. Population, 7,072. No cost. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 .... .... .... .... .... 1868 60 60 .... 53 88.3 The population of the town is 7,072. There is no Vaccinator, and no expenditure for vaccination. The inhabitants of the town were unacquainted with the benefit of vaccination, and I found much difficulty in getting children for vaccination up to November last, although they were informed of the good effects of it; and there was great want of readiness among the inhabitants to submit their children to vaccination, and the unwillingness appeared among all castes up to November. The lymph in use has been of good quality. KURRACHEE. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon E. MORTON, (Acting). Population, 75,000. Average cost of each Vaccination, 1 Anna 2 Pies. Years. Total Vaccination. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 3,411 ...... ...... 3,265 95.4 1868 3,035 ...... 376 2,886 95.0
71 The favourable results attendant on vaccine operations in Kurrachee are clue to the attention bestowed by the Vaccinator on the selection of typical vesicles, and the practice of direct vaccination from arm-to-arm. The people generally do not show any unwillingness to the removal of lymph from the vesicles, and allow their children to be taken about for vaccination purposes for a small gratuity and free conveyance. In proportion to the rising importance of Kurrachee, and its yearly increasing population, vaccination does not appear to be progressive. During the year under report, as compared with the previous year, there has been a decrease of 376. From the annexed comparative table, showing the number vaccinated annually since 1864, it is apparent that for the last four years it can scarcely be said to have increased. The total number operated on was very small in comparison to the population, which may be approximately estimated at 75,000. It therefore admits of but little question that the prophylactic benefits of vaccination are not clearly understood, much less appreciated by the people. In a daily increasing and populous place like Kurrachee, the seaport and outlet for the traffic of Sind and the Punjaub, every effort &quot; to render the protective system of vaccination more extended, efficient, and complete,&quot; to dispel the prejudices of some, and to overcome the apathy and indifference of others, should be put forth. Every means to keep the subject constantly before the people should be resorted to, and no opportunity of explaining and impressing upon their mind the advantages of infantile vaccination, should be lost. These remarks apply more particularly to the town of Kurrachee, where opposition, through prejudice and ignorance, shows itself in the persist- ent refusal of a large number of the inhabitants to allow their children to be vaccinated. A comparison with the birth-rate of the town would prove interesting, but unfortunately no reliable data can be obtained, on which to base a comparison of the relative propor- tion of births to the number of children vaccinated. To awaken the people to the prophylactic benefits of vaccination, I would recom- mend that an energetic intelligent man, himself convinced of its blessing and capable of convincing others, equal to giving inquirers a history of vaccination, its progress, termination, and preventive virtues, and able to meet their questions with full and satis- factory replies, be employed on an adequate salary, with the present Vaccinator, as his assistant. The exertions of a man of tact and kindly feeling, daily moving in the midst of the residents in the town and its vicinity, seeking opportunities of explaining the principles of vaccination, and endeavouring to persuade them of its benefits, would, I have little doubt, be crowned with success. The barriers of prejudice once broken down, and the minds of the people enlightened on the subject, a large increase in the number of operations will testify to the appreciation of its advantages by many, but. I fear this increase at least will only be comparative; the apathy and indifference of the masses can alone be overcome by legislation stepping in and making vaccination compulsory.
72 It is worthy of note that the ignorant and destitute Mekranees, so far removed from all civilizing influences, exhibit in the most marked manner their estimate of the value of vaccination. At certain seasons of the year they come flocking into Kurrachee seeking employment, and eagerly resort to the Civil Hospital, seeking to be operated on,73 SHIKARPOOR. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. F. KEITH, M.B. (Acting). Population, 45,000. Total cost, Rs. 297, of which a portion was paid by the Municipality. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas 10 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 1,490 .... .... 1,434 96.2 1868 1,240 .... 250 1,188 95.8 In the Civil Hospital last year there were four cases of small-pox of a mild character. In the Dispensary vaccination seems very successful. I have visited the Dispensary, for the purpose of seeing how it was done, and I believe it to be most successful. In the city there were 15 cases of small-pox, and one death. KOTREE. One Municipal Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. WIL- LIAMS, M.D. (Acting). Population, 20,626. Total cost, Rs. 268. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas 9 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 893 .... .... 810 90.7 1868 1,150 257 .... 1,089 94.7 In the column of successful vaccinations there is an increase of 279, as compared with the preceding year 1867 ; this is due chiefly to vaccination being carried on in the villages around Kotree. The greater percentage of success is owing probably to su- perior lymph supplied me by Dr. Pinkerton in tubes in the month of February. Since using this lymph the vesicles are found well and fully developed. There has been but little small-pox in the neighbourhood of Kotree during the past year ; a few cases 10 c
74 have been traced to inoculation, and reported to the District Magistrate. In Kotree town there were 508 cases vaccinated, against 420 in 1867; and in the district 642, against 473. I have asked for the number of births that occur within this talooka, or even town, but it appears no such return is made ; until something like an accurate registration of births is kept, it will be impossible to carry on vaccination efficiently. The Vaccinator, Majlis Rai, has worked hard and zealously ; he has been rewarded by the Municipality by an increase of salary. SEHWAN. Operations performed by Mr. Apothecary POLLARD, in Medical charge of Dis- pensary. Population, 4,800. No cost. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 163 .... .... 148 90.8 1868 133 .... 30 110 82.7 The number of children vaccinated during the year 1868 has been 133, of which number 110 have been successful operations. Last year there were 163 vaccinated, of which 148 were successful; the year 1868, therefore, shows a decrease in successful oper- ations of 38. The population, and particularly the Hindoo portion, are still averse to the operation being performed on their children, and as no coercive measures are allowed, great difficulty is experienced in procuring subjects. On the arrival of the Collector, Colonel Lambert, in the district, about the middle of December 1868, I made known to him the difficulties I experienced, and the small amount of assistance rendered by the officials and influential men of the town in carrying out vaccination, and he kindly directed the Mooktyarkar and Mookee of the town to use more exertion in the matter, and to report to him weekly the progress made. Since this time I have been able, through their assistance, to procure more chil- dren, and I hope to be able to carry out vaccination more successfully for the future The lymph used in the early part of the year was continued from the previous year, and was originally supplied in capillary tubes by the Superintendent of Vaccination, and found to be very good ; latterly, lymph has been received from the District Native Vac- cinator, which is also good: this, I am informed, was also established from capillary tubes, supplied by the Superintendent of Vaccination.
75 JACOBABAD. Operations performed by the Dispensary establishment under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. R. L. McDOUGALL, M.D. Population, 15,000. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 11 ...... ...... 4 36.4 1868 46 35 ...... 16 34.8 I regret that I am unable to furnish any report on the subject of vaccination generally, and more particularly on the points noted in the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals', Sind Division Circular, as I have no data at all on which to found such a report. Since the establishment of a District Vaccinator, who is in no way under my control, the number of applicants at the Dispensary has been very small, and of that small number the greater part came from a distance and not from the town. For instance, the 11 cases in December came from a distance of about 10 miles; they were the children of a few families of Jats, who had come from the Khelat territory for the cold weather. SUKKUR. Operations performed by the Apprentice, under Mr. Apothecary A. WILSON, in Medical charge Charitable Dispensary. Population, 12,000. Total cost, Rs. 60. Average cost of each Vaccination, 1 Anna and 2 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 677 .... .... 641 94.7 1868 717 40 .... 669 93.3 717 persons were vaccinated during the year 1868 ; of these, there were 1 Chris- tian, 373 Mussulmans, 337 Hindoos, and 6 other castes. 669 were successful, 20 un- successful, and 19 doubtful. During the month of November 10 adult convicts, of
76 the Bukkur Jail, were vaccinated at the Charitable Dispensary, and included in the return. Vaccination is performed weekly by the Dispensary establishment, viz.: the Medical Apprentice and Goorgah, and the only cost attending the vaccination carried on in both towns of Sukkur is that of a Peon, at Rs. 5 per mensem, or Rs. 60 per annum, who is attached to the Dispensary, for the purpose of bringing the children for vaccination. BOOLA KHAN'S TANDA. Operations performed by SYPHOON MULLICK. (General No. 215), Hospital As- sistant, in charge of Dispensary. Population, 754. No cost. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 88 .... .... 67 76.1 1868 88 .... .... 82 93.2 88 cases of vaccination were performed during the past year, out of which 82 were successful, 3 doubtful, and 3 unsuccessful, also. The lymph used for vaccination was good. Having no Peon or Police Sepoy to render me assistance, I experience great difficulty in collecting the children, the people not being willing, in many instances, to bring them without a little persuasion. I think if this matter were laid before the Commissioner in Sind, or the Superintendent of Police, they might be induced to give orders for a Peon or Police Sepoy to render assistance when it is needful. TATTA. Operations performed by Sub-Assistant Surgeon GONSALVES, L. M., in charge Charitable Dispensary. Population, 7,000. No cost. Year. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 20 .... .... 20 100.0 1868 265 245 .... 251 94.7
77 Vaccination was commenced in the town of Tatta by the Medical Officer in charge of the Tatta Charitable Dispensary in December 1867, and during that month 20 persons were vaccinated. Before the Dispensary was established (which took place in November 1866) it was carried on by one of the Government itinerant Vaccinators, but it appears that between that time and December 1867 no vaccination was carried on in this town. During the year 1868, 265 persons were vaccinated in the town of Tatta, being on an average of 22 per month. In every hundred of population 3.78 were vaccinated. Of 265 vaccinated, 251 were successful, 8 doubtful, and 6 unsuccessful. Throughout the year fresh lymph was employed, except during the month of December 1868, when the result having proved unfatisfactory, fresh lymph was obtained from the Superintendent of Vaccination, Sind Circle. Vaccination was generally carried on in the town, and not at the Dispensary. Small-pox prevailed in the town during the months of November and December, and it still continues, but to what extent I have not been able to ascertain. Having been in charge of the Dispensary only four and twenty days, I regret my inability to make any further remarks. KULLADGHEE. One Municipal Vaccinator, under Civil Surgeon, Assist. Surgeon J. SIMPSON, M.B. Population, 9,362. Total cost, Rs. 54-15-0. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas and 6 Pies. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the pre- ceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 .... .... .... .... .... 1868 628 628 .... 628 100 The above result dates from 1st February 1868, as previous to this date no vaccina- tion records were kept in this Hospital, owing to the fewness of the vaccinations. During the year under report, viz : from 1st February 1868, 378 persons were vacci- nated in the Civil Hospital by the 1st and 2nd Hospital Assistants, and from 1st July 1868 (on which date a Vaccinator was appointed by the Municipality) 250 were vaccinated by the Municipality's Vaccinator. Total number vaccinated during the year under report was 628. Great assistance was given by the Magistrate of this district in carrying on the operations, but the Fouzdar is very indifferent and inattentive in assisting the Vaccinator.
78 The number vaccinated did not increase so much as it was expected it would do. Most of the classes of Hindoos, such as Brahmins, Marathas and low castes, were generally willing to have their children vaccinated, but, I regret to say, that owing to caste prejudices, and ignorance of the benefit derived from the operation, the Maho- medans and Lingayets at this station, and the villages within reach, required much persuasion to have their children brought for vaccination. No case of small-pox was observed during the year under report. The lymph and vesicles were good, up to a short time ago, and a fresh supply is now desirable. BAGULKOTE. Operations performed by AMROOTA TATTIA (General No. 460), Hospital Assist- ant, in Medical charge of Dispensary. Population, 12,247. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 .... .... .... .... .... 1868 113 113 ... 102 90.2 In conformity with the instructions contained in Notification dated 2 7th Novem- ber 1867, the Charitable Dispensary was established at Bagulkote, but the necessary arrangements for the immediate opening of the institution not having been completed, I was obliged to use my utmost endcavours to put them in readiness for the completion of the work. In the absence of any definite instructions, vaccine operations were not at first commenced in this institution, but subsequently vaccination was commenced, on the receipt of Circular No. 2,990, dated 2nd August 1868, from the Inspector General Indian Medical Department. The number vaccinated of males was 65, and females 48. The lymph now in use is of superior quality, it having never failed. The lymph was received from the Assistant Vaccinator of this talooka. Small-pox prevailed in the town and surrounding villages mostly to the north side in the months of March, April, and May ; about thirty children were attacked in this town, and by the end of May the epidemic had disappeared.
79 BHOOJ. Three Native States' Vaccinators, under Mr. Dorabjee Hormusjee, G.G.M.C., in charge His Highness the Rao of Kutch's Dispensary and Hospital. Population, 18,606 . Total cost, 807-1-7. Average cost of each Vaccination, Rs. 1-4-8. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 705 .... .... 592 83.1 1868 624 .... 81 565 90.5 During the year 1868 there were 624 vaccinations performed at the Dispensary, and the principal towns of Kutch, viz.: Mandavee, Moondra, and Anjar, being 81 less than in 1867. I am sorry to observe that I was again obliged to carry on vaccina- tion last year on a limited scale, in consequence of some disputes pending between His Highness the Rao and his Bhyats ; the authority of the former was not recognised by the latter, hence, when the Vaccinators went round the towns belonging to the latter, they not only received no assistance from them, but great opposition was experienced from the leading members ; it was therefore necessary to confine vaccination to a limited space, viz.: to the towns belonging to His Highness alone, and hence the necessity of locating the Vaccinators at Mandavee, Moondra, and Anjar. Unless some arrangement be adopted, by which Bhyats can be made to allow the Vaccinators to vaccinate in their towns, I am sure vaccination will continue stationary. ADEN. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. W. JAMES,M.D. Population, 25,000. Total cost, Rs. 180. Average cost of each Vaccination, 3 Annas 11 Pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1867 628 .... .... 416 66.2 1868 725 97 .... 563 77.6
80 There has been an increase of 97 in the number vaccinated this year, as compared with 1867, but this is due to H. M's. Steamer Star bringing 120 captured slaves to this station during the early part of December. The supply of lymph was ample and constant during the year, and I was able to comply with the demands of the Medical Officers of the 2nd Queen's Royals and 7th Regiment Native Infantry. The quality of the lymph has been good, the vesicles being large and well de- veloped. Aden was free from small-pox from February to November, but 20 cases were admitted during December, the result of direct importation of the disease from Lahaj and by the Star.
APPENDIX. 11 v
ii TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERIN Table showing the Number and Names of the Circles and their Superintendents; the with those of last year; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste Number of Operations performed by Number. CIRCLES. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS, Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vaccina- tors attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. 1867. Increase. Decrease. 1868 1867 1 CENTRAL ............ Assistant Surgeon Turnbull, M.D....... 29 29 52,957 52,462 495 ...... iii No. I. TENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. Number of Vaccinators employed ; the Total Vaccinations performed, and compared Age, and Result; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated ; and the Average each Vaccinator, for the year 1868. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Successful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one Year. Above one Year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 27,753 25,204 47,015 2,264 16 ...... 3,662 19,633 33,324 51,001 931 1,025 96.3 1,826 3,250 2,703 5,204 537 11 1 200 2,581 3,372 5,241 348 364 88.0 496 13,055 10,907 21,164 1,578 230 ...... 990 5,131 18,831 22,744 575 643 94.8 1,089 5,275 4,188 8,522 690 21 ..... 230 3,374 6,089 9,095 255 113 96.1 1,051 38,073 33,130 60,427 5,810 6 168 4,792 46,872 24,331 65,403 2 202 3,598 91.8 2,158 1,201 974 1,703 381 ... ...... 91 1,443 732 1,999 119 57 91.9 1,087 17,145 15,197 28,957 1,352 443 26 1,564 7,065 25,277 31,422 501 419 97.1 2,310 243 167 369 29 11 ...... 1 121 289 391 17 2 95.4 205 21,269 17,590 4,565 31,759 ... ...... 2,535 14,285 24,574 38,053 247 559 97.9 2,286 12,930 10,682 2,885 18,648 ... 2 2,077 7,740 15,872 22,966 303 343 97.2 1,816 5,663 4,860 9,014 1,342 ... ...... 167 4,914 5,609 9,905 264 354 94.1 1,315 3,874 3,633 7,030 391 ... ...... 86 3,159 4,848 7,094 239 174 94.5 1,501 5,727 5,030 7,170 1,456 962 949 220 4,793 5,964 8,149 1,033 1,575 75.7 1,793 155,458 134,265 204,025 66,237 1,700 1,146 16,615 121,111 168,612 273,363 7,044 9,316 94.3 1,683 iv TABLE VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS Table of Vaccination through the Agency of Native Chiefs, arranged according to for the Number. CIRCLES and STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vaccina- tors attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. 1867 Increase. Decrease. 1868 1867 1 CENTRAL ............... Assistant Surgeon Turnbull, M. D. ........ 2 2 1,602 1,668 ...... 66 v No.II. OTHERS IN NATIVE TERRITORY. Circles of Vaccination and Stations, and showing Details as in Table No. I., year 1868. Total number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Successful to Number Vaccinated. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vac- cinator. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 833 769 1,516 65 ...... ...... 21 779 823 1,495 87 20 95.3 846 9,777 8,006 16,146 835 24 ...... 778 5,223 12,560 17,068 392 323 95.9 808 2,378 10,702 19,875 1,509 3 ...... 1,693 11,897 11,183 20,939 967 1,174 90.7 1,757 2,782 2,599 5,264 56 47 ...... 14 1,199 4,182 5,083 211 87 94.4 2,690 1,256 849 111 1,892 2 ...... 100 662 1,443 1,891 166 48 89.8 2,105 41,187 17,836 33,628 5,306 ...... ...... 89 13,698 25,325 35,924 1,776 1,323 94.1 1,148 3,642 3,441 6,802 212 ...... ...... 69 2,334 4,749 6,649 276 158 93.8 1,012 299 325 316 308 ...... ...... ...... 247 377 565 51 8 90.5 208 52,154 44,527 83,658 10,183 76 ...... 2,764 36,039 60,642 89,614 3,926 3,141 92.6 1,167
vi TABLE VACCINATIONS UN Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged according Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vaccina- tors attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1867. Increase. Decrease. Males. Female. 1868 1867 1 PRESIDENCY ...... Tanna .................... 1* 1* 232 176 56 ... 121 Do. Police Hospital. ... ... 39 ... 39 ... 24 Rutnagherry ............ 1 1 1,432 1,302 130 ... 868 Carwar ................ 1 1 362 308 54 ... 198 Do. Police ............ ... ... 11 ... 11 ... 6 Vingorla ................ ... ... 382 151 231 ... 229 Surat ................ 1 1 2,840 1,631 1,209 ... 1,566 1 Broach .................. 1 1 1,266 1,226 40 ... 784 Alibaugh ............ ... ... 335 200 135 ... 200 Bandora ................ ... ... 336 93 243 ... 208 Coorla .................. ... ... 109 77 32 ... 57 Oorun ................ ... 1* ... 102 ... 102 ... Callian .............. ... ... 37 104 ... 67 20 Bhewndy ................ ... ... 87 78 9 ... 57 Dapoolie ............ ... ... 252 123 129 ... 127 Sawunt Warree ...... ... ... 28 58 ... 30 19 Honore ................ ... ... 73 59 14 ... 39 Total ...... 5 6 7,821 5,688 2,133 ... 4,523 3 2 POONA ............ Poona ............ 1 1 1,641 2,022 ... 381 1,022 Do. Charitable Dis- pensary ...... ... ... 96 ... 96 ... 64 Ahmednuggur ...... 1 1 1,010 993 17 ... 685 1* 1* 808 735 73 ... 516 Do. Civil Hos- pital ..... ... ... 130 ... 130 ... 92 Do. Police do. ... ... 25 ... 25 ... 13 Kurrar ................ ... ... 73 ... 73 ... 41 Sircy .................... ... ... 38 ... 38 ... 15 Barsee Dispensary ... ... ... 43 ... 43 ... 24 Kulladghee ............ 1* ... 628 ... 628 ... 340 Sattara ............ 1 1 3,177 1,344 1 833 ... 1,806 1 Sholapoor ............ 1 1 671 1,655 ... 984 379 Do. Charitable Dispensary ...... ... ... 78 ... 78 ... 53 Dhoolia ................ 1 1 878 808 70 ... 505 Nassick ............... 1 1 1,013 1,079 ... 66 530 *Muncipal
vii III. SURGEONS AND OTHERS. ion, and showing the Details as in Table No I., for the year 1868. Total Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Success- ful to Number Vaccinated. Number of Persons Vaccina- ted by each Vaccinator. Caste. Age. Result. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 174 15 29 102 2 90 142 191 13 28 82.3 232 38 1 ... ... ... 8 31 29 3 7 74.4 322 108 2 ... ... 596 836 1,080 136 216 75.4 1,432 279 32 49 ... 2 56 306 306 42 14 84.5 362 9 1 1 ... ... 11 ... 11 ... ... 100. ...... 336 27 19 ... ... 65 317 358 17 7 93.7 ,882 759 10 105 84 1,241 1,599 2,370 112 358 83.4 2,840 784 391 3 88 ...... 650 616 1,018 27 221 80.5 1,266 274 16 16 ... 29 64 271 263 56 16 78.5 ...... 96 14 225 1 ...... 54 282 286 46 4 85.1 ...... 43 22 37 7 ...... 41 68 55 31 23 50.4 ...... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 16 9 ... 2 10 14 23 25 ...... 12 67.5 ...... 31 29 ... ... 27 21 66 56 20 11 64.4 ...... 236 14 2 ... ... 29 223 228 5 19 90.5 ...... 21 6 ... ... ... 15 13 28 ... ... 100. ...... 50 11 10 ... 2 17 56 68 5 ...... 93.1 ...... 5,591 1,455 414 225 136 2,972 4,849 6,372 513 936 81.4 1,226 1,226 267 78 70 ...... 700 941 1,387 112 142 84.5 1,641 85 9 2 ... ...... 29 67 67 20 9 69.8 ...... 871 94 6 ... 39 679 331 914 43 53 90.5 1,010 710 67 9 ... 22 609 199 713 48 47 80.2 808 119 9 ... ... 2 48 82 100 13 17 76.6 ...... 23 2 ... ... ... 21 4 23 1 1 92.0 ...... 70 3 ... ... ... 15 58 60 5 8 82.2 ...... 28 10 ... ... ... 2 36 37 1 ...... 94.5 ...... 13 30 ... ... ... 17 26 32 10 1 74.4 ...... 446 119 1 ... 62 266 362 628 ... ... 100. 628 2,978 166 26 3 4 1,147 2,030 2,825 45 307 88.9 3,177 429 200 3 ... 39 291 380 585 43 43 87.2 671 74 4 ... ... ... 34 44 68 ... 10 87.2 ...... 654 77 18 ... 129 662 216 796 53 29 90.5 878 809 78 37 ... 89 505 508 956 37 20 94.3 1,013 vaccination.
viii TABLE Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vaccina- tors attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex 1867. Increase Decrease. Males. Female. 2 1868 1867 POONA (continued). Bagulkote ............... ... ... 113 ...... 113 ...... 65 Punderpoor ......... ... ... 90 ...... 90 ...... 51 Waie.................. ... ... 5 ...... 5 ...... 1 Moondegode ............... ... ... ...... ...... ...... ...... Belgaum .................. 1 1 578 803 ...... 225 297 Dharwar ............... 1 1 661 635 26 ...... 354 Kolapoor ............... 1 1 2,028 1,751 277 ...... 1,068 Do. (Dispensary) ... ... 334 ...... 334 ...... 160 Do. Infantry ... ... ... 255 ...... 255 ...... 130 Gokak ............... ... ... ... ...... ...... ...... ...... Peint ............... ... ... 55 ...... 55 ...... 30 Hullial ............... ... ... 25 ...... 25 ...... 20 Dhurrumgaum ............ ... ... 108 ...... 108 ...... 55 Total ......... 11 10 14,561 11,825 2,736 ...... 8,317 6 3 NORTHERN ............ Ahmedabad ............ 2* 2* 4,604 4,273 331 ...... 2,357 2 Do. Dispensary. ... ... ... 8 ...... 8 ...... Kaira ..................... 1 1 796 867 ... 71 492 Rajkote .................. 1 1 308 999 ... 691 162 Dholka ............... ... ... 34 ...... 34 ...... 18 Veerumgaum ............ ... ... 122 ...... 122 ...... 71 Dakore ............... ... ... 60 ...... 60 ...... 34 Total ...... 4 4 5,924 6,147 ...... 223 3,134 4 SIND ................... Kurrachee ............... 1 1 3,035 3,411 ...... 376 1,632 1 Do. Jail............ ... ... 49 ...... 49 ...... 49 Do. Dispensary ... ... ...... 116 ...... 116 ...... Hydrabad ............ 1 1 1,847 1,702 145 ...... 1,151 Shikarpoor ......... 1 1 1,240 1,490 ...... 250 645 Korree ............ 1* 1* 1,150 893 257 ...... 693 Sukkur Dispensary ... ... ... 717 677 40 ...... 495 JacobabadCiv.Hospital ... ... 46 11 35 ...... 27 Larkhana Dispensary. ... ... 410 415 ...... 5 228 Mehur do. ... ... ... 88 192 ...... 104 48 Schwan do. ... ... ... 133 163 ...... 30 78 Jerruck do. ... ... ... 69 42 27 ...... 41 Rohree do. ... ... ... 390 377 13 ...... 242 Oomerkote do. ... ... ... 156 38 118 ...... 97 Nuggur Parkur do. ... ... ... 126 81 45 ...... 59 * Muncipal
ix III.x TABLE Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vacci- nators attached. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1867. Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. 1868 1867 4 SIND (continued). Halla Dispensary...... ... ... 207 75 132 ...... 111 96 Mahomed Khan's Tan- da Dispensary ...... ... ... 126 174 ...... 48 68 58 Boola Khan's Tanda Dispensary............ ... ... 88 88 ...... ...... 45 43 Meerpoor Buttora do. ... ... 145 273 ...... 128 84 61 Alliyar Ka Tanda do. ... ... 242 115 127 ...... 144 98 Khetty Bander do. ... ... 85 58 27 ...... 50 35 Taroosha do. ... ... 97 254 ...... 157 55 42 Tatta do. ... ... 265 20 245 ...... 160 105 Mittee do. ... ... 63 16 47 ...... 30 33 Kippra do. ... ... 44 ...... 44 ...... 30 14 Total... 4 4 10,818 10,681 137 ...... 6,262 4,556 5 ADEN .................. Aden .................. 1 1 725 628 97 ...... 495 230 Grand Total... 25 25 39,849 34,969 4,880 ...... 22,731 17,118
xi No. III.xii TABLE GENERAL ABSTRACT OF VACCINATION DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Number of Vaccinators. Total Number Vaccinated. Compared with last year. Sex. 1867. Increase. Decrease Males. Females. 1868 1867 No. 1. Vaccination under Superintendents in British Territory by Government Estab- lishment .......................................... 134 134 2,48,10 2,39,446 8,664 ... 1,32,559 1,15,551 Do. do. by local Funds do. ............... 13 13 23,612 21,854 1,758 ... 12,930 10,682 Do. do. by Municipalities do. ............ 31 26 25,462 18,391 7,071 ... 14,020 11,442 No. 2. Ditto ditto and others in Native territory. 83 79 96,681 82,832 13,841 ... 52,154 44,527 No. 3. Ditto under Civil Surgeons ............... 19 19 26,312 24,654 1,658 ... 15,090 11,222 Do. in Dispensaries where there are no Vaccinators specially appointed to vaccinate .............................. ... ... 5,260 3,895 1,365 ... 3,133 2,127 Do. at 5 Civil Stations do ............... ... ... 816 343 473 ... 457 359 Total ......... 280 271 4,26,253 3,91,415 34,838 ... 2,30,343 1,95,910
xiii No. IV. OR THE YEAR 1868. Number Vaccinated, arranged according to Ratio per cent. of Success- ful to Number Vaccinated. Caste. Age. Result. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. ,85,342 45,952 1,657 1,143 14,016 1,05,852 1,42,258 2,33,771 5,992 8,347 94.2 2,685 18,648 ... 2 2,077 7,740 15,872 22,966 303 343 97.2 20,789 3,857 100 30 686 12,596 12,866 23,865 911 686 93.6 83,658 10,183 76 ... 2,764 36,039 60,642 89,614 3,926 3,141 92.6 17,954 6,187 419 321 1,431 12,516 13,796 23,409 1,207 1,696 89.3 3,051 1,814 293 10 92 2,359 2,901 4,641 400 219 88.5 689 104 23 ... ... ... 642 722 50 44 88.5 ,14,368 86,745 2,568 1,506 21,066 1,77,276 2,48,977 3,98,983 12,789 14,476 93.5
xiv TABLE No. V. TABLE OF AGES. Vaccination in 1868, arranged according to Age, whether performed under or above one year of Age. ESTABLISHMENTS. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under one year. Above one year. Under. Above. I.xv ESTABLISHMENTS. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under one year. Above one year. Under. Above. III.xvi ESTABLISHMENTS. AGE. DIFFERENCE. Total Vaccinated. Under one year. Above one year. Under. Above. IV.xvii SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendents.xviii WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.xix KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.xx TABLE No. VII. CASTES IN WHICH VACCINATION WAS PERFORMED. Castes. Number Vaccinated. Christian .................................... 2,568 Hindoo .................................... 314,368 Mussulman .............................. 86,745 Parsee .............................. 1,506 Other Castes ............................ 21,066 Total ............ 426,253 TABLE No. VIII. TABLE OF VACCINATIONS IN THE BOMBAY ARMY FOR THE YEAR 1868. Number Vaccinated in 1868. Europeans. Natives. Native Regiments. Regiments .............................. 15 1,731 Lines .................................... 1 276 Bazaars .............................. ...... 132 Cantonment Bazaar ........................ 176 3,557 Oednance and other Departments .................. ...... 43 Total............ 192 5,739 Grand Total...... 5,931
Vaccination. No. 1939. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 13th August 1869. Letter from the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, No. 2280, dated 3rd June 18692 6. It is satisfactory to learn that so much practical good has resulted from the registers that are now kept in each village. They will, independently of their utility for statistical purposes, afford an effective check on the returns of the Vaccinators. Government desire that the special attention of Collectors and their Assistants be given to the inspection of these Registers. It should be the duty of the Mamlutdars' Carkoons in whose circles the villages are situated, to pay as much attention to the accurate preparation of these and other statistical documents, as to that of the ordinary revenue accounts of the village. 7. Dr. Turnbull's remarks as to the zealous manner in which the Munici- pal Commissioners in the Sattara Collectorate watch the work performed by the Vaccinators in their employ, proves how much good may be effected by enlisting the services of the people themselves in the work of supervision. &quot;They (the Municipal Commissioners) look after the Vaccinators' returns so minutely, that they refuse not unfrequently to pay him, till they receive the confirmation.&quot; No stipendiary agency that Government could employ would probably be so efficacious. 8. The time has now arrived for considering whether the strength and efficiency of the Vaccination Department, on the success of which the happi- ness and safety of the great mass of the population so greatly depend, might not be increased by the aid of the recently established &quot; Local Funds,&quot; and the Committees through which they are administered. The Superintendent General is requested to place himself in communication, through the Revenue Commissioners, with the several Presidents of Committees, and ascertain how far they are disposed to contribute towards this work. In the opinion of Government the rural Vaccinators should chiefly be paid from this source. If this principle were adopted, and the Vaccinators for large towns paid for by Municipalities, the entire amount of the imperial expenditure might be devoted to strengthening the staff of Superintendents. Every District or Collectorate might have at least one Assistant Superintendent. In making this suggestion, His Excellency in Council wishes it to be clearly understood that his object is solely to increase the efficiency of the Department, and not to relieve the Imperial Exchequer. It is not, in the opinion of Government, just, after the people have responded to the calls that have been made towards local taxation, for the State to withdraw the aid it had previously given. So far from voluntary efforts on the part of the people affording grounds for the diminution of State aid, they furnish the strongest argument for increasing such aid.
3 9. The suggestions for having recourse to legislation for the suppres- sion of Inoculation, and for making Vaccination compulsory within the limits of the Town and Island of Bombay, have been and are engaging the attention of Government. 10. His Excellency in Council has much pleasure in expressing his approval of the manner in which Dr. Pinkerton and the Officers under him have conducted their several duties. The Department is necessarily dependent on the co-operation of the Officers employed in the general administration of the country, and Government have learnt with satisfaction the marked assist- ance rendered by Colonel Schneider at Sawunt Warree, and Mr. Dhunjeebhoy Cowasjee, the Deputy Collector of Sattara. The recent death of Doctor Ffolliott, who had shown himself a most zealous Officer, is to be greatly lamented. (Signed) F. R. S. WYLLIE, For Chief Secretary to Government. To The INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, The SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION, The REVENUE COMMISSIONER, N. D., The REVENUE COMMISSIONER, S. D., The COMMISSIONER in SIND, All COLLECTORS, and the FIRST ASSISTANT COLLECTOR IN CHARGE PUNCH MAHALS, The POLITICAL DEPARTMENT of the SECRETARIAT, The PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT of the SECRETARIAT, The ACCOUNTANT GENERAL.
