REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1869-70. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1870.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND. FOR THE YEAR 1869-70. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1870.
No. 2071 OF 1870. FROM THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, Indian Medical Department. To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, General Department. Bombay, 27 th July 1870. SIR,2 protecting juvenile life in the most direct way; and yet such is the want of information and intelligence on the part of the mass of the people on this subject, that were it not for the influence of Government Officers, some of whom, I observe with pleasure, are reported to take much interest in vacci- nation, it is doubtful whether vaccination would not be dwarfed into incon- siderable dimensions, or even die out altogether. 6. It is a hopeful sign that the number of Vaccinators in Native States is increasing (paragraph 7); and, in reference to the suggestion in paragraph 8, I think that the whole Government Estalishment might be withdrawn from Kattiawar, vaccination being kept up entirely from Local Funds, with the exception of the expense of supervision, which should always be an Imperial charge. 7. In reference to paragraph 9, vaccination is only one of the duties of the Sub-Assistant Surgeon or Medical Subordinate in charge of a Dis- pensary, and I regret to have to state that in most cases it is discharged with little interest. When the Dispensaries are placed under closer supervision, it is believed that all medical duties will be performed with much greater efficiency than at present. 8. Paragraph 10, at its close, states that Superintendents &quot; control and direct, but they cannot exercise a close supervision.&quot; This is true, and very much to be lamented. But I conceive that something more may yet be done in the increased activity of Superintendents, and still more by the appointment of Native Assistant Superintendents, as advocated in paragraph 11. But I think, speaking generally, that the whole Department would lose something of the confidence at present extended to it, if the element of European supervision were to be withdrawn. I would beg to state that past experience proved that the withdrawal, or rather diminution, of Euro- pean superintendence led to very unsatisfactory results, so much so as to necessitate a re-organization of the Department so as to replace the Euro- pean Officers as far as possible. The plan of employing graduates of the Grant Medical College as Deputy Superintendents was also tried, but proved useless, and had consequently to be abandoned. 9. On this point, it is important to draw the attention of Government to the anomalous character of the two appointments pointed out in paragraph 11 by the Superintendent General of Vaccination. 1. Civil Surgeon, Rajkote. Superintendent of Vaccination, Kattiawar. 2. . Charge of Bheel Corps. Superintendent of Vaccination, Rewa Kanta.
3 I quite concur in the opinion of the Superintendent General of Vacci- nation that Superintendents should have only vaccination duties to attend to. I would suggest, however, that Dr. Pinkerton should be desired to bring forward the subject separately. 10. Paragraph 16 contains a simple and easy method of registration of vaccination in villages. 11. I regret to see that the lymph in use was so frequently &quot;bad,&quot; and hope that the active means advocated by the Superintendent General will ensure an improvement in this respect during the next year. It is the one fault which admits of no excuse, and damages the character of work which may have been very good, but which is obliged to be taken on trust, from the inability of Superintendents to inspect all work or the whole of their respective Circles in one working season. 12. Inoculation appears to be falling out of popular practice, but it is much to be feared that it will not be abolished from the faith of the people so long as small-pox continues to be so prevalent and so fatal a disease. Much must remain to be done by the Superintendent General, when he re- ports (paragraph 23) that of 21,943 cases of small-pox, 93.5 per centum were &quot; unprotected.&quot; I would ask, How is it possible that any population in the Presidency can have 93 per cent. of its number unvaccinated ? It would have been interesting if further particulars of the means adopted to protect the people of the two Talookas specially named were stated. The whole of the figures in the earlier portion of this paragraph are untrust- worthy. The small difference of the death-rate of the protected and unpro- tected is contrary to all experience. 13. I think it must be accepted as being creditable to the Department that so few instances of a want of truthfulness in Vaccination Returns have come to light (paragraph 24), and that (paragraph 25) the conduct of the Vaccinators has been generally well spoken of. 14. The percentage of success (paragraph 27) is doubtless in reality less than 96.2. There are so many influences which tend to destroy the perfectness of a vaccine vesicle on which success depends, even when the Vaccinator's work has been as good as possible. 15. I think there can be no doubt that the Establishment has worked well during the year under report, and I would beg to support the Superintend- ent General's notice of the good work of individual Officers. 16. I should be glad if Government would sanction the recommenda- tion in the concluding portion of paragraph 36, the Weekly Returns being of much importance.
4 17. Upon the great question as to whether Syphilis can be communi- cated by vaccination, no negative evidence can be of use. It must be settled by direct experiment. The only practical use of the inquiry so far, is to make it certain that no mischief can be communicated if only pure lymph be used; and this is of great importance. 18. I observe in paragraph 38 that mention is made of the result of an inspection of some schools at Vingorla. In three schools 18 unprotected children were found. Although this subject has been frequently mooted before, and has been unfavourably decided upon, I cannot help recording my strong opinion, that no child should be admitted to a Government school unless actually protected by vaccination, or at least, with the permission of the guardians, that the child should be vaccinated on the first convenient opportunity. 19. In conclusion, I would express a hope that Government will see in this Report evidence of good work in the Vaccination Department, and of the intelligence, zeal, and activity of the Superintendent General of Vaccination. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W. THOM, For Inspector General, Indian Medical Department,
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND, FOR THE YEAR 1869-70. Change of the year for report from the calendar to the official year. This is the Second Annual Report of the Superintendent General of Vaccination. It embraces a period of fifteen months, viz. from 1st January 1869 to 31st March 1870, but the returns for the first three months of 1869 are shown separately, so that the returns for 1869-70 can be compared with those of 1868. Until the year 1855 the annual returns and reports of vacci- nation were made for the official year, but they were thereafter rendered according to the calendar year; and now, the Government of India in their Resolution No. 5304, dated 9th December 1869, have directed that all reports and returns shall be for the official year. In order to comply with the Resolution, I did not submit a report or returns for the calendar year 1869, but have made out a return showing the vaccinations performed between the 1st January and 31st March 1869 in the old forms, and the returns for the official year 1869-70( iv ) and, third, the tables of figures showing the results, &c. for the 1st quarter of 1869 in the old forms, and a new set of forms showing the results, &c. for 1869-70 under two grand divisions( v ) official year 1870-71. It was my wish, as stated in the 4th paragraph, of letter No. 579, dated 27th July last, to the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, that, on these stations agreeing to maintain a Vaccinator of their own, the Government Vaccinators should be transferred for duty in the districts under Superintendents of Vaccination, because there are in nearly all Circles too few Vaccinators; but the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, was pleased in his letter No. 4520, dated 16th December last, to state, in reference to the Nassick Vaccinator, &quot;that the saving effected by the transfer of the vaccinating duties at Nassick to the Municipality should lapse absolutely to Government, and the services of the Vaccinator and Peon cannot therefore be made available for any other purpose.&quot; I regret this, for the reason above given, and also because, if all station vaccination expenditure be thus treated, it will reduce the grant for vaccination by Rs. 3,500 annually, which might be very useful in case of a reorganization of the Department, as there is every reason to suppose that the Government of India will not sanction more than the present expenditure for any kind of reorganization. Municipal Vaccinators. 5. There has been an increase in the number of Vaccinators maintained by Municipalities, and there is every probability that the number will be still further increased, and Government relieved of the expenditure on account of vaccination in all towns capable of maintaining their own Vaccinator. The following is a list of the towns which maintain Vaccinators out of Municipal funds : ( vi ) Circle. Name of Town. Name of Collectorate. Number of Vuccinators. 1869-70. 1868. SOUTHERN .. 1.Khanapoor ......... 1 1 2. Moon ............. 1 1 3. Kurrar ............... 1 1 4. Walwa............ 1 1 5. Korehon ........ 1 1 6. Malseerus .......... 1 1 7. Belgaum .............. 1 1 8. Hooble ................ 1 1 9. Gudduck and Bette- ghurry ................. 1 1 10. Khatow .......... 1 .. 11. Uthnee ............ 1 .. 12. Sircy ............... 1 .. Total.... 12 9 NORTHERN.. 1. Ahmedabad ...... Ahemedabad ......... 2 2 2. Veerungaum .......... Do........ 1 1 3.Dholka ............... Kaira .............. 1 1 Total ........ 4 4 SIND ............... 1. Kotree .................. Kurrachee ............ 1 1 Total.... 1 1 WESTERN .. &lt; 1. Tanna............ Tanna ............. 1 1 2. Panwell .............. Colaba .............. 1 1 3. Oorun .............. Do. ............... 1 1 Total ...... 3 3 Grand Total.. 34 30 It appears that there is an increase in the Southern Circle of three, and in the Central Circle of one Municipal Vaccinator. I think all towns of 20,000 inhabitants should maintain a Vaccinator, and that he should vacci- nate in all villages within a radius of three or four miles of the Municipal town. Superintendents should endeavour to persuade Municipalities to maintain their own Vaccinators, wherever it seems advisable that they should do so.
( vii ) Local Fund Vaccinators. 6. During the past year three Local Fund Vaccinators were appointed in the collectorate of Poona, and six in Dhar- war. Tanna, Colaba and Rutnagherry Collec- torates have provided for several in their budgets for 1870-71. The institution of Local Fund Vaccinators first took place in Sind; they have been at work now for several years there, and have proved of great use in aiding the weak Government establishment. Native States' Vaccinators. 7. The number of Vaccinators paid by Native States has also been increased. In the Kattiawar Circle three have been appointed by the Thakore of Bhow- nuggur, and one by the Thakore of Mallia. In the Northern Circle one was appointed by the State of Dhurrumpoor. In the Rewa Kanta Circle the Rajah of Loonawarra (who formerly maintained one in conjunction with the Nawab of Balasinore) maintains two, and the Nawab one; a second one has been maintained out of the Barria tribute, and one has been appointed for the Sunkeria Mewas,( viii ) set free. In the Sind Circle two of the Government Vaccinators have for several years back been employed as Native Assistant Superintendents with very great advantage. Their Government pay is supplemented by an addition from the Local Fund grant. Dispensary Vaccination. 9. In Circular No. 2990, dated 27th August 1868, the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, at my suggestion, issued instructions to Medical Subordinates and others in charge of Dispensaries to carry on vaccination as an important part of their duty. I have much pleasure in stating that they have in many instances responded well thereto, but in others the number of operations is very small indeed. It would appear that, as a rule, we need not expect people to come to the Dispensaries to ask for vaccination, and nothing short of carrying the means of vaccination to their doors will induce the masses to accept it. So long as this is the case the number of operations at Dispensaries must be small. Wherever there is a Municipal Vaccinator in a town having a Dispensary, I think it would be well for the Vaccinator to vaccinate one day a week at the Dispensary, and two days he should vaccinate in the streets, taking street by street. In cases where there are no Municipal Vaccinator, I think a Medical pupil should be attached to the Dispensary, and he should carry on vaccina- tion in the same manner as a Municipal Vaccinator. A town having a Dispensary or Municipal Vaccinator should not be vaccinated by a rural Vaccinator, except in cases of emergency. Again, in small towns having a Dispensary, it would be well only to vaccinate during the cold season, because the number of children is too few to enable the Medical Subordinate to have a sufficient number of subjects all the year round to insure his always being able to select a good vaccinfer. Payment of peregrinating Vac- cinators from Local Funds instead of from Imperial Funds. 10. In the 8th paragraph of Government Resolution No. 1939, dated 13th August 1869, I was directed to place myself in communication, through the Revenue Commis- sioners, with the several Presidents of Com- mittees, and ascertain how far they are disposed to pay the rural Vaccinators out of Local Funds; and Government stated if the Imperial expenditure on their account could be set free, it might be devoted to strengthening the staff of Superintendents. Before asking the question, I considered it advisable first to endeavour to obtain an idea of how many Vaccinators are necessary for each collectorate. I therefore asked the Revenue Commissioners to favour me with statements showing the number of talookas, the area, and population of each collectorate. Having obtained this information, I calculated that we should require about forty more Vaccinators in the Southern Division, and
( ix ) about twenty more in the Northern Division, than there are at present, if the wish of Government, to have one in each talooka, were carried out. I have submitted a scheme to the Revenue Commissioners of the Northern and Southern Divisions, and as soon as I receive their answers I will send up my report to Government on the subject; but I may briefly state that the scheme consists in having one Vaccinator for each talooka, to be paid from local in- stead of imperial revenue, and the money so set free to be expended in payment of Native Assistant Superintendents, who will aid the European Superintend- ents. At present our Superintendents cannot exercise any real practical supervision over the Vaccinators on account of the great size of their Circles. They control and direct, but they cannot exercise a close supervision. Native Assistant Superintend- ents. 11. There is not the least doubt but that we ought to have Native Assist- ant Superintendents to assist the European Superintendents. It may be a question whether it would not be better to have Native graduates of Medicine as Superintend- ents, and no European Medical Officers. The Honourable Mr. Chapman has given a good deal of attention to this subject, and he seems to think that there should be a Sub-Assistant Surgeon, or a qualified Native Medical man, as Superintendent in each collectorate. I at once allow that such an arrangement would be better than our present method, of having a Commis- sioned Medical Officer superintending very large areas, over which he cannot keep a close supervision; but on making a rough calculation I found that to do so the cost would be about six times more than at present. My own views were, therefore, modified by the consideration of expense; and I came to the conclusion that the European Superintendents should remain as at present, and that the money set free, by the Local Fund Committees taking upon themselves to pay the rural Vaccinators, should be employed to pay Native Assistant Superintendents, who should be chosen from among the Vaccinators themselves. The advantages of this are, that the prospect of promotion to the grade of Native Assistant Superintendent would stimulate Vaccinators to work well, and induce good men to seek employment in the Department. At present we have only four Commissioned Medical Officers, who are full-timed Superintendents of Vaccination, namely :( x ) Rs. 100 per mensem, but his substantive appointment is the Civil Surgeoncy of Rajkote. This arrangement is not a good one, and I am of opinion that the Superintendent should have no other than vaccination duties to do. How- ever, I am bound to say that Dr. Butler has managed his Circle with great credit; and his knowledge of Kattiawar is so valuable, that I would not propose to disturb the present arrangement so long as he remains in his pre- sent position. Again, Assistant Surgeon Welsh is Superintendent of Rewa Kanta Circle, and receives no pay from the Vaccination Department; his pay is passed to him as Medical Officer of the Guzerat Bheel Corps; and recently his appointment was classified among the second class civil stations. The other two Superintendents are both Natives,( xi ) devise a scheme for paying batta to Vaccinators for all successful vaccinations over and above a fixed number,( xii ) Superintendents have complained, and state that Rs. 5 per diem are not sufficient to cover their expenses. I selected Dr. Butler, Superintendent of Vaccination in Kattiawar Circle's letter for submission to Government; and I briefly stated in my endorsement No. 1103, dated 4th March last, that &quot; I can say, from my own knowledge, that Rs. 5 per diem for our Superintend- ents will not cover all the expenses of travelling,&quot; &c.; and pointed out to Government that our Superintendents get no other kind of allowance, such as tentage, office allowance, nor are they supplied with tents. This Govern- ment in their Resolution No. 756, dated 29th March, again recommended that the former rate of travelling allowance bo granted. Certificates of Vaccination from candidates for Government em- ploy. 14. In Resolution No. 1138, dated 12th May 1869, Government made known that they were not prepared to adopt the rule that a certificate of successful vaccina- tion, when there is no evidence of protection by small-pox (or insusceptibility), be exacted from all candidates for Government employ. I will not urge a reconsideration of this, but I may mention that the recruits of the Bombay Native Army have for many years past been vaccinated, when not otherwise protected; and it is worth mentioning that there have only been fifteen deaths from small-pox among the Sepoys in the last ten years. I have never heard of recruits on this side of India objecting to be vaccinated. They quietly submit to it, as a necessary preliminary to their enlistment. Again, the employés of the Telegraph Department suffered so severely from small-pox, that it was directed in Circular No. 1897 of 1868-69, dated 20th March 1869, from the Superintendent, Sub-Bombay Division, to the Assistant Superintendent in charge Bombay Office, that all employés in the Telegraph Department be vaccinated when it does not interfere with caste prejudices : and they were vaccinated or re-vaccinated without a murmur, as far as I know. Superintendence of Dispensa- ries. 15. Mr. Grey, Collector of Belgaum, made a suggestion early in 1869, that Superintendents of Vaccination might, when on tour, inspect Dispensaries. The sugges- tion was referred to me for opinion by the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, in his letter No. 1090, dated 12th April 1869. I stated in my answer thereto, No. 284, dated 19th idem, that Superintendents have time enough to inspect Dispensaries without detriment to their vaccination duties, and that, in point of fact, they do now inspect the vaccination work at Dispensaries. At the same time I stated
( xiii ) that 1 was not so clear about making them controlling and directing Officers of Dispensaries, because that would make them responsible Officers; and it is impossible to say how much work would be required to bring the Dispen- saries into good working order, and to keep them so. As inspecting Officers only, Superintendents might write in a book in each Dispensary when on tour their remarks on( xiv ) 18. In Table No. VII. I have summarized the monthly employment returns of each Superintendent; and the following is a condensed form of the employment returns of the seven Superintendents for the year 1869-70 :( xv ) Lymph. 19. In my letter No. 145, dated 23rd October 1868, when reporting to the Inspector General, Indian Medical Depart- ment, what was the best method of getting lymph from England, and the best season to have it sent out, I recommended that lymph should be sent out in capillary tubes only, as points nearly always failed, and that it should be tested lymph; that is to say, it should be kept in England for three weeks, and then one tube of the set charged from each child should be tried, and if it succeeded that it would guarantee the virtue of the rest. It was recommended that fifty tubes of lymph should leave England about the middle of October and December, and that one- half of each should be obtained from the National Vaccine Establishment, London, and the other half from the Central Vaccine Institution for Scotland; and that half of the English and half of the Scotch should be sent in the usual way through the post, and the other half in the Ice-room of the Peninsular and Oriental Company's Steamers. On the 8th November, a packet of thirteen tubes was received from the Central Vaccine Institution of Scotland. The following shows their distribution and result of use :( xvi ) Issued to Number of Tubes. Result. Number of Points. Result. Central Circle............... ...... ...... 5 Failed. Presidency do. ............. 4 Failed (?)*... 8 Do. Western do. ............. ...... ...... 5 No report. Northern do. ............. ...... ...... 5 Failed. Sind do. ............. ...... ...... 5 Do. Kattiawar do. ............. 3 Succeeded ... 5 Do. Rewa Kanta do. ............. 3 Do. ... 5 Do. Total... 10 38 * It is not quite certain that there was not a mistake made. On the 12th January 1870, I received a packet of ninteen tubes from the National Vaccine Establishment, London, and the following is the result:( xvii ) The foregoing tubes came out by post. On the 24th January 1870 I received a case (No. 1) containing thirteen tubes from the Central Vaccine Institution of Scotland, which came out in the Ice-room of the Mail Steamer. The whole were used by Dr. Colah in my presence, in Neriad, on six children: one child had five good vesicles, another four; two others had two small vesicles, and two failed. On the 5th February I received a case (No. 2), containing twenty tubes, from the National Vaccine Establishment, London, which also came out in the Ice-room of the Mail Steamer. The whole were sent to Dr. Butler. Six: children were vaccinated by himself from six tubes, all successfully; fourteen tubes were distributed in two's to seven Vaccinators, from which fourteen children were vaccinated,( xviii ) ern and Western Circles several Vaccinators were found working with bad lymph. In the Presidency Circle there was a deficiency of lymph until animal vaccination was begun. When on tour in the Northern Circle I saw some very indifferent lymph. In all cases when lymph deteriorates it is renewed, and Vaccinators should be encouraged to ask for now lymph when- ever they have any suspicion of their lymph having degenerated. Any Vacci- nator found carrying on work for a length of time with bad lymph should be dismissed the Service, because to thus produce bad vaccination knowingly is inexcusable. The Superintendents of Circles will take care to inform Vaccinators that they must work only with good lymph. In most of the civil stations the lymph was good throughout the year. In Sattara it deteriorated in September, but renewed itself on the subsidence of the rainy season. In Kaira it was renewed several times. When I was in Kaira I saw some very indifferent vesicles and vaccine marks, which, I believe, were more owing to the carelessness and want of skill on the part of the Vaccinator, than to the state of the lymph. Dr. Wyllie says the vesicles were small, and that the lymph should be renewed. In Larkhana, Rutnagherry, and Kurrachee, it became bad, and was replaced by good lymph. &quot; Animal Vaccine.&quot; 20. When Dr. Blanc returned from Europe he brought with him some cow-pox lymph in tubes and on ivory points from London. He obtained his first supply from M. Warlomont in Belgium, who had obtained his first supply from the natural pox on the cow, and now propagates it by inoculating from one calf to another. Dr. Blane when on leave practised the same method in London for six months with perfect success, and it was from that stock that he brought his &quot;Animal Vaccine&quot; to India. He expressed to me a wish to establish &quot; animal vaccination&quot; in Bombay. I was delighted to give him every assistance, and I have much pleasure in stating that the first inocu- lation proved a success. This was in December last. He then instructed Mr. Anunta Chandroba how to inoculate the calf and take the lymph from the vesicles. Ever since then Mr. Anunta Chandroba has carried on animal vaccination, and in his Report he speaks of it being a great boon to Bom- bay, on account of its being a source of pure lymph, as well as being a method of having abundance of it. He has had some difficulty in getting supplies of heifers, and acknowledges the great assistance afforded him by getting them from the Bombay Municipality for three months free of expense. I would also beg to bring to the notice of Government this ready and willing aid given to the Department by Mr. Crawford and Dr. Hewlett, who have both interested themselves very much in &quot; animal vaccination ;&quot;
( xix ) indeed I may say that had they not done so, it could not have been carried on; and I beg to suggest that Government acknowledge the aid rendered by both these Officers. I cannot speak too highly of Mr. Anunta Chandroba's exertions in overcoming the difficulty attendant on the introduction of &quot; animal vaccination,&quot; even though that difficulty was almost confined to the question of obtaining heifers. It appears that the people at once took to &quot; animal vaccination&quot; kindly, and even Bhattias and Bunnyas prefer cow-lymph to human-lymph. I have to record the liberality of Mr. Cowasjee Jehangeer, who generously undertook to defray the expenses of &quot; animal vaccination&quot; for one year, and gave us a grant of Rs. 540 for that purpose. Government thanked &quot;that gentleman for this additional proof of his liberal philanthropy.&quot; In Resolution No. 280, dated 2nd February last, it was stated that &quot; His Excellency in Council is satisfied with the results of the experiments already made, and approves of Dr. Blanc's and Mr. Chandroba's exertions in this matter.&quot; Dr. Blanc, in the month of February, inoculated a heifer at Tarra- poor, in the Tanna Collectorate, with perfect success, and the people rushed to get their children vaccinated from the cow, showing that no prejudices need be apprehended in the districts any more than in Bombay. The first estimate which was made of the probable cost of &quot; animal vaccination&quot; in Bombay was Rs. 540 per annum ; but it was forgotten that the butchers would not be allowed to slaughter the calves used, for some time, thereby increas- ing the expenditure. Dr. Blanc informs me that in London, Paris, and Brussels, the calves are slaughtered immediately after the lymph is taken from the vesicles, and no expense incurred by keeping them for three or four weeks after the operation. It would now appear that the cost will be very much more than was estimated. Mr. Anunta Chandroba enters very fully into the subject in his Report, and comes to the conclusion that five calves will be required every month, and that, to buy them, each will cost Rs. 15, besides Rs. 7½ for feeding; thus requiring Rs. 112½ per mensem, a large portion of which, however, would be recovered by the sale of the calves. I think this charge should be met by the Municipality. I had the pleasure of speaking to Mr. Crawford lately on the subject, and I have much pleasure in stating that he hopes to be able to supply us with calves ; and I have no doubt he will be able to do so at a much cheaper rate than the above. The method of propagating animal vaccine is very simple. Dr. Blanc, in an article in the Medical Times and Gazette of 25th September last, says:( xx ) &quot; from cows. This lymph has never passed through the human body, and &quot; has no connexion with the Neapolitan lymph, of whose origin at one time &quot; some doubts were expressed. &quot; In selecting the calves we propose to inoculate, great care should be &quot; taken to ascertain that the animal is in perfect health and in first-rate &quot; condition. The question of health is not of much importance with reference &quot; to the possibility of the transmission of disease, because, if in any way &quot; ' seedy,' the inoculation will partly or completely fail, but with this failure &quot; the link is interrupted ; and if no preserved, lymph has been kept in reserve, &quot; much inconvenience must necessarily follow. Calves from five or six months' &quot;old should be preferred; too young they sicken, too old they are difficult &quot; to manage It will necessarily require a much more lengthened series of &quot; inoculations in order to arrive at some precise rules ; but, as far as I have &quot; observed, it appears to me that strong calves give a stronger lymph, delicate &quot; calves a weaker lymph; also that in white or light coloured calves the '' eruption appears sooner, the vesicles are larger and arrive at maturity a day &quot; earlier than in black or brown calves. In warm and moist weather the &quot; eruption is quicker in its development, in cold weather somewhat later. &quot; From these two observations I would therefore advise that dark calves &quot; should be selected in warm weather, and white or light coloured calves in &quot; cold weather. Male or female calves are alike suitable; the only important &quot; point is to select those whose skin is fine and transparent, and the mammæ &quot; or scrotum full and plump. &quot; In order to vaccinate the calf, it should first be bound and held firmly &quot; upon a table by a couple of assistants; any strong table will answer the &quot; purpose. Mine is of common dealwood, provided with six iron rings. Two &quot; men seize the calf and place it on the table. The fore-legs are bound &quot; together and then tied to the front rings, the right hind-leg is tied to the &quot; posterior ring on the table, and the left hind-leg is lifted up and fixed by &quot; a rope to a ring placed above. A loose rope is passed over the neck, so as &quot; to keep the head down. The calf thus secured is easily managed. To avoid &quot; dirt, a circular hole is made in the table, to which is adapted a zinc pot, in &quot; which the excreta are received. First of all, the mammæ or scrotum and &quot; the surrounding abdominal region must be very carefully shaved. I dis- &quot; pense with the Continental practice of scraping the poor brutes in order to &quot; excite vascular action; I allow them the luxury of a good lather of soap &quot; and a sharp razor; but after the shaving, the parts are frictioned with a &quot; dry towel.
( xxi ) &quot;To inoculate the calf different plans are followed, either superficial inci- &quot; sions of about half an inch in length, smaller and deeper incisions, or val- &quot; vular punctures. Dr. Warlomont prefers the long incision, Dr. Lannoix the &quot; smaller one. I have tried both, and now generally inoculate by long incisions &quot; and by valvular punctures, kindly suggested to me by Mr. Marson. The &quot; long incisions give more lymph, but I believe that it is not quite so active &quot; as the one obtained by the valvular puncture. I therefore prefer the last for &quot; vaccinating children, and from the first I collect lymph for inoculating other &quot; heifers. I make on the mammæ or scrotum, and on the abdomen, from &quot; one hundred to one hundred and fifty punctures or incisions. I inoculate a &quot; heifer every eighth day. If at that date I find on the heifer some vesicles &quot; still transparent, I use them for inoculating the fresh calf. Sometimes none &quot; are found in that condition ; at other times only a very few; it is, therefore, &quot; necessary on the sixth and seventh days always to collect a certain amount &quot; of lymph for inoculating the next calf, as well as to have a supply on hand &quot; in case of accident. Although lymph in tubes frequently fails when applied &quot; to man, it retains for several weeks all its properties when inoculated into &quot; the bovine race. Care must be taken before filling the tubes to add a drop &quot; of glycerine to the lymph, otherwise it would adhere so strongly to the &quot; tubes that it could not be blown out again. I am careful that every incision &quot; and puncture is well touched with lymph. Between the thighs, and on the &quot; mammæ themselves, on account of the higher temperature of these parts, the &quot; vesicles rise sooner, and are also the first to lose their limpidity; therefore &quot; I have seldom found any of them fit for use on the eighth day. When the &quot; weather is warm, in order to have some good vesicles for the eighth day &quot; (for inoculating the next heifer), I make on the abdomen a certain number &quot; of punctures with lymph preserved for a month or six weeks ; whether the &quot; cause lies in the lymph or in the cooler spot, the important fact is that &quot; usually the vesicles developed under these conditions are a day late. But &quot; as in man, the individual susceptibility of the calf has also some influence. &quot;In the majority the eruption is beautiful, all the vesicles following a regular &quot; course, and yielding an abundance of lymph. In a few rare instances a &quot; great many of the vesicles are arrested in their development, or are quite &quot; superficial, almost dry, and early lose their transparency. To inoculate a &quot; calf carefully it requires about an hour ; as soon as the operation is com- &quot; pleted, the calf should be removed from the table, made to drink some milk, &quot;and tied in his stable. A cloth bandage in summer, one of flannel in &quot; winter, should at once be tied round the abdomen. By this the parts are &quot; kept warm, the calf is not annoyed by the flies, nor can he lick the inocu- &quot; lated spots. For this reason also the head-rope should be rather short.&quot;
( xxii ) 21. I am of opinion that there should be a Vaccinator in each Circle appointed to carry on animal vaccination : the expense of it in the districts would, I think, be small. In order to enable Superintendents to acquire a knowledge of the method of operating, I have recommended that all Super- intendents of Vaccination be allowed to come to Bombay on a short visit, to gain a practical knowledge of animal vaccination.* Inoculation. 22. None of the Superintendents in their report make any mention of inoculation having being practiced in 1869-70, with the exception of the Superintendent in Sind, who says that an instance was reported, but not substantiated on inves- tigation. Small-pox. 23. In the Central Circle small-pox prevailed more or less in every ta- looka except one, but it was epidemic in Indee and Shindghi Talookas only. At paragraph 13 of Dr. Gordon's Report he shows the number, deaths, &c., from small-pox in each collectorate of the Central Circle. There were 21,943 cases of the disease in 1869. &quot; Of these, 93.5 per centum were unprotected, and 6.48 had been previously vaccinated. Of the former 12.3 per centum died (a very small death rate), and of the latter 8.9 per centum. Of the 6.48 protected and after- wards affected by small-pox, 1.5 were vaccinated in infancy, and 4.9 in after life; of the former there died 4.2, and of the latter 10.2 per centum. Thus it appears that infantile vaccination is nearly two and a half times a better pro- phylactic than vaccination in after life. In detail I do not place very much reliance upon these returns, more especially with reference to the number of cases occurring after vaccination. During my tour, I on several occasions tested the correctness of the Returns for 1868. As statements of the total number of cases of small-pox, they are not very far from correct. As to the numbers entered as previously vaccinated I discovered some grievous errors. As in- stances, I may mention the returns of the villages of Ankola and Wakharrie, in the Nassick Zillah ; the returns from the former showed that fifty-eight cases of small-pox had occurred during 1868, and that all of them had been previously vaccinated. Upon careful inquiry I found this to be altogether incorrect, only one child had been previously vaccinated. The same was the case with the return from Wakharrie.&quot; In the Southern Circle, Mr. Raby says that he receives no returns of small-pox, but reports have occasionally reached him of its prevalence, and he always sent a Vaccinator to the affected locality as soon as possible. It was rife in parts of Dharwar, Canara, and Belgaum Collectorates. Dr. Blanc, Superintendent of the Western Circle, * This was sanctioned in Government Resolution No. 1232, dated 26th May 1870.
( xxiii ) received returns of small-pox from Tanna and Colaba Collectorates, and he has tabulated them in paragraph 20 of his Report; but he says &quot; evidently no weight can be attached to these returns.&quot; The Northern Circle was almost free of small-pox. In the Sind Circle 471 deaths were returned for the year 1869. Only a few cases were reported in the months of January, February, and March 1870, in the Kattiawar Circle. In the Rewa Kanta Circle there were thirty-seven cases in the Punch Mahals, out of which four died. There were more cases in the Native States of this Circle, but no particulars were obtained by Dr. Welsh, the Superintendent. In the Presidency Circle (Island of Bombay) there were 1,725 deaths from small-pox. It appears that, with the exception of the Presidency Circle (Island of Bombay), the Circles have been less affected during 1869 by small-pox than in most previous years. With regard to the Presidency Circle, the registration of small-pox is pro- bably not perfectly correct, but I think it is more so than in any other part of this Presidency, and there is not the least doubt about there having been a severe epidemic and many valuable lives lost in the town of Bombay. As long as Vaccination is not compulsory, an epidemic every three or four years may be predicted, because small-pox is always being imported from the maritime coasts of Asia, and less than half the children born annually are vaccinated, so that there is always a ready field of victims for the disease to lay hold of. This will be all changed if the proposed Vaccination Bill becomes law. Mr. Anunta Chandroba, the Superintendent, says that compulsory vaccination and &quot; animal vaccine&quot; lymph in abundance will put an end to epidemics of small-pox in Bombay. Small-pox existed, more or less, at the following stations :( xxiv ) Truthfulness of Vaccinators' Returns. 24. I regret that an instance of falsification by a Government Vaccinator took place in the Central Circle, and another in the Western Circle. In Kattiawar two in- stances of falsification by Native States' Vac- cinators were discovered. Falsifications have not been many, considering the number of Vaccinators, and I think the returns may be accepted as not very far from the truth( xxv ) During the second period, or official year 1869-70, there were vaccinated in( xxvi ) actual number of persons vaccinated. Thus A B vaccinates fifty persons in May, and returns them thus( xxvii ) (a)( xxviii ) (d)( xxix ) Total cost. Cost of each successful Vaccination. 1. Government ........... Rs. 1,00,798 Rs. 0 6 8 2. Municipal ............... ( xxx ) fits of it. In Kattiawar, Dr. Butler says the Chiefs have given every assistance, and were most courteous to him when on his tour. He says there is a tendency to employ too many Vaccinators ; but I have no doubt Dr. Butler will have influence enough to prevent the Chiefs doing so. Too many is as great an evil as too few. I have now gone through every one of our Circles, and I feel perfectly certain that the splendid progress of vacci- nation in Western India is due in a great measure to the countenance and aid so freely given by the Revenue and Political Officers; I never found them backward in helping us when called on for aid; and many of them go much further, and display an anxiety that vaccination may be placed within the reach of all in their districts. Transfer. 34. In my last report I recommended that Sattara Collectorate be transferred to the Central Circle (Maratha- speaking), and Kulladghee to the Southern Circle (Canarese-speaking). Government approved of that, and on the 1st April 1870 the transfer took place. Commendation of Superintend- ents. 35. On a review of the work of 1869-70, I come to the conclusion that the Department has worked well as a whole; and I have much pleasure in stating my satis- faction thereat. It is true that in several Circles instances of falsification came to light, but until there be closer supervision, I can hardly lay any blame for that, either on our system, or on the Superintendents. The Superintendents have, I think, done their duty well, some of them exceed- ingly well, and I would beg to bring the names of Drs. Butler, Welsh, and Gordon to the favourable notice of Government. I regret that Dr. Welsh has resigned his appointment. His zeal and industry in the Rewa Kanta has during his superintendence of four and a half years brought a neglected Circle into first-rate order, which, I hope, will be maintained. Dr. Blanc has intro- duced animal vaccination into India, and has taken considerable trouble to establish it. For this service as well as for his energetic superintendence, I would beg also to bring his name to the notice of Government. Weekly Returns, &c. 36. For several years back weekly returns of vaccination have been in use in the Sind Circle. They were introduced by Dr. Martin, when he was Superintendent of Vaccination in Sind; but it was left for me, on succeeding him, to bring them into general use there. After I became Superintendent General, Mr. Robert- son, Collector of Dhanwar, who takes great interest in vaccination, suggested
( xxxi ) that some means of informing the local Officers of the whereabouts, &c. of Vaccinators should be adopted. I thought that weekly returns from the &quot;Vaccinators to the Mamlutdars, who should forward them to the Collector, would meet Mr. Robertson's object, and on bringing the subject to the notice of Dr. Arnott, he authorized me to introduce the weekly return form throughout the Presidency. This has been done, and I am happy to say that the Superintendents generally speak of it having been very useful. The object of it is( xxxii ) 5th.( xxxiii ) Colonel Schneider has done so much to render it popular. In the Western Circle I examined some vaccinations in Vingorla town, and schools there. The result in the schools were :( xxxiv ) Mahals, and was much, pleased with the progress of vaccination in this Circle. Dr. Welsh, deserves great credit for the advance which has been made during his time of office as Superintendent. When he joined his appointment in 1865 there were five Government and five Native States' Vacci- nators; there are now ten of the latter. In 1865 the vaccinations were 7,331; in 1869-70 they are 19,642; and he invariably tests the Vaccinators' work by calling the names from the registers. From the Rewa Kanta I passed into the Northern Circle, and joined the Superintendent at Moondah, in the Kaira Collectorate. I saw the children of a good many villages in the collectorates of Kaira and Ahmedabad. We called the children's names over from the registers. One or two of the Vaccinators had their registers wonderfully correct, and none had any false names, but I regret to say that I saw several Vaccinators working with deteriorated lymph; this should never happen; and while in every other respect I can speak very highly of Dr. Colah's arrangements, I regret that any Vaccinators should ever, under any circumstance, use bad lymph. Many of the vaccine marks were bad, show- ing that the lymph had been deteriorating for some time. After very carefully considering the cause of the deterioration, I came to the conclusion that the chief cause of it was the Vaccinators being in the habit of vaccinating too many children from one vesicle. Dr. Colah issued instructions to all his Vaccinators not to vaccinate more than five or six persons from one vesicle, and he renewed the lymph of nearly every Vaccinator in his Circle immediately from the English lymph which I gave him. After passing through Kaira and Ahmedabad Collectorates I entered Kattiawar, and along my route I examined the villages. In Walleh I saw one hundred and thirteen children, all of whom, except two, had good marks. In Limra twenty,( xxxv ) His Highness the Rao's Medical officer, Mr. Dorabjee Hormusjee, and sug- gested to him that some arrangement should be made for superintending His Highness the Rao's Vaccinators, and that their number should be in- creased. I was sorry that I did not meet Major Shortt, the Political Agent, at Bhooj. He had gone with His Highness the Rao to meet His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh. But I have much pleasure in stating that His Highness the Rao has since my visit appointed one more Vaccinator and a Superintendent. In Bhooj I saw only nine vaccinated children; all had good marks. From Kutch I returned to Bombay, by boat, about the end of the official year. J. PINKERTON, M.D., Surgeon, Superintendent General of Vaccination. Bombay Presidency. Matheran, 3rd June 1870.
VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 of &quot; zahirnammas&quot; to every village in the Circle ; 4th, to the universal use of the amended return, introduced by Dr. Turnbull, of the unprotected children in even- village ; and, 5th, also in a great measure, I believe, to the fact that the benefits of vaccination are now more fully appreciated by the natives. Average number of vaccinations by each Vaccinator. Importance of Native officials interesting themselves in vaccina- tion. 2. The highest number of operations was performed by Tattia Dhondeo (Gene- ral No. 244). He vaccinated 4,407 persons, exclusive of the two Vaccinators employed in my office; the average number of operations performed by each in the Government establishment was 2,072. Considering the difficulties to be over- come, the number of vaccinations performed by many of the Vaccinators is very fair indeed. Some, however, have not exerted themselves sufficiently in proportion to the assistance and support accorded them. I have imposed a few fines for laziness and negligence, but in most cases my representations have been at once responded to. I must here observe that much might be done to make vaccination more effectual, if all the native officials could be made to take suffi- cient interest in this very important part of their duties. From many talookas I receive no complaints of want of assistance ; but in not a few little or no Support is given, and I have had on several occasions to bring to the notice of the Collector or Mamlutdar the frequent complaints by Vaccinators of want of assistance on the part of the village officials. Sex. 3. Of the total number 51.8 were males, and 48.2 females; nearly the same as last year. Case. 4. The following table will show the percent- age of each caste as compared with 1868 :3 Months. Number of Villages inspected. Number of persons in Vaccinators' Registers. Number of persons whom the Vaccinator has returned as vaccinated. Vaccinated children seen, but names not called from the Register. Present during inspection. Absent during inspection. Successful. Unsuccessful. Absence ac- counted for. Unaccounted for or false. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. October ................ 39 893 55 925 17 1,793 39 58 1,890 121 November ............ 46 1,552 118 1,995 46 3,468 90 153 3,711 80 December ............ 36 1,684 108 1,091 ... 2,788 53 42 2,883 132 January ................ 34 1,290 89 630 ... 1,945 50 14 2,009 41 February .............. 31 1,046 58 3,072 ... 3,812 172 192 4,176 50 March .................. 30 785 63 722 ... 1,489 47 34 1,570 71 Total........... 216 7,250 491 8,435 63 15,295 451 493 16,239 495 From this table it appears that I have during the last six months called 16,239 names from the Vaccinators' registers. There were present during inspections 7,741, and of these 93.6 were successful; but of the 16,239, the Vaccinators had returned 97.1 as successful, excluding those doubtful. The number (63) entered in the above table as unaccounted for, or false, occurred in the returns of one Vaccinator, who was dismissed the Service. This will be alluded to subsequently. State of Lymph. Vesicles. Lymph exchanged. 7. The quality of lymph in use during the period under review has been, on the whole, satisfactory, with the exception of the two instances mentioned in the résumé of my tour. The vesicles have been generally normal and well deve- loped ; the cicatrices well marked, pitted, and characteristic. Lymph has been exchanged with Superintendents of the several Circles within the Presidency. With a certain amount of care and attention in the selection of vesicles from which to propagate the virus, I believe that vaccine lymph may be maintained for some years in a state almost as healthy and active in this country as in England. During the last six months seventeen tubes charged with English lymph have been received from the Superintendent General. The lymph in ten of these tubes proved successful on application. Two were broken in transmission through the Post Office. The lymph on five ivory points also received proved inert. From these sources of English lymph, supplies have been distributed over the greater part of the Circle. During the year 1869-70 I have distributed 282 capillary tubes, charged with lymph. With the exception of one occasion, when glasses were spe- cially asked for, tubes have always been supplied. I regret that I am unable to show
4 in a tabulated form the results. The replies received have been so few that such is not practicable ; but I am of opinion that a fair amount of success has attended its use. Inoculation. 8. No reports of inoculation have been received during the year; and if such a practice exists within this Circle, it is only to a very limited extent in some of the outlying districts of Khandeish. Apathy and indifference on the part of the people, and paucity of Vaccinators, are the chief obstacles to the extension of vaccination. 9. Apathy and indifference appear the great impediments to the extention of vaccination ; but there is also another and a very great one indeed, viz., the paucity of Vaccinators over the country. In the course of my tour I have endeavoured personally to persuade and conciliate the people ; and as I heard the occurrence of small-pox in those vaccinated advanced as an objection, I have, wherever small-pox existed, endeavoured to convince them of the advantages of vaccination. The inhabitants of large villages are more prone to prejudice than those of small. It is very seldom that this prejudice extends to villages in the vicinity of the large towns. The Vaccinator in the Niphar Talooka pointed out to me instances confirming this, and also that he has known prejudice exist only for a time. He visited the village of Doghur about the beginning of the year 1869, but could obtain no subjects ; but on again visiting the place in November, he found the people anxious for vaccination. 10. During the year 1869-70 I have examined the work and lymph, and tested the returns, of twenty-two Government Vaccinators, nine Municipal, one Native State, and also work at four Dispensaries. All have been found correct, with the exception of the returns of Narayen Gopall (General No. 241), who was dismissed the Service. With reference to testing the correctness of these returns, I must mention that my Carkoons, Balcrishna Rajaram (General No. 207) and Ramjee Khunderao (General No. 240), have rendered most effective assistance, being ever ready to check the slightest difference between the Vaccinator's return and the village register. Cost. 11. The following table shows the expendi- ture and cost of each successful vaccination in the several establishments:5 Thus it appears that the cost of each successful vaccination in the Government establishment, although debited with the cost of administration, is less than in the Municipal or Local Funds' establishment. Municipalities' Vaccinators. Joonere Municipality and seve- ral others have appointed Vacci- nators. 12. There are fifteen Municipal Vaccinators in this Circle, and the numbers vac- cinated by them contrast very favourably with the pre- vious year, there being an increase of 2,022 opera- tions. Two of these Vaccinators have been appointed within the last month, one by the Municipality of Joonere, and the other con- jointly by the Municipalities of Kheir, Warreh, Mun- cher, and Allundee, in the Kheir Talooka. The former is the native Doctor in charge of the Dispen- sary. The latter only began work on the 1st April, but his appointment shows very clearly that the benefits of vaccination are becoming more fully appreciated by the natives. Until very lately, little or no vaccination had ever been performed in any of the four villages for which he is appointed. I had meetings with three of these Committees, and, from the desire expressed to possess a Vaccinator, I am inclined to believe that the work will be carried on energetically and effectually. The Vaccinator employed by the Sangola Committee resigned, but his place was filled up with as little delay as possible. The Vaccinators maintained by the Municipalities of Sholapore and Nassick were dismissed without any reference being made to me on the subject; other men have been appointed to both places, one on my recommendation, and the other on the recommendation of Mr. Burn, in charge of the civil duties at Nassick. Notwithstanding the increase, the numbers vaccinated monthly by most of these Vaccinators have not come up to my expectations. No doubt they have many diffi- culties to contend against; but from what I have seen, I believe the chief cause to be the want of interest felt by the individual members of Municipalities in the promotion of vaccination. All Municipal Vaccinators, except those of Poona and Nassick, operate in the surrounding villages within a radius of three miles. Native States' Vaccinators. 13. In this Circle there are only two Vaccinators under Native Chiefs. During the period under review there is an increase of 1,033 vaccinations, as compared with 1868 ; the Vaccinator in the Peint State was sick for about six weeks, otherwise the increase would have been still greater. So far as I am aware, every facility is afforded to these men for carrying on their work. Local Funds' Vaccinators. 14. Vaccination by Local Funds' Vaccinators began during the year. In April 1869, the Collector of Poona informed me that Rs. 720 had been sanctioned in the Local Fund Budget for the maintenance of Vaccinators within the zillah. Three Vaccinators were appointed in August upon a monthly pay of Rs.13, and one rupee for contingencies. So as to increase their pay I solicited a further grant for the current year, but I understand the Committee have declined to sanction it; so far as I am aware no
6 definite arrangement for appointing Local Fund Vaccinators has been come to in any of the other zillahs, but the matter is under consideration. Dispensary Vaccination. 15. The number of vaccinations performed by Subordinates in charge of Dis- pensaries has not been so great as might have been expected. This is easily accounted for, when we consider that they only vaccinate those who voluntarily present themselves at the Dispensary, and that in many instances it is difficult for them to keep up a continuous supply of lymph. In order to remedy this, I would beg to suggest for the favourable consideration of the Inspector General, that either the apprentice or medical pupil attached to the Dispensary be directed to vaccinate through the town one day in every week. By this means, not only would a fresh supply of lymph be kept up, but the apprentice or pupil would, be acquiring knowledge of a subject, which, although con- sidered simple, and almost below notice, is often very imperfectly known by many of the young subordinates. Small-pox. 16. Small-pox has prevailed, more or less, in every talooka of this Circle, except one ; but the disease only assumed an epidemic form in the talookas of Indee and Shindghee, in the collectorate of Kulladghee. Statistics of Small-pox during the year 1869 in the Central Circle of Vaccination. Collectorate or Native State. Total number of cases of Small-pox during the year 1869. Of the total number were vaccinated Of these died of small-pox who were vaccinated. Of the total number were unprotected Of these died of Small-pox Total deaths from Small-pox out of the total number of cases. In In- fancy. In after life. In In- fancy. In after life. Ahmednuggur...... 2,972 13 79 1 2 2,880 313 316 Poona ............... 3,790 50 94 2 16 3,646 238 256 Nassick ............ 2,510 80 183 2 13 2,247 251 266 Khandeish ......... 4,954 28 276 8 52 4,650 563 623 Kulladghee ......... 5,161 144 387 ... 22 4,630 866 888 Sholapore............ 2,548 15 74 1 8 2,459 299 308 Peint State ......... 8 ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... Aukulcote ......... Not received. Total 1869...... 21,943 330 1,093 14 113 20,520 2,530 2,657 Total 1868 47,234 390 1,458 16 101 45,388 4,314 4,431 The totals of 1868 have been entered for comparison, and the contrast is very favourable ; the more so, as owing to the change of date for submitting this report, 1 have been enabled to include in the above table the returns from every talooka
7 Deaths from Small-pox. Each Talooka should have a Vaccinator. within the Circle, except two ; whereas the total for the year 1868 only shows about two-thirds of the actual number of cases which occurred. Of the total number of cases 93.5 per centum were unprotected, and 6.48 had been previously vaccinated. Of the former there died 12.3 per cent. (a very small death rate), and of the latter 8.9 per centum. Of the 6.48 protected, and afterwards affected with small-pox, 1.5 were vaccinated in infancy and 4.9 in after life ; of the former there died 4.2, and of the latter 10.2 per centum. Thus it appears that infantile vaccination is nearly two and a half times a better prophylactic than vaccination in after life. In detail, I do not place very much reliance upon these returns, more especially with reference to the number of cases occurring after vaccination. During my tour I on several occasions tested the correctness of the returns for 1868. As statements of the total number of cases of small-pox, they are not very far from correct. As to the numbers entered as previously vaccinated, I discovered some grievous mistakes. As instances, I may mention the returns from the villages of Ankola and Wakharrie, in the Nassick Zillah ; the returns from the former showed that 58 cases of small-pox had occurred during 1868, and that all of them had been previously vaccinated. Upon careful inquiry I found this to be altogether incorrect. Only one child had been previously vaccinated. The same was the case with the return from Wakharrie. The deaths from small-pox during 1869 were 2,657, as compared with 4,431 for 1868. Is there no remedy for this terrible loss of life among the young? I do not advocate compulsory vaccination for the present, because I am of opinion that such a law would entail serious hardships on a large mass of the population. Let all other means be fairly tried first, so as to give the natives an opportunity of appreciating the advantages of vaccination. The only means of doing this is by having a Vaccinator for each talooka, so that he might be continually moving among the people, and, as it were, teaching them. Area and Population. 17. The following table will show the area and population of the different Collectorates and Native States in the Central Circle :8 Tour. 18. Résumé of my tour.9 very satisfactory. This Vaccinator has sent me a weekly supply of lymph in tubes during the whole year. In Poona Havielly I examined the work and lymph of General No. 40, who is a careful and efficient Vaccinator. On arrival at Poona I examined the work and lymph of the Municipal Vaccinators. They are both very attentive. In July, Keshew Sedeshwur informed me that he had visited Lonee Kalvar, a village about twelve miles from Poona, but on account of the aversion of the people to vaccination, he could not get any subjects. I proceeded to the village, had the people collected, explained the benefits of vaccination, and commenced the work myself. On returning to ascertain the result of my work, I brought the Vaccinator with me, and we had no difficulty in getting subjects. In the course of six weeks the Vaccinator operated on 286 children in that village alone- Leaving Poona on the 4th of October, I travelled through the talookas of Kheir and Joonere, and inspected the work and lymph of General No. 13 and 277 ; every- thing was satisfactory, but the work was small in amount. I was not much surprised at this, as the inhabitants are very indifferent to vaccination, and often refuse to allow lymph to be taken from the arms of their children. It was with the greatest reluctance that a few children in each village were brought for my inspection. As an instance, I may mention the village of Kheir, with a population of upwards of 6,000. Here only two vaccinated children were brought to me. On my complaining to the Fouzdar, who was present, and who had rendered every possible assistance, he said some of the people were anxious to know what authority I had for ordering them to bring their children for my inspection. They also stated that they had no objec- tions to show their children if I went to their houses. Leaving Joonere I passed on to the Sungumnair Talooka, in the Ahmednuggur Zillah, where I examined the work of Narayen Gopall (General No. 241). On calling over the names of the children from this Vaccinator's register I found that many of those entered had never been vaccinated ; that the names of several were entered who had had small-pox previously, and these not only bore distinct traces, but their names appeared in the village small-pox register ; two were not over twenty days old at the time they were returned as vaccinated, and a few did not exist. In almost every village, where I examined this Vaccinator's work, falsehoods were discovered. &quot;What appeared to me at first very wonderful, was that the village registers corresponded in every particular with the Vaccinator's returns ; but on questioning the Coolkurnees, most of them admitted they had not been present at the time the children were vacci- nated, they had merely obtained a list from the Vaccinator, and entered the same in their registers. The absence of Coolkurnees at the time the Vaccinator is operating is of too frequent occurrence, and, I believe, is mainly due to their residing in another village than that of which they have charge. I communicated the circumstances to Mr. Keyser, the Assistant Collector in charge of the talooka, who investigated the matter, and fined most of the Coolkurnees. The Vaccinator was dismissed the Service. 2 v s
10 I then proceeded through the talookas of Ankola and Sinnur to Nassick, examining the old work of General Nos. 207 and 288, and the recent work and lymph of the Head Vaccinator (General No. 13). The work of these men was care- fully performed. At Nassick I saw the work of the late and present Municipal Vaccinators. I then passed on through the talookas of Dindooree, Niphar, Chandore, Baglan, and Malligaum, to Dhoolia. At Dindooree the work and lymph of General No. 223 was examined. The cicatrices were generally small, but very distinct. His lymph was renewed with two tubes from England, which proved successful. In Niphar and Chandore I examined the work and lymph of General No. 53,which were satisfactory in every instance. Vaccination has been firmly established in these districts, and the old prejudices have fallen before its onward progress. In Baglan I inspected the work and lymph of General No. 50 ; he is one of my most careful Vaccinators ; and I had every reason to be well satisfied with his work. Not so with that of General No. 60, whose work was next examined, in the Malligaum Talooka; his lymph was bad, and his method of operating awkward, to say the least. Having re-taught him, I renewed his lymph, and before leaving satisfied myself that he would in future perform his work more efficiently. Leaving Dhoolia on the 29 th December, I travelled towards Pimpulnair, where I examined the work and lymph of General No. 211. His lymph was unsatisfactory, and I renewed it with some tubes from the Superintendent of Vaccination in Sind, which produced very good vesicles. Passing on through Nizampoor Petta, a place where little or no vaccination had ever been performed, I entered the Nandoorbar Talooka, where I examined the work and lymph of General No. 225. Vaccination has only been going on here for about a year, but the people are quite alive to its benefits. Leaving Nandoorbar I travelled eastward, through Virdul, to Seerpoor, where I examined the work and lymph of General No. 214. From Dr. Turnbull's remarks upon the work of this Vaccinator I expected to find matters in a very unsatisfactory condition, but during the last two years he has improved: his work was well performed, and his lymph was good. I then passed on to the Amulnair Talooka, where I examined the work and lymph of General No. 272 : both were satis- factory. Travelling eastwards I passed through the talookas of Errundole, Pachora, and Nusseerabad. Here I inspected the work and lymph of General No. 258, with which I was well pleased. Thence through Bhosawul to Sowda, where I examined the work and lymph of General No. 140. Having been lately transferred he had only succeeded in establishing good lymph in one village. I vaccinated here with lymph received from England and Bombay. With the inspection of this man's work terminated my duties in Khandeish. On the 12th March I travelled by rail from Bhosawul to Munmar. Thence, proceeding towards Ahmednuggur, I passed through the talookas of Sawergaon and Kopurgaon, where I examined the work and lymph of General Nos. 288 and 289. The lymph of the former being inactive, was renewed. Very little vaccination has been done in these talookas for some time, and it was with the greatest difficulty I
11 could get a few children collected for inspection. On the 31st March I reached the Rahooree Talooka, Zillah Ahmednuggur, having during the last fourteen months travelled over the greater part of the six zillahs included in the Central Circle. During 1869-70 I have visited 314 villages, examined 14,013 vaccinated children, and travelled 1,506 miles. Can Syphilis be transmitted by vaccination ? 19. The possible transmission of syphilis by vaccination has engaged my attention; but I have seen nothing worthy of remark. Assistance from Revenue Officers. 20. The Revenue Officers and their Assistants have given me great assistance. It is mainly through the interest taken by these Officers in vaccination that matters go on so smoothly. Cost. 21. Detailed statements of the expenditure of vaccination in each talooka sepa- rately, and of the monthly returns, are appended; also a statement showing the results of vaccination during 1869-70, as compared with the five previous years. SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.12 Increase of Vaccinations. Percentage of Success. Last year I was able to report a larger number of vaccinations than had been previously performed in this Circle. For the year now under review, I have again the satisfaction of exhibiting a still further increase in the number of vaccinations of the Government, Native Chiefs, and Dispensary Establishments. In the above table there is an aggre- gate increase of 11,700 over 1868. The total number of vaccinations throughout the Circle is 65,700, and of successfully vaccinated 62,348, or a percentage of success of 96.9. This percentage of success cannot well be compared with former years, inasmuch as the &quot; doubtful cases&quot; were not then deducted, as now, from the total before estimating the percentage. But excluding, for the sake of comparison, those cases from the total of the year 1868, the percentage that year was 96.5) thus giving a very similar result to the present. Government Establishment. 2. The greatest increase is in the Government establishment; the total vacci- nations performed being 28,499, and of successful cases 27,178, giving a percentage of 97.1. This, I consider, highly satisfactory on the whole, for nearly all these Vaccinators have increased their operations over any previous year ; and bearing in mind the difficulties many of them met with in some talookas, I think it reflects considerable credit on them. Sadasheo Mahadoo (General No. 192) has done the greatest number of operations of any Vaccinator of this Circle. General No. 218 has also been doing good work throughout the year. I would beg to recommend, if practicable, some gratuity be given to these Vaccinators. Jaghcer Establishment. 3. In this establishment there is also a creditable increase of 2,171 ; the total number vaccinated being 22,572, and of successful cases 21,715, or a percentage of success of 97.3. In the Report for 1868 (paragraph 9) I mentioned that Colonel Anderson, the Political Agent at Kolapoor, had consented to take into consideration a proposal for placing the Vaccinators of that State on a better footing as regards pay. This, I am glad to say, has been since carried out, and the Vaccinators of this State now receive a scale of pay similar to that of Government Vaccinators. I also remarked, in the above para- graph, the fact of the Bhore Punt having thought fit to reduce his Vaccinator's pay Rs. 3. This I must state has since been cancelled, and the Chief has signified his willingness to continue the Vaccinator's pay as before. In the Kolapoor State there is a consider- able increase during the year as compared with the previous year, due in a great measure to the increased pay to the Vaccinators. Of individual Vaccinators of the Kolapoor State, the most noteworthy is the Seerole Vaccinator, whom last year I had occasion to severely reprimand. He has apparently improved since then. The Bhoodaghur, Veshalghur, and Panalla Vaccinators are also doing good work, though the returns of the Veshalghur Vaccinator are somewhat less than last year, but still more than the average by far. There was a break in the work of vaccination in the Kagul District, by reason of the decease, from cholera, of the Vaccinator.
13 Percentage of Success. 4. The smallest percentage of success is shown by the Dispensaries, and this rather diminishes at first sight the percentage of the aggregate. Age and Sex. 5. The percentages of age and sex are :14 Municipalities. 9. There has been a slight decrease in the Municipalities' vaccinations, explained mostly by the interruption to the work in the Muni- cipalities of Gudduck and Hooblee of the Dharwar Collectorate. Regarding the Gudduck Municipality, there was considerable trouble occasioned by the non-payment of the salary due to the Vaccinator. His pay had been in arrears for some months, and, though I repeatedly wrote to the Collector respecting it, for a long time I could get no payment made. The alleged complaint was laziness of the Vaccinator, and at his laziness, if such it can be termed, there can be little wonder, considering that he was kept in arrears of pay for over four months ; and, as he truly remarked, he was not sure that he should be paid at all. At length he resigned the appointment, and some months subsequently I recovered the amount due, through the Collector. I could not, however, procure a Vaccinator to fill the vacancy for some time, as the irregular manner in which the former Vaccinator had been paid being known, others refused to go there. Subsequently it was arranged that the Vaccinator should receive his pay monthly through the Treasury. I then procured a Vaccinator, and since then. I have experienced no more trouble, nor received any complaints. There was a lapse of four months in the work. There was also some little trouble with the Hooblee Municipality of a similar description to the above, viz. arrears of pay; and the Vaccinator was obliged to vacate his post for want of the means of livelihood. Smallness of the work performed was the complaint alleged; but no complaint of this or any other kind had been made to me. It seems that the Municipality had arranged to pay the Vaccinator so much per cent., instead of, as usual, a fixed salary ; the consequence was the Vacci- nator for the first month, not being able to do much work for want of sufficient lymph, found himself receiving a scale of pay much less than he expected. He was to get rupees ten for every one hundred vaccinations. In case, therefore, he only vaccinated, say, fifty his pay would only be Rs. 5. To these terms, it is scarcely necessary to add, no Vaccinator would be willing to consent. After much correspondence, it has lately been arranged to pay the Vaccinator a fixed salary of Rs. 10 a month, and at the rate of Rs. 10 for every one hundred vaccinations exceeding one hundred. This is about the best arrangement that could be made under the circumstances; but Rs. 10, as I have represented, is insufficient, as a fixed salary, to procure the services of a good man. The percentage though is, in my opinion, a desirable mode of payment. During the year three more Municipalities have entertained Vaccinators; viz., the Municipality of Uthnee, Khatow, and Sircy ; the latter has been entertained for about two months only, and has done little work yet. On my visit to Sircy in February last, I found this Vacci- nator a person wholly unfit for the post, and recommended his dismissal, which has since been acceded to. He was quite incapacitated, by old age and imperfect vision, from performing the duties of a Vaccinator. Lymph. 10. The lymph in use throughout the year has for the most part been good, the exceptions met with are stated under paragraph 12. New lymph was introduced in January 1870, from
15 the Superintendent General of Vaccination, but it has not been spread about much for want of tubes. Animal lymph was also received from the Local Superintendent of Vaccination, Bombay, but proved inert. Lymph has been supplied to the Civil Surgeons of Carwar, Belgaum, Sattara, and the Superintendent of Vaccination, Central Circle, and others. Small-pox. 11. No returns are received, but reports have occasionally been made of its prevalence in certain localities; and the nearest Government Vaccinator has in such cases been directed as soon as possible to proceed to the district indicated. At all times it is difficult, and occasionally undesirable, to spare the services of a Vaccinator from a talooka, when possibly there may be already isolated cases of variola appearing, and where it is then necessary to carry on vaccination as speedily as possible. Government Vaccinators are very few in a collectorate, and those are the only ones that can be transferred. Small- pox has been very rife in parts of Dharwar and Canara, as also in the Chickodee Talooka of the Belgaum Zillah. Tour. 12. At the commencement of the year 1869 I was at Kolapoor, but since, in the Report for 1868, I remarked on certain occur- rences that I met with during the months of January, February, and March 1869, it is unnecessary here repeating them. In April and May I inspected the remainder of the Sattara Vaccinators, and some of the Kolapoor Chief's Vaccinators. During the rains I was at head-quarters, and occasionally inspected the work of General No. 57, whose lymph was not as good as it might be, from carelessness on his part. In October I again commenced my tour, first visiting the talookas of Gokak and Chickodee, and examining the work of the Government Vaccinators there, with which I was satisfied. In November I inspected the work of General No. 231, but, from circumstances connected with the post, I was prevented seeing his lymph ; and as he was unacquainted with the manner of charging tubes, I was obliged to take him with me to the nearest Vaccinator and show him. He was extremely careless in his operations, vaccinating with blood or lymph indiffer- ently. Some other Vaccinators whom I have visited are also addicted to this repre- hensible manner of vaccinating, simply, I believe, by reason of the want of knowledge of the injury they are likely to inflict. I cannot but think that it is expedient to adopt some better system of instructing Vaccinators in their work, than merely permit- ting candidates to receive instruction from some other Vaccinator. I also visited the Chiefs Vaccinators of Ramdroog and Torgal. The Chief of the former gave me every assistance in his power, and the vaccinated cases were better collected here than at any place I have visited during my tour. The Vaccinator had been ill for some time, and was out of lymph; and as he also was ignorant of the manner of filling tubes, it was necessary that he also should accompany me to the nearest Vaccinator for instruction. With this object I addressed the Chief, who at once acceded to my request, and was apparently very anxious that his Vaccinator should be supplied with good lymph. I subsequently visited the talookas of Dharwar, Hooblee, Bunkapoor, Hongul, Kamdgee,
16 Ranehbednore, and Koade, of the Dharwar Collectorate ; in some of these talookas vaccination had never been previously performed, and consequently the natives being, to a certain extent, unfamiliar with the operations, opposed the Vaccinators much. In fact, in some places, the Vaccinator could get no subjects for operation. The Local Fund Vaccinators of Kamdgee and Ranehbednore were working with such bad lymph that I at once suspended the latter Vaccinator for a month, and directed him to pro- ceed to the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Hooblee Dispensary (which was the nearest) to learn his duties, and when certified to be proficient I would re-employ him. He could not accompany me for the purpose of being taught, as I was moving too frequently. I fined him a month's pay for his great carelessness and inattention. From the Dharwar District I crossed into Canara, and first inspected the work of General No. 251, whose lymph was very good; also examined the work of the Sircy Vaccinator, as before stated. From thence I travelled through the talookas of Compta, Honore, Ancolah, Karwar, and Yellapoor, inspecting the work of the Vaccinators and Dispensaries ; but, as a rule, I could get. very few collected for inspection. 13. During the year 1869-70 I have inspected 6,172 cases of vaccination ; but in no case have I witnessed syphilis conveyed by the use of vaccine lymph. WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.17 However satisfactory this result may appear, it is not one that should per se be considered of much value ; indeed, we should be guarded against giving too much importance to a mere increase. Quality of Vaccination rather than quantity desirable. 2. I fear that in this country quality in vaccination is too much sacrificed to quantity. Every return relates more or less pro- minently to quantity, and in an annual report the appearance of the vesicles and cicatrices, the real effi- ciency of the Vaccinators, the protection afforded by good and typical vesicles, the selection of proper cases, &c., cannot be brought so prominently to notice as the mere number of vaccinations performed. To a &quot; decrease &quot; a sense of blame is attached, and praise bestowed when an increase has occurred. When a decrease takes place, hopes are expressed that an increase will follow a more energetic supervision on the part of the Superintendent. In my humble opinion, this inference is not consistent with facts, and the influence of the Superintendent, as far as quantity is concerned, must, for the following reasons, be somewhat limited : 18 Method of inserting Lymph. 4. Some Vaccinators make from ten to twelve punctures on one arm and none on the other (I once counted as many as nineteen vesicles on one arm), generally quite close to one another. Some make only one puncture ; some, very properly, three or four on each arm, but they are made on a line,19 Brahmins, Bunnyas, and by Mussalmans engaged in trade. Many of them are intelli- gent and well-informed, and most of them well-off. The houses are substantially built, and an appearance of prosperity pervades the whole district. Here vaccination, as a rule, is not accepted. What course of action should be adopted regarding the inhabitants of the towns and the more enlightened natives20 tried in this country. I would also suggest that for good lymph we should pay the parents a sufficient amount to induce them to allow lymph to be taken from their children, say one rupee; few, I believe, would refuse the gratuity; and as such agency is only required in towns, the total expense on that score would not be considerable, and should be borne by the towns themselves. 10. In order to ascertain, as far as lay in my power, the progress of vaccination in those parts of my Circle that I visited, 1 examined the children of the different schools, and obtained the following result:21 Good. Indifferent. Bad. Unhealthy Sores. Vesicles .......... 36 186 180 138 Cicatrices ........ 119 194 390 Total ..... 155 380 570 138 The percentage of good vesicles is only 9.3, and of good cicatrices 15.3. If we take the total of good and indifferent of both vesicles and cicatrices, we have the per centage of successful cases 45.6. I believe that on a larger scale this percentage would be found to be low. Since the end of the official year I have met with better results ; still 97 or 96 per cent is too high. Something between 45 and 97, say 70 per cent., is, I believe, a fair estimate of successful vaccination in this Circle. When speaking of my tour I will have occasion to mention the steps taken when the lymph used by a Vaccinator was found to be bad or indifferent. Conduct of Vaccinators. 12. The most steady men, or those who have done the most work during the year, are22 Renewal of Lymph from Heifers. tion be continued, and its practice extended to other cities, India will be in possession of as good vaccine lymph as can be obtained from England itself. 15. On two occasions I inoculated heifers in my Circle, and thereby renewed the lymph in several talookas. I experienced no difficulty whatsoever in procuring heifers, and, far from meeting with any opposition, great anxiety was shown by all to be vaccinated from that pure supply. 16. I propose making during the year a series of experiments with dried lymph on ivory points, and liquid lymph in tubes, or preserved between plates of glass. If, as I believe, points are found to give a higher percentage of success, they should on this score alone be preferred. Points being so much easier to charge than tubes to fill, the Vaccinator could always carry with him a large supply of lymph, and, once taught how to use them, would obtain very fair results. At present the Vaccinators have frequently to put up with bad lymph, as it is not the child presenting the best vesicles that can always be conveyed to another village, but the one whose parents are willing to go. One point can only be used for one super- ficial incision, and the bad practice of vaccinating a large number of children from an inadequate supply of lymph would then be obviated. Animal Vaccine a good and pure source of Lymp. 17. I believe that we have now the means of keeping up a good supply of vaccine lymph ; but unless the same advantage is extended to the Vaccinators themselves, all our efforts will be made in vain. I supplied on one occasion some very good lymph to the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge of one of the Callian Dispensaries, and with it he vaccinated three children ; in two (I saw them on the eleventh day) he obtained beautiful vesicles ; in the third, vesicles were very indifferent, almost spurious. To my astonishment he had taken lymph from these bad vesicles for vaccinating other children ; the result was unsuccessful, and he lost his supply. If Sub-Assistant Sur- geons, who are supposed to know better, cannot distinguish between good and bad vesicles, what are we to expect from the generality of our Vaccinators. Supernumerary Vaccinators de- sirable. 18. Two or three supernumeraries should always be attached to the Superin- tendent's Office, and thoroughly trained in every detail of their work, before they are employed as Vac- cinators. The want of properly trained men, always at the disposal of the Superintendent, is a want I have greatly felt. Having had to make lately several appointments under the Local Funds, I had no alternative but to appoint men whom I could get, and who were in some respects not well suited for the work. I kept them all for some time near me, allowing them to draw part of their pay ; but they had studied under our Vaccinators, and it is well known how much more difficult it is to &quot;unteach&quot; than to &quot;teach.&quot; These supernumeraries (who should receive pay at the rate of from ten rupees to fourteen per mensem), after a few mouths' training, would be of the greatest use. They would be always at hand,
23 and ready to fill up temporary vacancies, and, through their agency, in time we would have really good Vaccinators24 Superintendents of Vaccination might be also Sanitary Officers in their Circles. 21. The general extension of vaccination and, through this agency, the extinc- tion of small-pox are the objects most closely con- nected with this Department; at the same time, as all Superintendents of Vaccinations are Medical Offi- cers, I believe that their presence in the district daring several months in the year could be turned to advantage for other practical purposes. I have often regretted being myself unable to recommend, nay, enforce, certain simple sanitary measures in the towns and villages I came across. Such is generally the total disregard of all hygienic measures, that I can no more be astonish- ed at the great havoc annually made by several preventible diseases, such as fever, dysentery, cholera, &c., but only wonder that sickness and mortality are not greater than they actually are. In my opinion great advantages would be derived if the Superintendents of Vaccination were appointed Sanitary Commissioners of their respective Circles, so that, whilst effectually striving to annihilate one of our most dreaded diseases,25 Tour. heifer was successfully vaccinated. Once fairly started, and confident from what I saw of Mr. Anunta Chandroba's ability and willingness, I left the working out of the system to him. Having taken over charge of my Circle from Mr. Cody at the end of December, a few days afterwards I proceeded to Bandora, and inspected the work of the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Dispensary. None of the children he had vaccinated in the town could be collected ; so we repaired to the Convent of St. Joseph and to the Orphan Asylum, where a large number of children had been vaccinated by the Sub- Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Dispensary. He must have worked with very bad lymph, as the average of bad cicatrices was very considerable ; indeed, out of 115 that I examined, three only could be called good. I next visited Bassein, and examined the old work of Mahadew Vaniek, Assistant Vaccinator (General No. 58) : on the whole it was very bad. I then visited almost all the villages in that talooka, inspect- ing the work of Apprentice Vaccinator (General No. 324) Gopall Christna ; his lymph was bad, producing small bullæ, frequently followed by unhealthy sores. I changed his lymph, having fortunately just received some English lymph from the Superintendent General. I next proceeded to the talooka of Mahim, and examined some of the old work of Vaccinator (General No. 38) Babajee Yadew : on the whole it was bad. I next visited Dhanoo, inspected the work of Head Vacci- nator (General No. 38) Maljee Mulakar ; his lymph was good, but the amount of work performed very small. From Dhanoo I went to Tarrapoor, where I vaccinated myself fifty-four children from a heifer. My next inspection was made at Tanna, where I examined the work of the Municipal Vaccinator ; and, finding his lymph indifferent, I vaccinated for him twenty-two children with lymph of recent human transmission. In one case I mixed together a little humanized lymph and some heifer's lymph: from the mixed lymph I obtained most beautiful vesicles. From Tanna I proceeded to Kurjut, and examined the work of Apprentice Vaccinator (General No. 290) Mahadew Govind; his work was very fair, but he had made so many incorrect returns that I had to recommend his being dismissed the Service. I proceeded from that place to Callian, and examined the Dispensary vaccinations there. I found that vaccination was very much neglected in that town, and, in order to give it, if possible, a start, I vaccinated myself at the Dispensary ten children. I next visited Bhewndy, where I also found the work much neglected. The present Medical Subordinate in charge Dispensary has not been long in that appointment, and as he seems desirous of giving more attention to the vaccination of the place than his predecessor, I trust that next year the results will be more favourable. Before leaving I vaccinated with him a few children. I next visited a number of villages in the Bhewndy Talooka, examining the work of Apprentice Vaccinator Trimbuck Govind (General No. 326) ; his tymph was worthless, and his work both scanty and indifferent. He promised to do better in future, if sent elsewhere, and to give him another trial. I acceded to his request, and transferred him to Moorbar. I next proceeded to Warra, and inspected the work of Assistant Vaccinator (General No. 166) Ballajee Girkur : it was not good, the lymph he used was very inferior, and the cicatrices of former operations either bad or 4 v s
26 indifferent. I supplied him with fresh lymph, and directed him to abandon the lymph he was working with. 24. During the year, with the exception of the Native States of Johar and Sawunt Warree, the whole of the Western Circle has been visited by Mr. Cody, Acting Superintendent, or myself. Some talookas have been visited twice. On one occasion I was only a day's march from Johar, and would have inspected the work of the Vaccinator employed there, had he not been absent, without leave, at the time. Aid received from Civil Autho- rities. 25. On all occasions I have received every assistance possible from the Civil Authorities,. and beg to record my best thanks for the kind manner with which they have, one and all, given to this Establishment their valuable support. No care of communicated Sy- philis met with. 26. During my tour I have examined upwards of four thousand children, and have not met with a case of transmitted syphilis. 27. The following report was handed to me by Assistant Surgeon Cody. It is for the period he held the charge of this Circle:27 his old work, which appeared to have been well done, the cicatrices being in most instances characteristic. The lymph he was using at the time had deteriorated a good deal, the vesicles not showing at all well. I renewed it for him from some points of English lymph sent to me by the Superintendent General of Vaccination for trial, and directed him not to use deteriorated lymph any more, but to report to me at once its having become so whenever that should happen. I next proceeded to the Kurjut Talooka, where I examined the work of Apprentice Vaccinator Mahadew Govind. His old work was quite satisfactory, but the lymph he had then in use, like that of the former Vaccina- tor, was not at all good. I renewed it for him, and directed him to leave Khalapoor, where he was then working, and proceeed towards Kurjut, as I had received a requi- sition for the services of a Vaccinator from some villagers in the latter neighbourhood. Subsequently his work progressed quite satisfactorily. I next proceeded viâ Chorok to Panwell, where I examined the work of the Municipality's Vaccinator, Sedeshwur Vittul. He had very little work to show me, and even that little was not at all satis- factory. He accounted for this, in some measure, by stating that he met with a great deal of opposition from the people, and had consequently a difficulty in maintaining his lymph; he also stated that he received a very small amount of assistance from the Munici- pal Authorities. I renewed the lymph for him, and directed him to work in the adja- cent villages within a radius of two miles or so, in order to keep up a good supply of it. I had subsequently to suggest this man's removal, as I found he did not improve. I next examined the work of Vaccinator Babajee Yadow (General No. 38), who was work- ing at some villages five or six miles distant from Panwell. I found his work, both old and recent, very well done. The vesicles he showed me were by far the best I had yet examined, and were decidedly characteristic in their appearance. I took advantage of this lymph to lay in a stock of tubes charged with it, and subsequently found it &quot;take&quot; in every instance I had occasion to use it. I could not at all complain of the quality of this man's work, but the quantity of it was by no means satisfactory. I next proceeded to Oorun, where I examined the work of the Municipal Vaccinator : it was all old work, showing very good and characteristic cicatrices. This man had, I found, left his work a couple of months previous to my arrival, and was consequently dismissed by the Municipality. I made arrangements to send another man to replace him. The Dispensary at Oorun had no vaccination going on in connection with it ; the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge stated, that he found it a matter of impossibility to induce the people to bring their children to him for vaccination. After my visit another Sub-Assistant Surgeon, Mr. C. Pestonjee, was appointed to the charge, who has made very praiseworthy efforts to keep up vaccination. The numbers in his returns were few to commence with ; but still they show that he has gone some way in overcoming what appeared before an impossibility. At Kurunja my office Vac- cinator, Mahadew Vaneik, vaccinated a number of children with successful results. Before leaving Oorun I would wish to express my sense of the assistance I received from the Mahalkurry of the Petta, who showed a strong desire to aid me in every way and to further vaccination in the district under his charge. From here I went on to Penn, where I examined the work of Vaccinator Babajee Vittul (General No. 26)
28 I found his lymph good, and his returns quite correct as far as 1 tested them. He had been at work here for some years, and had done good service both to the town and surrounding district. I inspected a good many villages in the talooka, and found in them large numbers of children well protected. Before leaving Penn, I directed him to proceed to the Mahar Talooka, and commence work there. My reason for making this change was that there had been no Vaccinator in the latter district for years, and, consequently, there was no protection from small-pox. Some- time after this man's removal I got a requisition from Penn for the services of a Vaccinator to operate on some children in the town. I then suggested the advisability of entertaining a Municipal Vaccinator, as it was nearly impossible for me, with the few men I had at my disposal, to send them one. After some correspondence, the Municipality agreed to entertain a man for one month ; but as I could not obtain a trained hand to accept so precarious an appointment, I had to let the matter drop. I may here add that such a proposition from the local administrators of so important and populous a town as Penn is, astonished me not a little. From Penn I proceeded to Alibagh, where I examined some children who were vaccinated by Mr. Pereira, the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Dispensary. The lymph he was using was not at all good, so I renewed it for him. His vaccination register, and, as indeed, everything pertaining to his Dispensary, were kept in a most neat and orderly manner. The district portion of this talooka was somewhat neglected as regards vaccination ; but of this, and the means taken to remedy it, I will have to speak more fully further on. From Alibagh I proceeded to the talookas of Roha and Mangaum, where I examined the work of Assistant Vaccinator Balloo Chalka ; his lymph was very good, and his work, generally speaking, both in quantity and quality, everything that could be desired. He appears to be a most careful and painstaking man, and one who seems to enjoy a considerable amount of respect and influence amongst the villagers. I filled a good number of tubes from his lymph,29 Vaccinator Hurry Ramchandur, the marks of which were well defined. I was waited on here by some Brahmins, who requested me to vaccinate some of their children, as there was small-pox just then in the bazaar. I went into the bazaar one morning and vaccinated some thirty children, and, at the same time, told the parents that I would require to see them on the eighth day. This they consented to, but on my going there on the eighth day, I was met by a sturdy refusal to do anything of the sort. I could only, after considerable delay, prevail on them to produce four children for inspection, who, however, showed very good vesicles. I leave this fact to speak for itself, as an illustration of what ignorant prejudice can do even amongst the highest caste, in the absence of compulsion, to hinder our best efforts. Local Fund Vaccinators. 3. During the monsoon I brought to the notice of Mr. Salmon, the Acting Collector, the few hands we had in the department to carry out vaccination, and suggested that some Local Fund Vaccinators might be engaged. He readily agreed with this proposition, and took advantage of the first meeting of the Committee to bring the matter before them, when an estimate for three Vaccinators, with their Peons, &c., was unanimously passed. A similar grant was made by the Local Fund Committee of the Colaba Collectorate, and in both cases the hands were to be engaged from the 1st April 1870. Tour. 4. After the monsoon I went to the Dewghur Talooka, where I examined the work of Assistant Vaccinator Casseram Múlakur : it was satisfactory in every way. I next proceeded to Malwan Talooka to sec the work of Head Vaccinator Maljee Múlakur. I was satisfied with his work, but had to find fault with his conduct. I transferred him from Malwan to Sunjun Talooka, in the Tanna Collectorate. From Malwan I proceeded through Rutnagherry to a portion of the Rajapoor Talooka to examine the work of Apprentice Vaccinator Hurry Ramchandur. His work and returns were satisfactory. From here I went to Sungameshwur, in which neighbourhood occurred the incident I before stated relating to small-pox, where I examined some work performed by Apprentice Vaccinator Hurry Ramchandur, which I found well done. I next went on to Chiploon, and examined some work performed by Assistant Vaccinator Gunputrow Hurryba. From here I went on to Khed, where I saw some work by the same Vaccinator. In both instances the work was satisfactory. I next proceeded on to the Colaba Collectorate, and examined some recent work of Vaccinator Babajee Vittul in the Rhygurh District, which I found very good indeed. From here I went on through Poladpoor and Mahar to Nagotna, which place I reached about the 20th December, and on the 22nd I delivered over charge of my office, &c, to Dr. Blanc. 5. The conduct of the Vaccinators during the year, with two exceptions, was, on the whole, satisfactory. A few faults there were in some instances no doubt, but nothing more serious than merely to require the imposition of a slight fine. The two exceptions to this were two Apprentice Vaccinators ; one of whom was dismissed for falsifying his returns, and the other, a new hand, but a few months in the department, for inattention to, and a general unfitness for, the work.
30 Vaccination in Native States. 6. Of the two Native States in this Circle I can only speak from the returns I received. In both instances vaccination seems to be in a most satisfactory condition. Vaccination at Dispensaries. 7. Of the Dispensaries, generally speaking the returns were by no means satis- factory. There are two or three in which the Medical Subordinates and others in charge of Dispen- saries seem to make every effort to vaccinate ; but I must say the larger proportion have during the time I acted as Superintendent shown any thing but a strong desire for its spread, or efforts to induce it to become popular NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.31 the decrease is found to be very slight, viz. 930 in the Government and 346 in the Native States' establishment; whilst, on the other hand, there is an increase of 652 in the work performed by the Municipal Vaccinators. Vaccination at the Dispensaries was only systematically carried on during the year under report. I do not take into calculation, therefore, the work of this establishment, but, taking only the other three establishments together, the actual decrease is only 624. Total vaccinated. Percentage of Success. 3. The total number of operations performed by the four establishments during the past twelve months is 98,503. Of these 91,118 were successful cases. Excluding from the calculation the unknown cases, and taking only the successful and unsuccessful cases, the percentage of success comes to 96.4. Sex, Age, and Caste. 4. The result, as regards sex, age, and caste, is shown below :32 I also endeavoured, about the close of the year, to introduce animal vaccine lymph ; two supplies of it were from the Local Superintendent of Vaccination, Presidency Circle; and I have been just partially successful in establishing vaccination with it. Use of Tubes. 7. Supplies of lymph in capillary tubes were sent to the undermentioned Officers:33 The Peons, who receive Rs. 7 per month, are now well satisfied, and the Vaccinators also feel thankful to Government for their pay being restored to what they used to receive when getting grain compensation. New Weekly Return of Vaccination. 11. The Superintendent General of Vaccination introduced a new weekly vacci- nation return, which was an improvement upon the old one in many respects. Printed forms of this new return were received and brought into general use in August last, the main object in its introduction being to make the native officials take some interest in furthering the progress of vaccination in their talookas. The Vaccinators now report in writing to the Mam. lutdars of their talookas, mentioning the villages in which they are about to commence operations. If they anticipate difficulty in any particular village, they request the Mamlutdars to afford them assistance, and in their weekly returns mention whether they got the required assistance. One copy of the return is sent to the Mamlutdar, and, through him, to the Collector of the district. In some places an additional copy is sent for the information of the Assistant Collector in charge of the talooka. The District Revenue Officers are thus kept acquainted with the localities in which vaccination is carried on, and also learn whether the necessary help to vaccination was given by the Talooka Mamlutdar. In case they find that this was not given, an explanation is imme- diately called for. Thus the Mamlutdars are now obliged to interest themselves particularly in helping vaccination in their talookas. Re-vaccination desirable 12. In my last report I pointed out the desirability of carrying on re-vaccina- tion in these parts. About the close of the year, instructions were received from the Superintendent General of Vaccination to take measures for its introduction. A circular was issued to all the Vaccinators in February last, explaining to them what re-vaccination means, and desiring them to introduce it in their talookas from 1st April 1870. It was necessary that the rural population should be informed of this. A zahirnama, ex- plaining to the people the advantages of, and the desirability of permitting, re-vacci- nation has, therefore, been published, and printed copies of it sent to each village through the Collectors of the different zillahs. A circular note has also been sent to all village Patels and Tulatees, enjoining them to use their influence and get all the grown-up children of their villages re-vaccinated. As this is a new thing, diffi- culties in some quarters are to be anticipated ; but I hope that the next annual return will show not a small number of re-vaccinations. 13. All the Collectors and Political Officers have taken up this subject of re-vaccination very warmly ; not only for this alone, but for the cordial assistance given to me in all vaccination matters, I feel very thankful. Vaccination at Dispensaries. 14. The last annual returns contained only the work of three Dispensaries, viz. those of Dholka, Veerungaum, and Dakore. There were then in this Circle nine other Dispensaries already open, and ten new ones have been since opened, making altogether twenty-two district Dispensaries, in nearly all of which vaccination is now carried on. At first 5 v s
34 I experienced some difficulty in getting the Hospital Assistants to establish vaccina- tion ; the majority of them are now doing some work, but there are a few still who vaccinate two or three children per month only,showing that they take little or.no interest in vaccination. During my tour of inspection I visited nine Dispensaries, in two of which only was vaccination carried on, viz. in Gogo and Dholka; in seven others, viz. Kuppurwunj, Dakore, Dhollera, Dhundooka, Neriad, Borsud, and Jumboosur, there was no work. Some of the Hospital Assistants, I am sorry to observe, do not know much of vaccination ; one Hospital Assistant, who got his Apprentice to carry on vaccination at the Dispensary, says, in his annual report, that neither &quot; he nor myself had sufficient experience.&quot; Population of Circle. 15. In last report the total population of this Circle was stated to be 2,715,765. Under instructions from the Superintendent General of Vaccination, fresh returns regarding the population of each talooka have been obtained and incorporated in Statement No. I. The total population of this Circle, as calculated from these returns, amounts to 2,671,228. Taking the usual birth rate of 1 in 30, the annual births in such a population should be 89,040 : but our annual work exceeds this number a great deal. The annual vaccinations indicate that the population must be about 30 lakhs. The late disastrous famine in Marwar, however, has caused a large influx of destitute Mar- warees to Guzerat, and I observed that each family had a goodly number of children, nearly all of whom come under vaccination. This circumstance, I believe, tended much to increase the annual returns of 1868, as well as the present ones. Tour. 16. The following is an account of my tour of inspection. In January 1869 I commenced the inspection of the Vaccinators of the Native States of Pahlunpoor. I was encamped at Toovud, from which place, and from Summee and Rhadunpoor, the work of the new Vaccinator, Bulvuntrao Gopall, of Rhadunpoor, was examined. His lymph in Toovud was good ; in other villages bad. He was found to be an untrustworthy man : he had put one set of dates in his weekly reports, and another in his monthly returns, clumsily attempting to hide the irregularity of his work; the entries of several villages were also doubtful. Of him I have to state that he was selected, examined as to his knowledge of vaccination, and appointed to the post, by the Political Superin- tendent himself. What, I believe, was my proper work and duty, was done by him without any reference to me. At Rhadunpoor I was encamped for about ten days, during which time I had much to do in the way of giving medical relief to the people. Ever since the introduction of vaccination into the Rhadunpoor territory, the Vaccinators have experienced much difficulty. Among the village population vaccination is availed of to some extent ; but in the Kusba itself great opposition is met with, the Kusbatee Mahomedans and the Bunnya merchants not permitting it- I therefore asked and obtained two interviews with His Excellency the Nawab, during one of which, I begged of him to afford the Vaccinator the assistance he was much in need of, and to promote vaccination in his territory. I had also
35 many and long visits from the Kharbarries, who gave me every assurance of helping the Vaccinator in his work. On leaving Rhadunpoor I felt some satisfaction that this, my second visit to it, would lead to some good result. If the reports however, which I continually receive from the Vaccinator, be correct, things are still much the same as before. From Rhadunpoor I travelled through the talookas of Warye, San- tulpoor, and Morewarra, lying on the eastern boundary of the Great Runn, examining the old work of Jeithalall Bechurlall. From Morewarra I travelled toTehrwara, where Jeithalall was carrying on fresh work. All his past work was satisfactory, and his lymph was good, Of the entries of a few villages, I had very grave doubts as to their correctness : on the whole, however, he was doing well. From Tehrwara I travelled to Seoree, from which place and from Summnow, the work of Jeitharam Mooljee, the new Vaccinator of Khakhrej Talooka, was examined. Jeitharam had only commenced work in November 1868, so that I had only his two months' work to examine, and it was found satisfactory. My next encampment was made at Deesa, where Assistant Vaccinator Vishnoo Luxmon (General No. 172) was working: both his past work and lymph were good. From Ghud and Pahlunpoor, my next two stations, the work of Dana Bhava, the Vaccinator of the Dewan Sahib of Pahlunpoor, was examined. In my last report I mentioned of this man, that he is the best of all Native States' Vac- cinators ; I was, therefore, sorry to find him working with bad lymph. The lymph of Ghud and other villages was bad, and it had to be given up after a trial of a fortnight. The lymph of Kusba Pahlunpoor was only good, and was kept up. His past work of six months was also bad. There are two other Vaccinators of the Pahlunpoor Superintendency, but one of these (the Dhanera Vaccinator) was dismissed for mis- conduct about a fortnight previous, and the other (Vaccinator of Wow and Thurrad) had gone away to his native country without asking for leave. I next proceeded to Santhul, in Kuttosun Zillah of Mahee Kanta Agency, where Mulek Bapoo Amibhai was working; his lymph was on the whole good, and his past work satisfactory. Travelling from Santhul I arrived at Mansa, and examined the old work of that place and of Wursoda, performed by Jadevrai Mahdevrai some nine months before. The marks in both places were very good, and his returns very correct. Travelling on from Mansa, I was on the 1st April (the commencement of the official year under report) encamped at Purantej. The fresh and past work of Assistant Vaccinator Hurjeevun Wishwanath (General No. 154) was examined and found good. From Morassa, the next station, the work of Motilall Bapoojee, a Mahee Kanta Vaccinator, who was only employed in the previous November, was examined. His past work was rather middling ; his lymph in Thana Mehgraj was good only ; in other places, the vesicles, though good in appear- ance, were small in size. Apprentice Vaccinator Chugunlall Kalidass's work (General No. 311) was also examined from Morassa and from Dehemai. He was found working with very bad lymph : his vesicles were the size of pin-heads : the cicatrices of his past four months' work were also small. He was ordered to stop work and proceed to Purantej to bring fresh lymph from the Vaccinator there. From Dehemai and from Satumba, the work of Jeevram Chuttorbhooj, another Mahee Kanta Vaccinator, was examined. His lymph was also bad and had to be discontinued. I had to take this Vaccinator with
36 me to my next station, Kuppurwunj, and there supplied him with good lymph. On the 1st May I was in Kuppurwunj, and the work of its Vaccinator, Jeithalall Poonja- jee (General No. 173), was examined : everything was found satisfactory. He is a man that can always be depended upon. The Hospital Assistant at Kuppurwunj had hither- to not established vaccination at the Dispensary. I explained to him the desirability of his doing so at once. He wanted some assistance from the Vaccinator's Peon to begin with ; this was allowed him, and ever since he has kept on working. The next inspec- tion was that of Assistant Vaccinator Mulek Anoo Anamut (General No. 111), of Thasra. His lymph in one village was bad, in the rest good ; the marks of his old work were middling. From Thasra I travelled to Dakore, Oomreth, and Ore, and I examined the fresh and old work of Assistant Vaccinator Gungasunker Ruveesunker (General No. 188). His lymph was good, and his past work satisfactory. From Ore, also, and from Gamree, the work of Assistant Vaccinator Chugunlall Asharam (General No. 221), of Anund Talooka, was examined. His lymph in Anund and another village was good, and in the rest it was bad, and was abandoned. In the previous year this man was detected appropriating the money allowed to parents for carrying their lymph children from one village to another for vaccine purposes, and was consequently reduced for a short period from an Assistant to an Apprentice Vaccinator. This time he was found to have put false dates in his weekly reports, and in one village he had been very cruel in carrying two young women of a respectable class, with their infants, to a distance of seven koss, without any reasonable cause. I have consequently removed him to another talooka. After finishing his examination I left my last station, Gamdee, for Surat on the 20th June. I left Surat again for the districts in the last week of October, and, crossing the Gulf of Cambay, came over to Gogo and commenced work from there. Some past work of former Vaccinators was seen in the villages, and at the Dispensary the old work of Assistant Apothecary Mr. Roane, and fresh work of Senior Apothecary Mr. Lewis George. The Dispensary vaccinations were good. From Gogo I passed through Bhownuggur and Wulleh, and arrived at Burwalla, where Assistant Vaccinator Surdarmia Munnamia (General No. 170) was working. His work was quite satisfactory. From Burwalla I travelled to Dhollera, the Vaccinator of which place was laid up with fever in August, and had lost his lymph, and had not resumed work again. I had sent him some tubes of fresh lymph from Burwalla by a messenger, and took some with me. Vaccination was established in Dhollera, and from thence two lymph children were taken to Dhundhooka. Vaccination was also established at the Dhollera Dispensary. The past work of Assistant Vacci- nator Hurrychund Bhaskerjee (General No. 91) was examined from Dhollera and Dhundhooka, and after thoroughly establishing his lymph I left him for the next man, Assistant Vaccinator Vulubram Dinanath (General No. 177), who was stationed at Koth37 From Koth I travelled to Dholka, and examined the work of Assistant Vaccinator Morar Khemchund (General No. 52). His lymph was good and his past work middling, but his register was full of inaccuracies as regards names, sex, result, &c.: his recent work of the past few months was bad. The lymph of the Municipal Vaccinator of Dholka, Hurgovun Bechur, was good, and the lymph of the Dispensary vaccinations under Hospital Assistant Bhow Sukaram was very good. From Dhollera I reached Ahmedabad on Christmas Day. Soon after New Year's Day I took my camp to Butwa, and from there examined the recent and fresh work of Apprentice Vaccinator Kaloo Fujul (General No. 296), which was not satisfactory. Some old work of Dossumia Abdulla (General No. 56), the late Duscroe Vaccinator, was also examined and found very good. From Butwa I visited Jeitulpoor and other villages of Sanund Talooka, and examined the work of Vaccinator Purbhoodass Heerjee (General No. 20). His work was good, and his returns very faithful. From Butwa, I next took my camp to Mhoondah, and for the first time examined the work of Kassinath Mahadew (General No. 41). His lymph on the whole was good, as well as his old work ; his register was faithful; and, as regards noting the result of vaccinations, very accurate. It was the middle of January, and the Superintendent General of Vaccination, who was on his tour of inspection in Guzerat, joined me here. Travelling together from Mhoondah we arrived at Neriad, and examined the work of Assistant Vaccinator Muncharam Kasiram (General No. 63). His lymph in the town of Neriad was bad, in the villages tolerably good ; his old work was also good. Some lymph received by the Superin- tendent General from the National Vaccine Establishment of Scotland was tried here, and produced good results after a second transmission. From Neriad we travelled on to Matur, and examined the work of Assistant Viccinator Ichasunker Keerpasunker (General No. 127). Both myself and the Superintendent General were satisfied with his old, recent, and fresh work. Leaving Matur I encamped at Pundolee, in Borsud Talooka, and examined old, recent, and some fresh work of Vaccinator Lakheshvur Ghelabhai (General No. 128) of Borsud. His returns were faithful, but all his past work was bad : the cicatrices were just faintly visible, his vesicles were imperfectly developed and small in size: he seems to have been vaccinating a large number of children with insufficient lymph. I supplied him with some English lymph, which was to be introduced at Borsud. From Pundolee I took my camp to Cambay, and examined the work of its Vaccinator, Goolab Jumiet. His lymph one day was good, the other days bad. English lymph and some animal lymph, received from the Local Superintendent of Vaccination, Bombay, was introduced here. In February 1868 I was in Cambay, and had introduced some English lymph, then received by me from Bombay. I found that the marks of vaccinations with that lymph were very good, but it appeared that the Vaccinator was not able to keep that lymph going. Goolab Jumiet's work was, on the whole, satisfactory. From Cambay I proceeded to Borsud, and completed my examination of Lakheshvur Ghelabhai (General No. 128), which was commenced at Pundolee. It appeared that all his vaccinations of the past two years were bad, whereas those done in previous years bore good marks. The English lymph given to him at Pundolee produced very good vesicles, and it was brought into use, his own
38 lymph having been abandoned. Animal lymph brought in tubes from Cambay was also introduced here, and after a few transmissions has produced excellent results. From Borsud I also examined the fresh work of General No. 221 at Napaar, and found it to be good. There was no vaccination going on at Borsud Dispensary, and the Hospital Assistant went on leave just after my arrival. Travelling from Borsud to Salol I crossed the river Mhye, and arrived at Karelee in Jumboosur Talooka. Some old work of Assistant Vaccinator Chintamunee Vithul (GeneralNo. 96) was seen at Karelee, and I proceeded to my next station, Juntram, where, from the returns and weekly reports, I expected to find him working, but the day of vaccination he was not there. I learned that the vaccinations in Juntram were all performed by another man named Soorujram Nathjee. The monthly returns of January and February were carefully examined ; most of the villages were visited; and I was satisfied that this man Chintamunee had left his talooka for his native town, Chiploon, in Rutnagherry, after the first week of January. The work performed by Soorujram was of the worst kind, and there were many false entries. The friends of Chintamunee, at Jumboosur, hearing of my being in the talooka, were intent upon passing off the fraud on me. They procured a false certificate from the Hospital Assistant in charge of the Jumboosur Dispensary, and got up some other false reports. For several reasons it was thought convenient not to undertake any criminal prosecution. Chintamunee Vithul was dismissed from the Service, and the conduct of the Hospital Assistant reported to the Deputy Inspector General, Northern Division, and the Superintendent General of Vaccination. From Juntram I proceeded to Jumboosur, and from thence to Pukhajun in Wagra Talooka, from where the old and fresh work of Apprentice Vaccinator Ruveesunker Tooljasunker (General No. 303) was examined. His past work was not satisfactory : he vaccinates very few children at a time : his vesicles, though normal in appearance, were rather small: his weekly reports were incorrectly dated, vaccinations of one week having been entered into subsequent weeks. I could not exactly find out why he did so, and can only guess that he has been irregular in his work. From Pukhajun I travelled to Bhersum, and by the close of the year under report, had just arrived and encamped at Broach. Result of the inspection of Vacci- nators' work. 17. Of the 28 Vaccinators whose work was examined during the above tour, four were found working with bad lymph; the lymph of five others was not so good as it ought to have been ; the rest were doing very good work. Each man's inspection was thorough and searching. During this long tour there was no discovery of any case of making false returns, i. e., entering false names. Mistakes, as regards age, sex, result, and solitary entries of unvaccinated names, have been noticed here and there. Conduct of Vaccinators. 18. On the whole, it affords me great pleasure to state, as a class, the conduct of the Vaccinators was uniformly good and meritorious, and their work during the year is a sufficient proof of their zeal and industry.
39 Changes among Vaccinators. 19. There have been but very few changes among the Vaccinators. In the Go- vernment establishment, one man, Dossumia Abdulla, Assistant Vaccinator (General No. 56) of Duscroe died after a short illness. In the Native States' establishment, Jadevrai Mahadevrai, Mahee Kanta Vaccinator, was dismissed about the close of the year. He was a very good Vaccinator, but latterly he would neither obey the Political Agent nor myself. His place has been filled up by a new hand, Govindrao Balajee, who promises to be a good, hard working man. In the Pahlunpoor Superintendency, the dismissal of one Vaccinator, Heerasing Ruttonsing, of Dhanera, was ordered in February 1869. This man was of a most violent temper, and was constantly abusing, assaulting, and other- wise ill treating people. He sent in a report in January 1869, regarding an assault committed upon him by some shepherds. On the other hand, a complaint was pre- ferred against him by the other party before the Dewan Sahib of Pahlunpoor, of his having taken a shepherd woman from one village with her child for lymph purposes, of having committed a criminal assault upon her on the way, and then permitted her to return to her village. The case was investigated by the Durbar Vukeel, who, by the desire of the Dewan Sahib, addressed a Yád to the Political Superintendent, urgently requesting his dismissal. Both the Political Superintendent and I promptly complied with the request, and Heerasing was virtually dismissed in March 1869. Failing in his solicitations with me and the Political Superintendent for re- employment, he seems to have gone and obtained permission of the Pahlunpoor Durbar to go to work again, and did actually work till August 1869. The Durbar, when an explanation was asked, put forth the plea that he was only temporarily re-employed to put down a slight prevalence of small-pox. Whatever may have been the case, it was a most irregular proceeding. Heerasrag, though dismissed in March, continued to work till the end of August. It was after several repeated demands that he was finally dismissed. For filling up the vacancy, I proposed, in the first instance, that a respectable man should he selected either by the Durbar or the Political Supe- rintendency, and I would undertake to teach him vaccination. After waiting for some months, I offered to send a competent person at once. It is now more than a year, and yet this place remains unfilled. The dismissal of a bad man was a difficulty, but the filling up of the vacancy with a new man seems to be a greater difficulty. I have related this instance in detail, in order to show the difficulty of superintendence in Native States. In fairness, however, it must be stated here that such a difficulty has only been met with in the Pahlunpoor State. In the Mahee Kanta territories, the supervision is as perfect and uninterfered with as one could desire. Major Black, the Political Agent, takes a great interest in vaccination, and exercises great supervision over the Vaccinators. I can only here express my deep sense of obligation for the ready help which he has always afforded me. No case of transmitted Syphilis seen. 20. From January 1867 up to the end of March 1870 I have inspected 49,571 vaccinated children, but I cannot call to mind a single case in which there was even a suspicious look
40 of syphilis. I have not seen a single case of even a doubtful transmission of syphilis as a result of vaccination. It will be seen that my experience of this subject is entirely- negative. SIND CIRCLE. Superintendent.41 greater &quot; decrease &quot; in the number vaccinated by Local Fund Vaccinators, as they would have been obliged to dispose of their horses. This reduction of the number of Vaccinators and redistribution of pay was done under the sanction of the Commis- sioner in Sind. Considering, then, that the whole of Sind (excluding the Dispensaries and Civil Surgeoncies) should, according to the calculations of both my predecessors, not give more than 60,000 vaccinations a year, I think that the Government and Local Fund Vaccinators have worked admirably. The decrease in the amount of work done by the Vaccinator of Kheirpoor State, paid by His Highness Meer Ali Murad, is very considerable, and much to be regretted. The cholera epidemic, and the unusual amount of sickness prevailing from September to February, consequent upon the very heavy rains, sufficiently account for the diminution of vaccinations by Dispensary officers. Many of the officers in charge of Dispensaries commenced vaccinating, time after time, only to give it up owing to the excessive sickness. The greater number of them seem to me most anxious to carry on vaccination, and I hope that this year will show a considerable increase in the number vaccinated. Sex. 2. The proportion of males to females vaccinated in the talookas is 55.5 to 44.5, whilst in the Dispensary towns the ratio is 58.4 males to 41.6 females. Castes. 3. In the talookas there were 11.25 Hindoos vaccinated to 81.3 Mussulmans; the remaining 7.45 being made up of other castes, including 4 Christians and 1 Parsee (in the 62,120 total vaccinated). Other proportions obtain amongst the Dispensary vaccinations,42 Cost, 6. The average cost of each successful vaccination has varied annually for the last five years ; depending on the total of successful cases and the total cost. In 1867 each successful case cost 6 annas and 7 pies, whilst in 1868 each case cost only 5 annas and 3 pies; the total cost, in the latter instance, being considerably below the average, owing to the appointment of Superintendent having been vacant for three or four months. We may expect the average cost to be from 6 to 7 annas for each successful case. In the majority of Dispensaries there has been no cost, excepting a rupee or two paid for bringing vaccinifers from a Talooka Vaccinator to the Dispensary. But in Larkhaua there has been some payment made for vaccinating, jointly by Government and the Municipality, amounting to Rs. 134, so that each successful case cost 6 annas and 2 pies. At Sehwan, too, a sum of Rs. 7 a month was allowed for vaccinating, which, I believe, has been stopped. It has always been very difficult to carry on vaccination at Sukkur ; indeed, the same complaint comes from every Dispensary; and I am afraid that if the large Dispensaries have not the means to keep a Peon, with a fee to encour- age the Vaccinator, that the number of vaccinations will dwindle to nothing. Small-pox. 7. From returns kindly furnished me by the Commissioner in Sind, there appear to have been 471 deaths from small-pox during the year 1849. In the several Collectorates the following numbers are given :43 Tour. 9. My predecessor, the late Dr. Ffolliott, examined thoroughly the districts of Upper Sind in the early part of 1869, marched down the right bank of the Indus, and delivered over charge on the 17th May, and then left on sick certificate for England. He reported his satisfaction with the work done by the &quot;Vaccinators. From January to the end of April he travelled over 500 miles, and inspected 5,519 children. Till the 17th of July I carried on the duties of Civil Surgeon of Kotrce, and officiated as Superintendent of Vaccination. I then went to the Thurr and Parkur districts, chiefly on account of an outbreak of cholera there. Major Tyrwhitt and I worked very hard there for weeks, and returned before the end of August. Since then I have examined the work of some Vaccinators in the Kurrachee Collectorate, and the state of vaccination in every talooka of the Hydrabad Collectorate and the Thurr and Parkur ; altogether I have seen the work of about 17 Vaccinators and 7 Dispensaries. The quality of the recent work done by the Vaccinators is very good ; that of the Dispensaries not quite so good, owing, I believe, to the difficulty in getting a sufficient number of children to operate upon weekly, and consequently an insufficient number of vesicles for the selection of lymph. Correctness of Returns. 10. I was satisfied with the correctness of the records of all the Vaccinators, except three. Purbet Rai had a false entry of eight names; Chelaram (No. 142) of twenty names; and Jettah Mull (No. 77) failed in some instances to revisit the villages to ascertain the result of his operations. To save himself the trouble of going a second time to an out-of-the-way village he put them all down as successful : he should have entered those as doubtful. He admitted his fault when I found out three cases entered as successful instead of unsuccessful, otherwise his work was all that could be desired- The reason they dared make such false entries was that they imagined there work would not come under close supervision. From July to March I have inspected 16,629 children in 474 villages, and travelled 2,931 miles. Of course I could not have done this without the very greatest assistance. Assistance from Civil Authorities. The Commissioner in Sind, Sir William Merewether, Major Wallace, Acting Col- lector of Hydrabad, and Major Tyrwhitt, Political Superintendent of the Thurr and Parkur, frequently went around with me from village to village, and assisted me very materially in gather- ing and inspecting the children. The people were very much pleased to have such attention shown, and such interest taken, in having their children protected against small- pox ; even the Mukhtiarkars begin to feel it is their duty to assist, in explaining to the people the benefits of vaccination, and to encourage them to bring their children to be vaccinated. I always, too, receive every assistance from all the Deputy Collectors. Mr. Tyndall, the Deputy Collector of Sehwan, helped me very materially in personally examining into some difficulties at Sehwan and Dadoo, and in having them removed. Sir William Merewether never missed an opportunity to inquire of the people the progress of vaccination amongst them, beslowing; praise on the energetic, and rebuking
44 the apathetic in open Durbar. Mr. Moore, too, the Assistant Commissioner, very kindly gave me every permission and help in inpecting the school children. Speaking generally, the schoolboys are sons of Hindoos, and well marked with small-pox. For instance, at the Tharoosha School, I saw 73 children, of whom 14 only were vaccinated, 20 were unvaccinated, and 39, or upwards of half the children, were marked with small-pox. Now the 39 were the children of the wealthier Hindoos. I scarcely need add that at the Durbar held in Tharoosha, Sir William Merewether gave a &quot; lecture on this disgraceful state of things.&quot; Vaccination progresses favourably now at Tharoosha. Quality of Lymph. 11. The quality of the lymph has been perfectly good throughout the year, showing that the Vaccinators have been careful to extract the lymph at the proper time. The vesicles consequently are typical, and the areola in due time is formed ; a slight pitting is left after the scab has fallen. For the last few months I have experienced much difficulty in supplying lymph to Dispensaries for want of capillary tubes. It happens at times that there may be no Vaccinator within many miles of a Dispensary so as to send a child with lymph there. I may here mention that people object very much to have lymph taken from the vesicles ; but I think that a more liberal payment would generally overcome the majority of objections, the allowance now given, particularly in the Local Department, is insufficient. Native Assistant Superintendents. 12. Hassah Mull, the Head Vaccinator, and Assoo Mull, one of the Vaccinators, have rendered me, in their capacity of Native Assist- ant Superintendents, very material assistance, during the year. They arc given a small allowance from the Local Funds, which enables them to carry on some supervision over the other Vaccinators, as well as carry on their own work. Hassah Mull has worked the district north of Hydrabad, and Assoo Mull the southern portion with the Thurr and Parkur. I had to dismiss two Vaccinators for neglect; they were both working in the Lár, and within a very few weeks twice lost their lymph. Two others left the Department within the year45 KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.46 place where small-pox may break out), should be removed. I have had more requests from heads of villages &quot;to send Vaccinators&quot; during the last year than I ever received before. Several instances have come before me of parents taking their children many miles to the nearest station, rather than wait for the annual visit of their own Vac- cinator to operate on their children. I have received no complaints from Vaccinators of ill treatment or of serious impediments being place in their way when carrying on work,47 low-caste children too. Besides the above changes, one Vaccinator, employed by the Chief of Jhusdun, died. Vaccinators dissatisfied with their pay. 8. Most of the Vaccinators are dissatisfied with their pay,48 tioned belonging to Mangrole. Besides the above mentioned false returns, I found several other suspicious cases, but could not prove them. Weekly Returns. 13. The weekly returns are decidedly a good institution; independent of the information they give to those in authority over the different stations, they have also been the means of compelling the Vaccinators to keep up a continuous supply of lymph. Before they were introduced the Vaccinators were constantly allowing their lymph to lapse, often causing a break of weeks. I seldom get demands now for fresh lymph on this account. Chiefs all give assistance. 14. The Chiefs, one and all, have given me great assistance, and all those I have visited have been most courteous. Peons paid by Chiefs. 15. Previous to 1869-70 the Peons on duty with the Superintendent and Government Vaccinators were paid by Imperial Local Funds, (tribute?); now they are paid by the Chiefs. This is one reason why the cost to Government of the Vaccination establishment is less for 1869-70 than formerly. Tour. 16. The employment return shows most of the particulars connected with my tour. In April and May I was in Rajkote, doing all the duty, both Civil and Military. June, July August, September, and part of October, I was also in camp, engaged with my own Civil duties there. I was not able to travel much in October and November on account of the late rains : the roads were so heavy in some places I could only get over two or three koss a day. The locusts also severely interfered with my inspection duties ; wherever they settled the people seemed fascinated by them ; and as long as they remained it was utterly impossible to collect the children. During the year I have visited every talooka except Jafferabad, Limree, and Jhusdun, and inspected all the Vaccinators' work except seven. From March 1869 to March 1870 I have visited every talooka, save one, and inspected every Vaccinators' work except one. Never seen a case of Syphilis traceable to Vaccination. 17. I have now inspected 40,000 children, and have never seen a case of syphilis that could be traced to vaccination as the way or means by which it was introduced. Work of Vaccinators. 18. In reference to the Vaccinators' work not one of them had done perfectly satisfactory work, there was some fault or another : one had vaccinated very few, another had done it very carelessly,49 ling allowance has been curtailed by nearly one half, I respectfully submit that the present rate of travelling allowance to Superintendents does not pay much more than half the travelling expenses, and that, necessarily, the inspection duties, if properly per- formed, must be so at the expense of the Superintendents' pay as well as his insufficient travelling allowance. Dispensary Vaccinations. 20. The Dispensary Vaccinations are very few in number, because each village, where the Dispensaries are situated, has its own (Chief's) Vaccinator. The Hospital Assistants at the Dispensaries simply vaccinate the children of the Government servants at the stations, and any chance case that may be an inmate of the Dispensary Hospital. REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent.50 For several years Tulaties in the Punch Mahals, under instructions from the Agent to the Governor, have been required to prepare lists of the unvaccinated children in their villages for the use of the Vaccinators. These lists, however, are often so very imperfect as to be almost useless; and the Vaccinators not unfrequently neglect to apply for them, and depend solely on the exertions of themselves and Peons. Village registers have not as yet been of any advantage, as Tulaties, as a rule, neglected to keep the vaccination statistics. 2. The increase in the Native States is principally due to the appointment of three additional Vaccinators in the month of November. After deducting the vac- cinations (1,671) performed by these men, there is still an increase of 1,412, resulting from the exertions of all the Assistants, with the exception of the two men in Rajpeepla, in which district there has been a decrease in consequence of the sickness of one of the men, and the non-receipt of the monthly returns for March. Area of Circle. 3. In the annual Report for 1868 the area of the Circle, excluding the Sunkeira Mewas, was recorded at 14,001 square miles. Since then the Native State of Barrea has been surveyed, and ascertained to be little more than half the size it was supposed to be ; and it is now believed that the area of Loonawara is only about 800 instead of 1,736 square miles, as previously supposed. Making allowance for these corrections, the area of the whole Circle is now estimated at 12,725 square miles; but if all the Native States were surveyed, this estimate would probably be found much too high. Population. 4. The population is estimated at 360,000, which, however, must be very much below the mark, as the population of the Punch Mahals alone is about 169,000, or 100 to the square mile. From a census of the Native State of Bareea, recently taken, it would appear that the population is about 57 to the square mile; so, taking the area of all the Native States at 11,050 square miles, and calculating the population at that rate, it would be 629,850, which added to the population of the Mahals would make a total of 798,850. Number of Vaccinators. 5. No change has been made in the number of Government Vaccinators. In October 1869, Mr. Propert offered, in the event of my considering the present number of Government Vaccinators insufficient, to recommend the appointment of stationary Vaccinators, to be paid from the Local Funds, and maintained solely for the benefit of the Kusba towns. I could not take advantage of this offer, as the towns are small, and the itinerant Vaccinators must reside and carry on their work in them during the rains ; but I suggested that two additional itinerant Vaccinators should be appointed by the Local Funds' Committee for duty in Godra and Dohud. My motive for making this suggestion, which was not carried into effect, was simply to increase the number of infantile vaccinations by reducing the area of the Vaccinators' districts. At present the average area of the five districts is only 335 square miles, and had addi- tional men been sanctioned there would not have been any increase in the total number of primary vaccinations after the first year of their appointment.
51 6. In the Native States three additional Vaccinators were at work during the last four or five months of the year. Formerly one man used to work in Loonawara and Ballasinore, and draw pay from both States in equal portions; but in October last, Major Barton, after considerable trouble, succeeded in inducing the Babee of Ballasinore to entertain a Vaccinator for his State alone. The Rajahs of Loonawara and Barrea are both minors ; and Government in Resolution No. 3380, dated 19th October 1869, sanctioned the appointment of a second Vaccinator in each of these States. Excluding Rajpeepla and Chota Oodcypoor, the average area of each Vaccinator's district in the Native States is now about 500 square miles. Rajpeepla is no less than 4,500 square miles, but the Rajah will not sanction more than two Vaccinators. He has been asked to do so oftener than once, but he has always declined ; and on the last occasion he ex- pressed a desire that both the present men should be dismissed, and one man appointed in their stead. There is only one Vaccinator in Chota Oodeypoor, the area of which is said to be 3,000 square miles. Age. 7. I have all along paid great attention to the subject of age, and I now believe that the returns arc as accurate in that respect as it is possible to get them. It is extremely difficult to ascertain the ages correctly, as the parents can give little information, and the Vac- vinators have almost always to judge solely from the appearance of the children, many of whom are vaccinated when about twelve months old. In 1868 the percentage of vaccinations under one year of age was in the Punch Mahals 42, and in the Native States 32 ; during the past year the figures are the same in the Punch Mahals, and in the Native States 28. In this Circle there is now little or no objection made to infantile vaccination ; and in the neighbourhood of the Kusba towns, where the Vac- cinators reside during the rains of each year, almost all the operations are performed during infancy. Of the children inspected by me while on tour, the percentage under one year was Punch Mabals 42.2, and Native States 33.4. Adult vaccination has never been practised in this Circle ; in the months of November, December, January, and February, while inspecting the children, I took a note of the number vaccinated above 10 years of age, and found it to be less than one per cent. of the whole- Sex. 8. Of the total vaccinations 50.3 per cent. were males and 49.7 per cent. females. In 1868 the percentage of females was 48.4. These figures are, I believe, correct. Caste. 9. As regards caste the percentages are as follows :52 Lymph. 11. The lymph throughout the year has generally been good. Since last annual report I have forwarded 378 tubes, charged with fresh lpmph, to the Local Superintendent of Vacci- nation, Bombay, 6 to the Superintendent of the Kattiawar Circle, and 14 to the Super- intendent of the Central Circle. In November I received lymph in 3 tubes from the Superintendent of the Central Circle, which was used with success ; and in December I received 3 tubes and 5 points, charged with English lymph, from the Superintendent General of Vaccination : the points failed, but the tube lymph proved successful, and on second transmission large and characteristic vesicles were obtained. I also received 4 tubes charged with animal vaccine lymph from the Local Superintendent of Vacci- nation, Bombay, in February last, which, on trial, proved quite inert. Small-pox. 12. During the month of April 8 persons were attacked with small-pox in Oomerpara, Jhalode, and 1 died; and in the village of Wassunya, Halole, of 19 persons attacked with the same disease in September, 3 died.. The Vaccinators lost no time in vaccinat- ing the unprotected in these villages, and the disease did not spread. These are the only cases that occurred in the Punch Mahals throughout the year. In the Native States small-pox was rather more prevalent; cases occurred in Soonth, Veerpoor, and Barrea, in March 1869, and in Sunkeira Mewas and Rajpeepla during the months of May, June, and July. I have been unable to obtain particulars as to these outbreaks, but believe that the attacks were neither numerous nor fatal. In April, May, and June, cholera was more or less epidemic in all parts of the Circle. 13. Inoculation is not practised in this Circle. Tour. 14. Since January 1869 I have inspected the work of all the Vaccinators (many of them oftener than once) with the exception of two of the three men appointed in November last. The method of inspection was the same as that carried out by me during the past four years ; viz., at each village visited, on the children being collected, to call the name of each vaccinated child from the Vaccinators' monthly returns, and, on the child being brought before me, to test the accuracy of the return as regards sex, age, and result. As the children were examined, they were passed over to a Peon, who kept them separate from the others until all the names had been called, the arms of those present inspected, and the absence of others accounted for by the Patel, who was invariably present. In this way 315 villages were visited, and 5,630 children inspected. In addition, I also inspected the arms of 400 children whose names were not called from the returns. As a general rule, I first visited the head-quarters of the Vaccinator whose work I was about to test, and after examining his work there, made a second camp in his district, where I remained for some days visiting the villages in the neighbourhood, and thus got a very fair idea as to the quality of his work and the accuracy of his returns. The Vaccinator was usually present at all inspections, as I accompanied him his lymph days, and he came with me on the days he had none. On 1st January 1869, I was in the Native State of Barrea with Assistant Vaccinator
53 Mahasook Kuddoojee, who has now been working in that district for two years with great success. His lymph and the resulting cicatrices were decidedly good; and the only unsatisfactory part of the work was that very few of the operations performed were on children under one year of age. I have no doubt that an improvement will soon take place in that respect, as, has been already stated, there are now two men at work in Barrea. On the 4th January I returned to my head-quarters, Dohud, where I remained until the 28th, inspecting the work of Assistant Vaccinator Jaithalal Gunputram (General No. 253), who is a very intelligent, hard working man. When I am in Dohud he does the Guzerathi work of the office in addition to his ordinary duties, and when I am on tour I place a substitute in his appointment, and take him with me as Carkoon on increased pay. The manner in which he has all along performed his various duties has been most satisfactory. On the 28th I camped at Ruliatee, in the Jhalode districts, and commenced inspecting the work of Apprentice Vaccinator Pursotum Duyaram (General No. 279). His district is rather more difficult to work in than the others, but, notwithstanding that, he always manages to perform a creditable number of operations, and his vesicles and cicatrices are generally very good. I next went to Soonth, where Assistant Vaccinator Sobharam Sewuckram has been employed since May 1867. At first he had great difficulty in inducing the people to submit their children for vaccination, as the opera- tion was new to them, no Vaccinator having been there for many years before, and a fair start was not made until I visited the district in November of that year. Since that time considerable progress has been made,54 and Vaccinator Balajee Purbhooram (General No. 254) in Godra, and also the work of Assistant Vaccinator Mahasunker Cassiram (General No. 255) in Kalole, and Appren- tice Vaccinator Dajee Kaiwulram (General No. 319) in Halole. The first three men have been in the Department ever since the formation of this Circle, and it is sufficient to say that their work has all along been thoroughly good. General No. 319 had at that time only been employed for about a year, and I was highly satisfied with the success he had met with. I inspected 31 of his villages, and always found the vesicles and cicatrices large and well formed. I next proceeded to Chota Oodeypoor, and, as usual, felt this to be the least pleasing part of my tour. This State is the only part of the Circle in which the progress of vaccination has not been satisfactory : the Vaccinator gets little or no assistance from the authorities, and is, therefore, unable to overcome the opposition of the people. In 1866 the vaccinations amounted to 389, in 1867 to 535, in 1868 to 484, and during the past year to 706. This increase is so far satisfactory; but the quality of the work was indifferent, the percentage of success, according to the Vaccinator's returns, only amounting to 84.3, which, however, is too high, as many unsuccessful operations had been recorded as successful. For this I heavily fined the Vaccinator ; but I could scarcely blame him for his want of success, as I knew he was both able and willing to work well, if the people would only give him a fair chance. He has to contend with many difficulties, which, I believe, will be overcome in course of time by perseverance. During previous years vaccina- tion had chiefly been carried on in the neighbourhood of the Kusba town ; but as the town is a small one, and the surrounding country decidedly jungly and thinly populated, I, on the occasion of my visit in 1868, directed the Vaccinator to take his lymph to Wasna, in the southern part of the State, the country there appearing more populous and the people more civilized. After inspecting Wasna and the surrounding villages, I took my camp to Boodaleoo, where I only remained for one night, as I found that, instead of being an aid to the Vaccinator, I was a hinderance. There was lymph in two villages, Boodaleoo and Timbroo, but I did not see it, as the people left their villages on my approach, and remained absent during the 24 hours I was encamped there. The Patel undertook to bring the people in ; but as he neither did so, nor returned himself, I reported the circumstance to the Political Agent. Before leaving the Vaccinator, I vaccinated several children in Wasna with tube lymph. My next camp was at Naswaree, in the Sunkeira Mewas, which has only been a vac- cination district since September 1868. The Vaccinator, Wishoonath Oomyasunker, was very ill for about a month, but, notwithstanding that, and the fact of the district being a new one, he succeeded in vaccinating 651 children. The people do not readily accept his services, and he is therefore unable to travel over his district as rapidly as he otherwise would. I inspected 14 of his villages; the work, though not as good as that of the more experienced Vaccinators, was creditable. His percentage of success was only 76.6, but his returns were correct. On the 14th December I started for Rajpeepla, where there are two Vaccinators, Fuckeer Mohamed Mullang- bhoie and Heeralal Wishoonath, who have been employed in the same State for many years, and have always done very good work. The first mentioned man suffered
55 severely from illness, and was able to do little or nothing for nearly three months. The returns of both were accurate, their lymph good, and cicatrices large and well formed. This satisfactory state of affairs might be looked for, as Rajpeepla, or, at least, the part of it in which the Vaccinators usually work, is populous ; the people, comparatively speaking, highly civilized; and vaccination is carried on without difficulty. As an example of this, I may mention that on visiting one of the villages56 further increase in the amount of work done. With other two or three Vaccinators, I believe vaccination in the Native States would soon be as thorough as it is in the Punch Mahals. Never saw a case of Syphilis resulting from impure Lymph. 19. I have altogether inspected the arms of 16,573 children during the four years I have held my present appointment, and have never seen a case of syphilis resulting from the use of impure lymph. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. Local Superintendent.57 most unfortunately short of lymph, which at no time was overabundant. At times, as many as a hundred and fifty or two hundred have at once attended at the vaccinat- ing stations, applying for the operation. These required, at the least, from 10 to 15 vaccinifers, and we could scarcely command two or three. To give, therefore, the bare chance of an escape, we were compelled, however reluctantly, by the earnest entreaties of the anxious parents, to use good, bad, and indifferent lymph, and we always warned them of the extreme likelihood of the operation failing when the lymph used was not of first-rate quality ; then the lymph received in hermetically sealed capillary tubes from the different Superintendents of Vaccination from the Mofussil was used, and in the majority of instances proved unsuccessful. A drowning man catches at a straw ; and our condition, and that of the applicants for vaccination, was no better. With all our shifts, it now and again happened that some persons had to go away unvaccinated ; and some, arriving too late at the stations, had even to come two or three successive days before they could be vaccinated. There can be no doubt that had the Vaccine Department always had fresh, and good, lymph at command, many more would have been vaccinated, and many thus saved from falling victims to that fell, but easily preventible, disease and scourge of humanity58 tendent General of Vaccination and myself. The lymph had remained in his posses- sion for a considerable period (three months I think), and from previous experience apprehensions were entertained that the operation might prove a failure. Fortunately, however, it succeeded admirably, and Dr. Blane was enabled to inoculate a fresh heifer, with the lymph thus obtained from the first, on the 15th of the month, the seventh day after the first operation. This also proved completely successful. He then successively inoculated two or three more heifers, and successfully vaccinated many children with lymph direct from the inoculated heifers; and after thus establishing an excellent supply of animal vaccine virus, left Bombay to join his appointment. After him, the task of carrying on and keeping up animal vaccination in Bombay naturally fell to my lot. I must confess that I had considerable misgivings as to my ability to perform the task satisfactorily. I was but a novice, and my men, equally ignorant of the subject, were awkward in their assistance, and the necessary appliances and instruments were wanting. We had to be contented with, and make use of, the awkward appliances we could improvise from the imperfect materials at our command. All this could not fail to cost me many an anxious day; and it was not till after I had successfully inoculated four or five heifers, and vaccinated with equal success many children with the lymph obtained therefrom, that I became reassured. I had, however, difficulties of another and more potent kind to contend against, and, what is worse, difficulties over which I could have no control whatsoever. The cow being an animal held in high religious veneration by the mass of the Hindoos, few could be induced to give us the use of their heifers for inoculating purposes. Some did, indeed, lend us their calves for a money consideration to the extent of some two or three rupees a head, but the number of such was very small indeed59 nation was obtained to enter into a contract with a butcher on the above terms, as proposed by himself, he had completely changed his mind, and absolutely refused to abide by his word, saying that the arrangement would put him to great loss : for the carriage of the heifer from Bandora to Bombay and back alone would more than swallow up the sum bargained for. Altogether, he did not seem at all willing to enter into any sort of contract with us for the supply of heifers. As a matter of obligation, however, he said he would give us the use of his calves at Bandora ; but, even then, would expect Rs. 5 as remuneration. This offer was, of course, useless, as we required the calves in Bombay. There were only two courses for us to take under the circumstances ; either to defray all the expenses attendant upon getting the heifers from Bandora and taking them back, together with Rs. 5 for the loan of each, to be paid to the butcher, or to buy calves for ourselves. Unfortunately, as stated before, there being no mart for heifers in Bombay, no heifer fit for our use, or, indeed, of any kind, could be procured here. To buy them at Bandora, where alone they could be found, would entail the expenses of taking the animal all the way to Bombay. Altogether, the thing appeared to be very difficult of accomplishment. I was, how- ever, determined, at whatever cost, to keep up animal vaccination, for some short period at least, and then represent the matter to the superior authorities. Whilst thinking as to what steps I should take in the matter, it occurred to me that Dr. Hewlett, the Health Officer for the City of Bombay, and the Municipal Commis- sioner, who, both taking great interest in the progress of vaccination, and have the butchers under their control, would be able to render me all the necessary assistance by using their influence with them. I accordingly waited upon Dr. Hewlett, gave him a full account of what we had done about animal vaccination, and represented to him the difficulties we were labouring under, and requested him to try to help us out of them. Dr. Hewlett kindly gave a patient ear to all I had to say, expressed his gratification at hearing that animal vaccination had proved such a success here, and showed his concern at our difficulties. He said that he would be only too glad to render any assistance that lay in his power, but that, circumstanced as he was, he did not clearly see his way to be of any use in procuring heifers. To induce the butchers to give us the loan of their heifers would be difficult, if not impossible, seeing that he could not permit them to be slaughtered for some three or four weeks after the operation. He might try and see if Mr. Crawford, Municipal Commissioner, could not be prevailed upon to sanction the purchase of heifers for our use and the feeding of them for a month from the Municipal funds, and thereafter sell them for whatever they might fetch. On inquiring, he learnt from the Superintendent of Bazaars that the price of each heifer would be about Rs. 15, and the feeding would cost some 7½rupees more. We wanted five heifers at least every month, so the Municipality should have to incur on our account an expenditure of Rs. 112-8-0 per month. Of this a portion, and a large portion, would ultimately be recovered by the sale of the animals. Dr. Hewlett, suiting his action to his words, wrote at once an official letter to Mr. Crawford, representing to him the whole case at it exactly stood, and strongly recommended that the Municipality would do well in giving the assistance so urgently required; the more so as it was calculated to further very materially the cause of vac-
60 cination generally, and as regards the city of Bombay, particularly, and that it would also prove very valuable in carrying out the provisions of the proposed Vaccination Act. Mr. Crawford was pleased to give a prompt response by at once sanctioning the proposal as an experiment. Animal vaccination was thus, for a time at least, secured on a reliable basis- We received in all some fourteen heifers from the Municipality, of whom two had to be returned as useless, on account of their suffering from some erup- tion of the skin of the part to be operated upon. The inoculation in some of the last heifers supplied by the Municipality proved unsuccessful. A spurious sort of eruption did follow the operation ; but heifers inoculated, and children vaccinated with the lymph obtained from them both proved unsuccessful, thus materially in- creasing the total of failures for the year. Though the supply of heifers from the Municipality rendered us perfectly independent, I never slackened my exertions in procuring heifers from private sources, either gratis or for a money considera- tion ; and, as the result proved, it was as well that I did so, for when several of the Municipal heifers failed, not a single heifer of the fourteen that I obtained from private sources proved unsuccessful. I was thus enabled to keep our animal vaccine virus in an excellent condition up to the end of the year. From the 9th December 1869 to the 31st March 1870, there were in all twenty heifers inoculated. Of these fourteen belonged to private individuals, five of which only were paid for61 vesicle cicatrice. There were, however, not wanting cases in which the vesicles were rather late in appearing62 be taken from their successfully vaccinated children, not caring to know that at that rate vaccination would have to cease altogether. This antipathy to allow lymph to be taken was in some cases so very powerful as to make some persons forego the benefits of vaccination and keep their children unprotected, rather than get them vaccinated and be then required to give lymph from them. In animal vaccination we have now provided to us the means of producing a supply of lymph, the purest and most effective, to an unlimited extent. Each successfully inoculated heifer can give us lymph enough to vaccinate a hundred persons. Many have seen this, and have seen also that, having thus an independent supply of lymph, children with lymph are not molested, and, thus re-assured, have not hesitated to bring their children to the stations to be vaccinated. This in itself is not a trifling advantage. It will smooth the way considerably for the quiet carrying out of the proposed Vaccination Act. Backed by an Act, animal vaccination cannot fail to put an end to epidemics of small-pox in Bombay. Conduct of Vaccinators. 5. The subordinates have given me every satisfaction, and their conduct and assistance in connection with animal vaccination is deserving of praise. Never saw Syphilis communi- cated by Vaccination. 6. So far as my observation and experience go63 VACCINATION UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. POONA. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major LORD, M.D. Population (portion of Poona) 30,000. Total cost Rs. 192. Average cost of each vaccination, 1 anna and 11 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Comparcd with the proceding year. Success- fully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 1,641 ........... ........... 1,387 ........... 1869-70 ......... 1,565 ........... 76 1,323 85.0 Report.64 Sassoon Hospital. 6th. Small-pox existed in Poona and its vicinity from January till May last year. Judging from our Hospital returns, it was most prevalent in January and March, and declined after the latter month. There has been none this year. The want of a separate ward or an Hospital for small-pox and other inflections diseases is very much felt at Poona. This was noticed in the last yearly report; but, so far as I am aware, no effective steps have been taken to supply the want either in the Canton- ment or for the Station generally. SHOLAPOOR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon G. Y. HUNTER. Population 60,000. Total cost Rs. 240. Average cost of each vaccination, 4 annas. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared With the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 671 ...... ...... 585 ...... 1869-70 ......... 949 278 ...... 802 89.6 The total number of cases vaccinated during the year by the Government Vacci- nator in the town and out-parts of Sholapoor, as shown in the above table, exhibits an increase of 278 as compared with the preceding year. During the period under review, there have been two Vaccinators at work in the town of Sholapoor, and their joint labours raise the total of vaccination to 1,599. The second Vaccinator is employed by the Municipality, and furnishes his report thereto. The vaccination is practised conti- nually in the city, and once a week the children are brought to the Civil Hospital by the Government Vaccinator for my inspection. In nearly all the cases which came under my observation, the vesicles were well formed and the lymph of good quality. The vesicles, though normal in character, were somewhat smaller during the rains than in the other seasons. The Vaccinator seems willing, diligent, and well behaved, but often complains of the difficulties he has to contend with from the opposition of the inhabitants, who do not seem yet to fully appreciate the blessings of this almost certain preventive against small-pox ; were it otherwise, the number of operations upon children under one year would be many more than at present among a population of 60,000. The Lingayet portion of the community are still very averse to vaccination, particularly the Bunyas and weavers. I am happy to be able to state, however, that no epidemic occurred during the last year.
65 SHOLAPOOR CHARITABLE DISPENSARY. Operations performed by Nursoo Goorapah, Third Class Hospital Assistant, in Medical charge of Dispensary and the Native Medical Pupils. Population 60,000. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 78 ........... ........... 68 ........... 1869-70 ......... 201 23 ........... 164 86.3 Vaccination was performed every week on Wednesdays at 10 A.M. by me or the Native Medical pupils attached to this Dispensary in addition to our other duties. The increase in the number of operations this year is owing chiefly to the services of a Peon having been placed at the disposal of the Dispensary in the month of May 1869. The operations were not all done at the Dispensary. The Peon with one of my Native Medical pupils was occasionally sent out to vaccinate. The result was then inspected by me at the Dispensary. Vaccination seems to have made pretty good progress during the year under report. The people, especially the Lingayets, who form at least one-third of the population of this town, though still reluctant to subject their children to the operation, are coming out slowly, and becoming sensible of the advantages of vaccination. The deformities produced by small-pox, which the people still think is the work of a goddess, have convinced many people of the necessity of vaccination. Although much is done, still much remains to be done. 2. The lymph in use throughout the year was to all appearance very good. The resulting vesicles were normal in size and appearance. 3. Measles prevailed in the hot season in the town, but to what extent I have not been able to ascertain. 4. The present Municipal Vaccinator, Pundhernath Dyanashwer, who now and then brings the children operated upon by him for my inspection, seems to be a dili- gent and hard-working man. He has, in addition to the duties in the town, to go to several small villages within three miles distance of this town. 5. As vaccination was performed by the establishment attached to this Dis- pensary, the cost, &c. of vaccination itself cannot be properly ascertained. 9 v s
66 DHOOLIA. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon G. BAINBRTDGE. Population 13,277. Total cost Rs. 193. Average cost of each vaccinatino, 3 annas and 1 pie. Years. Total Vacci- nated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 878 ...... ...... 710 87.9 1869-70............ 996 118 ...... 895 89.8 Considering that the population of this place is but slowly, if at all, increasing, I think these figures indicate a very satisfactory progress, which may be attributed to the constantly increasing value set upon vaccination by the inhabitants. Vaccination has been performed twice every week, and the supply of lymph has been uninterrupted and of good quality. Much less difficulty than heretofore has been experienced in procuring subjects for vaccination since the appointment of Hospital Peons, one of whom has always been available to assist the Vaccinator. The Patel of the village was somewhat irregular during the early part of the year in attending to render aid to the Vaccinator; but latterly he has given proper assistance, after having been fre- quently reminded of his duty. Many people are still averse to bring their children for inspection of the results of the operation. All those, however, who live in the town are examined without fail, and only a few escape who go away from the place before the period of maturation of the vesicles is completed. Many of the uninspected cases go to make up the list of doubtful vaccinations, but most of them would certainly have been found successful if present for examination. There are still some of the well-to-do classes of Hindoos who persist in trying every possible prevarication and excuse with a view to evade the operation, though they seldom absolutely refuse to submit their children to it. The conduct of the Vaccinator during the past year has been satisfactory. The Municipal Commissioners of the town have, in accordance with the desire and suggestion of Government, sanctioned a charge of Rs. 15 per mensem for the pay of a Municipal Vaccinator. This expenditure has been estimated for in the Municipal Budget Estimate for the year 1870-71, and may therefore be commenced from the 1st April 1870, when the Government will be relieved of the charge for vaccination at this station. Since the month of November 1869, the Assistant Vaccinator has been in charge of the Charitable Dispensary lately opened, and has, at the same time, been per- forming his substantive duties. His pay has been saved during this period.
67 Small-pox was prevalent in the town during the months of April and May; four- teen cases came under my observation, and I believe that this number embraces almost all which occurred. Most of these cases were treated at the Civil Hospital either as in- or out-patients. Two of them68 6 pies, not including the cost of lancets, which were supplied from the Hospital stores as required. The number vaccinated by the Municipal Vaccinator during the year was 509, at a cost of 7 annas and 1 pie each nearly, not including the value of lancets and stationery, which were supplied by the Superintendent of Vaccination, and the price is not known. Government paid a Vaccinator at Rs. 10, and subsequently at Rs. 13 per mensem to the 18th November, and a Peon at Rs. 7 per mensem to the 22nd December, with Rs. 4-15-0 for stationery, amounting to Rs. 163-0-7. The Municipality paid a Vaccinator at Rs. 12, and subsequently at Rs. 15 per mensem, with a Peon at Rs. 6 per mensem, during the year, amounting to Rs. 225. KULLADGHEE. One Municipal Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. SIMP- SON, M.B. Population 14,384. Total cost Rs. 122. Average cost of each vaccination, 3 annas. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............ 628 ........... ........... 628 100.0 1869-70 ......... 651 23 ........... 651 100.0 During the year 1869-70, 651 persons have been vaccinated by the Municipal Vaccinator, Duttatree Narayen,in a population of 14,384, at Kulladghee and surround- ing villages, at a total cost of Rs. 122, including pay of Vaccinator and contin- gencies, at the average cost of about 3 annas for each vaccination, this sum being paid by the Municipality of Kulladghee. There is a small increase this year as compared with last year. The Vaccinator informs me that the people are now more willing to have their children protected, as they see the benefit of it. The state of lymph has been good : it is kept up by vaccinating from arm to arm. The conduct of the Vaccinator was good. There has been no small-pox in the town of Kulladghee ; but the Vaccinator tells me he has seen a few cases in some of the villages he has visited. I think a small supply of empty tubes might be issued to the Vaccinator here to enable him to supply any of the neighbouring Vaccinators with fresh lymph if required, as it would be kept in a better state in them than on plates.
69 BAGULKOTE. Operations performed by Amroota Tattia (General No. 460), Third Class Hospital Assistant, in Medical charge of Dispensary. Population 12,247. No Cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 113 ........... ........... 102 ........... 1869-70............ 229 116 ..... 216 94.2 The vaccine operations in the Dispensary were performed by me amongst a popula- tion of 12,247. As the operations were performed by me, with the assistance of the Dispensary Peon and a Police Sepoy, who attends on certain fixed days appointed for this purpose, and as the lancets, papers, &c. that were used belong to the Dispensary, no separate charges could be named for vaccination. 2. It must also be observed that even these charges are supplied by the Muni- cipality. The average cost could not also be computed for the above reason. 3. Comparing the work for the seven months of 1868-69 with that of last year, there may appear a decrease in the average of about 36 children, and the only cause of the decrease appears to be, that the Municipality have appointed a separate Vaccinator from the month of January 1869. That individual goes over the town as well as the surrounding villages to carry on his operations ; so the people prefer getting their children vaccinated at home, instead of taking the trouble of attending the Dispensary. 4. The number of children vaccinated by the Municipal Vaccinator during the last twelve months amounts to 375, and this sum being added to the number of those vaccinated in the Dispensary makes a total of 604, which shows that the general progress is extremely satisfactory. 5. I am very glad to state that the state of the lymph throughout the year was excellent. 6. There were no cases of small-pox in this town; but I hear that the disease was prevalent in the neighbouring talookas, especially in Moodebehal and Hoongoond, during the four months of the hot season.
70 DHURRUMGAUM. Operations performed by Mr. Apothecary W. WAITE, Khandeish Bheel Corps. Population ......... No Cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 108 ........... ........... 92 85.4 1869-70............ 167 59 ........... 165 98.8 Vaccination was without much difficulty carried on throughout the year, and with, I am happy to say, far greater success than during the preceding year. 167 children, of ages varying from four months to three years, were vaccinated. Of these, 162 were of the Bheel corps, and 5 of followers. 165 cases proved successful, and only 2 unsuccessful; these latter being again vaccinated until the operation proved success- ful. The number of unsuccessful cases to successful, as shown, is very small com- pared with previous years, being only 1.2 per cent. The unsuccessful cases, it was noticed, occurred in children above one year of age rubbing and scratching their arms and breaking the vesicles before they arrived at maturity. On one occasion only during the year (in the month of November) was I necessitated to apply to the Native Vaccinator at Nusseerabad for a supply of lymph, and which he very readily supplied me with (sent on glasses). The lymph appeared very good and healthy, and vaccina- tion was recommenced at the beginning of December. During eleven months of the year, from April to October and December 1869, and from January to March 1870, a fresh supply of lymph was continually kept up, and vaccination was propagated from one child to another, which accounts for the very small number of failures. In one instance only, as above remarked, did the supply of lymph in the Hospital run short. Vac- cination is still practised once a week amongst the children of the corps and followers, the operation being at all times carefully performed by myself. 2. It is most pleasing to have to note again during another year the entire absence of small-pox amongst the children of the corps, and that only a few mild cases appeared in the town of Dhurrumgaum. No fatal cases were reported as having occurred.
71 KARWAR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon S. B. HALI DAY (Acting). Population 9,975. Total cost, Rs. 154. Average cost of each vaccination, 3 annas and 4 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868..................... 362 ......... ......... 306 ......... 1869-71 ......... 733 371 ......... 601 86.0 The total number vaccinated during the year 1869-70 is 733, being 371 more than in the previous year. Of this total number, 100 only were under one year of age, and 633 over that age. The small number under one year is accounted for by the very great prejudice the natives have against vaccinating a child under one year of age; after that age they readily submit, but do not seem anxious, to have the operation performed, except when small-pox prevails, and then they become anxious to have it done. Station Vaccinator Simon Gonsalves (General No. 329) is paid entirely by Government, and I allow one of the Hospital Peons to assist him. The increase I consider fair and satisfactory, and shows that the natives are getting more faith in the operation. The lymph has been good and in sufficient quantity during the year. The conduct of the Vaccinator has been satisfactory. I cannot suggest any improvement over the present system. Small-pox is rare here ; 9 persons were attacked lately, and of this number 2 died and 7 recovered. The two fatal cases were not vaccinated ; 2 also of the cases which recovered were not vaccinated, and those suffered more severely than the vaccinated. The disease then disappeared, and no measures were necessary to arrest it,
72 SATTARA. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. V. CARTER, M.D. Population 22,949. Total cost, Rs. 305. Average cost of each vaccination, 2 annas and 4 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868 .................. 3,177 ......... ......... 2,825 ......... 1869-70............... 2,033 ......... 1,139 1,831 98.2 The above table shows a diminution in the number of vaccinations at this station, as compared with the previous year, but not with other former years. The cause of decrease may be referred to the great prevalence of cholera in 1869 : for experience has shown that this fell disease has a paralyzing and distracting effect upon the people, highly unfavourable to the progress of vaccination ; families are both unwilling to move, and are strongly disinclined to vaccination, during the prevalence of this epidemic. Such considerations, I am assured, amply account for the falling off in the number above shown; and I believe there is generally no opposition offered to Vaccinator's work, but, on the contrary, a satisfactory appreciation of its benefits. It should be added that small-pox widely prevailed during the early part of the year under report, and had not the dread occasioned by cholera co-existed, it is probable that no decrease would have occurred, as vaccination was proceeding steadily in April (in which month no fewer than 837 children were vaccinated) ; but afterwards the monthly number diminished two-thirds, and then suddenly fell to 97 in June. 2. The lymph employed here continues to be good and efficient; in the month of September, as it appeared to give less satisfactory results than usual, a fresh supply was obtained in tubes from the Circle Superintendent, but it did not take well, and with the subsidence of the rainy season the original lymph much im- proved. Perhaps this fact may serve to show the unabated efficiency of Jennerian vaccine, which the advocates of animal vaccine (so called) are disposed to doubt. The percentage of success, 89.8, is slightly over that in 1868, which stood at 88.9. 3. The Vaccinator has continued to conduct his work so well, that any addition to his pay, by way of batta, for district work, would be merited ; and it does not seem clear why he should not have the benefit of rank by service as well as Hospital Assistants and District Vaccinators. 4. Referring to the subject named in paragraph 2 of Circular No. 4442, dated 9th December 1869, by the Inspector General, Medical Department, and subsequent
73 instructions, (a) and (b) are shown in the attached return. Total cost as last year, Rs. 305 per annum paid by Government only ; finally (d) the average cost of each vaccination amounted to annas two and pies four, being an increase on that of the previous year, owing to the smaller number actually vaccinated. BELGAUM. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major G. G. MAITLAND, F.R.C.S. Population 35,973. Total cost, Rs. 156. Average cost of each vaccination, 3 annas and 11 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increaase. Decrease. 1868............... 578 ...... ...... 566 ...... 1869-70............ 627 51 ...... 611 97.4 Vaccination has been carried on by the Station Vaccinator uninterruptedly throughout the year. The number vaccinated is in advance of that of the previous year by 51, and it is hoped that now the Vaccinator has a Peon permanently attached to him, he will be able to show a greater increase of numbers vaccinated than in former years. In addition to the number above shown, the Vaccinator was engaged in carrying on operations in the Cantonment Bazaar and Ordnance Lascars' Lines. In the former 95 children were vaccinated, and in the Lines 21 ; total 121. Of these all were reported successful. The vaccine lymph has been uniformly good, and the percentage of successful vaccinations is 97.4. The success, however, I ascribe, in great measure, to the practice here adopted, of carrying on arm-to arm vaccination, and not trusting to the dry vaccine virus, which in certain seasons, and however carefully preserved, very often fails in its results. The Vaccinator is an old and experienced operator, and I have every reason to be satisfied with the work performed, and to the trustworthiness of his returns. Small-pox in a modified form was somewhat prevalent in the town, Cantonment Bazaar, and Lascars' Lines during the month of April 1869. Of the 23 cases reported within the Military limits, 15 were adults and 8 were children. All the persons attacked had been previously vaccinated, and all made a favourable recovery. Of the few cases among the Ordnance lascars that came under my own observation, the disease appeared in a very mild form, and speedily recovered. 10 v s
74 DHARWAR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon M. M. MACKENZIE, Population 30,000. Total cost, Rs. 120. Average cost of each vaccination, 2 annas and 3 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868............ 661 ......... ......... 536 ......... 1869-70......... 835 174 ......... 718 85.9 The accompanying vaccination return for the past official year shows an increase of 174 over that of the preceding year, there having been 835 operated upon as compared to 661 in 1868; of these 835, 718 were successful, giving a percentage of 86, as compared to 81.1 of the preceding year. The greatest number of monthly vaccinations occurred respectively in May, March, February, January, December, November, and June. Sex and Age.75 162, 112, 97, and 68 ; there has been a steady decrease towards the latter months of the year, November and December presenting only 16. The late Vaccinator, Shewana, had for along time been consumptive, and, although a good, conscientious man, was unable latterly to overtake his work. He died in Decem- ber 1868, and was succeeded by the present Vaccinator, Appana bin Teepuna, a good, steady, and zealous youth, who, I am glad to report, has been increasing the numbers and success of vaccination cases. TANNA. One Municipal Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. C. KIERNANDER. (Acting). Population, 10,581. Total cost, Rs. 246. Average cost of each vaccination, 10 annas and 9 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease 1868.................. 232 ...... ...... 191 82.3 1869-70............ 324 92 ...... 300 92.5 Vaccination was carried on throughout the year in the town of Tanna, with the above, I think, very satisfactory results. They include 49 cases that were vaccinated in the neighbouring villages, as will be seen from the following return for the year. The Vaccinator's name is Pandoo Ram Sawunth. He is paid by the Municipality, and his salary has been increased from Rs. 11 to Rs. 20 a month; he has also been allowed, he tells me, to spend Rs. 6 and annas 5 in presents to the children, and their mothers who allow lymph to be taken. The total cost, therefore, to the Muni- cipality has been Rs. 246 (no Peon is paid by the Municipality). Each vaccination cost 10 annas and 9 pies. I have not seen a single case of small-pox during the year I have been here, nor has any case been reported to me. The lymph was good, and I found no difficulty in keeping up a regular supply. The Vaccinator behaved well during the year, and is a willing and hard-working man. I have found no difficulty in inducing people, who have at first refused, to allow their children to be vaccinated, by quietly pointing out its benefits, and the dangers likely to accrue to the whole family and neighbourhood if such a pestilence as small-pox once breaks out amongst them. I have seen every case operated on by the Vaccinator in the town, and have vaccinated a few myself, and have no doubt that the confidence engendered in the parents of those already vaccinated will give us a large increase of numbers in 1870-71.
76 RUTNAGHERRY. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon C. JOYNT, M.D. Population, 20,789. Total cost, Rs. 229. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation, 3 annas and 1 pie. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868.................. 1,342 ...... ...... 1,080 ...... 1869-70......... 1,183 ...... 154 847 72.2 There is a decrease in the number vaccinated as compared, with the year 1868, and the percentage of success is considerably less also. This was owing to the variable quality of the lymph used till January, in which month it was so bad that eighty-two operations (all that were performed) failed. A new supply of good lymph was obtained from the Circle Superintendent in February, and the operations have been fairly successful since. The progress of vaccination in Rutnagherry is slow, and the reluc- tance of some of the people to its extension considerable ; and this reluctance is to some extent attributable to the unsuccessful result of the operations, people naturally dislik- ing the trouble of having their children operated on when the operation proves of no use. The lymph was variable during the earlier months of the year, becoming worse towards the end of 1869, and very bad in January, when every operation failed; it was good in February and March. The conduct of the Vaccinator has greatly improved in the last three months. Any improvement that may be deemed practicable will be adopted, and the Writer is attentive to the matter. Small-pox has been prevalent in the neighbourbood during the greater part of the year, and has had the effect of causing a greater demand for vaccination than previously obtained. VINGORLA. Operations performed by the Medical Pupils under Mr. Apothecary MUNDAY,S supervision. Population, 10,000. No Cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 382 ...... ...... 358 ...... 1869-70 ......... 296 ...... 86 275 95.8
77 Vaccination has been performed by the Native Medical pupils attached to the Civil Hospital, and under the supervision of the Apothecary in Medical charge of the Station of Vingorla. 2. A decrease of eighty-six in the total number vaccinated, as compared with the previous year, is owing to the vaccination being stopped in July, in consecquence of Cholera being amongst the inhabitants, and those children that had been vaccinated in the end of June having left the place, fearing the Cholera that was in the vicinity of their houses. Lymph was obtained from Sawunt Warree early in August, which proved good, and vaccination has been kept up since with considerable difficulty, the inhabit- ants not caring about it. Notwithstanding the Chief Constable giving all the assistance in his power, and the operations performed at the dwellings of the people, it is with difficulty that sufficient numbers can be procured : the parents hide the children when they see any one approaching for the purpose of vaccinating. There being no Native Vaccinator's Peon here to procure children, a considerable amount of trouble is experienced. 3. Progress does not appear to have been made during the year. 4. The lymph has been good throughout; in many cases the vesicles have been found broken by the parents, to prevent its being taken to vaccinate others. 5. Improvements might be made, and the numbers increased, if a Native Vaccinator or Peon resided here for the purpose of collecting children. 6. No cases of small-pox occurred during the year. DAPOOLEE. Operations performed by Honorary Assistant Surgeon A. POLLARD in charge Civil Hospital. Population, 6,000. No Cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 252 ......... ......... 228 90.5 1869............ 348 96 ......... 288 82.8 During the year 1869-70 there were 348 children vaccinated, varying in age from three months to ten years. Compared with the preceding year this shows an increase of 96, and if compared with the year 1867 an increase of 225 vaccinations; thus showing that the prejudice entertained by the population against this operation being performed
78 on their children is rapidly giving away before the known benefits derived : in fact, the people now seem to look upon it in its proper light, and believe it to be a preventive of small-pox, or, if the disease should be contracted after vaccination, they believe that it will appear in a very modified form. Of the children operated on, 202 were males and 140 females,79 The quality of the lymph made use of during the year was good. The vesicles were of normal size and appearance, and passed regularly through their various phases. The want of lymph sometimes felt, owing to parents objecting to its being taken from the vesicles, but it was soon supplied by the Superintendent of the Circle. Small-pox prevailed to a certain extent in the town, especially among the Kolees, or fishermen, who entertain strong prejudices against the practice of vaccination, and never allow their children to be vaccinated. SURAT. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. J. GANE, (Acting). Population, 90,000. Total cost, Rs. 264. Average cost of each vaccination, 2 annas and 6 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868............... 2,840 ...... ...... 2,390 ...... 1869-70 ......... 1,680 ...... 1,160 1,523 96.7 The population of Surat is estimated at 90,000. During the past official year one thousand six hundred and eighty children have been vaccinated by the Native Vacci- nator (under my supervision), being a decrease of one thousand one hundred and sixty compared with the previous year. The decrease is to be attributed to the circumstance that small-pox did not prevail during the year: consequently the natives were not so ready to bring their children for vaccination. Results.80 Lymph.81 KAIRA. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon H. COOK, M.D. Population, 12,539. Total cost, Rs. 242. Average cost of each vaccination, 4 annas and 1 pie. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 796 ......... ......... 638 80.1 1869-70............... 951 155 ......... 725 76.2 The total number of cases of vaccination performed by the Station Vaccinator in the town of Kaira and its neighbourhood has been 951. This, compared with the number of cases in the preceding year, shows an increase of 15582 The quality of the lymph and vesicles has, on the whole, been good, though fresh supplies of lymph have had to be obtained three or four times in the course of the year, owing to the deterioration of the vesicles. When this was observed good lymph was at once obtained from the district Vaccinator, and the work carried on without delay. At present a fresh supply is required, and has been applied for. The conduct of the Vaccinator has been good on the whole, though I have had to find fault with him for want of care in the selection of vesicles with which to carry on his vaccinations, also for vaccinating at a later hour of the day than was advisable, and, consequently, working under unfavourable conditions. The children vaccinated are inspected every month, and the character of lymph thereby ascertained. The in- habitants seem to fully understand the value of the operation, and, as a rule, do not object to have the operation performed. As the same time, it must be stated that they do not evince any anxiety about the matter : they must be sought out; and when the children are vaccinated, their parents do not trouble themselves much about ensuring the successful result of the operations, by preserving the vesicles from injury. There has been no epidemic of small-pox in the town, nor have I seen any cases among patients brought for treatment at the Civil Hospital, though a few cases do occur. So far as I am aware, inoculation is not practised. The operations were performed by Assistant Vaccinator Ramchunder Barsay (General No. 209). The total cost of vaccinations for 1869-70, all of which is borne by Government, was Rs. 242-8-0, and the average cost of each vaccination was 4 annas and 1 pie. The average cost of each vaccination for the year 1868 was a little over 2 annas and 7 pies ; the increased cost for 1869-70 is principally due to the increased rate of pay to the Vaccinator and the pay of a Peon entertained for this work since February. The present system of vaccination seems to work well; and unless vaccination is made compulsory, I see no other means of making it more general but time, and consequent increased intelligence and knowledge of the benefits of the operation among the people. AHMEDABAD. Two Municipal Vaccinators under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major D. WYLLIE, M.D. Population 150,000. Total cost, Rs. 464. Average cost of each vaccination, 1 anna and 1 pie. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 4,604 ...... ...... 4,489 ...... 1869-70......... 4,047 ...... 557 3,881 96.8
83 The total number vaccinated was 4,047, which, compared with the work of the previous year as above exhibited, shows a decrease of 557 operations. The unusual prevalence of measles, more or less present throughout the entire year, is assigned as the chief cause of decrease. But, apart from this, other influences must have been operating to account for the large falling off in vaccinations since 1866 ; and this, I think, is due to the fact that, as a municipal institution, the establishment has not the same status in popular estimation that it had when it was directly employed by Go- vernment. The repeated complaints of late years, that parents, on one pretence or other, conceal or withdraw their children after vaccination, so as to prevent their em- ployment in propagating the prophylactic,84 semblance of authority, without any of its exercise, would do much to overcome the vexatious obstructions that prejudice and ignorance put up as respects children already vaccinated, while the presence of such Peons would be an assurance to the people of Government being still directly interested in the success of the work, and thus confer a prestige on the labours of the establishment, which, as servants of the Municipality, it would be vain under existing circumstances to look for. Small-pox was more or less present in the city from January to June, and gave some little stimulus to the efforts of the Vaccinators, although less pronounced than in former years. The deaths from this disease for the period, as registered by the Municipality, were 117. Every case was taken to lessen the spread of the epidemic ; and while the occasion was used to press vaccination on the people, the houses wherein affected persons had been were subjected to lime-washing, and buildings outside the city were set apart as a separate Hospital for the reception of cases. An incident occurred that may be recounted in illustration of the difficulty of obtaining lymph from children. One of the Peons had obtained the consent of the mother of a vaccinated infant to permit the Vaccinator to take lymph from its arm, and while this was being done the Peon was wantonly assaulted and beaten by a neighbour of the woman's, a man in no way connected with her. The aggressor was convicted and fined by the Magistrate. It is needless to say, that an occurrence of this kind would not have happened had the Peon belonged to the Police. GOGO. Operations performed by Mr. Apothecary GEORGE, in Medical charge Dispensary. Population, 8,227. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868 .................. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1869-70............ 542 542 ...... 479 90.8 The total number vaccinated during the year was 542 ; among these, 48 were un- successful, and 15 doubtful or unknown, the remainder were successful. No annual return of vaccination was rendered for the twelve months of the past year, as vaccination was in abeyance; a quarterly return, from January to March 1869, has been rendered. The vaccinations were performed by the Medical Subordinates in charge; viz., Assistant
85 Apothecary W. Roane (General No. 97) from April to July 1869, Second Class Hospital Assistant Babajee Bhoonkie (General No. 310) in August, and from September to the end of the year by me. The population of Gogo is 8,227. The cost of the vaccination for lancets, paper, &c., is unknown, as these have been procured by indents, nor can the average cost of each vaccination, for the same reason, be ascertained. Vaccination sedulously performed with the best of lymph. One case of small-pox occurred in April in a child who was not vaccinated : the child recovered. Vaccination is not received by the wealthier Hindoo community with the readiness displayed by Mussulmans. The children having to be brought to the Dispensary for vaccination, the Hindoo parents, probably for this reason, seem to be restrained from taking any trouble to secure the prophylactic ; moreover, they say that total immunity from small-pox after vaccination has not been realized. They cannot be made to understand that vaccinating their children secures them from the virulence of the contagion, which, if it do not prove a prophylactic, yet is indubitably a modifier of the force of the virus, should their children be placed in contiguity with sufferers from the disease. RAJKOTE. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon A. M. BLOMFIELD, (Officiating). Population, 17,500. Total cost, Rs. 276, of which Government paid Rs. 156, and the Raja Rs. 120. Average cost of each vaccination, 3 annas and 7 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 308 ......... ......... 259 86.3 1869-70............... 1,215 907 ......... 1,000 82.3 This return includes those vaccinated in the station and town of Rajkote and neighbourhood. There is a considerable increase over the number vaccinated last year. Those cases which have come under my notice, i. e. those vaccinated in the Military lines, have all presented good vesicles. No cases of small-pox has been reported to me.
86 KURRACHEE. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon N. HOPKINS. Population, 100,000. Total cost, Rs. 307-8-0, of which the sum of Rs. 180 was paid by Government, and Rs. 127-8-0 by the Municipality. The average cost of each successful vaccination, 1 anna and 5 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868............ 3,035 ......... ......... 3,265 ......... 1869-70............ 3,933 898 ......... 3,422 91.9 The vaccination return for 1869-70 shows that there was a considerable increase in the number vaccinated over the previous year, and this increase would have been greater had it not been that in the month of July the lymph was bad, and I had to order complete suspension of all operations till I got a fresh supply ; and again, during the period cholera was raging in Kurrachee, vaccination was not so vigorously carried on. The real increase in 1869-70 over 1868 is 898 ; the percentage of successful cases is lower than in the year 1868, owing somewhat to 271 of vaccinated patients in July being recorded unsuccessful through bad lymph. During the month of January 1869 there were 14 cases of small-pox, and again from January to April 1870 there were 66 cases of small-pox ; and I regret to say that the disease is still in the town and suburbs to a certain extent, but every effort is being made to vaccinate all who have any communication with the affected persons. I have long been of opinion that there is work enough for two Vaccinators in Kurrachee ; and I find that the late Dr. Ritchie, when Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals in Sind, strongly recommended that there should be two appointed. Amongst the inhabitants, some are strongly against vaccination ; others are apathetic, and make no efforts to have their children vaccinated. An instance occurred only the other day ; a man brought his child into the Civil Hospital with small-pox. I asked him why he had not had his child vaccinated. He replied that the man (Vaccinator) had not called ; if he had he would have had his child vaccinated. It is impossible for one man to find out where every child is who ought to be vaccinated, if the parents are indifferent about the remedy ; and the more numerous the Vaccinators are, the more likely are children of apathetic people to be found out and the remedy applied. I would strongly recom- mend that two Vaccinators be appointed to Kurrachee for twelve months to sec the result. The conduct of the Vaccinator has been generally good.
87 The Jail annual return shows that a large number of prisoners were vaccinated during the year. There was one case of small-pox in the Jail and one case of chicken- pox. To prevent the disease from spreading the prisoners were all vaccinated as soon as possible. HYDRABAD. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon T. HOLMESTED. Population, 40,000. Total cost, Rs. 216, of which the sum of Rs. 96 was paid by the Municipality, and Rs. 216 by Government. Average cost of each vaccination, 1 anna and 1 pie. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 1,847 ...... ...... 1,827 98.8 1869-70............ 2,162 315 ...... 2,153 99.5 During the past year 2,162 vaccinations were performed ; this gives an increase of 315 over the preceding year. 2. Last year I had to report that the Amils were objecting to vaccination, and recommended it should be made compulsory. The objections, I am glad to say, are on the decrease, and the Vaccinator has seldom any complaints to make of obstruction : but my opinion remains the same, that vaccination ought to be compulsory, and the follow- ing measure would to a great extent make it so ; viz., that no child be admitted into any school, or person into Government employ, who could not show the scars on the arms, or small-pox marks ; &quot;that every parent be fined, according to his means, who may suffer his child to catch small-pox, unless the child has the modified type and shows the scars on the arms.&quot; 3. The lymph has continued good throughout the year : no necessity has arisen to change or supplement it. Lymph has been given away occasionally. The Superin- tendent of Vaccination has sent for several supplies. 4. The Vaccinator is a good man, and does his work well. During the past year I wrote, asking that his pay might be slightly increased, so that he might be entitled to pension. The application was refused. I hope at some future period his case may again be taken into consideration. 5. I cannot at the present time suggest any further improvement. 6. No case of small-pox was seen by me during the year, or by my Hospital Assistant; but the Vaccinator reported, at the commencement of the hot weather, that
88 he had seen one or two suspicious cases amongst some Marwaree children. No case was reported as occurring amongst the inhabitants of Hydrabad. 7. The Vaccinator's name is Raymon Khan (General No. 233). 8. The population amongst whom vaccination is performed numbers 40,000. 9. The total cost of the vaccinations amounted to Rs. 216, of which Govern- ment paid Rs. 120, and the Municipality Rs. 96. The average cost of each vaccination was one anna and one pie. The lower classes of Europeans object fre- quently to have their children vaccinated from native ones. I find this prejudice much less frequent amongst the better classes : they appear to be satisfied that what is being done is the best, and that their opinion cannot be so good as that of a Medical Officer. From my reading and experience, I come to the conclusion that if the lymph is taken from a proper vesicle on to a clean lancet, and no blood contaminates it, there is then no fear of injuring any child by the venereal poison. During this year all telegraph employés received an order to be vaccinated. Amongst those who presented themselves before me were two young men, who had on their arms peculiarly good marks of previous vaccination ; notwithstanding that, they were vaccinated again, and to my surprise, in both of these cases, most successfully. From this the inference might arise that the protective properties are exhausted in some cases before the obliteration of the scar ; so every one in the vicinity of danger should be re-vaccinated every few years. SHIKARPOOR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. F. KEITH, M.B. (Acting). Population 45,000. Total cost Rs. 289-12-0, of which the sum of Rs. 121-12-0 was paid by Government, and Rs. 168 by the Municipality. Average cost of each successful vaccination, 3 annas and 9 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 1,240 ......... ......... 1,188 ......... 1869-70............ 1,224 ......... 16 1,183 98.5 Compared with the preceding year there is a decrease of 16. 2. Great difficulty is met with in getting the people to bring their children to the Dispensary for the purpose of vaccination, and the Vaccinator has to go to their houses several times, and reason with them, before they can be induced to bring them out.
89 3. If the state of the lymph can be estimated from the kind of vesicle on the arm it must be very fair. 4. The conduct of the Vaccinator is good. 5. No improvement necessary. 6. There was no small-pox throughout the year. KOTREE. One Municipal Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon JOHN ROCHE, M.D. Population 20,626. Total cost, Rs. 268. Average cost of each vaccination, 5 annas and 10 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 1,150 ...... ...... 1,089 94.7 1869-70............ 784 ...... 366 707 93.2 The decrease in the number vaccinated during the official year 1869-70 is due principally to the prevalence of sickness in the last six months, and in part to the Vaccinator's death in September of cholera. The present Vaccinator, though a good man, was not so successful as to numbers in October and November as his predecessor might have been. LARKHANA. Operations performed by Third Class Hospital Assistant G. T. D'CRUZ (General No. 453), under Sub-Assistant Surgeon BALCRISHNA SUDAMJEE. Population 8,000. Total cost, Rs. 134. Average cost of each successful vaccina- tion, 6 annas and 2 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 410 ...... ...... 385 93.9 1869-70......... 371 ...... 39 350 94.3 12 v s
90 In submitting the accompanying annual return, I beg to state that, from 1st April 1869 to 31st March 1870, the total number of children vaccinated amounted to 371. Of this number 350 cases were successful, and 21 doubtful and unsuccessful. At the commencement of December last, vaccination was stopped for three weeks, as the lymph had got bad, owing partly to the neglect of the parents in not taking care of their vaccinated children and in not observing the directions given, and partly to some of the vaccinated subjects being removed from Larkhana to adjoining villages. Since the receipt of fresh lymph from the Superintendent of Vaccination the operations have been carried on with great success. They have been performed by Third Class Hospital Assistant G. T. D'Cruz (General No. 453). Now and then children were procured with great difficulty. No cases of small-pox came under my observation during the year under report, nor did the disease prevail in an epidemic form. ADEN. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. W. JAMES, M.D. Population 25,000. Total cost Rs. 215. Average cost of each successful vaccina- tion, 5 annas. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 725 ...... ...... 563 77.6 1869-70............ 844 119 ...... 692 81.9 The increase this year is again attributable to the large number of manumitted slaves brought to this station by Her Majesty's steamers, and as small-pox had broken out amongst them, vaccination was rigidly enforced, to check the spread of the disease, with the happiest result. Variola of a virulent type has been very prevalent during the year, 273 cases having been admitted into the small-pox ward ; out of which 99 died. As the disease originally spread from direct importation, a species of quarantine has been instituted, and no one is now allowed to land from pilgrim steamers or ships and native craft till officially visited by the Health Officer or his Assistant. The supply of lymph has been constant throughout the year, and of very good quality : the non- success in 152 cases is due rather to the carelessness on the part of the patients and their friends, than to the quality of lymph. The Medical Officers of Her Majesty's 82nd and 12th Regiments have been supplied with lymph. From the former no report has been
91 received, but the latter states &quot; the vesicles have been very good indeed.&quot; The Assistant Vaccinator, Anunt Vittul, had to be sent to Bombay on 18th September 1869, on medical certificate, and the present one, after two months' probation, was appointed to act. Both have done their work satisfactorily. Statistics of Small-pox during the year 1869-70. Number. Total number of cases of small-pox during the year 1869-70 .................. 273 Of the total number were vaccinated In infancy ........................ ...... In after life ........................ ...... Of these died of small-pox who were vaccinated In infancy ............ ...... In after life ............ ...... Total number of cases of small-pox during the year 1869-70 ............... 273 Of the total number were unprotected ....................................... 99 Total deaths from small-pox out of the total number of cases ............... 99 BHOOJ. Three Native States Vaccinators under Mr. DORABJEE HORMUSJEE, G.G.M.C. Population 400,000. Total cost Rs. 799. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation, 1 rupee 6 annas and 8 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success. Increase. Decrease. 1868 ............... 624 ...... ...... 565 90.5 1869-70............ 610 ...... 14 550 90.1
92 From 1st April 1869 to 31st March 1870 there were 610 vaccinations performed at Bhooj, Mandavee, Moondra, and Anjar ; of these, 550 were successful, and 60 unsuc- cessful or doubtful. During the past financial year there were 14 operations less than in 1868. In consequence of the points of dispute between His Highness the Rao and his Bhyads being not brought to any settlement, vaccination was again confined to the above mentioned places. During the present year one of the Vaccinators was discharged and another entertained. Jadowjee Hurchund, formerly a Compounder and Vaccinator attached to this Dispensary, is also entertained as a Vaccinator at Moondra. I hope to see vaccination extend during the next year, should the Bhyads be persuaded to allow vaccination in their own villages. 2. As for suggestions to increase the progress of vaccination in Kutch, it is neces- sary to consider what objections the people here have for vaccination, the removal of which will clear the way for increased vaccination. The first of them is that they have a firm belief in a goddess, which they call Silta Mátá, an image of which is generally found at the principal villages, where they take their affected children on the eighth or ninth day after the appearance of small-pox, and make them bow down before the god- dess that she may extend her kindness towards them; second, when their children get an attack of small-pox after vaccination, they attribute it to the provocation of the god- dess, and hence they would rather prefer to have small-pox than vaccination. These objections can only be removed as the people become more and more civilized, and as they understand the merits of vaccination and re-vaccination. This will be a work of time, and a radical change can only be expected after a long period. Besides these general objections, vaccination has been for some time past limited to his Highness' principal towns, as it could not be carried out at villages belonging to Bhyads, in which nearly one-third of the population of Kutch live. I intend, however, to make a fresh trial by sending Vaccinators to their villages, and will be able to give an account of the result in my next year's report. 3. There were a few cases of small-pox. 4. I have the honour, further, to inform you that, in order to give a fresh impetus to vaccination, His Highness has been pleased to increase the number of Vaccinators from three to four, and to appoint a Superintendent to watch their progress. 5. I have the honour to request you to supply me with some quantity of lymph in sealed tubes, so as to enable me to distribute them amongst the Vaccinators, in order to keep up vaccination continually.
TABLES FOR 1st Quarter of 1869.
94 TABLE No. I. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. Table showing the Number and Names of the Circles and their Superintendents ; the Number of Vaccinators employed ; the Total Vaccinations performed; the Total Number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result; the Ratio of Successful to Total Vaccinated, for the 1st Quarter of 1869. Number. CIRCLES. Names of the MEDICAL OFFICERS, Superintendents of Vaccination. Number of Native Vacci- nators attached. Total Number vaccinated, arranged according to Total. Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number vac- cinated. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful Doubtful. 1 Central ... Assistant Surgeon Turnbull, M.D. ........................ 29* 6,629 5,965 3 11,082 568 ... 941 4,409 8,185 12,086 252 256 12,594 95.9 Assistant Surgeon W. R. Gordon, M.B. (Acting) ... 1295 TABLE No. II. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS AND OTHERS IN NATIVE TERRITORY. Table of Vaccination through the Agency of Native Chiefs, arranged according to the Circles of Vaccination, and showing Details as in Table No. I., for the 1st Quarter of 1869. Number. CIRCLES AND STATIONS. MEDICAL OFFICERS. Number of Native Vacci- nators attached. Total Number vaccinated, arranged according to Total. Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number vac- cinated. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussalman. Parsee. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1 Central..... Assistant Surgeon W. R. Gordon, M.B. ............... 2 302 319 ... 561 56 ... 4 210 411 601 18 2 621 96.7 2 Southern...... Assistant Surgeon J. Raby ... 23 2,929 2,179 14 4,955 300 ... 139 1,544 3,864 5,184 110 114 5,408 95.8 3 Northern...... Dr. Muncherjee B. Colah ... 12 3,066 2,751 ... 4,960 419 4 401 3,164 2,653 5,230 221 366 5,817 89.9 4 Western ...... Assistant Surgeon T. Cody ... 2 949 840 31 1,700 52 ... ... 405 1,384 1,665 81 43 1,789 96.9 5 Sind...... Assistant Surgeon J. Ffolliott. 1 333 185 ... 70 426 ... 22 143 375 512 ... 6 518 98.8 6 Kattiawar ... Surgeon E. R. Butler, M.D. ... 35 5,693 4,799 ... 9,261 1,211 ... 20 3,858 6,634 9,655 442 395 10,492 92.0 7 Rewa Kanta.. Assistant Surgeon J. T. Welsh, M.D. ........................ 7 1,226 1,144 ... 2,225 105 ... 40 735 1,635 2,236 72 62 2,370 94.3 8 Kutch ......... Mr. Dorabjee Hormusjee, G.G.M.C.................. 4 93 115 ... 105 101 2 ... 69 139 203 3 2 208 97.6 Total ...... 86 11,591 12,632 45 23,843 2,700 6 629 10,128 17,095 25,286 947 990 27,223 92.9
96 TABLE No. III. VACCINATIONS UNDER CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. Table of Vaccination under Civil Surgeons and others, arranged acccording to Divisions, and showing the Details as in Table No. I., for the 1st Quarter of 1869. Number. DIVISION OF DEPUTY INSPEC- TORS GENERAL. OF HOSPITALS. CIVIL STATIONS. Number of Native Vacci- nators attached. Total Number vaccinated, arranged according to Total. Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number vac- cinated. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. 1 Presidency. Tanna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1* 48 46 24 52 7 11 ...... 41 53 92 2 ...... 94 97.8 Rutnagherry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197 2 Poona98 TABLE No. III.99 TABLE No. IV. General Abstract of Vaccination for the 1st Quarter of 1869. DESIGNATION OF TABLES. Number of Vaccinators. Total Number vaccinated, arranged according to Total. Ratio per cent. of Suc- cessful to Number vac- cinated. Sex Caste. Age. Result. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful Doubtful. No. 1.100 TABLE No. VIII. Table of Vaccinations in the Bombay Army for the 1st Quarter 1869. Number Vaccinated. Europeans. Natives. Native Regiments. Regiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 717 Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 122 Bazaars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... 43 Cantonment Bazaars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 737 Ordnance and other Departments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 65 Staff and Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 269 Total . . . . . . 48 1,953 Grand Total . . . . . . 2,001
TABLES FOR 1869-70.
102 A.103 W. R. GORDON, M.B. .. .. .. .. 2,126 1,132 Nassick Collectorate. 400 67,816 Niphar...... 1,040 1,086 .. 1,648 69 .. 409 707 1,419 1,879 41 203 2,126 .. .. .. .. 97.7 1,522 .. .. .. .. 769 .. 401 47,868 Sawergaon.. 400 369 .. 658 25 .. 86 174 595 762 5 2 769 .. .. .. .. 99.3 .. .. .. .. ... .. 1,248 19,778 Nandgaon .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,703 1,331 966 88,537 Baglan ..... 1,429 1,274 .. 2,641 34 3 25 1,063 1,640 2,656 20 27 2,703 .. .. .. .. 99.2 .. .. .. .. 1,604 2,046 775 54,825 Malligaum .. 802 802 .. 1,408 123 .. 73 410 1,194 1,534 45 25 1,604 .. .. .. .. 97.1 .. .. .. .. 1,468 450 577 53,535 Ankola...... 750 718 .. 1,376 19 .. 73 599 869 1,405 33 30 1,468 .. .. .. .. 97.7 .. .. .. .. 1,817 1,349 440 63,200 Sinner...... 873 944 .. 1,612 43 .. 162 583 1,234 1,596 42 179 1,817 .. .. .. .. 97.4 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,106 77,331 Nassick...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,683 1,996 716 59,897 Dindooree.... 847 836 .. 1,493 32 .. 158 628 1,055 1,604 10 69 1,683 .. .. .. .. 99.3 .. .. .. .. .. 810 756 36,678 Chandore .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 912 1,692 46,904 Egutpoora .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,572 Kulludghi Collectorate. 864 85,703 Hoongonda .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,350 81,643 Baghawaree. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,714 .. 1,555 103,696 Badame...... 868 846 .. 1,592 114 .. 8 981 733 1,666 6 42 1,714 .. .. .. .. 99.6 .. .. .. .. 2,075 2,307 2,376 97,891 Bagulcote.... 1,108 967 .. 1,954 98 .. 23 1,028 1,047 2,022 9 44 2,075 .. .. .. .. 99.5 .. .. .. .. .. .. 726 74,887 Moodebahal.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,022 1,699 1,386 64,020 Beejapoor.. 552 470 .. 965 48 .. 9 639 383 982 9 31 1,022 .. .. .. .. 99. .. .. .. .. 4,407 1,110 1,683 95,986 Indee ........ 2,367 2,040 .. 3,409 477 .. 521 489 3,918 1,107 .. .. 4,407 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,555 98,990 Shindghee .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,211 1337 Khandeish Collectorate. 874 111,395 Sowda .... 594 617 .. 1,133 52 .. 26 363 848 1,174 24 13 1,211 .. .. .. .. 98. 1309 566 69,569 Bhosawul.. .. .. .. .. 1,572 1,821 323 51,060 Nusseerabad. 785 787 1 1,499 47 .. 25 736 836 1,305 55 212 1,572 .. .. .. .. 99.6 .. .. .. .. 770 .. 762 26,608 Seerpoor .... 391 379 .. 757 13 .. .. 275 495 762 3 5 770 .. .. .. .. 99.6 .. .. .. .. .. .. 474 34,506 Shahada ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 778 459 68,262 Errundole.... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 449 35,631 Chalesgaum.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 7 .. .. 506 56,706 Virdul...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 518 55,266 Jamneir...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,280 21,750 Tulloda....... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,967 759 63,672 Dhoolia...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 404 1,494 539 68,853 Pachora...... 207 197 .. 377 27 .. .. 129 275 404 .. .. 404 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. .. .. .. 1,428 504 41,843 Chopra...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,176 1,382 1,234 46,123 Pimpulnair .. 601 575 .. 1,129 26 .. 21 453 723 1,155 13 8 1,176 .. .. .. .. 98.8 .. .. .. .. 2,231 494 538 73,415 Amulnair.... 1,172 1,059 .. 1,943 226 .. 62 507 1,724 2,216 4 11 2,331 .. .. .. .. 99.8 .. .. .. .. 2,218 .. 680 36,544 Nundoorbar.. 1,122 1,096 .. 2,133 85 .. .. 124 2,094 2,114 30 74 2,218 .. .. .. .. 98.6 .. .. 1 1 1,023 545 Natives State 420 61,000 Aakulcote.... 558 465 .. 818 129 .. 76 177 846 948 75 .. 1,023 .. .. .. .. 92.8 .. .. 1 1 1,612 1,057 960 26,167 Peint........ 739 823 .. 1,573 21 .. 18 776 836 1,560 41 11 1,612 .. .. .. .. 97.4 .. .. 1 .. 930 .. Nuggur . . . . . . . . . . 27,735 Nuggur Town. 509 421 23 672 104 1 130 525 405 852 41 37 930 .. .. .. .. 95.4 .. .. 2 2 1,651 1,509 Poona . . . . . . . . . . 80,416 Poona City .. 937 714 5 1,530 112 2 2 905 746 1,380 60 211 1,651 .. .. .. .. 95.8 .. .. 1 1 213 49 Indapoor . . . . . . . . 10,636 IndapoorTown 95 118 4 165 19 .. 25 83 130 181 28 4 213 .. .. .. .. 86.6 .. .. 1 1 417 771 Barmuttee . . . . . . 9,811 Barmuttee do. 219 198 .. 385 12 .. 20 151 266 386 16 15 417 .. .. .. .. 96. .. .. 1 .. 18 .. Joonere . . . . . . . . . Unkn. Joonere ..do. 3 15 .. 4 13 .. 1 4 14 13 .. 5 18 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 564 75 Nassick . . . . . . . . . 25,000 Nassick .. do. 288 276 30 455 63 .. 16 296 268 432 71 41 564 .. .. .. .. 82.6 .. .. 1 1 334 432 Beejapoor . . . . . . . 8,891 Beejapoor do. 186 148 .. 265 24 .. 45 196 138 322 7 5 334 .. .. .. .. 97.8 .. .. 1 .. 568 .. Bagulkote . . . . . . . . 15,968 Bagulkote do. 265 303 .. 437 105 .. 26 322 246 513 35 20 568 .. .. .. .. 93.6 .. .. 1 .. 637 129 Kulladghi . . . . . . . . 6,032 Kulladghee do. 380 257 .. 519 85 .. 33 338 200 635 .. 82 637 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 653 737 Sholapoor . . . . . . . 33,977 Sholapoor do. 352 301 1 498 130 .. 24 510 143 594 5 54 653 .. .. .. .. 99.1 .. .. 1 1 661 394 Barsee . . . . . . . . . . 14,442 Barsee .. do. 354 367 .. 580 58 .. 23 373 288 602 11 48 661 .. .. .. .. 98.2 .. .. 1 1 537 1,103 Punderpoor . . . . . 15,597 Punderpoordo. 202 245 .. 491 15 .. 31 316 221 384 68 85 537 .. .. .. .. 84.9 .. .. 1 1 792 754 Sangola . . . . . . . . . 11,717 Sangola .. do. 406 386 .. 736 21 .. 35 336 456 664 61 67 792 .. .. .. .. 91.6 Total. .. .. 45 43 68,471 60,512 35,433 33,038 71 59,838 3,511 6 5,045 26,046 42,425 64,452 1882 2137 68,471 .. .. .. .. 97.1 1,522
104 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agen- cy, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those Doubtful from the Total Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Sex. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. RESULTS. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding Doubtful. Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding Doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cinations. In Secondary Vaccinations. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. SOUTHERN. Assistant Surgeon. .. .. .. 2 Vaccinators in Superintendent's Office. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1,749 1,538 Belgaum Collectorate. Sq. Miles 11,814. 753,180 Belgaum . . . . 966 783 8 1,649 64 .. 28 422 1,327 1,670 40 39 1,749 .. .. .. .. 97.6 .. .. 1 1 404 1,337 Sumpgaum . . 233 171 .. 376 28 .. .. 108 296 401 1 2 404 .. .. .. .. 99.7 .. .. 1 1 1,735 1,174 Pursghur . . . . 886 849 .. 1,561 148 .. 26 334 1,401 1,728 5 2 1,735 .. .. .. .. 99.7 .. .. 1 1 1,579 1,373 Gokak . . . . . . 902 667 .. 1,423 111 .. 45 704 875 1,544 14 21 1,579 .. .. .. .. 99.1 .. .. 1 1 1,738 1,390 Chichoree. . . . 910 828 .. 1,576 136 .. 26 209 1,529 1,705 4 29 1,738 .. .. .. .. 99.7 .. .. 1 1 1,435 1,085 Beedee ...... 820 615 39 1,286 18 .. 92 547 888 1,376 20 39 1,435 .. .. .. .. 93.4 .. .. 1 1 1,710 1,280 Dharwar Collec- torate. Sq. Miles 5,195. 860,224 Dharwar .... 929 781 7 1,427 236 .. 40 295 1,415 1,657 33 20 1,710 .. .. .. .. 98.0 .. .. 1 1 1,472 1,203 Nowlgoond .. 797 675 .. 1,312 114 .. 40 172 1,300 1,447 15 10 1,472 .. .. .. .. 98.9 .. .. 1 .. 1,366 .. Bunkapoor . . 689 677 .. 1,156 198 .. 12 212 1,154 1,273 29 64 1,366 .. .. .. .. 97.7 .. .. 1 1 1,410 1,040 Hongul . . . . . . 789 621 .. 1,133 268 .. 9 57 1,353 1,332 69 9 1,410 .. .. .. .. 95.7 .. .. 1 .. 860 .. Hooble . . . . . . 450 410 .. 754 86 .. 20 158 702 843 15 2 860 .. .. .. .. 98.2 .. .. 1 .. 333 .. Ranehbednore. 197 136 .. 163 170 .. .. .. 333 300 26 7 333 .. .. .. .. 92.0 .. .. 1 1 564 915 Koade . . . . . . 340 224 .. 495 69 .. .. 22 542 513 24 27 564 .. .. .. .. 95.5 .. .. 1 .. 947 .. Kurjagee .... 500 447 .. 860 70 .. 17 198 749 873 29 45 947 .. .. .. .. 96.7 .. .. 1 1 1,459 741 Kulghutgee.. 804 655 32 1,315 93 .. 19 117 1,342 1,409 23 28 1,459 .. .. .. .. 98.3 .. .. 1 .. 618 .. Roan . . . . . . . . 341 277 .. 579 35 .. 4 261 357 588 13 17 618 .. .. .. .. 97.8 .. .. 1 1 1,308 974 North Canara. Collectorate. Sq. Miles 4,314. 367,582 Coompta.... 770 538 80 1,117 24 .. 87 44 1,264 1,238 61 9 1,308 .. .. .. .. 95.3 .. .. 1 1 1,245 1,194 Honore...... 604 551 91 1,010 38 .. 106 92 1,153 1,162 83 .. 1,245 .. .. .. .. 93.3 .. .. 1 1 650 1,595 Sircy........ 390 260 .. 565 9 .. 76 6 644 .. 15 12 650 .. .. .. .. 97.6 .. .. 1 .. 581 .. Yellapoor.... 322 259 .. 565 16 .. .. 35 546 500 49 32 581 .. .. .. .. 91.0 .. .. .. .. 323 .. Siddapoor . . . . 169 154 .. 279 .. .. 44 35 288 290 26 7 323 .. .. .. .. 91.7 .. .. 1 1 1,152 1,039 Hullial . . . . . 651 501 65 950 122 .. 15 289 863 1,114 17 21 1,152 .. .. .. .. 98.4 .. .. .. .. .. .. Sattara Collectorate. Sq. Miles 8,349 970,442 Sattara . . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 330 .. Jowlee ..... 177 162 .. 310 1 .. 28 57 282 305 2 32 339 .. .. .. .. 99.3 .. .. 1 1 539 881 Waee........ 273 266 .. 459 6 .. 74 180 359 493 34 12 539 .. .. .. .. 91.6 .. .. 1 1 2,789 1,330 Pulton ...... 1,395 1,394 .. 2,518 25 .. 246 306 2,483 2,652 57 80 2,789 .. .. .. .. 97.8 .. .. 1 .. 1,112 .. Kurrar...... 503 519 .. 973 25 .. 114 244 868 1,030 41 41 1,112 .. .. .. .. 96.1 .. .. 1 1 1,189 1,180 Wahwa...... 633 556 .. 1,059 34 .. 96 594 595 1,040 26 123 1,189 .. .. .. .. 97.5 .. .. 1 1 1,609 1,420 Tasgaum .... 938 671 .. 1,375 65 .. 169 1,490 119 1,578 21 10 16,09 .. .. .. .. 98.6 .. .. 1 1 127 1,208 67 60 .. 113 .. .. 14 56 71 119 6 2 127 .. .. .. .. 95.
105 J. RABY, .. .. 1 1 772 741 Jaghirs of Collectorate. 1,207 1,73,353 Sanglee...... 392 380 .. 683 89 .. .. 430 342 723 42 7 772 .. .. .. .. 94.3 1,020 .. .. 1 1 983 636 574 79,779 Merruz 1st .. 518 465 .. 803 180 .. .. 859 124 974 9 .. 983 .. .. .. .. 99.0 .. .. 1 1 408 338 197 47,060 Do. 2nd.. 233 175 .. 395 13 .. .. 314 94 385 14 9 408 .. .. .. .. 96.4 .. .. 1 1 176 482 271 29,786 Koorundwar 1st ........ 87 89 .. 147 26 .. 3 10 166 176 .. .. 176 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 384 404 177 22,890 Do. 2nd. 211 173 .. 261 91 .. 32 47 337 350 15 19 384 .. .. .. .. 95.9 .. .. 1 1 686 450 317 49,829 Moodhole .... 413 273 .. 654 32 .. .. 27 659 620 32 34 686 .. .. .. .. 95. .. .. 1 1 769 1,022 198 33,000 Ramdroog .. 431 338 .. 717 52 .. .. 131 638 743 .. 26 769 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 454 423 .. 120,051 Jumkhundee. 252 202 .. 412 42 .. .. 255 199 413 36 5 454 .. .. .. .. 91.9 .. .. 1 1 887 676 Jaghirs in Sattara Collec. 1,044 111,729 Bhore .......... 492 395 .. 843 1 .. 43 142 745 879 .. 8 887 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 481 466 266 58,980 Attapadee.... 293 188 .. 468 12 .. 1 60 421 479 .. 2 481 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 925 880 1,620 56,845 Jhutt . . . . . . 468 457 .. 872 41 .. 12 387 538 838 63 24 925 .. .. .. .. 93. .. .. 1 1 1,093 913 512 49,314 Phulton . . . . . 542 551 .. 886 52 .. 155 735 358 986 105 2 1,093 .. .. .. .. 90.3 .. .. 1 1 1,611 1,890 Kolapoor State. 360 14,748 Veshalghur .. 868 743 .. 1,294 53 .. 264 158 1,453 1,583 6 22 1,611 .. .. .. .. 99.6 .. .. 1 1 896 663 567 43,543 Echalkurnjee. 477 419 .. 807 29 .. 60 611 285 836 20 40 896 .. .. .. .. 97.6 .. .. 1 1 689 749 252 31,287 Kagul ...... 374 315 .. 607 18 .. 64 238 451 676 10 3 689 .. .. .. .. 98.5 .. .. 1 1 1,221 1,001 486 73,393 Gudhingluz .. 675 546 .. 1,159 53 .. 9 324 897 1,157 37 27 1,221 .. .. .. .. 96.9 .. .. 1 1 1,375 1,262 486 29,845 Bolorah ...... 662 713 .. 1,347 5 .. 23 388 957 1,348 8 19 1,375 .. .. .. .. 99.4 .. .. 1 1 1,566 1,117 540 66,463 Pannalla .... 833 733 .. 1,449 26 .. 81 517 1,040 1,534 10 22 1,566 .. .. .. .. 92.8 .. .. 1 1 1,518 1,343 900 54,794 Bhoodeghur. 773 745 8 1,387 23 .. 95 164 1,354 1,501 14 3 1,518 .. .. .. .. 99. .. .. 1 1 1,026 652 243 105,022 Sheerole...... 543 483 .. 964 44 .. 18 436 590 987 5 34 1,026 .. .. .. .. 99.4 .. .. 1 1 544 504 180 21,653 Torgull...... 295 249 .. 528 16 .. .. 57 487 527 .. 17 544 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 943 1,201 598 24,484 Auzara...... 482 461 3 883 20 .. 37 246 697 893 15 36 943 .. .. .. .. 98.3 .. .. 1 1 3,165 2,617 506 114,445 Kolapoor Sta- tion. 1,659 1,506 4 3,007 106 .. 48 666 2,499 3,107 37 21 3,165 .. .. .. .. 98.8 .. .. 1 1 870 .. Sattara Col- lectorate. Municipal Towns. 67,524 Khatow...... 468 402 .. 806 33 .. 31 394 476 826 24 20 870 .. .. .. .. 97.4 .. .. 1 1 972 1,256 77,367 Khanapoor .. 516 456 .. 915 19 .. 38 563 409 924 48 .. 972 .. .. .. .. 95. .. .. 1 1 1,124 1,246 63,488 Moan........ 548 576 .. 954 37 .. 133 447 677 1,031 45 48 1,124 .. .. .. .. 95.8 .. .. 1 1 1,087 1,045 113,295 Kurrar...... 610 477 .. 1,034 19 .. 34 29 1,058 1,087 .. .. 1,087 .. .. .. .. 100. .. .. 1 1 1,074 1,701 2,274 Koragaum .. 564 510 .. 956 41 .. 77 318 756 945 81 48 1,074 .. .. .. .. 92.2 .. .. 1 1 688 754 4,294 Walwa ...... 353 335 .. 662 24 .. 2 241 447 674 14 .. 688 .. .. .. .. 97. .. .. 1 1 875 245 Dhar- war Col. 54,689 Malseerus.... 456 419 .. 852 23 .. .. 554 321 644 178 53 875 .. .. .. .. 78.3 .. .. 1 1 725 789 104,100 Gudduck .... 375 350 .. 656 59 .. 10 216 509 712 10 3 725 .. .. .. .. 98.6 .. .. 1 1 1,032 1,597 35,278 Hooblee...... 538 494 2 874 153 .. 3 193 839 982 34 1 1,032 .. .. .. .. 96.6 .. .. 1 1 668 1,830 Belg. Collec. 26,366 Belgaum .... 410 258 9 553 106 .. .. 398 270 602 25 41 668 .. .. .. .. 96. .. .. 1 1 227 .. 16,254 Uthnee...... 107 120 .. 171 37 .. 19 69 158 207 15 5 227 .. .. .. .. 93.2 .. .. 1 1 26 .. N. Canara Col. 4,064 Sircy ...... 14 12 .. 18 8 .. .. 5 21 19 .. 7 26 .. .. .. .. 100. Total. .. .. 63 54 64,282 54,000 34,557 29,725 348 57,382 3,797 .. 2,755 17,837 46,409 61,170 1,750 1,362 64,282 .. .. .. .. 97.1 .. 1,020 WESTERN. H. J. BLANC, M.D., Assistant Surgeon. .. .. .. .. 431 .. Tanna Collectorate. 67,930 Dhanoo . .. . . . . 210 221 .. 419 .. .. 12 97 344 423 8 .. 431 .. .. .. .. 98.1 431 .. .. 1 .. 1,200 .. 51,465 Mahim ...... 607 593 2 1,142 26 30 .. 436 764 1,080 120 .. 1,200 .. .. .. .. 90. 1,200 .. .. 1 .. 1,021 .. 50,144 Bassein...... 526 495 289 718 14 .. .. 473 548 1,006 15 .. 1,021 .. .. .. .. 98.5 1,021 .. .. 1 .. 816 .. 34,894 Shapoor..... 411 405 .. 812 4 .. .. 335 481 699 117 .. 816 .. .. .. .. 85.7 816 2453 .. 22,250 Warra........ 1,254 1,199 .. 2,344 88 .. 21 1,035 1,418 2,307 146 .. 2,453 .. .. .. .. 94.4 2,453 .. .. .. .. 449 .. 41,835 Bhewndy ...... 254 195 35 412 2 .. .. 167 282 348 67 34 449 .. .. .. .. 83.8 449 .. .. .. .. .. .. 54,328 Callian...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 738 .. 47,952 Moorbar...... 385 353 .. 699 6 .. 33 301 437 710 28 .. 738 .. .. .. .. 96.2 73 .. .. 1 .. 2,439 .. 63,512 Kurjut ...... 1,300 1,139 .. 2,384 29 .. 26 940 1,499 2,331 108 .. 2,439 .. .. .. .. 95.6 2,439 .. .. 1 .. 275 .. 6,214 Town of Oorun 138 137 .. 269 3 .. 3 167 108 264 11 .. 275 .. .. .. .. 96. 275 .. .. .. .. 104 .. 75,324 Panwell...... 48 56 .. 104 .. .. .. 84 20 69 35 .. 104 .. .. .. .. 66.3 104 .. .. 1 .. 614 .. 8,939 Town of Pan- well...... 319 295 2 601 9 .. 2 261 353 577 37 .. 614 .. .. .. .. 93.9 614 .. .. 1 .. 279 .. 10,561 Town of Tanna 175 104 40 219 15 2 3 91 188 255 24 .. 279 .. .. .. .. 91.4 279 11 V S
106 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agen- cy, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those Un- known from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. RESULTS. D. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding doubtful. Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding Doubtful. Unknown. Total. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. WESTERN107 NORTHERN MUNCHERJEE BYRAMJEE .. .. 1 1 2,218 2,286 Kaira Collec- torate. Sq. Miles 1,408. 71,714 Kuppurwunj . 1,183 1,035 .. 1,878 234 .. 106 2,011 207 2,060 45 113 2,218 .. .. .. . . 97.8 2,039 .. .. 1 1 3,040 3,002 122,445 Mehmood- abad .... 1,694 1,346 .. 2,528 315 .. 197 1,707 1,333 2,706 57 277 3,040 .. .. .. .. 97.9 Matur...... .. .. 1 1 3,321 3,059 97,251 Neriad ...... 1,897 1,424 .. 2,645 379 .. 297 2,690 631 2,963 154 204 3,321 .. .. .. .. 95.0 .. .. 1 1 2,842 2,948 Mhoondah .. 1,524 1,318 .. 2,160 403 .. 279 2,526 316 2,628 77 137 2,842 .. .. .. .. 97.1 .. .. 1 1 2,034 2,345 55,922 Thasra ...... 1,087 947 .. 1,549 268 .. 217 1,459 575 2,008 13 13 2,034 .. .. .. .. 99.3 .. .. 2 2 5,198 5,142 108,576 Anund . . . . . . 2,910 2,288 .. 4,408 387 .. 403 4,216 982 4,861 150 187 5,198 .. .. .. .. 97.0 .. .. 1 1 4,743 3,537 90,293 Borsud...... 2,523 2,220 .. 4,109 213 .. 421 3,940 803 4,465 139 139 4,743 .. .. .. .. 96.9 .. .. 1 1 2,158 2,639 Broach Collector- ate. Sq. Miles 1,100. 72,742 Jumboosur .. 1,234 924 .. 1,945 206 .. 7 576 1,582 2,094 40 24 2,158 .. .. .. .. 98.1 .. .. 1 1 1656 2,017 31,174 Ahmode .. 869 787 .. 1,371 206 .. 79 1,359 297 1,403 100 153 1,656 .. .. .. .. 93.3 .. .. 1 1 35,578 Wagra .... .. .. 1 1 2,447 2,250 49,203 Broach ...... 1,222 1,225 .. 1,527 680 .. 240 2,370 77 2,155 98 194 2,447 .. .. .. .. 95.6 .. .. 1 1 1,854 1,968 57,305 Unklesur .... 935 919 .. 1,450 189 24 191 1,436 418 1,733 85 36 1,854 .. .. .. .. 95.3 .. .. 1 1 1,700 2,265 Surat Collector- ate. Sq. Miles 1,497. 28,144 Chaowrasee .. 846 854 .. 1,456 53 28 163 845 855 1,542 17 141 1,700 .. .. .. .. 98.9 .. .. 1 1 1,653 1,889 70,531 Oolpar ...... 864 789 .. 1,549 66 6 32 375 1,278 1,487 95 71 1,653 .. .. .. .. 93.5 .. .. 1 1 1,947 1,543 35,411 Mandvee .... 1,023 924 .. 1,864 82 1 .. 840 1,107 1,766 64 117 1,947 .. .. .. .. 96.5 .. .. 1 1 1,669 1,954 61,311 Bardolee .... 879 790 .. 1,532 44 3 90 419 1,250 1,549 87 33 1,669 .. .. .. .. 94.6 .. .. 1 1 2,802 1,852 64,233 Soopa........ 1,463 1,339 .. 2,447 128 .. 227 1,232 1,570 2,506 91 205 2,802 .. .. .. .. 96.4 .. .. 1 1 2,522 2,179 49,103 Chicklee .... 1,293 1,229 .. 2,088 242 2 190 515 2,007 2,434 23 65 3,522 .. .. .. .. 99.0 .. .. 1 1 l,663 2,552 71,972 Bulsar . . . . . 852 811 .. 1,506 31 3 123 221 1,442 1,449 93 121 1,663 .. .. .. .. 93.9 .. .. 1 1 1,721 1,585 41,604 Bugwara .... 860 861 .. 1,625 31 7 58 1,131 590 1,549 25 147 1,721 .. .. .. .. 98.4 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .... ...... On office duty with Superintendent. .. .. 1 1 3,233 3,299 Pahlunpoor State. Square Miles 6,041. 304,493 Pahlunpoor .. 1,729 1,504 .. 2,193 612 .. 428 1,482 1,751 3,074 69 90 3,233 .. .. .. .. 97.8 .. .. 1 1 268 746 Dhanera .... 144 124 .. 254 3 .. 11 174 94 201 67 .. 268 .. .. .. .. 75 .. .. 1 1 1,057 1,918 Rhadunpoor. . 582 475 .. 895 153 .. 9 483 574 934 41 82 1,057 .. .. .. .. 95.7 .. .. 1 1 1,777 2,231 Wao...... 894 883 .. 1,480 84 .. 213 995 782 1,740 24 13 1,777 .. .. .. .. 98.6 Thurrad. . . . .. .. 1 1 2,149 1,240 Kakhrej .. 1,204 945 .. 2,039 45 .. 65 942 1,207 2,143 2 4 2,149 .. .. .. .. 99.9 Deodur .... Tehrwara.. .. .. 1 1 1,079 2,678 Sooegaum 562 517 .. 1,001 16 .. 62 85 994 1,055 4 20 1,079 .. .. .. .. 99.6 Morewara.. Charchut .. Santulpoor Warye .... Bhabhur .. .. .. 1 1 2,672 1,861 State. Square Miles 4,000. 27,157 Watruck Kanta .. 1,412 1,215 .. 2,302 139 .. 186 1,601 1,026 2,332 216 79 2,627 .. .. .. .. 91.5 27,743 Bavesee.... 17,887 Kuttosun .. .. .. 1 1 2,411 1,801 Kanta 5,711 Edur Town 1,237 1,174 .. 2,248 155 .. 8 1,725 686 2,333 43 35 2,411 .. .. .. .. 98.1 58,939 Edur Talooka.. .. .. 2 2 3,173 3,588 Mahee 3,109 Ahmud- nuggur.. 1,649 1,524 .. 2,823 189 .. 161 1,709 1,464 2,699 210 264 3,173 .. .. .. .. 92.7 102,379 Nahnee Marwar.. .. .. 1 1 1,597 1,529 5,398 Daunta .... 894 703 .. 1,338 87 .. 172 751 846 1,180 189 228 1,597 .. .. .. .. 86.1 2,073 Poseena.... 32,039 Sabur kanta 1,006 Sadra Camp 2,031 Sadra Town
108 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccina- tions were per- formed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases,exclud- ing those Doubtful from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. RESULTS. D. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding Doubtful. Unknown. Total. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. NORTHERN109 J. WILLIAMS, M.D., .. .. .. .. .. .. Shikarpoor 40,000 Kumbur . . . . . . 1,3083 1,088 .. 1,688 2,172 .. 56 925 1,471 2,348 38 10 2,396 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28,000 Nusseerabad.. 384 284 .. 97 565 .. 6 511 157 658 3 7 658 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14,000 Labdaria .... 196 137 .. 36 282 .. 15 232 101 333 .. .. 333 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15,000 Tigr.......... 1,046 869 .. 229 1,609 .. 77 863 1,052 1,896 5 14 1,915 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30,000 Mehur........ 383 292 .. 55 602 .. 18 320 355 675 .. .. 675 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25,000 Kukkur...... 809 696 .. 98 1,276 .. 131 976 529 1,301 62 142 1,505 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Jacobabad Dis- trict. . . . . . . . . . 33,000 Jacobabad .. 803 692 .. 111 1,349 1 34 881 614 1,409 7 79 1,495 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25,000 Kusmore .... 377 306 .. 23 646 .. 14 282 401 638 2 43 683 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27,000 Thul ........ 1,153 989 2 289 1,823 .. 33 1,105 1,042 2,135 6 6 2,147 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Hydrabad Collectorate. 80,000 Hydrabad.... 599 503 .. 146 860 .. 96 440 662 1,035 4 63 1,102 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45,000 Mahomed Khan's 1,835 1,395 .. 234 2,815 .. 171 596 2,624 3,140 22 58 3,220 .. .. .. .. .. Tanda .... .. .. .. .. .. .. 35,000 Bagekatanda. 687 527 .. 111 1,038 .. 65 277 937 1,139 27 48 1,214 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 42,000 Buddeen .... 1,200 1,086 .. 262 1,855 .. 169 610 1,676 2,186 20 80 2,286 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20,000 Digri ........ 832 757 .. 158 1,145 .. 286 836 753 1,558 20 11 1,589 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 46,000 AliyarjoTanda 438 357 .. 141 602 .. 52 313 482 795 .. .. 795 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40,000 Shadadpoor .. 1,564 1,102 .. 433 2,167 .. 66 934 1,732 2,663 1 2 2,666 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40,000 Sukkrund .... 1,568 1,165 .. 269 2,386 .. 78 792 1,941 2,651 43 39 2,733 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 42,000 Mora ........ 194 138 .. 45 285 .. 2 123 209 332 .. .. 332 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50,000 Nowshera Feroza .... 984 757 .. 160 1,468 .. 113 910 801 1,544 73 124 1,741 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 33,000 Khandiaro .. 1,322 1,047 .. 301 2,011 .. 57 1,331 1,038 3,334 23 12 2,369 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Thurr and Parkur. 40,000 Oomerkote .. 758 604 2 137 952 .. 271 255 1,107 1,307 22 33 1,362 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 21,000 Kippra . . . . . . 1,797 1,480 .. 305 2,366 .. 606 729 2,548 3,208 36 33 3,277 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50,000 Nuggur Par- Kur . . . . . . . . 845 670 .. 390 449 .. 676 327 1,188 1,314 3 198 1,515 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40,000 Dipla . . . . . . . 267 216 .. 19 390 .. 74 34 449 448 5 30 483 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Kheirpoor State. 110,000 Kheirpoor. . . . 802 458 .. 167 872 .._ 221 353 907 1,235 .. 25 1,260 .. .. .. .. .. Total. 2 2 32 2 63,204 64,076 1,516,000 35,139 23,065 20 7,101 51,402 3 4,678 25,172 38,032 60,708 645 1,851 63,204 .. .. .. .. 99.0 .. 1,975 KATTIAWAR. E. R. BUTLER, M.D., Surgeon. .. .. 1 1 In Superintendent's Office. .. .. 1 1 1,918 1,501 Saiela . . . . . . . . 57,000 Saiela........ 1,017 901 .. 1,757 118 .. 43 424 1,491 1,833 19 66 1,918 .. .. .. .. 99.6 .. .. .. .. .. .. Choora ....... .... Choora...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1,759 1,226 Wankaneir .... 46,000 Wankaneir.. 968 791 .. 1,303 298 .. 158 1,320 439 1,720 30 9 1,759 .. .. .. .. 98.2 .. .. 1 1 l,812 1,629 Vithulgurh .... 42,600 Vithulgurh .. 967 845 .. 1,619 107 .. 86 790 1,022 1,736 44 32 1,812 .. .. .. .. 97.4 .. .. .. .. .. .. Moolee........ .... Moolee ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Do. .... .... Tulsana .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ........ .... Wurode...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 992 1,086 Bugusra ...... 27,000 Bugusra .... 525 467 .. 901 89 .. 2 67 925 801 51 140 992 .. .. .. .. 94.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. Kurreana...... .... Kurreana.... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1,123 1,017 Kotra ........ 33,000 Kotra........ 630 493 .. 934 161 .. 28 564 559 1,052 54 17 1,123 .. .. .. .. 95.3 .. .. .. .. .. .. Kherusra...... .... Kherusra .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Lodeeka ...... .... Lodeeka .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mengnce ...... .... Mengnee .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 933 1,269 Dhurrole ...... 20,000 Dhurrole .... 503 430 .. 764 141 .. 28 271 662 856 35 42 933 .. .. .. .. 96.0 .. .. 1 1 1,503 1,329 Lathee ........ 19,000 Lathee ...... 820 683 .. 1,358 109 .. 36 611 892 1,428 64 11 1,503 .. .. .. .. 95. .. .. .. .. .. .. Oond Surveya.. .... Chock........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 707 1,404 Joonaghur .... 260,000 Joonaghur .. 397 310 .. 568 139 .. .. 352 355 669 16 22 707 .. .. .. .. 97.6 .. .. 1 1 1,209 1,230 Do. .... .... Kootiana .... 678 531 .. 824 385 .. .. 534 675 1,164 31 14 1,209 .. .. .. .. 98.2 .. .. 1 1 438 917 Do. .... .... Mangrole .... 222 216 .. 326 99 .. 13 206 232 429 8 1 438 .. .. .. .. 98.1 8 Govt. Vaccinators in Jan.1870 (omitted). 499 413 .. 775 104 .. 33 299 613 844 22 46 912 .. .. .. .. 97.4 .. .. 1 1 730 1,312 Do. .... .... Oona ......... 429 301 .. 629 101 .. .. 110 620 649 70 11 730 .. .. .. .. 90.2 .. .. 1 1 871 402 Do. ..... .... Puttun ...... 485 386 .. 699 172 .. .. 150 721 860 2 9 871 .. .. .. .. 99.7 .. .. 1 1 1,069 260 Do. ..... .... Mallia........ 582 487 .. 1,023 46 .. .. 524 545 1,024 27 18 1,069 .. .. .. .. 97.4
110 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agen- cy, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those Un- known from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. RESULTS. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding Doubtful. Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding Doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccinations. In Secondary Vaccinations. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. KATTIAWAR111 .. .. .. .. .. .. Babra........... .... Babra........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1,231 678 Pallytana ...... 50,000 Pallytana .... 698 533 .. 1,195 36 .. .. 365 866 1,201 12 18 1,231 .. .. .. .. 99.0 .. .. 1 1 1,351 l,327 Porebunder.... 60,000 Porebunder .. 672 679 .. 1,220 125 .. 6 343 1,008 1,249 46 56 1,351 .. .. .. .. 95.6 .. .. 1 .. 230 .. Mallia ........ 12,000 Mallia........ 135 95 .. 158 72 .. .. 7 223 164 38 28 230 .. .. .. .. 82.1 Total. 2 1 45 42 .. .. .......... 1,582,468 ........ 29,475 25,504 .. 46,229 6,844 .. 1,906 20,423 34,556 51,005 2,068 1,906 54,979 .. .. .. .. 96.1 .. 1,169 REWA KANTA. J. T. WELSH, M.D., Assistant Surgeon. .. .. 1 1 2,370 2,004 Panch Mahals.. 51,427 Godra .... 1,191 1,179 .. 2,055 237 .. 78 1,201 1,169 2,334 36 .. 2,370 .. .. .. .. 98.4 1,309 .. .. 1 1 3,361 1,743 Do. 42,673 Dohud ...... 1,154 1,207 .. 2,221 111 .. 29 1,000 1,361 2,245 63 63 2,361 .. .. .. .. 97.2 .. .. 1 1 1,721 1,457 Do. 29,000 Kalole ...... 864 857 .. 1,616 51 .. 54 992 729 1,578 99 44 1,721 .. .. .. .. 94.0 .. .. 1 1 1,674 1,124 Do. 23,111 Halole ...... 846 828 .. 1,573 34 .. 67 411 1,263 1,664 7 3 1,674 .. .. .. .. 99.5 .. .. 1 1 1,350 1,179 Do. 22,527 Jhalode ...... 649 701 .. 1,313 34 .. 3 376 974 1,154 99 97 1,350 .. .. .. .. 92.0 .. .. 2 2 3,068 3,521 Native States. Not known. Rajpeepla.... 1,518 1,550 .. 2,846 101 .. 121 1,251 1,817 3,029 9 30 3,068 .. .. .. .. 99.7 .. .. 2 ½ 2,073 622 Loonawarra.. 1,074 990 .. 1,969 89 .. 15 570 1,503 1,972 60 41 2,073 .. .. .. .. 97.0 .. .. 1 ½ 434 400 Ballasinore .. 221 213 .. 349 82 .. 3 146 288 416 12 6 434 .. .. .. .. 97.1 .. .. 2 1 2,098 1,066 Barrea ...... 1,055 1,043 .. 2,083 4 3 8 265 1,833 1,855 111 132 2,098 .. .. .. .. 94.3 .. .. 1 1 706 484 Chota Oodey- Poor ........ 400 306 .. 701 .. .. 5 389 317 485 90 131 706 .. .. .. .. 84.3 .. .. 1 1 1,136 610 Soonth and Kuddana .. 568 568 .. 1,113 19 .. 4 67 1,069 978 65 93 1,136 .. .. .. .. 93.7 .. .. 1 1 651 371 Sunkeira Me- wal ........ 330 321 .. 615 36 .. .. 159 492 457 139 55 651 .. .. .. .. 76.6 Total . .. .. 15 12 19,642 14,630 .... .... ...... 9,870 9,772 .. 18,454 798 3 387 6,827 12,815 18,167 790 685 19,642 .. .. .. .. 95.8 .. 1,309 PRESIDENCY. ANUNTA CHANDROBA Sub-Assist. Surgeon. .. .. 6 6 9,222 10,757 Bombay Island. 816,562 Bombay City. 5,192 4,030 805 6,104 1,336 833 144 3,528 5,694 6,002 1,141 2,079 9,222 .. .. .. .. 84.0 .. 1,537 Total. 4 3 275 256 424,774 393,865 226,376 198,308 1,737 310,989 78,353 976 23,719 175,596 249,178 307,622 13,175 13,077 424,774 .. .. .. .. 96.7
112 A.113 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence. MONTHS. District in which operations chiefly conducted in each month. Total Number RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percentage successful, excluding those Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Unknown. NORTHERN CIRCLE. April 1869...... Whole Circle...... 10,529 9,828 270 431 10,529 97.3 May 114 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence. MONTHS. District in which operations chiefly conducted in each month. Total Number vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percentage Successful, excluding those Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Unknown. REWA KANTA CIRCLE. April 1869 ...... Whole Circle ...... 1,457 1,362 50 45 1,457 96.4 May 115 A.116 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number vanccinated. Percentage of Success, ex- cluding those Unknown from the Total. Cost of each Successful Case. A.117 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, ex- cluding those Unknown from the Total. Cost of each Successful Case. A.118 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, ex- cluding those Unknown from the Total. Cost of each Successful Case. B.119 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, ex- cluding those Unknown from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. B.120 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, ex- cluding those Unknown from the Total. Cost of each Successful Case. D.121 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, ex- cluding those Unknown from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a p. Rs. a. p. D.122 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vccinated. Percentage of Success, ex- cluding those Unknown from the Total. Cost of each Successful Case. SIND CIRCLE. D.123 A.124 B.125 J. RABY, .. .. .. .. 179 .. Gokak 126 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent of Vaccination. No. of Native Supe- rintendents of Vac- cination attached to the Dispensary. No. of Vaccinators attached to the Dispensary. Total Number of Per- sons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agen- cy, or Native State for the population of which the Dis- pensary is provided. Population of Area included in the last column. Name of Dispensary. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of Successfu Cases, ex- cluding those Doubt- ful from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A B. C D SEX. CASTE. AGE RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful and Doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccinations. In Secondary Vaccinations. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. 1869-70. 1868. SINDH. J.WILLIANS, M.D., Assistant Surgeon. .. .. 1 1 3,933 3,035 KurracheeTown 100,000 Civil Hospital.. 2,219 1,714 103 992 2,261 71 506 1,685 2,248 3,422 377 134 3,933 .. .. .. .. 91.9 .. 3,933 .. .. .. .. 240 .. Do. Jail.. .... Jail Do. .. 236 4 .. 22 218 .. .. .. 240 161 79 .. 240 .. .. .. .. 67.0 .. 240 .. .. .. .. 38 25 Do. .. .... Charitable Dis- pensary 22 16 .. 10 24 4 .. 13 25 26 5 7 38 .. .. .. .. 83.8 .. .. 1 1 2,162 1,847 HydrabadTown 40,000 Civil Hospital.. 1,401 761 65 1,100 960 1 36 1,318 844 2,153 9 .. 2,162 .. .. .. .. 99.5 .. 2, 162 .. .. 1 1 1,224 1,240 Shikurpoor 127 KATTIAWAR. E. R. BUTLER, M.D., Surgeon. .. .. 1 1 1,215 308 Bajkote Town .. 17,500 Civil Hospital.. 713 502 5 923 235 6 46 743 472 1,000 215 .. 1,215 .. .. .. .. 82.3 .. 1,215 .. .. .. .. 4 24 Wudwan 128 TABLE No. VI. TABLE OF VACCINATION IN THE BOMBAY ARMY. Number Vaccinated. Europeans. Natives. Total. European Regiments for 1869 ............ Regiments ........................................ 614 16 630 Lines ................................................. ...... 232 232 Bazaars ........................................... ...... 45 45 Total ...... 614 293 907 Native Regiments for 1869-70........... Regiments ........................................ 16 2,322 2,338 Lines ................................................. ...... 199 199 Bazaars ........................................... 2 62 64 Cantonment Bazaars ......................... 119 2,428 2,547 Ordnance and other Departments...... 4 155 159 Staff and Details........................... 1 590 591 Total ..... 142 5,756 5,898 Grand Total ...... 756 6,049 6,805 TABLE No. VII. SUMMARY OF EMPLOYMENT RETURNS OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1869-70. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.129 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.130 WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent. Assistant Surgeon T. CODY (Acting). 131 KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.Vaccination. No. 2095. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 1st September 1870. Letter from the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, No. 2071, dated 27th July 18702 4. The Superintendents of Circles have worked with marked zeal, especially Drs. Williams, Gordon, and Colah. The Table of the number of Stations visited and distances travelled shows very creditable results. The result of Dr. Pinkerton's references to the Presidents of the several Local Funds Committees, as to the extent of assistance that may be expected from them, will be awaited. It is certain that increased Imperial aid cannot be looked for. His Excellency in Council is satisfied that it would not be expedient to reduce the present limited amount of European Medical super- vision. But it is advisable to employ an intermediate agency between the Superintendents and the Vaccinators; and the suggestion of Dr. Pinkerton, to appoint Native Assistant Superintendents selected from the Vaccinators, will probably be found the most feasible, if the pay of rural Vaccinators can be met from Local Funds. 5. It seems conclusively proved that the plan of obtaining lymph from tubes instead of on ivory points is the best. Two packets containing each twenty-five tubes will be ordered, one from the National Vaccine Establish- ment, London, and the other from the Central Vaccine Institution of Scotland. 6. His Excellency in Council has read with great interest the account of the success that has attended the introduction of animal vaccination. So far from the people entertaining any prejudice against it, they appear to prefer it to the ordinary mode. The Inspector General is requested to direct all Civil Surgeons to make themselves acquainted with the process ; and the Superintendents of Vaccination are to take every opportunity of instructing them and the Medical Officers in charge of Dispensaries. Much credit is due to Dr. Blanc for having introduced this important discovery into India, and to Mr. Anunta Chundroba for the manner in which he has worked the system in Bombay. The thanks of Government are also due to Mr. Crawford and Dr. Hewlett for the effectual aid they have rendered. 7. The suggestions contained in paragraph 15, as to the manner in which Superintendents, when on tour, should examine into and report on the state of Dispensaries, have the entire approval of Government, and are to be adopted. 8. It is satisfactory to notice that there has been an increase in the number of Vaccinators maintained at the cost of Municipalities. In all there are now thirty-four. Of these, only four are found to be employed in Guzerat; and His Excellency in Council considers that the large towns in that province might fairly be called upon to support Vaccinators. The Muni- cipality of Bombay is also to be requested to contribute.
3 9. The Director of Public Instruction will be requested to co-operate with the Superintendent General, with a view to ensuring, as far as possible, all boys attending Government Schools being protected against small-pox. 10. His Excellency in Council has pleasure in recording his entire satisfaction with the successful and energetic manner in which the adminis- tration of the Department has been superintended by Dr. Pinkerton. (Signed) F. S. CHAPMAN, Chief Secretary to Government. To The INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. The COMMISSIONER IN SIND. The REVENUE COMMISSIONER, N. D. The REVENUE COMMISSIONER, S. D. The MUNICIPAL COMMISSIONER for the CITY OF BOMBAY. The HEALTH OFEICER for the CITY of BOMBAY. The DIRECTOR of PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1870-71. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1871.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1870-71. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED FOR GOVERNMENT AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1871.
No. 2817 OF 1871. Bombay, 24th July 1871. From The INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To The SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, GENERAL DEPARTMENT. SIR,2 10.I think every year a definite statement to this effect from each Superintendent should be included in the report. 11.A good deal of attention has been given to animal vaccination, the practice of which, however, should, I think, be confined to large cities, where there are special facilities for its introduction and working, and many and great difficulties in the way of the smooth and vigorous working of the older method of vaccination by human lymph from arm to arm. 12.The real protecting power of animal lymph has not been universally accepted; until it has stood the test of experience and trial it will be wise not to use it indiscriminately, but under a thorough supervision and in certain well-defined centres. In this way, some approximate test will be supplied as to its efficacy in comparison with human lymph in the presence of an epidemic of small-pox. 13.I regret to observe that progress has not been made in Dispensary vaccination. As these institutions are now inspected and reported upon by Superintendents of Vaccination, it is possible that in time an increased interest in the work will be created and better results follow. 14.In conclusion, I would respectfully urge that the time has fully come for some special attention to be paid to the condition of the city of Bombay, in which small-pox is endemic and destroys annually a large number of lives. I believe vaccination to be as capable as over of protecting from small-pox, and that, as a rule, most of the deaths from this disease might be prevented, and will be eventually prevented, should Government be pleased to introduce a compulsory Vaccination Act. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. WRIGHT, Inspector General, Indian Medical Department.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1870-71. This is the third annual report of the Superintendent General of Vaccination. Divisions of the report. 2. The report is divided into the usual heads :( ii ) the progress and benefits of vaccination will be more manifest if we can re- gister our vaccinations according to the registration districts for births, &c. This we can do easily, and already have done so, as far as we can; but having changed the vaccination year from the natural to the official, there will be some difficulty in making correct and precise comparisons between the number of vaccinations and the number of births, and also in making correct compari- sons between vaccinations and small-pox deaths, because of the difference of the year for vaccination and registration of births and deaths. I am of opi- nion that the vaccination year should be the natural year, and correspond with the year for registration of births, &c. I know perfectly well from eight years experience that the Government of India need not fear that the tour of Superintendents will in any way be interrupted by the annual papers falling due on 1st January instead of 1st April. Government peregrinating es- tablishment of vaccinators. 4. The strength of the Government peregrinating establishment of vac- cinators, peons &c., was the same in 1870-71 as in the preceding year, up to 1st December last, when the six vaccinators and 3 peons of the Presidency Circle were taken over by the Municipality of Bombay, and Government relieved of all charges on account of vaccinators in the Island of Bombay. Government Station vaccina- tors. 5. I mentioned in my last report that the Government of India wantedall stations to pay for their own vaccinators. After considerable correspondence, Govern- ment in their Resolution No. 1481, dated 24th June 1870, were pleased to &quot;approve of the principle that towns should be required to pay for the vaccinators stationed in them; and the Superin- tendent General is authorized at once to remove all station vaccinators under Civil Surgeons, and to utilize their services as may seem best to him in the different Circles.&quot; This order of Government could not be at once carried out owing to the vaccinators' peons being omitted, but Goverment issued final instructions in their Resolution No. 3101, dated 19th December 1870. As the year was then drawing to a close, I thought it advisable to transfer the station vaccinators and peons on 1st March last, so that they received their first pay with the Circle establishments at the commencement of the official year 1871-72. I may state that there are now no Government Civil Station Vaccinators, and instead of the 18 Civil Stations having a Government vaccinator, the following maintain their own vaccinators from Municipal funds:( iii ) and Aden. Rutnagherry, Karwar, and Kaira being small towns, do not, I think, require a special vaccinator each, and will be attended to by the vaccinators of these three talookas. Surat will not maintain a vaccina- tor. The municipality of that large town passed a Resolution that &quot; they do not consider it to be the duty of the Municipality to take the place of the Imperial Government in employing vaccinators, though they may occasionally supplement existing action by grants-in-aid.&quot; I do not care to express any opinion on the above Resolution, but it is difficult to understand the principle of only giving a grant-in-aid, in a city almost large enough to employ two vaccinators, and still more difficult for me to use a grant-in-aid, for every grant I get must represent the annual cost of at least one vaccinator. Surat and Randier might at least unite to provide a vaccinator for both towns. The Rajkote Civil Station vaccinator has, like all the others, been transferred to the Circle Establishment, and as there is a vaccinator kept by the Chief for Rajkote town and the surrounding villages, it was unnecessary to ask the town to maintain another one. Municipal Vaccinators. 6. The number of Municipal vaccinators was increased by eighteen duringthe past year, chiefly owing to the transfer of the Government Station vaccinators to Circles of Vaccination, as detailed in the preceding paragraph. Several of the large towns entertained each a Municipal vaccinator in the place of the Govern- ment Station vaccinator, which they hitherto had attached to the Civil Hos- pital. In last year's report I anticipated that Government would be relieved of the expenditure on account of vaccination in all towns which require the entire services of a vaccinator. I can now say that my anticipation has been almost realized, the town of Surat being the only exception. I still trust that the municipality of Surat will see that it is only fair that they should pay for their vaccinator, since that town should have the whole services of a vaccinator. There are still a few large towns which never had a Govern- ment vaccinator specially for themselves, such as Vingorla, Randier, Jum- boosur, and others, which might I think keep up each a vaccinator of their own. I think every town of over 20,000 inhabitants would be better to have a vaccinator to itself, and Superintendents should try to induce such towns to entertain a vaccinator. It is true that the annual births in a popu- lation of 20,000 souls would give too little employment for a vaccinator all the year round, but the Superintendents can allot a few of the neighbouring villages to a municipal vaccinator and so increase his work. The following is a list of the towns which maintain their own vaccinators :( iv ) Circle. Name of Town. Name of Collectornte. Number of ] cipal Vacci nators. 1870-71. 869-70. CENTRAL ........ 1. Poona .................. Poona .................. 2 2 2. Indapoor .......... Do. .................. 1 1 3. Kheir ................. Do. ................... 1 ... 4. Ahmednuggur ......... Ahmednuggur ............ 1 1 5. Sholapoor............... Sholapoor ............ 1 1 6. Barsee ............... Do. ............. 1 1 7. Punderpoor ............ Do. ............. 1 1 8. Sangola ............. Do. ............. 1 1 9. Barramuttee ............ Do. ............. 1 1 10. Khanapoor ............ Sattara ............ 1 1 11. Mân................ Do. ................ 1 1 12. Kurrar............. Do. ................ 1 1 13. Walwa .................. Do. ................ 1 1 14. Koregaon............. Do. ............ 1 1 15. Malseerus............... Do. ............ 1 1 16. Khatow.................. Do. ............ 1 1 17. Nassick ............ Nassick ............ 1 1 18. Dhoolia.................. Khandeish ............ 1 ... 19 17 SOUTHERN ... 1. Kulladghee.......... Kulladghee ............ 1 1 2. Bagulkote ............... Do. ............ 1 1 3. Beejapoor ............ Do. ............ 1 1 4. Belgaum.................. Belgaum ............ 1 1 5. Uthnee .................. Do. ............ 1 1 6. Hooblee.................. Dharwar ............ 1 1 7. Gudduck and Bet- tegherry ............... Do. ............ 1 1 8. Sircy ..................... North Canara ............ ... 1 7 8 WESTERN ... 1. Tanna..................... Tanna ............ 1 1 2. Panwell & ............... Do. ............ 1 1 3. Oorun ............ 1 2 3 NORTHERN ... 1. Ahmedabad ........... Ahmedabad ............ 2 2 2. Veerumgaum ............ Do. ............ 1 1 3. Dholka ............ Do. ............ 1 1 4. Dhundooka.............. Do. ............ 1 ... 5. Neriad ............ Kaira ............ 1 ... 6.Broach ............ Broach ............ 1 ... 7 4
( v ) Circle. Name of Town. Name of Collectorate. Number of Municipal Vaccinators. 1870-71. 1869-70. SIND 1. Kurrachee ............ Kurrachee ............ 1 ... 2. Kotree .................. Do . ............ 1 1 3. Hydrabad ............... Hydrabad ............ 1 ... 4. Shikarpoor ........... Shikarpoor ........... 1 ... 4 1 PRESIDENCY ... Bombay ................. Bombay ................. 11 ... Aden ..................... Aden ..................... 1 ... Grand Total ...... 51 33 Besides the above, the town of Dharwar has also agreed to pay for its own vaccinator, as has also the town of Sattara from the commencement of 1871-72. Whenever a Municipal vaccinator works in villages around the Muni- cipal town which pays him, a list of the names of the villages is given to him by the Superintendent of the Circle, so that the Talooka and Municipal vaccinators may not clash. There is still considerable room for an increase of Municipal vaccinators, and I trust Superintendents will use their best endeavours with communities of 20,000 souls or more to induce them to maintain their own vaccinators. When I had the honour recently of speak- ing to His Excellency the Governor on several subjects connected with vaccination, His Excellency remarked that probably the most convenient method of working Municipal vaccination, would be by receiving an annual grant from each of the Municipalities, and in return the Vaccination Depart- ment should keep the town vaccinated. I think something of this kind should be done, so as to have Municipal vaccination thoroughly under the control of the Superintendents. The Muncipalities in a few cases might object to this arrangement, but it would be undoubtedly a good one, and as it has been done by the Local Fund Committees I cannot see any difficulty in the Muncipalities doing so also. It is very seldom there is any difficulty with a Municipality, but neither our time nor energy should ever be wasted in cor- respondence about the dismissal of a Municipal vaccinator. I have frequently stated my opinion that a Municipal vaccinator should not be entertained, dis- missed, nor punished without the approval of the Superintendent of Vacci-
( vi ) nation of the Circle, and in the case of entertainment or dismissal the sanction of the Superintendent General should be obtained. This may appear to be almost too careful, but I write this after much consideration, and I think it is not right to leave the dismissal of a vaccinator entirely in the hands of Municipalities, because they generally take little interest in vaccinaton, nor in the hands of the Superintendent,( vii ) employed in January on account of small-pox being prevalent in Moongode talooka. In Khandeish we have never been able to supply sufficient Govern- ment vaccinators ; this was brought to Mr. Ashburner's notice, and he provided for six, who were at work during the past year. There were thus an increase of 16 Local Fund Vaccinators, making the total 38 as compared with 22 in 1869-70. It is six years past since in Sind the first Local Fund Vaccinators were appointed by the Hon. Mr. Mansfield, then Commissioner in Sind, and I trust it will not be long before all talooka vaccinators be paid by Local Funds, and Government entirely relieved of the expenditure on account of talooka and all other vaccinators. I have long been of opinion that the superintendence, printing and any other expenditure which is involved in the State's seeing that vaccination is as good as it ought to be, should be met from Imperial revenue, but that the people themselves should pay all expenses connected with vaccination itself in their own towns or districts; and this I hope will soon be done by the Local and Municipal funds paying for all vaccinators, vaccinators' peons, expenses of stationery for the vaccinators' use, and also the expenses incurred in carrying vaccinifers from their own to other villages to enable the vaccinators to vaccinate from arm- to-arm. Native States' Vaccinators. 8. In the Southern Circle a vaccinator was appointed for the NativeState of Savanoor. In the Kattiawar Circle two were appointed, one for Drangdra and the other for Moorvee. By the aid of Mr. Hope vaccination has been introduced into the State of Bansda by Dr. Colah. Dr. Blanc has recommended that two vaccinators be entertained by Jinjeera, and he thinks that the influence of Mr. Duff will be sufficient to ensure his recommendation being acted on. The proximity of Jinjeera to Bombay and the constant intercourse of its people with the people not only of Bombay but with those in the neighbouring- British territory which bounds the State of Jinjeera, make the introduction of vaccination into that State an object of importance. It is said that small-pox is nearly always present in the Hubshee's territory, and that the inoculation of small-pox is practised: under such circumstances the disease cannot fail to be brought into the districts of Colaba as well as into the city of Bombay. There was a considerable break in the work in Johar, on account of the ill- health of the vaccinator, who resigned, and it was long before one could be got to accept a vaccinatorship in the bad climate of Johar, but now a native of the place has been appointed, who will doubtless suffer less from ill-health than a stranger.
( viii ) Suggestions by Dr. Colah that the Native States in his Circle should contribute to a vaccination fund, from which the vaccinators should be paid. Dr. Colah has suggested that the Native States in his Circle contributeto a vaccination fund, and that the vaccinators be paid from it instead of from the Durbars. The suggestion I consider good, and only hope that the Durbars will approve of it and adopt it. It would save the Superintendent a great deal of trouble and the vaccination of the Native States would be done more regularly and better too. There has been a considerable increase of Native States' vaccination in Kattiawar and Rewa Kanta, a small increase in Sind and a smaller in Kutch. In all the other Circles there was a decrease, which I trust is only temporary, and hope that in next report the numbers will be again higher. I do not think our Superintendents can do very much more than they are doing in Native States, and the Chiefs generally give their aid and countenance to vaccination when the subject is brought before them. When I consider that many of the Chiefs maintain vaccinators more in deference to the opinions of their friends, the Political Officer and Superintendent of Vac- cination, I am inclined not to urge the subject of vaccination much on them, and feel disposed to wait and trust to the people themselves appreciating it. On the whole then I think vaccination in the Native States is progressing as well as we have any right to expect, though perhaps not as well and as quickly as we would like. Native Assistant Superinten- dents. Contributions from Local Funds towards paying rural vaccinators. 9. For several years back Government, as well as the Medical Depart- ment, have been conscious of the necessity of having a supervising agency between the Superintendents of Circles and the vaccinators, and Government directed me in their Resolution No. 1939, dated 13th August 1869, to place myself in communication, through the Revenue Commissioners, with the several Presidents of Local Fund Committees, and ascertain how far they are disposed to contribute towards paying the rural vaccinators, so that the imperial money which goes to pay them might be used for strengthening the staff of Superintendents. After obtaining precise information regarding the number of talookas in each Zillah, their population and area, I addressed a letter to the two Revenue Commissioners and to the Commissioner in Sind, in which I sketched a scheme, based on the in- structions of Government, that each talooka should have a vaccinator and each collectorate a Native Assistant Superintendent of Vaccination. I stated in my sketch that what is now known in India and Europe as the Bombay System of Vaccination has been found to work so well, and is so suitable to this
( ix ) country, that it has been generally adopted all over India. Its main features are that the vaccinators peregrinate from village to village and are under the control, direction, and supervision of a Medical officer, the Superintendent of vaccination, who also peregrinates through his Circle. The want of Native Assistant Superintendents was for many years little felt in this Presidency because the number of the vaccinators in each circle was few, and for many years they worked together in close proximity to the Superintendent, who could constantly watch over their work and conduct, but in recent years( x ) lishment, I included in it two Native Assistant Superintendents, who have ever since been found of the greatest use. 10. It took quite a year to complete the correspondence with Local Fund Committees, and I could only submit the result to Government in my letter No. 777 dated 30th January last, along with my proposals on the man- ner of carrying out the wishes of Government to have a vaccinator in each Talooka, and a Native Assistant Superintendent in each Zillah, which has undertaken to maintain its rural vaccinators. Acknowledgments due to Mr. Havelock, Mr. Rogers, and Sir William L. Merewether. 11.I think the Local Fund Committees have in general met myproposals in a truly liberal spirit. I would here beg to acknowledge the aid which I have received from the Revenue Commissioners, in the Southern Division from Mr. Havelock, inthe Northern from Mr. Rogers, and in Sind from Colonel Sir William L. Mere- wether. The whole of the correspondence took place through them as ordered by Government, and it must have caused them considerable trouble. They have most heartily entered into my scheme, and most courteously given me their assistance, which I beg Government will ac- knowledge. 12.I will now proceed to state what provision has been made in the Local Fund budget for 1871-72 by each zillah. I. In the Southern Division. Ahmednuggur Collcetorate. Scheme for paying all rural vaccinators from Local Funds in order that the Imperial money so set free may be used for strengthening the staff of Superin- tendents. 1st. Ahmednuggur collectorate has 11 talookas, an area of about 6,000square miles, and a population of about 700,000. I asked for Rs. 3,264 per annum to pay 10 vaccinators, 10 peons, and contingencies, but only got Rs. 1,200. This was about the amount Government was spending on 4 rural vaccina- tors in this Collectorate, and it would appear that the Committee were unwilling to grant more than a sum equal to the Government expenditure. This was introduc- ing a principle quite wide of our intention, which Government had declared to be that the money set free should be used for strengthening the inspecting staff of the Department. As the grant of Rs. 1,200 per annum is utterly insufficient to maintain 10 vaccinators and 10 peons, I proposed that a sum of Rs. 1,728 be paid from the Imperial grant, to make up the number of vaccinators to 10. There should be 11 vaccinators as there are 11 talookas, but one talooka was transferred from Nassick just about the time my proposals
( xi ) were first sent to Local Fund Committees, and so it was overlooked. As the grant from Local Funds is considerably less than what I proposed Go- vernment should continue to spend, I did not recommend the appointment of a Native Assistant Superintendent in the Ahmednuggur Collectorate. There is a Municipal vaccinator in the town of Ahmednuggur. Poona Collectorate. 2nd. Poona Collectorate has 8 talookas, an area of about 4,272 square miles, and a population of 606,000. My proposals were accepted by the Local Fund Committee, and I recommended that there be 8 vaccinators and peons at an expenditure of Rs. 2,472 per annum from Local Funds, and that there be a Native Assistant Superintendent paid from the Imperial money set free. There will now be in this Collectorate 8 Local Fund and 4 Municipal vaccinators. Two of the latter are for the large city of Poona and the other two for the towns of Kheir and Indapoor. There is also a Military vaccinator in Poona, who takes charge of the Cantonment vaccination in Poona and Kirkee. I am of opinion that this vaccinator is unnecessary, and that the two Municipal vaccinators in Poona are sufficient, but the Municipality made some objection to their vaccinators being employed out of Municipal limits. This is an objection that I think Dr. Turnbull, the Superintendent of the Central Circle, will be able to overcome. It really is an advantage to the Municipal vaccinators to have good large charges, and to have charge of a large Sudder bazaar like Poona should be a pleasure to a vaccinator, because vaccination is compulsory in all our cantonments, and there he can depend on maintaining his lymph without difficulty. Vaccination in Poona City and Camp requires to be organized. There have been four vaccinators, including the Civil Station vaccinator recently transferred to the Central Circle Establishment, at work for some years back in Poona, and two good vaccinators could have done the work easily and probably better at half the cost. Dr. Turnbull will give this subject his attention during the rainy season. Sholapoor Collectorate. 3rd. Sholapoor Collectorate has six talookas, an area of nearly 7,000 square miles, and a population of nearly 600,000. The President of the Local Fund Committee, Mr. T. Bosanquet, met with some little opposition to my scheme from one of the District Committees, but the sum I asked for was at length sanctioned. In this Collectorate, Government will be entirely relieved of all expenditure on account of vaccinators. I recommended 6 vaccinators with their peons, at a cost of Rs. 1,872 per annum; this of course includes contingencies. There are 5 Municipal vaccinators in this Collectorate, one in each of the following
( xii ) towns( xiii ) Belgaum Collectorate. 5th. Belgaum Collectorate has 7 talookas, an area of about 5,000 square miles, and a population of about 800,000. Mr. Grey, the Collector, informed me that the Local Fund Committees accepted my proposals, and there will be 8 rural Local Fund vaccinators at a cost of Rs. 2,472 per annum, including 8 peons and the contingencies. Several of the talookas are large and populous and could give employment to 2 vaccinators each. The talookas of Belgaum and Uthnee will have two, inasmuch as they have each a Municipal vaccinator. Chickordee talooka is the most populous and will have two Local Fund vaccinators. If a Municipal vaccinator could be appointed in any of the towns in Purusghur talooka and another in any of the towns in Sumpgaum talooka, they would find plenty of work as well as the talooka vaccinators, for these talookas con- tain over 100,000 souls each. This Collectorate will have a Native Assistant Superintendent, who may also occasionally see some of the Native States' vaccinators who are within, or closely connected with, this Collectorate. But I trust that eventually we will have Native Assistant Superintendents for Native States. Kulladghi Collectorate. 6th. Kulladghi Collectorate has 8 talookas, an area of 6,389 square miles and a population of over 700,000. In my proposals to the Local Fund Com- mittee I recommended that there should be 8 vaccinators, but the Committee only granted Rs. 2,240; so I can only give 7 vaccinators, who with their peons, &c. will cost Rs. 2,196 per annum. There are 3 Municipal vaccinators, 1 in Kulladghi town, 1 in Bagulkote, and 1 in Beejapoor. These men work in thevillages surrounding the Municipal town which pays each of them. I hope that next year the Local Fund Committee will sanction another vaccinator so as to give one for each talooka. There will be a Native Assistant Superintendent here to look after the 10 vaccinators. I went through this collectorate last cold season, and I must say that vaccination was about as backward in it as in any part of our territory. Kulladghi has been unfortunate, it has been changed from one Circle of Superintendence to another several times, and has been, I fear, much neg- lected. It now belongs to the Southern Circle and last cold season received considerable attention from the Superintendent, Mr. Raby. I asked the acting Collector, Mr. Monk Mason, to call the attention of Mamlutdars to the necessity of giving their aid and countenance to the vaccinators, and he very readily did so. After we get the new system into order, Kulladghi will, I have no doubt, soon be as weH vaccinated as the other Collectorates.
( xiv ) Dharwar Collectorate. 7 th. Dharwar Collectorate has 11 talookas, an area of nearly 5,000 square miles, and a population of 860,000. Mr. E. P. Robert- son entirely agreed with my proposals and added that, if the Native Assistant Superintendents could also be travelling medical men, with medicines to supply to the sick poor, much good might be done. I think this suggestion well worth our best consideration, and if we could get men from the Medical Subordinate Department to be active Native Assistant Superintendents of Vaccination, I see no reason against their being so em- ployed. There will be in this zillah 11 vaccinators and 11 peons at a cost of Rs. 3,396 per annum, including all contingencies. The town of Hooblee maintains a vaccinator, and the towns of Gudduck and Bettygherry jointly maintain another from Municipal funds, and Dharwar has commenced to do so too. The Native State of Savanoor has recently appointed a vaccinator. There will be a Native Assistant Superintendent to look after these 15 vacci- nators. Government will no longer pay anything for vaccinators in Dharwar Collectorate. Canara Collectorate. 8th. Canara Collectorate has 7 talookas, an area of 4,314 square miles (estimate), and a population of 367,582. My pro- posals were after some little correspondence accepted by the Local Fund Committee. There will be 7 vaccinators with their peons at a cost of Rs. 2,196 per annum, including contingencies and a Native Assist- ant Superintendent. There are no Municipal vaccinators in this Collectorate Rutnagherry Collectorate. 9th. Rutnagherry Collectorate has 8 talookas; the area is not exactly known but may be estimated at 7,000 square miles, and the population is about 700,000. My proposals were accepted at once by the Local Fund Committee, and a grant of Rs. 3,588 given. There will be 11 vaccinators and 11 peons, costing Rs. 3,396 per annum. There are no Municipal vaccinators in this Collectorate. There will be a Native Assistant Superintendent for this zillah. II. In the Northern Division. Ahmedabad Collectorate. 10th. Ahmedabad Collectorate has 7 talookas, an area of 3,865 square miles, and a population of about 700,000. The Local Fund Committee accepted my proposals and granted the sum asked for. There will be 7 vaccinators and 7 peons at a cost of Rs. 2,196 per annum. There are also 2 Municipal vaccinators in the City of Ahmedabad for its 150,000 people, there is one in Dholka, one in Veerumgaum, and one in Dhundooka. There will be a Native Assistant Superintendent to look after these 12 vaccinators.
( xv ) Kaira Collectorate. 11th. Kaira Collectorate has 6 talookas, an area of 1,729 square miles, and a population of nearly 700,000, or about 400 to the square mile. This is the most populous Collectorate in the Bombay Presidency. I regret to say that Mr. Elliot informed me that the Local Fund Committee would not give anything towards vaccination, so I recommended that 8 vaccinators should be kept up out of the Imperial grant. The town of Neriad has appointed a Municipal Vaccinator. There will be no Native Assistant Superintendent for this zillah, because no Imperial money has been set free from which to pay him. * Broach Collectorate. 12th. Broach Collectorate has 5 talookas, an area of about 1,600 square miles, and a population of about 300,000. I recom- mended that 4 vaccinators should be provided for. The Committee at first only granted Rs. 732, but I think the grant has since been raised to Rs. 1,464. At the time I submitted my scheme I was only cer- tain of the smaller sum, and so recommended that 2 vaccinators and 2 peons be paid by Local Funds and 2 from the Imperial grant at a total cost of Rs. 1,224 per annum. If sufficient have been provided to pay all the vaccinators from Local Funds then Broach Collectorate should have a Native Assistant Superintendent. The town of Broach has entertained a Municipal vaccinator. Surat Collectorate. 13th. Surat Collectorate has 8 talookas, an area of about 1,600 square miles, and a population of about 460,000. The Local Fund Committee have declined to give any thing to vaccination, so I recommended that 8 Government vaccinators should be continued there, at a cost of Rs. 2,472 per annum. There cannot be a Native Assistant Superintendent appointed for this zillah until the Local Fund Committee pay for their vaccinators. There are no Municipal vaccinators in this zillah. I look forward to Mr. Hope, the Collector, soon being able to give me a contribution both from Local and Municipal Funds. Khandeish Collectorate. 14th. Khandeish Collectorate has 16 talookas, an area of about 10,000 square miles, and a population of about 800,000. Mr. Ashburner, the Collector, approved of my pro- posals, but when he came to make up his Local Fund budget for 1871-72 he could not spare me more than Rs. 3,000. There will be 10 vaccinators and * Since this was written and sent to the press I am happy to say that I have been informed by Mr. Sheppard, Acting Collector of Kaira, that the Local Fund Committee have consented to pay for their vaccinators, and have granted Rs. 2,664 : so this Collectorate will now be entitled to a Native Assistant Superintendent.
( xvi ) 10 peons paid by Local Funds at a cost of Rs. 2,952, and I recommended that six should be paid from the Imperial grant at a cost of about Rs. 1,968 per annum; and in consideration of the Local Fund grant being liberal, I also recommended that Khandeish should have a Native Assistant Superintendent. During the past year there were 6 Local Fund vaccinators employed in Khandeish. There is 1 Municipal vaccinator in Dhoolia, making 17 in all. Nassick Collectorate. 15th. Nassick Collectorate has 10 talookas, an area ofabout 10,000 square miles, and a population of about 600,000. I pro- posed that there should be 10 vaccinators paid from Local Funds, but I only got a grant of Rs. 1,500, which will be expended on 5 vaccinators and 5 peons with their contingencies. To give one to each talooka I recommended that 5 vaccinators be provided by Government at an equal cost of Rs. 1,500. As Government would thus pay the same for vaccinators as the Local Funds there could be no Native Assist- ant Superintendent appointed. The town of Nassick maintains a Municipal vaccinator. I deeply regret that we cannot have a Native Assistant Superin- tendent in this large zillah, and I trust that next year the grant will be suffi- cient to enable us to pay for a vaccinator for each talooka and then a Native Assistant Superintendent will be appointed and paid from the Imperial grant. Tanna Collectorate. 16th. Tanna Collectorate has 11 talookas, an area of about 4,100 square miles, and a population of about 600,000. My pro- posals were accepted, and 11 vaccinators and 11 peons provided for, at a cost of Rs. 3,396 per annum. 4 Local Fund vac- cinators were provided for in 1870-71, and 3 were at work. The town of Tanna maintains a Municipal vaccinator, and the towns of Panwell and Oorun maintain 1 conjointly. There is also a vaccinator in the Native State of Johar. There will be a Native Assistant Superintendent in this zillah to look after these 14 vaccinators. Colaba Collectorate. 17 th. Colaba Collectorate has 5 talookas, an area of about 1,360 square miles, and a population of 276,000. The Local Fund Committee has granted sufficient to pay for all their vaccinators, and in my letter No. 821, dated 8th February last, I recommended that there be 5 vaccinators and 5 peons at a cost of Rs. 1,596 per annum. Dr. Blanc, the Superintendent of the Western Circle, has recommended that there be 2 vaccinators appointed in the Native State of Jinjeera, and he thinks that Mr. Duff's influence will be able to get them appointed. There arc no Municipal vaccinators in this Zillah. As Colaba Collectorate has taken over all the charges on account of vaccinators, there will be a Native Assistant
( xvii ) Superintendent, who may be able to take charge of one talooka in Rutna- gherry and one in Tanna, and thus equalize somewhat the number of vacci- nators to be supervised by the Native Assistant Superintendent in each of these three zillahs. Panch Mahals. 18th. Panch Mahals has 5 talookas, an area of about 1,600 square miles, and a population of about 170,000. My proposal to the Local Fund Committee was accepted, and there will be 5 vaccinators and 5 peons at a cost of Rs. 1,596 per annum. There are no Municipal vaccinators in this district, nor do I think any are required. There are 10 Native States' vaccinators in the Rewa Kanta, which with the Panch Mahals constitute the Rewa Kanta Circle. There will be one Native Assistant Superintendent, who will be able to look occasionally over the men in the Rewa Kanta as well as in the Mahals. The Superintendent of the Rewa Kanta Circle can only travel 4 months in the year,( xviii ) villages for vaccine purposes, and Rs. 480 to cover the office expenses of the Superintendent in connection with the supply of paper, books, &c., to the 12 vaccinators. The total expenditure will not exceed the grant of Rs. 4,344 per annum. Hydrabad town now maintains a Municipal vaccinator. There will be a Native Assistant Superintendent in this zillah to supervise these men. Shikarpoor Collectorate. 21st. Shikarpoor Collectorate has contributed the most liberally of all the Collectorates, and this is due in a great measure to its Local Funds being rich, and to Major R. R. Wallace, the acting Collector (who has been many years connected with Upper Sind) taking a great interest in vaccination. He remembers the day when small-pox was a terror in the province, and is alive to the benefits that vacci- nation has conferred on the Sindhis. Rs. 3,684 has been provided for 13 vaccinators and 13 peons' pay, Rs. 312 to pay parents of lymph-children taken from their own to other villages ; Rs. 870 to pay batta at the rate of 3 annas per diem to the vaccinators when on duty in the districts, and Rs. 480 for office allowance to the Superintendent, similar to the grant in Hydrabad. The total grant for the year is Rs. 5,538 but only Rs. 5,346 will be required. The town of Shikarpoor now keeps its own Municipal vaccinator. There will be a Native Assistant Superintendent in this zillah. Thurr and Parkur District. 22nd. Thurr and Parkur District can only contribute Rs. 400 per an- num, out of which 1 vaccinator and 1 peon with the vaccinator's contingencies will be paid at a cost of Rs. 396 per annum, and it was recommended that other 5 vaccinators and 5 peons should be paid from the Imperial grant at a cost of Rs. 1,356. This is a very poor district, but Major Tyrwhitt, the Political Superintendent, pro- mises to give a greater contribution as soon as he can afford it. There ought to be a Native Assistant Superintendent in this district as soon as there is a vaccinator for each talooka. Frontier Upper Sind Dis- trict. 23rd. Frontier Upper Sind District contains 3 talookas. The Local Funds are too poor to give any contribution, so 3 vaccinators and their peons to be paid from the Imperial grant at a cost of Rs. 804 per annum were included in my scheme. Rajkote and Deesa Can- tonments. 24th. Two vaccinators and 2 peons will be entertained for the camp and surrounding villages of Rajkote and Deesa, and paid from Imperial Funds. I doubt if there be much need for the man in Rajkote, but Government wished me to provide for the vaccination in camp, so I was obliged to keep one man there, and perhaps
( xix ) it is as well not to depend on a Native State's vaccinator for the protection of Rajkote Camp. Presidency Circle's Es- tablishment taken over by the Bombay Municipality. 25th. The whole six Vaccinators of the Presidency Circle (Island of Bombay) were taken over by the Bombay Munici- pality on the 1st December last, and their number has been increased to 11. The cost to the Muni- cipality will be Rs. 6,834 per annum. This includes Rs. 1,350 for animal vaccination and Rs. 420 for stationery and printing. The objects of Govern- ment in this scheme. 13. In my proposals to Local Fund Committees and to Government I have kept steadily in view the wishes of Government, which are( xx ) allowed Rs. 2 per mensem to buy paper, &c., and pay the parents of vacci n fers for their loss of time ; and each will render a monthly account of contin- gent expenditure. 17. In their Resolution No. 1203, dated 9th May 1871, Government has approved of the foregoing scheme with the following exceptions :( xxi ) The systems of Vaccina- tion in Oudh, the North Western Provinces, Bengal, and Madras. 19. Before submitting my scheme to Government it was deemed advisable that I should visit Bengal and Madras Presidencies, and see how the systems of Vaccina- tion worked there. I did so in the last rainy season, the season in which I could best get away. I regret to say I was unable to meet any of the Superintendents of the North Western Provinces, as they were in the Hills. In Oudh I saw Dr. Cameron, who was Acting Superintendent of Vaccination and Sanitary Commissioner, he very courteously gave me all the information in his power. In Oudh vaccination has, as yet, been almost confined to Lucknow and its environs. There is a Sub-Assistant Surgeon employed as Deputy Superintendent, 2 Native Superintendents and 25 vaccinators. Vaccination in Oudh is still in its infancy; the method and system may be good, but it never has been pushed. I saw Dr. Christison, the Civil Surgeon of Agra, who very kindly gave me some information about the method in vogue in the North Western Pro- vinces. I met here one of the Native Superintendents, who had charge of 9 tehsil vaccinators and 3 Municipal vaccinators in Agra; he appears to do the duty I wish our Native Assistant Superintendents to do. The fact is the North Western Provinces adopted the Bombay system and improved on it by appointing Native Superintendents, and we will now adopt their improve- ment. The system in Calcutta and its suburbs is something similar to that in the North Western Provinces. Dr. Charles, the Superintendent General, has divided Calcutta into 3 divisions, in each of which there is a Sub- Assistant Surgeon, and in each of these divisions there are two gangs of vaccinators each working under a head vaccinator, who is virtually Native Assistant Superintendent of the gang, and the 3 Sub-Assistant Surgeons are similar to our Circle Superintendents, who are mostly on this side Com- missioned Medical Officers, but the Sub-Assistant Surgeons in Calcutta have a much smaller area and fewer vaccinators to look after than our Superin- tendents. The system of working in gangs is a most excellent one where the population is dense, and in Bombay City we have begun to practise it, as well as continuing our vaccine stations where vaccination is practised on fixed mornings. There are 3 Metropolitan Circles in the neighbourhood of Calcutta under the Superintendence of Surgeon Powell. These Circles were created by Dr. Charles on the Calcutta model, and it was only recently that Surgeon Powell was appointed to be Superintendent of them. Each-Metropo- litan Circle has a Sub-Assistant Surgeon as Superintendent, 3 Head Vaccina- tors who are really Native Assistant Superintendents, each of whom has a gang of 6 or 7 vaccinators working with him. There are in all 53 vaccinators for
( xxii ) a population of five or six millions, the area I could not ascertain. The gang system works admirably well in Calcutta and the surrounding metropolitan circles, but it is expensive. The expense might have been kept down by letting them remain under Dr. Charles, and Dr. Powell's pay &c. would have been saved, but the Medical authorities in Calcutta were desirous of having active supervision by a Commissioned Medical Officer, and Dr. Charles could not very easily travel much, as he is Professor of Midwifery in the Calcutta Medical College. We have very few districts in which the population is dense enough to give employment for five or six vaccinators working in gangs, but it might be tried in the few that are well populated, such as Kaira and Tanna as well as in the Island of Bombay, where it is now on trial. In Madras the Circle Superintendents (Medical men) have been abolished, and there are now only the Superintendent General, Surgeon Shortt, and 23 Superintendents, who are not medical men, but men who have been selected from among the general body of 255 vaccinators. Dr. Shortt, and the Inspector General Indian Medical Department in Madras, both assured me that this system is not working at all well, and they trust that the Government of Madras will return to the Circle system, with a Medical Officer as Superintendent in each Circle, as well as the 23 men who are called Superintendents, who would then hold the position that our Native Assistant Superintendents will hold. I beg here to express my thanks for the courteous and kind attentions which I received from Dr. Charles, Superintendent General of Vaccination in Calcutta, Dr. John Cameron in Oudh (recently acting as Superintendent of Vaccination and Sanitary Commissioner) and from Dr. Shortt, Superinten- dent General of Vaccination in Madras. These gentlemen gave me every assistance and information in their power : and I would beg to suggest that this Government acknowledge the same through their Governments. 20. It will be seen from the foregoing that I consider the best system of vaccination for this side of India consists in having( xxiii ) owing chiefly to the neces- saries of life being dearer. in this Presidency, because the necessaries of life are much cheaper there than here. We might just as well expect a skilled workman in London to work for as little wages as an Indian one, as to expect a Vaccinator on this side of India to serve for as small a pay as one on the Bengal side. As long as the value of labour is measured by the value of life-necessaries this can never be. Dispensary Vaccination. 22. Vaccination has been carried on by nearly all the Medical Subor- dinates and others in charge of Dispensaries, but I cannot say that much progress has been made. Some of the officers had no practical knowledge of vaccination before they took charge of a Dispensary, and take no great interest in it. On the other hand many of them do their best to further the spread of vaccination in the towns in which they live. There was an increase of vaccinations at the Dispensaries in Sholapoor, Alibagh, Dapoolie and several others as exhibited in State- ment No. 5, but there is still room for much improvement at nearly all Dispensaries. I am quite alive to the difficulties that the officers in charge of Dispensaries have to contend with, and I can only trust that time will remove many of them and that Medical Subordinates and others in charge of Dispensaries will do their utmost to carry on vaccination in their Stations. Mr. Apothecary Waite, of the Khandeish Bheel Corps, Honorary Assistant Surgeon Pollard at Dapoolie, Mr. Apothecary Munday at Vingorla, Mr. Apo- thecary Sinclair at Kolapoor, and some few others have done well. In Ahmed- abad Sub-Assistant Surgeon Ruttonjee Hormusjee took some pains to introduce animal vaccination, but did not succeed; he has given some interesting details of his experiments, which will be found in their proper place further on. Inspection of Dispensa- ries by Superintendents of Vaccination. 23. When on tour last cold season the Super- intendents inspected the Dispensaries which came in their routes, as directed in the 7 para. of the re- solution on my last report. Changes among the Su- perintendents. 24. During the past year there were a few changes among the Superin- tendents. In the Central Circle Dr. Turnbull re- turned from furlough and took over charge from Dr. Gordon. There was no change in the Southern, Western, Northern and Presidency Circles. In Sind Dr. Williams went to England on sick leave about the end of the official year and handed over his office to Dr. Roche, Civil Surgeon of Kotree. In Kattiawar, Surgeon Blomfield acted for some months and Surgeon Shepherd the rest of the year; but he also has again left and
( xxiv ) Surgeon Blomfield is again acting. In Rewa Kanta Dr. Welsh, who had resigned some months before, handed over charge to Dr. Cody in autumn last. Summary of the inspec- tions of Superintendents. 25. The following table shows the inspections &c., performed by Superintendents during the year :( xxv ) other duties connected with a Circle which it is very difficult to gauge, and which must be attended to as well as the more important duty of inspecting the vaccinated children. For instance Mr. Raby has taken great pains to test his vaccinators' monthly returns through the Police Superintendents, which has given him a great deal of office work. Lymph. 26. In the Government Resolution No. 1320, dated 7th June, the Resident at Hyderabad was informed that supplies of lymph would be furnished to officers in the Hyderabad territory. This has been done by the Superintendent of the Central Circle. Lymph has also been supplied to H. H. the Rao of Kutch's establishment, and to all other applicants for it. Supplies of English lymph received. 27. In November last I received a packet containing 24 tubes of vaccine lymph from the National Vaccine Institu- tion, London. It was forwarded to Dr. Colah, and it succeeded in all the children vaccinated from them except one. On the 9th January last I received through the Inspector General Indian Medical Department a packet containing 26 charged vaccine tubes; 7 were issued to the Central, 5 to the Presidency, 6 to the Southern, and 7 to the Western Circle. In the Central Circle Dr. Turnbull had 14 children vaccinated from 7 tubes and ten took, many of whom had excellent vesicles. In the Western Circle 8 children were vaccinated and the result was not considered satisfactory by Dr. Blanc, who only got one good vesicle out of the lot; they all took more or less except one. In the Southern Circle Mr. Raby had 5 children vaccinated and two only proved successful. I am of opinion that never more than one child should be vaccinated from one English tube. The lymph in general use is good. 28. The lymph in use throughout the presidency has been reported as generally good; here and there it deteriorated and was renewed. In the Western Circle Dr. Blanc re- ports that in November and December it deterio- rated very much in many talookas, but by the middle of January he had it good every where. Dr. Colah believes that there is a tendency for the lymph to degenerate in the monsoon chiefly on account of want of care on the part of the parents of vaccinated children. Mr. Raby says that some of his vacci- nators are apt to take lymph from too ripe vesicles. This has been forbid- den and should not occur. The Civil Surgeons and Dispensary officers have almost unanimously reported their lymph as good. Inoculation. 29. Dr. Blanc says that inoculation is still practised in Rutnagherry, and Dr. Turnbull saw some recent cases of small- pox inoculation in the Jowlee talooka of Sattara iv vac
( xxvi ) collectorate, but he has taken steps to prevent the practice in future. The practice of inoculating with small-pox virus has almost disappeared, and I do not very well see how the inoculators will be able to compete with our vaccinators when we have one in every talooka. The practice is a very pernicious one and every official ought to set his face against it. When we shall have a vaccinator in each talooka no one will have any excuse for seeking inoculation, because vaccination will be within the reach of all. Small-pox. A column should be introduced into the new death registers for measles. 30. In the Central Circle there was no epidemic of small-pox, and only 3,621 cases occurred in the year 1870 of whom 321 died or about 9 per cent. Considering the population is nearly 5,000,000 the number of deaths is small. There were 556 deaths in 1870, in the Island of Bombay with its 800,000 of a population, or relatively fully eight times more than in the Central Circle. I do not see any hope of preventing deaths from small-pox in Bombay until a Compulsory Vaccination Act be passed. The disease prevailed in all the collectorates of the Southern Circle, but it must have been in a very mild form as few deaths occurred except in the talooka of Mongoode, where it appears that it was rather severe. To arrest the disease an extra vaccinator was put on there and paid out of Local Funds by Mr. Elphinstone. In the Western Circle only a few cases were brought to notice in the Rutnagherry Collectorate. The Northern Circle had an unusual immunity from small-pox. In Sind there was a great diminution of deaths from the disease as compared with the preceding year ; there were 121 deaths, 86 of which occurred in the town of Kurrachee, leaving only 35 for the rest of Sind, and of these Dr. Williams ascertained that at least 5 were deaths from measles. There ought to be a column in the new form for Death Registers for measles, otherwise the deaths from that disease will be entered in the small-pox column and of course vitiate all our com- parisons. I am of opinion that Government ought at once to give orders for a column for measles to be added to the new form. There were a few cases of small-pox reported in H. H. the Rao of Kutch's territory. In the reports of Civil Surgeons and from Dispensaries the presence of small-pox was noted as follows:( xxvii ) Sholapoor .......................... None. Belgaum. ............................... A few cases in cantonment in April and May 1870. Dharwar. ....................... Much less than preceding year. Karwar ............................. Prevalent, 17 deaths. No particulars. Kulladghi ............................ None. Kolapoor ............................. Did not prevail to as great an extent as in preceding year. Tanna ................................... None. Bandora................................. A few cases in March. Callian. .................................. None. Alibagh .................................. Do. Rutnagherry ........................... None in town. Dapoolie............................... Do. Vingorla................................ Do. Ahmedabad .......................... Do. Godra.................................... Do. Dhoolia ................................ No remark regarding the disease. Ahmednuggur ...................... Do. Kotree .................................. Do. Kurrachee ............................ Prevalent for 3 months in this year. Aden .................................... Ceased in May 1870. It appears that small-pox has been generally very little fatal up to the close of the year 1870-71, but I fear much that it is now on the increase (May), and it seems to be spreading over the whole world. I hope our vac- cination will stand the test and demonstrate its power to guard from death by the most fell and loathsome of all diseases. In the last 20 years small- pox has destroyed 17,472 lives in Bombay city. I am indebted to the kind courtesy of Dr. Hewlett, Health Officer of Bombay, for the following figures : Deaths by small-pox in Bombay Island given by quarter-years for the past 20 years. 1st Quarter, 1851-70 = 6,283 deaths ; average per quarter 314 2nd Do. 1850-69 = 9,401 ( xxviii ) Need I add a word more in favour of the opinion of the Bombay Associa- tion that Bombay should have a compulsory Vaccination Act? Without it, no intelligence, no forethought on the part of the Vaccination Department can prevent small-pox being endemic in Bombay, even if it were not constantly imported, which it is, from maritime Asia. Mr. Anunta Chandroba has given some information in his report about the difficulty of carrying on vaccination in times of small-pox, because of the prejudices of some Hindoos against doing anything to arouse the wrath of the goddess Shitala (Small- pox) . The real remedy is to vaccinate before the advent of the disease in any particular street, but I do not believe we will ever be able to vaccinate much over half the children born in Bombay without compulsion, nor do I believe it would be possible in any other city of an equal size without a vaccination Act rendering vaccination compulsory. 31. When small-pox appears in a place, the local officers should im- mediately communicate with the Superintendent of the Circle. When we shall have a vaccinator in each talooka the local officers will be able to direct the attention of the talooka vaccinator to the circumstance, and he will at once commence to vaccinate in and around the place. Conduct of Vaccinators. 32. The conduct of the vaccinators as a whole has been good. In the Central Circle Dr. Turnbull had in no case to do more than inflict a small fine on any of the Government vaccinators. One Native State's vaccinator was dismissed for being absent without leave. In the Southern Circle one Government vaccinator was dis- missed for falsifying his returns. The falsification was discovered by the Police checking a monthly return sent by the Superintendent, Mr. Raby ; the man absconded, so could not be tried. In the Western Circle Dr. Blanc reduced one for drunkenness, discharged one for falsifying his records, and one was convicted by a Magistrate of having misappropriated an anna of his lymph allowance. On conviction Dr. Blanc recommended his dismissal. I felt bound to act on the recommendation as the man had been convicted of a crime, though much against my will, for instead of misappropriation it is possible that it was an error of accounts. It seemed hard to dismiss a man after many years service for such a very trifling sum. In future Superinten- dents of Vaccination will request and receive the permission of the Superin- tendent General before prosecuting a vaccinator. Dr. Blanc has a few days ago recommended this man to the merciful consideration of Government, and I place that on record, but will not support it further than by merely thus bring- ing it to the notice of Government. Dr. Blanc has recommended that he be reinstated in a lower grade, but adds there is no vacancy in his Circle- In the
( xxix ) Northern Circle two Native States' vaccinators were dismissed for falsifying&quot;. In Sind two Local Fund vaccinators were discharged by Dr. Williams for errors in their returns in the matter of re-vaccinations; the punishment was much too severe and will not occur again. It has been a most difficult thing to get vaccinators to understand the arbitrary meaning attached to the word re-vaccination. In Kattiawar Circle 2 Chiefs' vaccinators were dismissed for falsifying. In Rewa Kanta Circle one Chief's vaccinator was discharged for being absent without leave. In the Presidency Circle Mr. Anunta Chandroba reports his entire satisfaction with the conduct of his vaccinators. It is probable that we will always have a few black sheep, but I think in several instances last year we have made a few blacker than is consistent with good common sense, and in several instances the punishments were far too severe. We have no right to expect perfection, and our punishments ought to be inflicted with a just consideration of the circumstances, and in general with the object of improving rather than degrading the vaccinators as a body. Re-vaccination. 33. In the annual returns for the year preceding the one under report the columns for re-vaccination were entirely blank. It will be remembered that in our old forms no columns existed for showing re-vaccinations separately from primary vaccina- tions, and any re-vaccinations which were performed were shown with primary vaccinations, indeed no distinction was made. The new forms are, in respect of showing the re-vaccinations separately, a great improvement on the old. It is now well recognized by the Medical Profession in general that infantile vaccination does not invariably protect the individual against either an attack of small-pox, or death from that disease, though it is rare that death occurs when the individual has four or more good vaccine cicatrices. It is also known that an attack of small-pox itself does not invariably protect from a second attack which may end fatally. From all the known facts it would even appear that a re-vaccination is as powerful if not more so to protect from small-pox than an attack of small-pox itself. During the past year there were according to the returns fully 30,000 re-vaccinations, but many officers and vaccinators at first entered secondary vaccinations in the re-vaccination columns, which was wrong, and has no doubt raised the number, how much I cannot say. A circular has been issued on the subject to all charges, and this will not happen again. Variolation. 34. Dr. Blanc attempted a few times to produce small-pox in the cow by inoculating with the virus of human small-pox, but he gives no particulars of the trials. They all failed. I also tried to do so along with Dr. Charles when I was in Calcutta,
( xxx ) and we also failed. It is a difficult thing to achieve, but it has been several times done in India, especially by Dr. Shortt in Madras. I do not know that it is of much use to us since we have animal vaccination going on. Retro-vaccination. 35. Mr. Cody, Superintendent of the Rewa Kanta Circle, succeeded in inoculating a calf with human vaccine virus, and he had very good and active lymph produced. Animal Vaccination. New animal lymph re- ceived from M. Warlo- mont, of Belgium. 36. During the past year Mr. Anunta Chandroba has kept up animal vaccination in Bombay. There were a good many failures in the first half of the year, but latterly his success has been very good indeed: experience has made him more skilful. The great advantage to the Department of having animal vaccination going on in Bombay is that it enables us to do without taking so much lymph from children's arms, to which many of the parents have an insuperable objection. The cost of animal vaccination has been borne partly by the Cowasjee Jehangeer grant* and partly by the Municipality's grant. I think there is every prospect of Mr. Anunta Chandroba being able to keep up the practice permanently. During last rains Dr. Blanc practised it in Poona, but it did not seem to be appreciated by the people there. He and I both tried to get the members of the Municipal Committee to take a personal and individual interest in the matter, but I cannot say that we succeeded. Mr. Oliphant, the Collector of Poona, gave us all the assistance in his power. After the rains were over, Sub-Assistant Surgeon Balcrishna Chintoba, who is in charge of the Charitable Dispensary in Poona, continued the practice for some time, but finally lost his lymph, and also I think his inclination to be troubled with animal vaccination. An unsuccessful attempt to introduce the practice in Dharwar was made by Mr. Raby. Dr. Blanc has several times received new animal lymph from M. Warlomont for Mr. Anunta Chandroba. I would beg to recommend that Dr. Warlomont's kindness be acknowledged, through the Secretary of State for India and the Belgian Government. Dr. Colah succeeded in commencing animal vaccination in his Circle, and the experiments were continued in Ahmedabad, but ended in failure. In Sind, Honorary Assistant Surgeon Leahy has succeeded in Sukkur, but it has not yet been going on very long. In Rewa Kanta Mr. Cody succeeded with animal vaccination and gives an interesting account of it in paras, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of his report. In Kattiawar, Dr. Shepherd informs me that animal vaccination was introduced * Referred to in the 20th para. of last report.
( xxxi ) at Wudwan, from there it was carried into several other Chiefs' states, and is now being continued at Bhownuggur by Kanajee Jairam, a native practi- tioner in that town, the Bhownuggur State having employed him to teach the State's vaccinators. In Bombay there is no objection raised by the natives to accept vaccination direct from the cow. Many vaccinators able to use capillary tubes. 37. Many vaccinators are able to use capillary tubes, but many are not able. When a Superintendent is inspecting the work of a vaccinator he generally ascertains if the man knows how to use a tube, and if he does not he teaches him. Aid from Civil and Poli- tical Officers. 38. The Superintendents unanimously acknowledge the aid they have received from the District Officers both in the Revenue and Political Departments. Tour. 39. During the year under report I visited the Southern, Central and Western Circles. In the months of April and May I was in Matheran busy with office work ; in June and July I was in Bombay, and saw the Local Superintendent of Vaccination carrying on animal vaccination. At the end of July I went to Poona, hoping to see the Bombay Vaccination Bill passed through the Legislative Council, but circumstances have delayed its introduction. Dr. Blanc had introduced animal vaccination into Poona and was practising it at the Charitable Dispen- sary, under considerable difficulty. In September I started from Bombay on a visit to Bengal and Madras, and returned in November. In December I com- menced my cold season tour and visited the Dispensaries of Oorun and Dapoo- lie. At the former no work was going on, and it was arranged for Oorun to be vaccinated by the Municipal Vaccinator employed jointly by Oorun and Panwell. At Dapoolie Honorary Assistant Surgeon Pollard was giving hearty attention to vaccination. At Rutnagherry I found the Station vaccina- tor's lymph deteriorated, and directed him to abandon it and get good virus from the talooka vaccinator. At Vingorla I found Mr. Apothecary Munday had excellent lymph, and keeping up vaccination, but he seemed to have a good deal of trouble in doing so, and was anxious that Vingorla town should have a vaccinator of its own. From Vingorla I passed through the Native State of Sawunt Waree, in which I saw a number of recent vacci- nators, but I am sorry to say they were not as good as I had seen two years before. I proceeded then to Belgaum, where I examined the work of the Government and Municipal vaccinators, and found both very good. In Jan- uary I travelled with Assistant Surgeon Raby, Superintendent of the Southern
( xxxii ) Circle, through Kulladghi Collectorate. I saw over a thousand vaccinated children in the towns of Kulladghi, Bagulkote, Hulloor, Naienglee, Moo- kurteehal, Hovin Hypurgee, Beejapoor, Tekodeh, and the villages around or lying on our route. The work was generally well done. In February I entered the Central Circle and met the Superintendent, Dr. Turnbull, at Jhutt; there we examined several hundreds of vaccinated children. The work and lymph were both bad. This Native State's vaccinator had evidently never been well trained, so Dr. Turnbull, with the consent of the Dufflé Sahib, attached him to his office for a time to train him. From Jhutt we marched by Shegaon, Sanund, to Attapadee, seeing some children en route. The vaccinations done by the Punt Prétineedee's vaccinator were very good. At Rahimutpoor and another village near Sattara I saw most excellent lymph which Luximon Babajee, the Khoregaon Municipal vaccinator, was working with. From Sattara I marched by Mahabuleshwur, and the Par Ghaut to the Western Circle, and met the Superintendent, Dr. Blanc, at Indapoor. On the 8th March we visited 4 villages, and saw 58 vaccinated children, about 7 of whom were either unsuccessful or indifferently vaccinated. On the 10th we saw 73 children in 4 more villages in the neighbourhood of Pohee, in one of which there were 9 unsuccessful out of the 30 seen. The vaccinator had put them down in the result column of &quot;unknown.&quot; On the 12th we visited Ashtumeh, and saw 18 recent vaccinations, one of which was a failure, and 15 had 3 or more good vaccine marks. On the 13th we visited 3 villages near Roheh and saw about 64 recent vaccinations, all most excellent, except 8 in the village of Neeree. On the 14th we saw about 35 children ; work fair in two villages, but bad in the third. The vaccinator said the work there had been started from tubes and at first it was not good. From the Western Circle I crossed to Bombay near the end of the year. Dr. Williams' visit to Guadur on the Mekran Coast for the purpose of in- troducing vaccination into Guadur. 40. Small-pox is frequently brought into the town of Kurrachee from the Mekran Coast as well as from other parts of Beloochistan. Dr. Williams paid a visit to Guadur to try and arrange with Captain Ross, the Political Officer there, for the introduction of vaccination into Guadur and neighbourhood. Government sanction- ed a small sum to be expended on this account, but Captain Ross having been absent from Guadur on special duty, no steps have yet been taken as far as I know. It is no doubt advisable to have vaccination going on at Guadur, for the sake of protecting the British employés there, but I question if it be the duty of Government to spend a penny in attempting to spread vaccination in Beloochistan. If the Belooches themselves can be induced to accept and
( xxxiii ) practise vaccination, the Department will do all in its power to further and assist such a praiseworthy step in as far as training men and supplying lymph are concerned. Superintendents all taught how to practise Animal Vaccination. 41. During last rains all the Superintendents came either to Bombay or Poona and were taught the method of practising animal vaccination. Since then Dr. Turnbull has returned from furlough. He will learn the practice in the coming rains. Dr. Keith joined the Department in May; he has seen Honorary Assistant Surgeon Leahy practise on the heifer in Sukkur, and he now proposes starting animal vaccination in Kotree himself. In the 6th para. of the Government Resolution on my last report Government expressed a wish that Civil Surgeons should make themselves acquainted with the process of animal vaccination. A few have done so, but none, as far as I know, have practised it for any length of time. I have already mentioned that Honorary Assistant Surgeon Leahy has been practising it in Sukkur for some time, and that it was practised in Ahmedabad with little success. I think it will be as well to let Civil Surgeons take up animal vaccination voluntarily, and whenever any one wishes to practise it we will supply him with lymph, and the Superintendents of vaccination will do all in their power to show them the method of operating on the calf. As soon as the Native Assistant Superintendents are appointed I will endeavour to establish animal vaccination in one place in every collectorate. Total number of vacci- nations. 42. There is again a very considerable increase in the number of vaccine operations. I am unable to say how many persons were vaccinated, because, except for the Northern Circle, the returns do not show the excess of operations over persons; that is to say do not show how many persons were primarily vaccinated more than once. This will be shown in next report. When an unprotected person is vaccinated unsuccessfully, he is again vaccinated, and this second vaccination is technically called a primary vaccination; perhaps it would be better if we had result columns for Primary, Secondary and Re-vaccinations, such as Dr. Charles has in use in Calcutta, instead of only for Primary and Re-vaccina- tions. The following figures show the number of vaccine operations for the year 1870-71 :( xxxiv ) Total of primary vaccinations and re-vaccinations in Civil Life... 519,143 Total of primary vaccinations and re-vaccinations in the Army . 7,558 526,701 Increase. 43. As compared with last year's returns there is an increase in Civil life of 61,281, but the vaccinations in Baroda territory are included in this report, and were not in my former reports. The vaccinations performed there in 1869 amounted to 22,383 and in 1870 to 23,659, our actual increase then in Civil life is 38,898. This I consider very satisfactory progress. If the population of this side of India, including Native States, be taken at 21,000,000, I think our primary vac- cinations should reach close on 600,000 a year. We are still a long way from that figure. In the Army Returns there is an increase of 753. I am indebted to the courtesy of Surgeon Martin, Secretary to the Inspector General Indian Medical Department, for the returns of the Native Army, and to the courtesy of Surgeon Veale, Secretary to the Inspector General British Medical Department, for the returns of the European Army. Percentage of success. 44. In Statement No. I the percentage in primary vaccinations is 96.2, this is half a percentum less than in last report. The percentage in re-vaccinations is 73.2, which is very high, but it is quite certain that errors were made by reckoning second vaccinations as revaccinations, so this percentage will be of no use for future comparisons or for statists. In Statement No. V, Dispensary Vaccinations, the percentage of success in primary vaccinations is 90.9, or fully one per cent. higher than in the previous report. The percentage of success in re-vaccina- tions at Dispensaries is 52.6, which is lower than in Statement No. I, but it is probably higher than it should be from the same cause as that which raised the percentage so high in Statement No. I. The following shows the percentage of success in each establishment in the Bombay Presidency :( xxxv ) of primary and re-vaccinations combined. The following shows the correct percentages of success in each Circle and for Dispensaries : ( xxxvi ) Ages. 47. The ages have not been given in the return of vaccinations per- formed in H. H. the Guikowar's territory, but ex- cluding them there were 63.7 above and 36.3 under one year old in every 100 primary vaccinations. In last report there were 41.8 per cent. under one year old. I regret this falling off of the number under one year old, for infantile vaccination not only gives earlier protection but better also than primary vaccination at a later age. 48. The following figures show in which establishments the increase and decrease occurred:( xxxvii ) (c) Native States Establishment in( xxxviii ) Circle having been taken over by the Bombay Municipality from 1st Decem- ber last, and to there having been several vacancies in the Northern Circle. It would be tedious to seek out the causes of every trifling increase or de- crease in each establishment of each circle, but it may be useful to show below the increase and decrease in each circle itself as a whole :( xxxix ) in commending any one as prominently deserving the notice of Government more than several others, but as it has for years back been the custom to do so, I would beg to commend Dr. Williams, Dr. Colah, and Dr. Blanc. Dr. Turnbull, for the short time he has been performing the duties of Super- intendent of Vaccination, Central Circle, since his return from Europe, has been devoting himself with all his former energy and ability to the cause of vaccination. I think his office records were in the best order of any I inspected during the year. Cost. 53. The total expenditure by the Vaccine Department in the year 1870-71 was Rs. 1,70,051. This is Rs. 33,850 more than in 1869-70. The increase was caused by( xl ) the one under report, and again the rank and pay of several of the Superin- tendents have increased by the evolution of time having given them promotion. This latter kind of increase we cannot control, but it is not material to Government whether a Surgeon be paid in the Vaccine Depart- ment or in some other; though it makes the rate of cost for each vaccina- tion more than if Assistant Surgeons held the appointments of Superin- tendents of Vaccination; not that I wish it to be so, I merely mention this as a cause of the increased rate of cost in the Government establishment. The rate of cost has also increased by 1 anna and 2 pies per successful vaccination in the Municipal establishment; I am of opinion that the rate of 6 annas and 5 pies for Municipalities is too high, and it will I hope be kept lower. The rate in the establishment of Local Funds and Native States is diminished by 1 anna in the former and 1 anna and 7 pies in the latter, so that the average for the whole Department is 6 annas; or 6 pies more than in my former report. I consider this average of ninepence for each successful vaccination cheap. I fear it will be more next year, but after that, when our changes are all introduced and in thorough working order, I hope we will be able to reduce the average cost of each successful vaccination a little. It is interesting to show the cost of each successful vaccination in each circle, with the number of vaccinators and the total successful vaccinated :( xli ) It will be seen that vaccination is dearest in the Kutch and Presidency Circles, and cheapest in the Northern, Kattiawar, and Central Circles ; but to make any real comparison the pay of the Superintendent should be excluded because it makes such a difference if there be a Surgeon in one Circle and an Assistant Surgeon in another. I trust that the cost in the Presidency Circle will be reduced, and I have no doubt it will be, if we get a compulsory Vacci- nation Act. In future reports I will show the cost of each successful vaccination in each Circle after excluding the pay of Superintendents. J. PINKERTON, M.D., Surgeon, Superintendent General of Vaccination, Bombay Presidency. Bombay, 29th May 1871. vi vac
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORTS OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF CIRCLES. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 2. In the table at the head of this report, I have made the requisite alterations, and, as will be seen, there is an increase in all the establishments except the Govern- ment one. The total increase, excluding Dispensaries, is 18,933, and the principal cause of it is no doubt the increase of vaccinators. This however will not account for the whole of it. In the Government establishment, but for a few months only, there have been two additional vaccinators, whose total operations amount to 556, and yet the decrease under this head is 1,592. Again, in September last, an addition of six was made to the number of Local Funds vaccinators. The number of operations performed by these men is 6,517, and the increase shown in the above table, is 9,326. A like result is obtained, on thus comparing the work under the head of Municipalities' establishment. On the whole, the establishments have worked well during the past year, and their operations have been satisfactorily performed. Causes of increase. 3. The continued and steady increase in the number of operations performed in this Circle, is, I think, due3 6. As will be seen, the average number of operations performed in the year by the members of my Establishment is 1,340, whereas it was 1,522 in the previous year : showing a decrease of 182 operations per man. It must be remembered however, that during the past year, at least eight of the vaccinators were only half-timed, i.e. were engaged for six months only out of the 12, and that the vaccinators of Sattara who per- formed, in 1869-70, only 950 operations per man, were transferred to this Circle in place of those of Kulladghee, whose returns for that year showed an average of 1,850, or nearly double. I hope during the current year, to see the Sattara vaccinators in this respect, nearly on a par with the rest of the Central Circle. Sex. 7. Of the total number of primary operations, 44,452 were on males, and 41,513 on females : giving a percentage of 51.7 and 48.3 respec- tively, or very nearly the same as for the preceding year. Caste. 8. The following table exhibits the percentages of castes, as compared with the preceding year; and does not appear to call for any special remark :4 General Nos. 207 and 240, my Office Karkoons, and every one of them resulted successfully, out of 109 punctures made, 104 resulted in vesicles more or less well developed. Numerous tubes were filled and distributed among my establishment and a large number of them are now using this lymph. It is satisfactory to think that the largest number of operations performed by a single individual, was by the man (General No. 244) in whose Talooka the English lymph was propagated, and that for three months he was using it, and no other. Husband's tubes. 12. These tubes have been very largely made use of during the past year for transmitting lymph by post to vaccinators, and numerous applicants both in and beyond the Presidency of Bombay. The great majority of the vaccinators can now use them. They are not however made use of as an alternative for arm-to-arm vaccination, except on rare occasions, and when children with fresh lymph are not available. Inoculation. 13. That this practice is not yet a thing of the past, I think I am right in affirming. No report of the inoculator carrying on his dangerous operations has been received during the past year, but while inspecting the work of the vaccinators in the Patun, Kurrar, Sattara, and Jowlee Talookas of the Sattara collectorate, I saw very many children who had been inoculated. In the village of Choreh of the Kurrar Talooka, a list of the names of 22 children was made. They had been inoculated in January 1870 by one Janoo Dungur, an inhabitant of Mandweh, Sattara talook. In the Jowlee talook there are inoculated children in every village : most of them having been operated on two or three years ago. The village officials did not see anything wrong in it, and in many instances have had their own children inoculated. The Mamlutdar of this Talooka, though he has been nearly five years in that district, knew nothing about it, and did not know there was such a person as an inoculator in his district. I have brought the matter to the notice of the Collector, and no doubt steps will be taken to prevent any thing of the kind in future. Small pox. 14. Small-pox during the year 1870 did not prevail anywhere in an epidemic form, and the return given below shows that only 3,621 cases occurred in a population of over four millions, and of these 321 are reported to have died. I do not submit these returns under the impres- sion that they are absolutely correct, or even a very near approximation to the truth. However, they are made up from registers of small-pox kept in nearly every village, and as both Dr. Gordon and myself have taken frequent opportunities to test them and found them fairly correct, I give them such as they are. Many of those given as occurring in persons previously vaccinated, occurred probably in persons unsuccessfully operated on. Of the total 8.8 per cent died, a very low death rate indeed ; while of those who had been previously vaccinated, 12.5 are reported to have died. There must be some serious mistake here, partly explained perhaps on the above supposition.
5 Collectorate. Total number of cases of Small-pox during the year 1870. Of the Total number were Vaccinated. Of the total who died from Small- pox were vacci- nated. Of the total num- ber unprotected. Of those unprotected died of Small-pox. Total deaths from Small-pox out of total number of cases. In In- fancy. In after life. In In- fancy. In after life. Poona.................... 344 1 1 1 1 342 22 24 Ahmednuggur ...... 366 4 9 1 ... 353 10 11 Nassick ............... 260 ... 7 ... ... 253 20 20 Khandeish............ 1,616 23 60 1 18 1,533 161 180 Sattara ................. 43. ... ... ... ... 43 1 1 Sholapoor ........... 992 21 34 8 ... 937 77 85 Total 1870 ...... 3,621 49 111 11 19 3,461 291 321 Total 1869 ...... 21,943 330 1,093 14 113 20,520 2,530 2,657 Conduct of the Vaccina- tors. 15. The conduct of the vaccinators generally has been satisfactory. One man of the Local Funds establishment was dismissed for in_ efficiency and disobedience. Of the Government establish- ment it has not been necessary to take serious notice of theconduct of any one : nothing more than a small fine or warning. No casualties tookplace during the year. Notice of the Vaccinators' visits to Villages. 16. In accordance with Government Resolution No. 1345, dated 7th June 1869, I have had printed a few copies of a notice to be sent to Village Officers by vaccinators, two or three days before visiting a village for the first time. It merely states the date and hour of the intended visit, asks their assistance in the collection of children for operation, and requests they will acknowledge receipt of the notice by their signature. I anticipate much good will result from the use of this notice as it will prevent Village Officers from making feigned excuses for absence. Koolkurnees in a great many cases live in other than their own villages, and are, consequently, very often absent when the vaccinator is at work. This notice, timely given, will in a great measure remedy this. Local Funds Establish- ment. 17. This establishment now consists of nine members, six having been added during the past year. They have worked well ; three in Poona and six in Khandeish Collectorate. Municipalities Establish- ment. 18. Except the addition of one vaccinator for several towns in the Kher Talooka of the Poona Collectorate, the number of Municipalities' vaccinators remains the same as the preceding year.
6 Native Chiefs' Establish- ment. 19. The work of some of these men is not carried on in a satisfactory manner, those of Jutt and Atpadee especially. The arrangements made during my visit to Jutt, will, I think, lead to an improvement in the work in that State. With regard to Atpadee, I have recommended the dismissal of the vaccinator, as well as several new arrangements for the improve- ment of vaccination there. I trust that all the recommendations will be carried out. The decrease in the returns of these vaccinators is entirely due to the vaccinator of the Atpadee Chief being absent without leave for several months. Tour. 20. An account of the tour made by Dr. Gordon will be found in his report, hereto attached. I assumed charge (on return from England) on the 1st December. Thereafter I proceeded to the Sholapoor District, and inspected during that month the Barsee dispensary, the work of the vaccinator employed by the Barsee Municipality, and of General Nos. 144 and 244 in the Marole Talooka. With the Barsee vaccinator's work I was not pleased and I had occasion to renew his lymph. That of General No. 144 (old work) was unsatisfactory, but that of General No. 244 was all that could be desired, whether we regard it in point of quantity, quality or the correctness of his records. Having minutely inspected work in the Marole talooka, I travelled to Sholapoor and there inspected the Dispensary, and the work of the Station and Municipality's vaccinators. All these were satisfactory. I also inspected the recent and fresh work of General No. 144, in the Sholapoor talooka, and found it satisfactory; the lymph good, vesicles well developed, and the cicatrices foveated. He was warned in writing regarding the carelessness with which he had performed his work in the Marole talooka. I next proceeded to Akul- kote. Like most of the Native States' vaccinators, his work was not very satisfactory. In some villages it was fairly so. Major Baumgartner, the Political Superintendent, takes considerable interest in vaccination, as well as other matters, and I hope, with his assistance, to improve matters in the Akulkote State. From Akulkote I returned, viâ Sholapoor, to the Marole talooka, and at Mohul tested the lymph received from England, the satisfactory result of which is recorded in para. 11 of this report. Punderpoor and its Dispensary and vaccinator were next visited. The amount of vaccine work done in this town has not been great, but in point of quality it was satisfactory. The Municipal Commissioners take no interest in vaccination whatever, and the Patels do not render any assistance. One of the latter actually refused to give me assistance. Small-pox was then prevailing in the town, but the Sub- Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Dispensary and Health Officer of the place could not get any information from the authorities (Native) regarding it, and he reported to me that recommendations made by him were generally disregarded by the Municipal Commissioners. From the arrangments made during my visit I trust some good will result, but owing to want of interest taken in the work of this Department by the Native Officials, I am not sanguine. From Punderpoor I travelled, viâ Sangola (where I inspected the work of the Municipal vaccinator and found it correct and good) to Jutt, where I met Dr. Pinkerton, the Superintendent General, who examined my
7 office records, and gave me the benefit of his experience and instructions regarding the general working of the Department. We inspected the work of the Dufflay Sahib's vaccinator in several villages, and found him so deficient in his professional education, &c., that I was obliged to ask the Dufflay Sahib to allow him to accompany me, in order that he might be instructed for one month in my office. This was done, and I think he will now perform his work more satisfactorily, though I must say I am not sanguine of his making a good vaccinator. From Jutt I proceeded in company with Dr. Pinkerton through the Atpadee State, and found the Punt Sahib's vaccinator was absent without leave. I, in company with Dr. Pinkerton, examined his old work, and found it (as regards his records at least) very unsatisfactory. Names were called over, but many persons were either absent or they did not exist. I have since recommended his dismissal. From Atpadee, I proceeded to Mainee, in the Khuttao talooka of the Sattara collectorate. During the month of March the work of the Municipal vaccinators of the Khuttao and Khanapoor talookas were visited, and their work inspected in a number of villages, and both were found to have performed their duties satisfactorily. I was dissatisfied with the amount of it only. General No. 88, employed in the Tasgaon talooka, was next visited, and the result of my inspection was very satisfactory indeed. He is a man of tact, and a good vaccinator, and would, I think, make a good Assistant Superintendent. From Tasgaon I crossed the Krishna and inspected the work of Shreedur Atmaram, employed by several Municipalities in the Walwa talooka. I was far from pleased with his work. Though he has been employed as a vaccinator for 7 years only, yet he is 52 years of age. He will never make a good vaccinator, and I am only waiting till the new Departmental arrangements come into operation, to see what arrangements can be made for the future. From Walwa I proceeded through the Patun and Kurrar talookas, inspecting the work of the Municipal vaccinator employed in the latter, and that of General No. 243 in the former. Both were satisfactory. Also the Dis- pensary at Kurrar was reported on. At Kurrar, I met Mr. Dhunjibhoy Cowasjee, the District Deputy Collector, who promised me every assistance in furthering vaccination. His energy and the interest he has always taken in the work of this De- partment are too well known to need any commendation from me. I left the Kurrar talooka and visited several villages in those of Koregaon, and Sattara ; the work res- pectively, of a Municipal vaccinator, and General No. 26, lately the Civil Surgeon's vaccinator. The former was fairly satisfactory, and the latter very much so. Here (Sattara) my tour ended. During the year, Dr. Gordon and myself have travelled 1,637 miles, visited 237 villages, seen the work of 31 vaccinators and three Dispensaries, and inspected the arms of 20,952 vaccinated and unvaccinated children; which, con- sidering the difficulties met with in travelling in some parts of the districts inspected, I hope will not be thought a small amount of work. 21. Though I have now been seven years in the Vaccination Department, and have inspected upwards of 80,000 children, I have never seen a case in which Syphilis had been communicated through vaccination. 7 vac
8 Report by DR. GORDON for the period he was Acting Superintendent of Vaccination in the Centred Circle in 1870-71. General Progress. The general progress of vaccination has been on the whole satisfactory. From what I have learned in my intercourse with the people, and from the desire expressed by the greater number to have their children protected, I am confident that the benefits of vaccination are becoming every year more perceptible to the natives. It is so at least in the districts, but in many large towns there still remains much to be done. 2. During last rains Dr. Blanc, assisted by the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Dispensary, and myself, carried on animal vaccination at Poona. Its introduction did not meet with the support of the public, and our efforts to obtain heifers were by many strenuously opposed. On each appointed day a few children only could be col- lected, and these were very reluctantly brought by the parents. Since October the work has been carried on by Mr. Balcrishna Chintoba, Sub-Assistant Surgeon, but the successful operations compared with the unsuccessful have been very few indeed. 3. In September many of the vaccinators reported that their lymph had de- teriorated in consequence of the heavy and continuous rains, and I regret to state that some of the supplies of English lymph introduced last season have been lost. Lymph was at once supplied to all vaccinators from whom I had received reports. 4. Generally the vaccinators have worked well. I have imposed fines in a few instances for disobedience of orders, and for working with bad lymph. Assistant Vac- cinator Balcrishna Rajaram, General No. 207, who has been, for the last six years, employed in the Superintendent's Office as a Carkoon, was tried by the Magistrate at Poona, on a charge of attempting to extort money from other vaccinators, and from candidates. It could not be proved that he had ever received any money as a bribe, and the evidence was not sufficient to warrant conviction. I considered him an untrustworthy person to have in the office, and sent him to work in the Waie talooka. General No. 37 was employed in the office in his place. Veshmenath Rago, Local Fund Vaccinator, Poona, was dismissed on account of carelessness, negligence, and utter disregard of orders. Small-pox. 5. The only report of small-pox received was from the Newassee talooka, to which place a vaccinator was ordered to proceed. Not- withstanding this the disease may have prevailed to some extent in other talookas, but the returns at the end of the year will tell. I must here make a few remarks with reference to the statistics of small-pox given in my report for 1869-70. I have paid great attention to this subject, and examined the small-pox re- gisters of many of the villages I have visited. From what I have learned I must again state that I believe these registers are very fair returns of the actual number of cases which have occurred. Perfection and perfect correctness cannot be expected, when we consider that these registers are kept by unprofessional men, At para. 16 of my Report for 1869-70 I stated that small-pox had been epidemic in only two talookas,
9 but that over the whole Circle 21,943 cases had occurred, of these 93.5 per cent. were unprotected and 6.5 had been previously vaccinated. With reference to this, the Inspector General in his letter No- 2071 of 27th July 1870, handing up the Superintendent General's Report for 1869-70 to Government, says in para. 12, &quot;I would ask, how is it possible that any population in the Presidency can have 93 per cent. of its number unvaccinated ?&quot; The population of the Central Circle is over 4,000,000, and among this population during 1869 there occurred 21,943 cases of small-pox, which is equal to about 5.3 per mille of population. I stated that 93.5 per cent. of the cases of small-pox were unprotected, but made no allusion to the percentage of unprotected among the population as a whole. I am not aware of the system pursued in the other Circles to obtain statistics of small-pox, but as the Inspector General has stated that the whole of the figures in the earlier portion of para. 23 of the Superin- tendent General's report (which is a quotation from para. 16 of my report) are untrustworthy, I respectfully submit that it remains to be considered, whether these registers are worth the trouble bestowed on their preparation and examination, and the unavoidable expense entailed in transmitting the returns from the Mamlutdars to the Superintendent, or whether some new method should not be devised, to ascertain more accurately the number of cases of small-pox occurring in each village. The Inspector General further states that it would be interesting if further particulars of the means adopted to protect the people of the two talookas specially named were stated. With reference to the Indee talooka, I stated as follows in the resumé of my tour for 1869, &quot; In the Western part of the Indee talooka I saw many cases of confluent small-pox, and it was obvious on looking at the disfigured countenances of the children collected for my inspection, that the disease had raged in an epidemic form not long previously. General No. 244 was ordered to work towards this part of the talooka, and the result was that during the month of June he vaccinated 795 children.&quot; Let it be remembered that previous to my going there no report with reference to the outbreak had been made to either myself or the vaccinator. As to Shindghee I heard through the Superintendent of Police that the disease had raged there epidemically, but this was only after the outbreak had all but subsided. A vaccinator was sent to the talooka at once. Tour. 6. On the 1st of April I was in the Nuggur talooka where I examined the work of General Nos. 237, 289, and the Municipal Vaccinator of Ahmednuggur. Many of the cicatrices were small on account of too many children having been vaccinated from one vaccinifer. I then went through Parnair to Seroor, where I examined the work of Veshmenath Rago, Local Fund vaccinator. Both work and lymph were unsatisfactory, and he was sent to Ahmednuggur to procure a fresh supply of lymph, and ordered to work gradually back to his own talooka. In the Kheir, Mawul, and Haveilly talookas I inspected the work and lymph of General Nos. 23 and 40, I had no fault to find with either. During the rains I examined the lymph of the two Municipal vaccinators and that of the Civil Hospital vaccinator at Poona. The two former were working with very inferior lymph,
10 and as there was a ready supply of animal lymph at hand, this was at once remedied. On the 8th of October I went to the Poorundhur talooka and inspected the work of General No. 37. The cicatrices were generally all large and typical, and his work had been performed with great care. I also saw some work here performed by Gene- ral No. 207. I next travelled through the Bimthurry talooka where I saw the work of Gungadur Rajaram, Local Fund vaccinator, and the work of the Municipal vac- cinator at Baramuttee. The work of both was satisfactory and the lymph was good. In the Indapoor talooka I examined the work of Govind Khunderao, Local Fund vaccinator. His work was the worst I have yet inspected. More than half the vaccinations performed by him since May were utterly worthless. His lymph had deteriorated so much that the resulting vesicles were all spurious; he was directed to abandon the lymph he was using, and go to the Baramuttee vaccinator to see proper vaccine vesicles and get a supply of fresh lymph. He was fined and warned to be more careful in future. At Indapoor I inspected the Dispensary and found everything very satisfactory. I next went to Kurmulla where I inspected the work and lymph of Ge- neral No. 301. Generally the cicatrices were indifferent, and many of the vaccinations had been performed very carelessly. The old work of General No. 223, was also in- spected. The cicatrices were all deep and pitted. From Kurmulla I passed through Kurjut, where I saw the old work of General No. 289. It was very satisfactory. On the 1st December I gave over charge to Dr. Turnbull. During the four travelling months since the 1st April I have examined 4,585 vaccinated children, visited 116 villages and travelled 697 miles. I have inspected the work of 9 Government, 3 Local Fund, and 4 Municipal vaccinators, the vaccinators at the Civil Hospital, Poona, and two Dispensaries.
11 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.12 Causes of Decrease. were lost for some months by reason of their unwillingness to leave that zillah, and the unavoidable correspondence and consequent delay that ensued, so that it was late in August before these men actually commenced work. It is true they did work in the Sattara collectorate during this time, but their returns for this period will be incorporated with those of the Super- intendent of Vaccination of the Central Circle. Another point of no small importance to account for the diminished work, and especially the smallness of the returns from these men was the fact of their being unacquainted with the Canarese language which is in use in the zillah to which they were removed. This under the circum- stances of the transference appears to have been unavoidable, and the Superintendent General of Vaccination informs me that he purposes transferring these men from this Circle as soon as practicable. They are very dissatisfied with their positions, and are constantly petitioning to be removed to Marathi-speaking localities, but I am unable to comply with their requests, because I have already vaccinators acquainted only with Marathi in the Marathi districts. Sickness among the vaccinators has been another cause of the decrease, and one vaccinator, Babajee Gungaram, General No. 233, was absent for three months without leave. The smallness of the work performed by two of these vaccinators, Babajee Gungaram and Sadasheo Mahadoo, is sufficient alone to account for the apparent decrease, for if we compare the work performed by them in 1869-70, viz...................... 3,978 with that for the present year, viz........................ 1,002 the difference will be observed to be..................... 2,976 Native Chiefs' Establish- ment. Suggestions for Im- proving Vaccination in Native States. 3. In the Native Chiefs' establishment the number vaccinated is 19,938 ; and of successful cases 18,752, or a percentage of 95.0. This also shows a decrease, but the decrease is apparent only, because if the numbers vaccinated by the four Chiefs' vaccinators of the Sattara collectorate be deducted from the total of last year there is really an increase of 752. During the year however there has been a vaccinator ap- pointed for the Savanore State, but he has only recently commenced work (for he was only appointed in January last), and his returns being only 83, scarcely affect the total. The vaccinator of Echulkurunjee died of cholera during the year, and a break of over two months occurred before the work was again commenced. Some improvement for the more effectual vaccination of the mass of the population in the Native States is urgently required, and the recom- mendations that I have made to the Political Agent regard- ing this will be found in the course of my tour ; they are chiefly these,13 centre town. Many of the outlying districts are never visited at all by the vaccinator, and when this is brought to his notice he generally pleads the smallness of his pay as an excuse. I am not in all instances prepared to deny but what it is a valid one, and some of the Chiefs appear unwilling to increase the pay of their vaccinators. Municipalities. 4. Under the head of Municipalities a considerable decrease is exhibited, partially accounted for by the reasons given above, viz. the trans- ference of the Sattara zillah to the Central Circle, and the consequently diminished number of Municipal vaccinators in this Circle, and by fall- ing off of the work of the Hooblee and Gudduck Municipal vaccinators. The Gud- duck vaccinator is supposed to work throughout the Dumbul Talooka, but no regular peon is allowed him and he complains of his inability to get many persons collected for vaccine operations. I represented this to Mr. Robertson, the Collector of Dharwar, who usually takes much interest in vaccination, but he informed me that if a peon were allowed to accompany the vaccinator occasionally it would be sufficient. I again pointed out to the Collector the necessity of a permanent peon for the purpose of col- lecting cases and otherwise assisting the vaccinator, especially if he be expected to work in out-villages, but I have since received no reply. The Hooble Municipal vaccinator is likewise not allowed a peon. The Sircy Municipality have thought fit to discon- tinue the services of a vaccinator. Dispensaries. 5. There is also a decrease in the dispensary vaccinations throughout the year under review, and though there is one Dispensary less this year than last, this does not affect the numbers, as all the dispensaries have a diminished number of operations. The reason of this is, I think, what I gave last year, at least I know of no other sufficient to explain it14 Canara collectorate. Small-pox was epidemic in the Moondgode Petah of that zillah, and though I sent Eshwant Ferrogojee, the Bankapore vaccinator there, at my representation Mr. Elphinstone, as a special case, sanctioned the entertainment of a vaccinator for this district. In parts of the Dharwar Collectorate still much oppo- sition to the spread of vaccination exists15 enough, but I cannot place much faith on the re-vaccination returns. In fact I think many of them might be considered as primary vaccinations. Testing returns. 9. In this Circle the vaccinators' returns16 tubes, as the remainder tried at Beejapoor proved successful, producing very good vesicles, and from these and other removes I renewed the lymph of several other vaccinators. In some villages I have met with very indifferent lymph and resulting cicatrices, while in others, vaccinated by the same vaccinator, as equally good work has been seen. I believe the reason of it is, that on first introducing lymph into a village and, an indifferent vesicle resulting, the vaccinator propagates from this source instead of giving himself the trouble to bring a fresh supply from another village. Animal Vaccination. 12. In November last I endeavoured to introduce Animal Vaccination into this Circle, and succeeded in inoculating a heifer, with lymph brought with me from Bombay, but on vaccinating children it failed. Several other inoculations from the same source failed to produce vesicles on the human subject. I attribute the failure in the human subject to the vesicles not having risen particularly well on the heifer. Vaccinators sometimes take lymph from too ripe vesicles. 13. Occasionally a vaccinator vaccinates from too ripe vesicles, when inflammatory products are mixed with the vaccine virus ; the vesicles are then large, and give a large supply of impure lymph, which produces bad vesicles and bad vaccination. Lymph supplied to all applicants for it. Lymph has been supplied in tubes to dispensaries, civil surgeons, vaccinators and all others who have applied for it. It is difficult at times to furnish lymph in well filled tubes on account of the inability of many of the vaccinators to fill them properly. I have shown the vaccinators the mode of filling tubes, but they do not appear to become very skilful in their use. When we have a Native Assistant Superintendent in each zillah many of the difficulties in this way will diminish, and the supervision will be closer, which means not only more work but better work also, and this latter is certainly desirable. Small-Pox. 14. During the year I addressed the different Collectors requesting that returns of small-pox might be forwarded to me monthly or quar- terly, but up to the present time I regret to say I have received none: but I have been informed that orders have been issued to furnish them in future. Small-pox has been prevalent in parts of the Kulladghee, Canara, Dharwar, and Belgaum collectorates. In the Chundgarh district of the Belgaum collecto- rate it was epidemic at the commencement of the year. The talooka vaccinator was ordered there, and I visited that part in November, but I did not hear of many deaths having occurred. In the Canara zillah small-pox was reported by Mr. Elphinstone to be prevailing, and in a very fatal form in the Moondgode Petah. I at once directed the Bankapoor vaccinator to proceed there, and General No. 334, recently entertained, was sent to Bankapoor, and directed to work towards the Moond- gode district, but both of these men were very soon obliged to relinquish work on account of sickness. Fever was very rife in both these talookas during the year, and I had no little difficulty in getting a vaccinator to go there. On my representing to
17 the Collector of Canara the desirability of appointing a special vaccinator for the Mooudgode district as a temporary measure, he sanctioned early in January the appointment of a vaccinator to be paid out of Local Funds, but even then I could not for some time secure the services of a vaccinator. I had a candidate at the time in the office, but on my directing him to proceed there he refused on account of the insalubrity of that part; so I was obliged to appoint a man who had been before acting as a substitute in the Canara zillah, though he is somewhat over the regulated age. In many villages where small-pox is prevalent the Natives do not bring forward their children as readily as might be supposed. I have myself witnessed the reluct- ance of Natives to be vaccinated under these circumstances ; this is especially the case in a part of the Canara collectorate, and to some extent for the following reason. Some years ago it was a common belief and disseminated by a civil surgeon of that district (a copy of whose letter was not long since sent me by the Collector) that when small-pox was epidemic in a place, it was useless, not to say noxious, vaccinating in that place, but that vaccination should be vigorously carried on in surrounding villages, so as to place a barrier of protected persons between the infected and other localities. The efficiency of this plan only seems to be ingrained into the minds of the Natives of those parts (especially about Sircy), so that the vaccination of the people during periods of small-pox is attended with no little difficulty. However desirable and advisable the latter proceeding may be, the former, I am of opinion, should not be lost sight of. It is true vaccination may get into disfavour somewhat in some instances from the fact of its failing to afford protection to those operated on, who may already be incubating the variolous poison, but when it is a question if the person vaccinated has or has not con- tracted the disease, it is preferable to run the risk than not vaccinate at all, as in the latter proceeding no security can be possible, whereas under the former there is the reasonable chance of the person being vaccinated before he has contracted the poison of small-pox. One point also is the aversion some Natives exhibit to allow lymph to be taken. At one village that I visited for this purpose, the parents had actually run off with their children to the jungle, having heard of the reason of my visit. Registers. 15. Registers of vaccination are now kept in all villages of the collectorates of this Circle, at least orders have been issued by the Collec- tors for such to be kept, and in most of the villages I have inspected they are fairly kept up. Some few instances I have met with where they have not been, but I have always brought it to the notice of the Collector. These registers will, I believe, prove an excellent aid to vaccination, because the Patels and Koolkurnees will now see that they are expected to assist the vaccinator. In the Native States these registers have not yet been introduced ; I have addressed Colonel Anderson on the subject of their speedy introduction into the Kolapoor State, and he informs me that orders will be issued for them to be kept. Major Westropp, the Assistant Political Agent, is also endeavouring to prevail on the Chiefs of the Southern Maratha States to introduce these registers in their villages. In February last I also addressed
18 Major Westropp pointing out the desirability of issuing zahirnamas in each of the States. I also sent him a copy of one in use in the Central Circle, and which will shortly be issued in this Circle too. He approved of the suggestion, and gave the necessary directions to the Kharbarees of Moodhol and Meeruj for their issue as soon as practicable, and likewise addressed the different Chiefs respecting them. The Superintendent of Vaccination of the Central Circle has lately forwarded to me a return in use in that Circle of all the &quot;unprotected&quot; in villages. This may probably be of some benefit to a vaccinator, and I purpose as soon as practicable requesting the Col- lectors to have similar returns compiled for each talooka. Tour. 16. I commenced this season's tour in November on my return from Bombay, by inspecting the work of substitute Hurry Kapalaswer in the Chundgurrh Petah of the Belgaum District, where small-pox had been prevalent at the early part of the year under review. I found the work satisfactory, and the Patel stated nearly all the children in the town had been vaccinated. At Tamboolwaree I also inspected cases, and saw a candidate vaccinate before me. I mention this for the following reason. On receiving the con- firmation return from the Superintendent of Police for the month of November the Patel and Koolkurnee of this village stated that the vaccinator had not vaccinated any cases during that month, and similar statements were made by the officers of some other villages. I actually personally saw, as I have stated, recently vaccinated cases there on the 14th of the month, and witnessed a candidate operate in my presence. I have duly represented this to the Collector, who is investigating the case, and I quote this as an example of the carelessness of some village officers, and how little reliance can be placed on their assertions with reference to the vaccinated cases in their villages. Village officials have not yet, as a rule, been accustomed to regard the work of vaccination as any duty of their own, nor have they been directed (as is the case in some Circles of Vaccination) to attend the vaccinator in his rounds of a village on his operating days. Mr. Grey, however, has very recently given orders to this effect, and I have no doubt an improved state of affairs will henceforth be inaugurated. I am sanguine that these returns of &quot; unprotected&quot; will enable a vaccinator to work much more easily and smoothly than he hitherto could do. I then travelled to the Beedee talooka, where I cannot say that vaccination is making as much progress as it should do ; principally too I think this is attributable to the inactivity of the vaccinator and indifference of the people. I met the Mamlutdar at the town of Beedee, where there has always been much opposition to vaccination, and he promised his active aid in future. The lymph in use was good. I next travelled viâ Kittoor to Hongul and Nurgoond. At Hongul I found several false entries in the vaccinator's book. I had the parents or relatives of the supposed vaccinated cases brought before me, and they stated that the vaccinator or rather his peon had told them he had no lymph then, but would return the following week, which he neglected to do. I had occasion to punish this vaccinator, Satapa Govindapa, last year, but as these vaccinations were done previous to that, and as it seems the vaccinator was told by a former Superintendent that he
19 might permit his peon to operate, a fine only was inflicted in this instance, He has certainly improved since last year, and bids fair to be more careful for the future. At Nurgoond and surrounding villages very few vaccinations have been done of late owing to the interruption of vaccination in the Noolgoond talooka by the dismissal of the late vaccinator for falsification. At Christmas I was in the Badamee talooka and in- spected the old work of Swamyrao Rungoo. He had been sick, and consequently had lost his lymph, which was subsequently renewed from vaccinator Jairam Krishna. His work, judged of by cicatrices, was good, and his registers and books neatly and well kept. On the 10th January I went into Kulladghee to meet the Superintendent General of Vaccination, who, after inspecting my office, &c., examined with me the work of the Kulladghee Municipal vaccinator, with which I was satisfied, as I believe was also the Superintendent General. This man had excellent lymph. The Superinten- dent General of Vaccination next accompanied me to Bagulkote, where we examined the work of the Municipal and Government vaccinators, as also that of the dispensary. Both vaccinators' work was on the whole satisfactory. By direction of the Superintendent General the Hospital Assistant in charge of the dispensary was directed to discontinue vaccinating at the dispensary because of there being insufficient children to ensure good work, and the fact of there being a Muni- cipal vaccinator, who will henceforth vaccinate in a greater number of villages than he has hitherto done. The Kulladghee vaccinator has almost solely confined his operations to the town of Kulladghee, which, as he states, does not give him a sufficient number of cases. The Municipality offer no objections to his working in other villages even within a radius of 8 or 10 miles, and by the recommendation of Dr. Pinkerton, he has been accordingly directed to work in the neighbouring villages. From there we travelled to the Bagehwara talooka. After two days delay I met the vaccinator General No. 192 at Mookurteehal, and examined his work in 10 villages altogether. In Telegee his lymph was very indifferent, though in other villages where his lymph was established it was good, the vesicles well formed, but small. In this talooka I visited in company with the Superintendent General of Vaccination the village of Sanchnal, and on calling over the names as usual, was told that one child was suffering from small-pox after having been successfully vaccinated. On having the child produced there was no doubt of its having the disease, but any marks of vaccination could not be discovered, nevertheless they still persisted that this was the child that was vaccinated. The vaccinator was absent, but on his arrival he informed us that he did not operate on this child but another in the same house, and the father who was sent for then stated, in contradiction to the assertions of the Patel and the mother, that his vaccinated child had gone to another village. To clear up the mystery the child was sent for and sure enough there were recent marks of vaccination on both arms, and it was from this very child that the vaccinator had taken lymph to vaccinate others. This again shows how careful one should be in not too readily giving credence to the assertions of village officers respecting vaccina- tion, who generally know little about it, and to save themselves trouble will make
20 almost any statements. In Hovin Hypurgee small-pox was prevalent at the time of our visit, and the vaccinator had been able to do but little work by reason of the lukewarmness of the village officers in giving him assistance. The Superintendent General of Vaccination represented it to the Collector, but I have not yet heard if a better state of affairs as yet obtains or not.* Here I parted with Dr. Pinkerton, who had been with me now nearly three weeks, and from whom I derived considerable information regarding the office records, &c., some of which it seems had been unneces- sarily kept for some time, and had added not a little to the extra work of the office. Since their discontinuance and the use of more printed forms there is a good deal less labour, but still a competent English writer is urgently required in my office. I then visited the Shindagee vaccinator, Gungadhur Ramchunder, who is doing very little work. He is dissatisfied with his removal from the Sholapoor to Kulladghee district. His lymph was good. He did not understand the new forms, as I may say very few of the vaccinators do. He was working very irregularly in his talooka, going from one village to another at long distances apart instead of working straight forward. I next met the Indee talooka vaccinator, Ramchunder Trimbuck, at Utharga. This is another of those transferred from Maratha districts, and he experiences some difficulty in getting on with his work. He had very good lymph in some villages, though his old work in the village of Seerkunhallee was very indifferent. At Benkunhallee small- pox was present in the village at the time of my visit, though the village officers were evidently desirous of concealing this from me, and I only found it out accidentally as I was leaving. The Koolkurnee had much obstructed the work, and his conduct I brought to the notice of the Collector. The Foujdar of the talooka had just arrived and he fully bore me out in my suspicions of this man. I requested the Foujdar to see that measures were taken to prevent any infected persons leaving the village, and directed the vaccinator to continue his work here with more activity. The Patel seeing the consequences apparently of his neglect, now readily tendered his assist- ance to the vaccinator. At Beejapoor, were I next travelled to, the vaccinator's work was not very satisfactory. His lymph was fair, but I established English lymph, received from the Superintendent General of Vaccination. This vaccinator has not done as much work as he should have done. He was afraid of vaccinating too many, lest he should have none to vaccinate after a time, for his operations have been confined al- most solely to the town of Beejapoor. Now, however, he will work in villages at a distance also. This man is sharp enough, but is indolent and requires a deal of look- ing after. I again met the Superintendent General of Vaccination at Jutt and the Superintendent of the Central Circle. I then visited the Jumkhundee State, whose vaccinator was unfortunately working in the Dharwar district, so that I did not see him. I examined however his old work in the town of Jumkhundee and some villages, and the result of my inspection of schools in Jumkhundee and three villages are as under:21 Vacci- nated. Unvacci- nated. Small- Pox. Remarks. Jumkhundee ......................... 54 62 48 Humnoor ......................... ...... ...... 29 Kunputtee ......................... 2 ...... 8 Goddahal ......................... ...... ...... ...... None Vaccinated. from which I must conclude the state of vaccination to be very unsatisfactory. I represented this to Major Westropp, the Assistant Political Agent, and attributed the defective vaccine arrangements to the following causes :22 had dismissed them with a caution for the future. Vaccinator Gopal Balall informs me he has experienced much less difficulty in procuring cases since Mr. Grey's visit here of late. It seems Mr. Grey made some inquiries regarding vaccination, and if more of the District Officers would do so too I am certain there would be very much less trouble. I then travelled to Meeruz and examined the work of the Chief's vaccinators in Meeruz and elsewhere. Mahadajee Juggonath has improved since I saw him two years ago ; he is a slow, steady man, and can vaccinate well enough, but he is somewhat indolent. His lymph was fair, but showed signs of deteriorating, so I replaced it from tubes I had with me. I also inspected the work of Anna Sahib's vaccinator, Khrishnajee Gunesh. His lymph and work were very indifferent, so I directed him, should the tube supplied fail, to procure lymph from Trimbuck Anunt, the Tasgaum vaccinator, near whom he was working. This man has only vaccinated in seven villages throughout the year. I brought this to the notice of the Chief's Kharbaree, as also to the Chief himself, who informed me personally that he would cause him to be directed to do better in future. The Sanglee vaccinator, Mahadajee Juggonath's lymph and work were very good. He is a careful, steady man and successful operator. I next travelled to Korundwar and examined the Sherole vaccinator's work in Sherole. In the town of Sherole his lymph and work were very fair, but in the village of Takowlee his lymph and marks were very bad. In another village however he had very good lymph, and it was only through great carelessness and to save himself trouble that his work in the above-mentioned village was so indifferent. He had vaccinated from glasses and propagated lymph from ill-formed and irregular vesicles. In consideration of his lymph being good elsewhere and having only recently fined him I merely cautioned him on his promising to amend. At Korundwar the Chief was very attentive and rendered me every assistance. The vaccinator was working in the Tekoteh district, where I had previously seen him. There are two vaccinators entertained by the Chief of this State, but their pay, Rs. 8 and 10 per mensem, is scarcely sufficient to induce them to work efficiently. They work very irregularly and receive their pay in the same manner, which makes them careless. At Echulkurrunjee I examined the work of the substitute appointed in the place of the late vaccinator, Gunesh Balajee, deceased. He has only recently commenced work but promises to turn out a good vaccinator. The Kharbarree speaks well of him. This concludes my tour for the year, during which I have travelled 2,197 miles, examined 186 villages, and inspected 6,579 vaccinated persons. Aid from Civil and Poli- tical Officers acknowledged. 17. To the Civil authorities I have to tender my best acknowledgments for the willing assistance they have at all times rendered me ; especially are my thanks due to the Collector of Kulladghee and the Assistant Political Agent of the Southern Maratha States. On my entering the Kulladghee district, or rather sometime previously, I wrote to the Collector requesting he would be so good as to direct the Mamlutdars of the talookas I intended to visit, to inform the Patels and Koolkurnees of villages that they would be expected to collect the vaccinated cases for my inspection at my request, and from the way in which in
23 most places my directions were attended to I have reason to believe that he did so. Certainly during this season's tour I have had much less trouble in this way than I have usually met with. I also informed the Assistant Political Agent at his request of the probable dates on which I might be expected at the different Jagheer States, and he very kindly gave notice to the Kharbarrees, so that on my arrival I had much less difficulty than formerly in making arrangements for seeing villages and meeting with the vaccinators. WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.24 under report be compared with the year 1868, it will be seen that the progress of vaccination in this Circle has been very satisfactory, and that the number of operations has increased from 38,133 to 59,372. 57,245 primary vaccinations performed during a year in a population said to be about 1,690,000, or even, as I believe, more correctly about 2,000,000, is, I deem, a highly satisfactory result, one hardly obtained in Euro- pean countries, and one which I have much pleasure in recording. Increase. 2. The increase is due principally to the employment of Local Fund vaccinators, but not entirely to that cause, as we have an increase also in both the Government and Municipal establishments. In 1869-70 the working staff of this Circle was 186/11, that is to say, eighteen men were employed vaccinating during twelve months and one during eight ; in 1870-71 the staff is represented by 23 6/12, or twenty-three working vaccinators during twelve months and one during eight. It will be seen by these figures that I have been working this year with a staff somewhat below the sanctioned strength. The following causes in- fluenced the temporary reduction of the staff below the authorized strength: (a). The difficulty in finding suitable persons for the ten appointments I was suddenly called upon to make in the Local Funds' Vaccination Establishment; they were only gradually filled up, and two vacancies still exist in that establishment. (b). Much sickness among the vaccinators, specially among those employed in the Tanna collectorate, due to malarious influence. (c). Sick and privilege leave granted to several vaccinators. (d). Dismissal of two vaccinators. (e). The station vaccinator of Rutnagherry was included in my establishment only since 1st of March last. (f). Sickness and resignation of the Native State vaccinator of Johar. It is apparent, as I have already mentioned, that the present increase is not entirely due to the employment of Local Funds' vaccinators, and I feel pleased to be able to record that, with few exceptions, the vaccinators employed in this Circle have done their very best, and that the annual returns which I have the honour to submit herewith, speak very favourably of the endeavours and industry of all. Decrease. 3. There is a decrease in the Native States' vaccination, but this does not affect the progress of vaccination in those States; it is merely a passing and temporary decrease brought on by exceptional circumstances. The vaccinator employed by the Native State of Johar was reported sick in the beginning of July last; he was sent to the Tanna hospital, where he remained several weeks very seriously ill from an attack of remittent fever. On his recovery he positively declined to return to Johar, and another vaccinator was appointed in his stead. This man a few weeks afterwards also resigned his appoint- ment ; he disliked the place, he was afraid to take his family there, and, as he informed me, he preferred poverty in Bombay, to dwell alone in the wild malarious
25 jungle of Johar. Under these circumstances I felt that it would be useless for me to appoint another man, and I considered that the only feasible plan was to get a native of Johar to accept the post. I accordingly wrote to the Political Agent of Johar, requesting him to select a young man, whom I would instruct and keep by me until I deemed him fit for his work ; at the same time I recommended that the pay should be increased, so as to induce a young man of a respectable family to accept the appoint- ment. The Political Agent (who is also the Collector of Tanna) approved of my suggestion, and he directed the Kharbaree of Johar to select a proper person. For many months no one could be found to accept the appointment ; at last, to my urgent and repeated requests, I was informed that a good selection had been made ; but a few days afterwards I was told that this candidate had, at the eleventh hour, also declined the honour of being the public vaccinator of Johar. To make a long story short, and suffice it to say, that it was only last month that a young man presented himself to me as the candidate-vaccinator selected by the Kharbaree of Johar. This young man has since been studying under my directions ; he is a well-educated youth, by caste a Brahmin, and from what I am able to judge, he will make a first-rate vaccinator ; and should he, as I hope, persist in his intention to settle down in Johar, we need have no fear as to the progress of vaccination in that Native State. By the beginning of next month he will be able to join his appointment. Native State of Jinjeera. 4. There are only three Native States in the Western Circle, and one of them, Jinjeera, does not provide for public vaccination. I had proposed to go to Jinjeera myself this season, and urge personally upon the Authorities the necessity of introducing vaccination into that Native State. But the political disturbances which occurred there lately, and the unsettled state of affairs that followed, induced me to postpone my visit to a more favourable time. I had the pleasure of meeting on my tour, in March last, the Collector of Colaba, who is also the Political Agent of Jinjeera, and from some conversation I had with that Officer, I thought that I perceived some chance of succeeding, and accord- ingly I wrote to him at once on the subject. I stated that I had reason to believe that small-pox and the practice of inoculation were both more or less prevalent, at all times of the year, in the Native State of Jinjeera ; and that, considering the vicinity of Jinjeera to Bombay, and the daily intercourse of the inhabitants with the neighbouring talookas, I trusted that he would agree with me, that this deplorable neglect of a great sanitary measure should not be allowed to continue any longer, and that without further delay the benefits of vaccination should be accepted by a Native State in which the Bombay Government had repeatedly shown great interest. I heard lately from the Political Agent that he is strongly urging the matter, and I feel confident that in next year's Report the Native State of Jinjeera will occupy a good place, and fairly rival in vacci- nation both Johar and Sawunt Waree. Municipal Vaccination. 5. This year's Report shows an increase of 1,220 operations performed by the Municipal Vaccination establishment, although the number of vaccinators employed by Municipalities has been re -
26 duced from 3 to 2. At the beginning of the official year I visited Oorun and Panwell, and from what I saw, I felt convinced that one vaccinator for the two Municipalities, would answer better than if both Municipalities were allowed to entertain each a separate one. The Presidents of the two Municipalities agreed to my proposal, and the Municipal vaccinator of Panwell was placed in charge of both towns on a slightly increased pay and with a peon allowed. He has performed 846 vaccinations more than the two vaccinators did in the previous year, and there was a saving of Rs. 60. Local Funds. 6. I had a good deal of trouble with the Local Funds' vaccinators. At the be- ginning of the official year I was called upon to fill up the appointments which had just then been sanctioned. Several appointments were given to young men who had served as &quot; candidates,&quot; and who had received very flattering testimonials from the vaccinators under whom they had served. As it turned out, most of these men were grossly ignorant, or lazy, idle fellows, and more likely to injure the progress of vaccination than to further its cause. For instance, a man, recommended by a Medical Officer, was appointed to the Bhewndy talooka, and during the three months he remained there, he never vaccinated a single child27 of Vaccination should also be informed, so that he might direct the district vaccina- tor to accompany or send to the Dispensary a few healthy children bearing good vesicles, from which the work should be begun. It was recommended that not less than fifteen or twenty children should be vaccinated at one sitting; this average being necessary in order to maintain a supply of good lymph, from which alone vaccination should be performed. I expected that by adopting this plan a higher percentage of successful cases would be obtained, and that it would prove satisfactory, both in its working and in its results, to the Medical Officers themselves and to the people under their care. Nor have my expectations been deceived: those who have followed cor- rectly and entirely my suggestions, have done good and creditable work. Mr. DeSouza at Bandora, Mr. Munday at Vingorla, have both worked well; but foremost of all, I would place Mr. Dunjeebhoy, in charge of the Callian Dispensary, who has worked the new system with much intelligence and zeal, and who was able in consequence to show an increase of operations from 43 in 1869-70, to 109, in 1870-71 whilst, at the same time, his percentage of success rose from 80 to 96.2. Lymph. 8. During November and December the lymph was reported bad in many talookas. I believe that the climate of the Konkan after the rains is very unfavourable to vaccine lymph. Good lymph was repeatedly forwarded to the vaccinators who had complained of theirs, and by the middle of January it was everywhere reported good. I saw some very good vesicles occasionally ; others somewhat inferior owing to their very rapid development and the purulent tendency of the lymph. As a rule, however, seventh day vesicles contained good lymph, and gave very fair results. Cicatrices. 9. 1 have taken notes of the character of cicatrices and vesicles in some 9,000 cases. I will give the result of my observation in the following tabular statement: 28 vourable circumstances into account, the difficulties of so many kinds our Native vaccinators have constantly to contend with, and I maintain that a real and probably permanent successful result, equal to 90 per cent. of operations performed, is very good indeed. Small-pox. 10. Outbreaks of small-pox were frequently reported to me as having occurred in the Rutnagherry. Districts. Whenever possible I went myself to the locality and very often found no small-pox at all, simply chicken-pox or a few isolated sporadic cases. In some places small-pox existed, but it was of a very mild character, and I believe that much exaggeration exists on this point. I have not succeeded in obtaining small-pox returns from Rutnagherry, but if they are not more valuable than those received from the Tanna and Colaba collectorates, sanitary science does not lose much by their absence. Inoculation. 11. Inoculation is frequently practised in the Rutnagherry Districts. When the presence of an inoculator in a talooka is reported to me I at once bring the matter to the notice of the Civil author- ities, who manage to drive him away from the locality ; but he generally turns up again elsewhere before long. It seems difficult to put a check to inoculation as long as the law is helpless in prosecuting inoculators and whilst the people of this country are favourably disposed towards it. General progress of Vac- cination. 12. Altogether the condition and progress of vaccination in this Circle may be deemed very satisfactory; patience, time, and good vaccination will decide the few wavering that may remain, but, as I have already mentioned, nearly 60,000 operations among a population of about 2,000,000 is quite as much as we are entitled to expect anywhere. There are a few localities in this Circle where vaccination is not received with the same favour as it generally meets with; the causes may be many, and I propose next season devoting myself to overcome the apathy or resistance which is complained of, notably in parts of the Bhewndy talooka, in some localities in Salsette, and in a few of the seaport towns. I have frequently gained over whole fishermen villages, whose inhabitants had proved most obstinate to the voice of the vaccinator, but who gave in at once when the subject was placed before them in a sensible manner, and when they saw that there was no coercion, but simply a laudable desire on the part of the Government to protect the lives of the people of India against fatal and dreadful diseases, they resisted no longer but cheerfully consented to receive the vaccinator and promised to afford him every assistance. I have no doubt that a similar result will also be obtained in the localities I have just mentioned, although it may require both time and perseverance for us to win over the more bigoted of the popula- tion. Conduct of the Vaccinators. 13. One vaccinator, Babajee Yadew was reduced to assistant vaccinator, on account of his dissipated habits ; he is a bad bargain and never will do much good in the service, and another man, Assistant
29 Vaccinator Govind Ballal, was dismissed the service for falsifying his returns, which he had done to a considerable extent, and for many years ; a third, Assistant Vaccinator Cassaram Palkar, was also dismissed the service for misappropriation of public moneys, the amount was trifling and a falsehood was pleaded in justification. Unfortunately the man had a bad name; he had been accused several times before of obtaining money and supplies from the parents of the children he had vaccinated. On one occasion I had to fine him for being absent without leave, on another occasion for detaining his peon's pay, and he was met last April at Narel, by the vaccinator attached to this office, the very day he should have been vaccinating in his talooka some sixty miles away. I felt bound under these circumstances to recommend his dismissal. But now that he has been severely punished, I trust that the experience he has gone through will teach him honesty and a better sense of duty, and I beg therefore to recommend him to the merciful consideration of Government, and that in consideration of his fourteen years' previous service he be reinstated but in a lower grade. No vacci- nators have been suspended ; the amount fined was altogether Rupees 42, and no other punishment of any kind was deemed necessary ; indeed most of the men have done their duty well; the Local Funds' vaccinators at present employed give satisfaction, and taking every thing into consideration I deem the conduct of the vaccinators on the whole both good and creditable. Tour. 14. At the beginning of the official year I visited part of the Tanna Collectorate. During the rains I proceeded to Poona to work at animal vaccination. In the beginning of October I proceed to Da- poolee, from thence I visited the whole of the Rutnagherry collectorate ; from Vingorla I returned North by sea and proceeded to Mhar, and from that place through the Colaba collectorate, which I also completely inspected. 15. Travelling in the Western Circle is no sinecure, it is both expensive and difficult, and I fear that on this account the Western Circle must always stand low, if not lowest, when compared with the other Circles of Superintendence. Extent and rapidity of travelling are not very feasible in the Konkan. Variolation. 16. I made during the year a series of experiments on the variolation of cows and heifers, and although I placed myself in the most favourable condition for success, I always and completely failed; nor was I, while on tour, more successful in my attempts to vaccinate heifers with heifer vaccine lymph, and the only time I obtained a favourable result was in retrovaccinating a calf: the vaccinations obtained with this lymph were very good, although not so readily accepted by the human system as humanized lymph gene- rally is. Thanks to Mr. Anunta Chandroba I received on several occasions some very good lymph to replace some that had degenerated, nor did I forget him ; I obtained from Dr. Warlomont, of Brussels, a fresh supply of Cow-pox on ivory points, which I at once forwarded to Mr. Anunta Chandroba, and I have had the pleasure to learn from that gentleman that they have proved very successful.
30 Aid from Civil Authori- ties acknowledged. 17. The Civil authorities have always and on every occasion afforded me their very valuable support, and doubtless it is to the interest taken in our work by Civil Officers of all grades that we owe our good progress, and it is again to their support that I look to for overcoming any prejudice that may still exist in a few localities. NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.31 any idleness or want of zeal among the vaccinators. With reference to the large number of operations in the preceding two years, it must be remembered that there was then a large influx of destitute Marwarees into Gujarat, many of whom were vac- cinated. During the year two municipalities, Neriad and Dundooka, have entertained vaccinators, so the work of those places which otherwise would have been performed by Government men, and included in the Government establishment, now goes to form the increase in the Municipal establishment. A glance at column 5 of statements Nos. I. and V. shows that notwithstanding the performance of re-vaccinations there is a general slight decrease of work in almost all talookas. This general decrease is, I believe, chiefly owing to want of unprotected children. For the past two years each talooka had a separate vaccinator and some of the large talookas were provided with two. Vaccination has now been so thoroughly carried on everywhere that now our men have only to work among the new produce of their talookas. As opportunity offered I have reduced hands, and during the year two vacancies were not filled up, so that the work of the Government establishment is only for 30 men. As regards the Municipal establish- ment, deducting the work of the two municipal vaccinators of Ahmedabad and of the municipal vaccinator of Broach, the total would be 3,171, giving a slight increase of 544 operations over last year. The Dispensary total includes the work of the Civil vaccinators of Surat, Broach and Kaira. The purely Dispensary vaccinations amount to 1809, which is a decrease of 860 operations. As regards the Native States' establishment, owing to the dishonesty and dismissal of several vaccinators, there was a considerable stoppage of work in the Pahlunpoor Superintendency, amounting nearly to the work of two vaccinators for the whole year. Compared with last year's work, however, the decrease of 1,281 operations is a very slight one. Taking the whole work performed by the four establishments as shown in the summary at the head of this report, the total number of operations performed during the past twelve months is 98,207 ; of these 87,492 were successful cases, this gives 93.7 as the percentage of suc- cess. Lymph. 2. On the whole, judging from the reports of vaccinators and from actual obser- vation of the lymph during the year under report, I may say that the lymph in use is good. Of the 30 vaccinators whose lymph was examined during the year, the lymph of 15 was undoubtedly good32 their talookas. About the close of last year I received a supply of animal lymph in tubes from the local Superintendent of Vaccination in Bombay. From this lymph a couple of children were vaccinated at Cambay. The lymph produced good pearly vesicles. Some more children of Cambay were vaccinated, and I charged a few tubes and took them with me to Borsud, where a retransmission was successfully done. A supply in tubes taken from Borsud was introduced successfully at Towra in Broach talooka, and from thence a supply was sent to Jamboosur. Out of the few children vaccinated by myself direct from the heifer-lymph in Surat, I was able to see one partially successful case and from this I filled one tube with difficulty. This tube, charged on the 19th October 1870, remained with me till the 14th January, by which time all the lymph in it had solidified. In using this tube at Deesa I was obliged to break it into several pieces, which were moistened in a little glycerine, even then I could extract very little lymph from it, and with this one child was vaccinated. On the 8th day, two small but pearly vesicles were observed. I directed the vaccinator to allow these vesicles to develop till the 9th or 10th day, and then to vaccinate one or two children. He did so ; a second transmission of this lymph producing very good vesicles, and he has been working with this lymph since the end of January. He is a vaccinator of 12 years' standing, and reports that the vesicles produced by this lymph are very large, and that during all his service he has never seen such good results. He sent me a supply of this lymph in tubes, which, after remaining with me for more than three weeks, was used at Bayud in Morassa talooka with good results. It produced beautiful vesicles and the lymph yielded was very clear and viscid. Every monsoon there is deterioration of lymph to a certain extent, but, during the last one, the deterioration was observed to be very great and general. In many talookas it continued from August up to November, and in some quarters it had to be entirely given up. This general deterioration of lymph every monsoon may be partly owing to the combined influence of heat and rain, but I believe it to be mostly due to the entire want of care on the part of the parents. The mass of the village populations being chiefly agricul- tural, the monsoon is the busiest season for them, and every member of a family capable of any work goes to the fields, and mothers have of necessity to take their children with them; add to this the nuisance of the flies, which is a sort of plague in Gujarat. I have myself noticed that, in the twinkling of an eye, a fly can suck up the lymph from a well-charged lancet. After vaccination the flies regularly stick to the punctures and dry them at once, and when vesicles form on the arms the irrita- tion produced by the flies causes the infants naturally to scratch the arms, and thus vesicles are opened and destroyed. During the monsoon, in consequence of this fly nuisance, to carry out vaccination is a work of the greatest difficulty : it entails the utmost care, and this very few of our vaccinators take. The result is that more bad work is done during these few months than during the rest of the year. During the coming monsoon I shall direct the vaccinators only to vaccinate the children of trades- men and such other people of villages as are not likely to expose their children to rain and heat, and to do only enough of work each week to keep up their lymph,
33 Vaccinators cautioned to do good work rather than too much of it. 3. During the year under report the attention of all vaccinators has been fre- quently drawn to the great necessity of doing good work only. Circulars were issued, enjoining them to perform every vaccination most carefully, to use the utmost caution in the selection of really good lymph, to charge their lances afresh for each puncture, and carefully to insert a good quantity of lymph on each occasion, and never to attempt making two or three or more punctures from one charge of the lancet. In case their lymph was spoiled, they were directed at once to report the same unhesitatingly, to stop work, and not to continue for a single day the use of such lymph ; and all have been distinctly informed that in case, on inspection of their work, it was found that these instructions were disobeyed and bad work performed, then they would be dismissed from the service. Columns of age and re- sult to be carefully filled in. 4. The importance of all vaccination statistics depends not only upon the cor- rectness of the numbers vaccinated, but upon the precision with which the ages and results of the vaccinations are recorded. As regards numbers the returns of this circle can be mainly relied upon. Since the last two years a modification has been adopted in the method of filling up the columns of age and result. Instead of the usual way of filling up columns with 1, the column &quot; under 1 year&quot; is now filled with the exact number of months of the age of the child up to 12, and the column &quot; above 1 year &quot; is filled with the exact number of years similarly. As regards noting the result, the column of &quot;successful&quot; is filled up with the exact number of vesicles developed. Experience of the past two years enables me to state that this method has induced among the vaccinators a great deal of accuracy of observation, and the inspection- results show that the returns of almost all are in the main correct. A careless and indifferent man is easily detected at the time of examination, and is adequately punished. Vaccination introduced into the Native State of Bansda. 5. In para. 9 of last report mention was made of the introduction of vaccination into Dhurmpoor, and I have now the pleasure to report that mainly through the exertions of Mr. Hope, the agent to the Governor, vaccination is now introduced into the neigh- bouring state of Bansda. Municipal Vaccination. 6. It also affords me much satisfaction to report that during the year under review I have succeeded in getting a few of the Munici- palities of Guzerat to employ their own vaccinators. When my last report was submitted there were only four Municipal vaccinators in the whole of Guzerat; this number is now increased to seven. After repeated representations the Dhundooka municipality agreed to entertain a vaccinator and one was engaged and has been working since July 1870. And I am glad to report that the Neriad municipality has also sanctioned an annual expenditure of Rs. 300 for a vacccinator.
34 Dispensary Vaccination. 7. Dispensary vaccination has had a fair trial during the year under report. There are in all 22 dispensaries. In my last report I mentioned that almost all the dispensary medical officers were written to, and encouraged to carry on vaccination, notwithstanding which a glance at statement No. V. will show that dispensary vaccination has progressed very little as regards numbers, and as regards quality35 those were only in a few of the several punctures made. Out of all the children seen by me, only one child had developed on its arms three good vesicles of middling size ; from two of these vesicles 1 managed, with difficulty, to fill one capillary tube on the 19th October. The result of the use of this tube lymph has been detailed in para. 2. Experiments on animal vaccination in Surat came to a close on my leaving in November for the districts. As I should be for some months constantly on the move, and as under such circumstances it would be difficult to carry on animal vacci- nation, on my arrival at Ahmedabad, I asked Mr. Ruttonjee Hormusjee if he could undertake to carry on animal vaccination. He readily consented to do so. I then waited upon Mr. Borradaile the Collector, and requested the grant of some money for carrying on animal vaccination in Ahmedabad. Mr. Borradaile very cordially consented to give Rupees 100 from Local Funds. By Resolution No. 2963 of Go- vernment in the General Department, sanction to this expenditure was given. On the ] 2th November, I inoculated a heifer at the Bechurdass Dispensary out of some lymph kindly supplied to me by Mr. Anunta Chundroba. On the 17th this operation was found to have so far succeeded as to enable me to inoculate another heifer to a good extent. Dr. Wyllie, the Civil Surgeon of Ahmedabad, had seen the method of animal vaccination as carried on in Belgium, but he kindly attended the dispensary on the 17th to see the process. I gave over charge of the last heifer to Mr. Ruttonjee, who, though somewhat interruptedly, carried on the work up to the middle of February, when in consequence of deterioration of the animal lymph it had to be given up. From November up to February 13 heifers were inoculated, and 53 children vaccinated with lymph direct from the heifers, and from the lymph of some of the successful cases, 149 children were vaccinated. During these experiments the process of carry- ing on animal vaccination was shown to Assistant Vaccinators Purbhooram Pransunker, Jeithalall Poonjajee, and Moola Ameeroodeen of the Government establishment, and to the Civil vaccinator of Surat and the two Municipal vaccinators of Ahmedabad. Surat and Ahmedabad being the two largest cities in this circle, it was my intention to make some definite arrangements for carrying on animal vaccination in them all the year round; in fact for the city of Ahmedabad such an arrangement was come to. The grant of Rs. 100 from the Ahmedabad Local Funds mentioned above was to cover all expenses up to March, and Mr. Borradaile said that in case further assistance was wanted, I was to apply for the same in March, so that the sum could be included in the Local Funds Budget for the current year. The results of Mr. Ruttonjee's ope- rations at Ahmedabad have deterred me, for the present, from carrying these experi- ments further, especially as the bad results are attributed to deterioration of the animal lymph. With a fresh supply of good lymph I hope to continue these experiments on a future occasion. Small-pox. 10. There has been no appearance of small-pox in this circle during the past year worth noticing, but just about the close of the year, I received a report of the appearance of small-pox in the Camp of Deesa.
36 Tour. 11. When the year under report commenced I had just arrived and encamped at Broach. From April up to the close of June, I was en- gaged in inspecting the work of the talookas of Broach and Unklesur, and of the following talookas in Surat collectorate, viz. Olpar, Mandvee, Bar- dolee, Soopa, Chicklee, and Balsar. Vaccinations performed at the Mandvee, Bardolee, and Balsar Dispensaries were also examined. I left Surat for district work in November. Oomedwar Jeever Dajee's work in the talooka of Anund in Kaira zillah was examined and found satisfactory. I arrived in Ahmedabad about the first week of November, introduced animal vaccination there, and made arrangements for its being carried on for some lengthened period. During November and part of December, I was employed in travelling through and examining the work of the vaccinators of Duskroi, Sanund and Veerumgaum talookas of Ahmedabad zillah. The dispensaries of Sanund and Veerumgaum were also examined and remarked upon, in accordance with the instruc- tions of the Superintendent General on this subject. I arrived at Punchasur in Rha- dunpoor zillah, about the middle of December, from which time up to the end of January I was engaged in travelling through and examining the work of the vaccinators of the Native State of Pahlunpoor. Three of these men were found practising various kinds of dishonesty, one of them in addition had falsified his returns to a considerable extent. Two men who were most guilty were dismissed at once ; the third, who was simply guilty of exercising dishonesty in making up his returns, and who was a very old servant, was severely reprimanded and cautioned that if he again was found doing the same he would be dismissed. From the commencement of February up to the close of the year I was engaged in travelling through Mahee Kanta. The work of all its vaccinators has been examined, and in addition the work of the three vaccinators of the Government establishment whose talookas lay in my way. During this tour I travelled through portions, more or less, of all the Government zillahs and through the whole of the Native States of Pahlunpoor, and Mahee Kanta. The work of 30 vaccinators and 5 dispensaries has been examined. Of the 30 vaccinators 20 were of the Govern- ment and 10 belonged to the Native States' establishment. Of 8 men whose work was unsatisfactory two were fined, and of the five men whose work was bad, one was dis- missed and two were heavily fined. The two men found making dishonest and false returns were dismissed forthwith. Difficult to manage in Native States. 12. Much difficulty is experienced in managing vaccination in the Native States of Pahlunpoor and Mahee Kanta: in the former there are the two Durbars of H. E. the Nawab of Rhadunpoor and of the Devan Sahib of Pahlunpoor, with which difficulties occur every now and then regarding vaccination matters. The pay of the vaccinators frequently falls into arrears ; if this or any other subject, for which the vaccinator may not have found the necessary relief, is either reported to me or the Political Superintendent, he becomes distasteful to the Durbar, and his removal is desired. If on the other hand the vaccinator is in good favour with the Durbar, but not easily amenable to this office, and a fine is imposed, though yads are returned reporting the infliction of the fine, in
37 Proposal to make a fund for vaccination in Native States. reality nothing is done. No such troubles occur in Mahee Kanta, where the difficulty in carrying on good and continuous vaccination arises more from the nature of the province than from any other cause. To show this best I would quote here the first para. of my letter No. 411, dated 18th February last, addressed to the Political Agent, on the subject. &quot;The division of Mahee Kanta into territories owned by the Edur Durbar, and by the several Thakoors has led to the entertainment of separate vaccinators. There are at present five vaccinators employed in the whole of Mahee Kanta, three of whom are paid from subscriptions by the Thakoors, and two by the Edur Durbar. Vaccinators paid by the Thakoors have allotted to them certain talookas belonging to the Thakoors, and the Edur country is divided between two vaccinators. But the territory of each Chief is more or less scattered, and with Government and Guicowaree territories there is such an interlacement of the whole that between one part of a Chief's Talooka and another part, portions more or less in extent of other Chiefs' territories intervene. The vac- cinators are only allotted talookas of certain Chiefs, so they have frequently to skip over from one part to another; as a consequence, vaccination, far from being con- tinuous and arm-to-arm, is carried on in a broken manner. It often happens also that certain portions, on account of difficulty of access, are entirely forgotten.&quot; To remedy these difficulties, a proposition for the re-organisation of the vaccination establishments of these two States has been lately submitted by me to the Political Officers, the main feature of which is the formation of a common vaccination fund for each of these States. The Princes and Thakoors who now pay for separate vaccinators are to contribute a lump sum annually to the Political Agency, the same to be not much above the present expenditure incurred by the said Chiefs and Thakoors. Upon the formation of such a fund the vaccinators and peons would receive their pay directly and regularly from the Political Officers, and there would be a certainty of all fines &c. being inflicted. The vaccinators who now receive nearly equal pay will also be graded after the model of the Government establishment, and they would be members of one common service, instead of as at present being servants of certain Chiefs only ; thus any one might be transferred to another place, or could be lowered in grade for misconduct: good service could be rewarded by promotion without changing the district of the vacci- nator, and in Mahee Kanta consecutive portions as far as the nature of the territory will permit, would be allotted to the several vaccinators. Whether a particular allotment comprises one or several Chiefs' territories would be immaterial ; the vaccinator would have to vaccinate all villages that came within its limits. This would lead to more thorough vaccination than at present, and as fewer breaks in lymph would occur the work performed would be more satisfactory. Taking this opportunity of a new orga- nisation of the Vaccine establishment of these territories, I have made a proposition for the entertainment of a Native Superintendent of Vaccination for each, as also for the providing of some money allowance to parents of children carried from their own to other villages for vaccination purposes. The Superintendent General of Vaccination has approved of my proposals, and I await with anxiety to know how these proposals will ultimately be disposed of.
38 Aid given by Revenue and Political Officers acknow- ledged. 13. Much valuable assistance has been received by the department from all the Revenue and Political Officers, for which I cannot close my report without expressing my best thanks. SIND CIRCLE. Superintendent.39 I have very little doubt they will have brought up the number of vaccinations to fully its usual average. The quality of the work done is excellent; as a rule they vaccinate in no less than eight places, so as to ensure a sufficient number of vesicles for thorough protection. Vaccinators records' nearly absolutely correct. 2. The records of the men were found nearly absolutely correct, excepting those of Chelaram and Khayal Mull, who managed to make their returns incorrect in connection with revaccination. They were both dismissed, and the man Assanund was discharged on account of inability, through (pretended) sickness, to work in Lar. No opposition to vaccina- tion except in towns where Hindoos abound. 3. There is no opposition to vaccination anywhere except in the large towns; in fact the country (agricultural) people are very grateful for being protected against small-pox. The cultivators are chiefly Mussulmans; the Hindoos amongst them being com- paratively few, offer little or no opposition to being vacci- nated, but where the Hindoos are numerous, as in large towns, there the progress of vac- cination is more or less arrested. The Hindoos readily acknowledge that vaccination saves them from an attack of small-pox ; but that is the very reason they object to it they look at small-pox from a religious point of view, and they apparently consider any interference with the cause of small-pox as tantamount to a sin. Animal vaccination. 4. For this reason I consider that animal vaccination ought to be accepted by Hindoos. The cow is a sacred animal, and if it be the medium to protect them against small-pox, instead of being objected to, its value would á priori be enhanced. In order to lessen as much as possible the scruples of Hindoos or any other people against vaccination and to have a supply of lymph that the most fastidious might rely on, I suggested to the Com- missioner in Sind that animal vaccination might be given a trial: he at once approved of it and pointed out Hydrabad as a desirable place, as having the advantage of being constantly under the supervision of the Civil Surgeon. But unfortunately Dr. Holme- sted objected to its introduction at Hydrabad, so we had to look out for another station. At this juncture I happened to fall in with Major Wallace, Acting Collector of Shikarpoor. I stated the whole case to him ; he said he felt sure that Mr. Leahy at Sukkur would take it in hand, and the Sukkur Municipality would very probably vote sufficient money to carry it out. I am happy to be able to say that Mr. Leahy has most willingly undertaken the task, and that the Sukkur Municipality has most readily and munificently granted the money. Thus animal vaccination will obtain a fair trial in Upper Sind, where also it will have to withstand the severe ordeal of intense heat. My best thanks are due to both Major Wallace and Mr. Leahy for their hearty assistance. Re-vaccination. 5. Re-vaccination has not yet had a fair start in Sind ; the people do not see the use of it, neither do the vaccinators : those entered as re- vaccinations are for the most part primary vaccinations. 11 vac
40 The vaccinators hunt up children of between five and ten years of age, and if they have no marks of vaccination and the parents say they have been vaccinated, the vaccinators operate upon them and enter the operation as a re-vaccination, which is almost inva- riably successful. Dispensary Vaccination. 6. At the Dispensaries vaccination has been carried on perseveringly, but there was a decrease on the previous year of 928. Deaths from Small-pox. 7. I am glad to be able to report a considerable diminution in the number of deaths from small-pox this year. In 1869 there was a total of 244 cases, whilst in 1870 there are only 121 reported, or less than one-half; again if we deduct from this 86 cases which happened at Kurrachee, not under my charge, the number is reduced to 35 ; from this I have a fur- ther reduction to make, for on my tour I found that the five cases reported from Oobaoro were not of small-pox but of measles : this brings the number under my charge down to 30, less than one-eighth the number reported last year. The new form for death registers should have a column for measles. 8. In connection with this subject I beg to express my opinion that the latest form of death report should have a column for measles, or the consequence will be that cases of measles, or other skin disease will be entered as small-pox. This happens now, and I have had reports from Oomerkote, Meerpoor Buttora, Oobaoro, corrected from small-pox to measles. I trust Government will see the necessity for giving a column for measles and the other exanthematous diseases, as well as for small-pox. Tour. 9. After my return from the Thurr and Parkur Districts I went to Upper Sind in April last, in company with Sir William Merewether, with the view especially of further- ing vaccination at Jacobabad, which is the only town in which the Civil Medical Officer makes no attempt at vaccination. I was unable to reach Jacobabad, by a severe attack of fever following exposure to the sun, but the Commissioner did an immense deal towards inducing the people to be vaccinated, and one of my vaccinators (Kishen Chand), together with the first Assistant Superintendent, vaccinated many people in the town and camp of Jacobabad. I afterwards went to Guadur, and arranged measures with Major Ross for carrying on vaccination in Southern Beloochistan, but we have been prevented from carrying out those measures owing to Major Ross being away in Persia on a political mission. Later, I visited Bombay to learn the method of animal vaccination. In my cold season tour I marched along the Western boundary of the Kurrachee and Shikarpoor collectorates, through the districts of Jacobabad across to the Eastern boundary of Shikarpoor, then through Sukkur down the right bank of the Indus. I scarcely need say that I have travelled over a great extent of country and examined many children. 10. My sincere thanks are again due to Sir William Merewether, who has most cordially assisted me in every way. My thanks are also due to all the Officers in Sind, who have invariably given me every assistance.
41 KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendent.42 Small-pox. 5. Small-pox was reported to prevail in Manickwara in March, and I have heard of its being in the villages in the neighbourhood of Rajcote. 6. The Talookdars in the neighbourhood of Rajcote have complained that since the transfer of the Station vaccinator no one has visited their villages for the purpose of vaccinating ; this work will probably be done during the monsoon, when the Super- intendent is in Rajcote. REWA KANTA CIRCLE. Superintendent.43 work had been got through that year, and that he did not consider it probable that the returns would attain their then dimensions in the subsequent or any succeeding year. 2. Again the year itself under report has been an exceptionally bad one as re- gards vaccination in these districts, in consequence of the very unhealthy condition of the circle for two or three months subsequent to the close of the monsoon ; and I do not believe it could, from this cause, contrast favourably with the one preceding it as regards numbers, even in the absence of the large number of operations performed amongst the children of the immigrants that augmented that year's returns to such an extent. During the months of October, November and a portion of December, malarious fever raged to such an extent that work was partly at a stand-still through- out the Circle, and very nearly completely so in one or two districts of the Punch Mahals. A good many of the vaccinators were incapacitated by it; and those who were able to carry on their work could not procure children to operate on, in consequence of the extent to which they, as well as their parents, suffered from fever. When these two facts are considered I think the wide difference between the total number of opera- tions performed in the Punch Mahals this year and last is not to be wondered at; and there is no reason to infer, as might be done from the large decrease in the Govern- ment establishment, that vaccination is becoming unpopular or the vaccinators less energetic in the performance of their duties. Increase in Native States. 3. Looking at the returns from the Native States, or the Rewa Kanta proper, it will be found that there has been an increase in the num- ber of operations this year to the extent of 2,492. This increase is due to an increased number of vaccinators who, with one exception which shall be mentioned hereafter, have been working steadily throughout the year ; and also, and 1 think more immediately, to the great interest taken in vaccination by Major Barton, the Political Agent. It is chiefly owing to his exertions on its behalf that vaccination has made such steady and sure progress in the States for which he is Po- litical Agent, and entirely due to his representations to the Chiefs that they have thus diffused the benefits of the prophylactic amongst their subjects. Without his co-opera- tion the Superintendent could do very little towards the extension of vaccination in the Native States, and, as far as I am concerned, I have never had to ask a second time for his assistance whenever I required it. 4. Taking the Circle as a whole, and considering also the total number of re- vaccinations, I think vaccination may be fairly said to have held its own for the year 1870-71. Vaccinators. 5. There were fifteen vaccinators in all employed during the year, of which number five were employed by Government, and worked in the Punch Mahals, and the remaining ten by the Chiefs of the States of the Rewa Kanta.
44 Government Vaccinators. 6. There was no change in the Government establishment during the year; but in three instances there was a break of work that materially affected the returns. In two cases the break occurred as a result of illness45 any defect I found in the lymph itself, or any inferiority it seemed to me to possess over the lymph I have seen in use in other Circles; but did so merely in conformity with a firm conviction I hold of its protective properties being capable of deterioration by being too humanized. Indeed the vesicles I saw here were just as good and as characteristic as any I had previously seen resulting from the use of human lymph ; and the lymph they contained appeared to me so pure and good that I should have been loth to replace it had I not been so thoroughly satisfied as I am of the superiority of that recent from the heifer. 11. In asking for animals for inoculation I at first found some difficulty in ob- taining them, as the owners required some remuneration for the loan of them, and 1 had no funds at my disposal for the purpose. On bringing this matter to the notice of Mr. Jervoise, Agent to the Governor Punch Mahals, he readily assented to give me every aid from the Local Funds, and placed at once at my command Rs. 100 from that source to meet any expenditure that might occur consequent on the introduction of animal vaccination. This sum has been quite sufficient to meet all the require- ments under that head ; and has enabled me, so far, to renew all the lymph in use in the circle, besides leaving a good balance to meet future contingencies of a similar nature. 12. I do not intend entering into a full and detailed description of the manner in which I performed the inoculations on the different calves I selected for that pur- pose, as such a description would entail an amount of unbecoming egotism without serving any practical end. Suffice it to say that I performed the operations, without the slightest variation, after the method which I learned from Dr. Blanc, Superinten- dent of the Western Circle, in Poona, last rains, who also kindly sent me on application a supply of animal lymph to commence work with. Since I performed the first in- oculation in the month of October last, I have kept up the supply of lymph steadily, with some few breaks, of longer or shorter intervals, during which time tubes were kept, charged from the vesicles on the last inoculated calf, up to the present time. All my inoculations have not, however, been successes, far from it; neither have the vac- cinations I performed, from what appeared on the heifer rich, first class vesicles, proved effective in every instance. The uncertainty of the effects of the lymph in many cases was, to say the least of it, embarrassing, the more so because unaccountable. One instance of this uncertainty was so remarkable that I must relate the details of it here, even in face of the resolution I have just stated of excluding all such details from this report. At Rampoor, in the Soonth State, I vaccinated 11 children from a calf 1 brought on with me from Jhallode, making two points on either arm of each child, thus giving altogether 44 points on the 11 children. The vesicles on the calf were good, and gave to all appearance every promise of the vaccinations being successful. Such was not the case, however, for on the 10th day only one vesicle appeared where I expected to find 44; and on the remaining 43 points, all of which I carefully ex- amined, there was in no single instance the slightest approach to the formation of
46 another. The vesicle was so good a one that I had 3 children, on whom the ani- mal lymph failed, vaccinated from it, making 6 points on each, 3 on either arm and on the eighth day after, the vaccinator, to whom I gave strict injunctions to watch the results, reported that 17 vesicles had appeared amongst the three children, and that they were so large and good he took all the lymph he could from them to work with, leaving, at the same time, his previous lymph to die out. This is the most striking instance I experienced of the uncertainty of animal lymph when used direct from the calf; but when transmitted in tubes I have invariably found it inert when applied to the human subject, so much so that I now always supply it to vac- cinators, after the first transmission, when they require their lymph renewed. By this means I have supplied every vaccinator in the Native States with fresh lymph, and they all report favourably of it. In the Punch Mahals I have at different times inocu- lated calves and from them vaccinated children in each separate talooka, so that the vaccinators are now working with lymph to the purity of which I can testify from personal observation, as well as to the richness of the vesicles it produces. Each of the Government vaccinators has been instructed how to perform the operation on the calf, as has also the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Godra dispensary, and one of them, assistant vaccinator Jaithalall Gunputram, who acts as office clerk, has become quite an expert at it, so much so that I would now have no hesitation in entrusting him with the performance of it on his own account. Popularity of animal vac- cination. 13. That animal vaccination is more or less popular in these districts, is, to my mind, beyond all doubt. In the first place, it would set at rest,47 simple and easily seen is partly devoid of attraction, while that which is mysterious and incomprehensible obtains a certain amount of respect and attention. This fact I have seen exemplified in Dohud, where a class of people, who usually affect to despise vaccination and are not usually seen at the vaccinator's rendezvous, came to me with their children as soon as they learned they would be vaccinated direct from the cow. Altogether the practical deductions I have drawn from the use of animal vaccination, are :48 Results. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Punch Mahals ................... 243 180 71 494 Rewa Kanta ...................... 90 44 10 144 Total...... 333 224 81 638 This table shows a certain amount of popularity for re-vaccination in the Punch Mahals, while it does not seem to make head in the Rewa Kanta. Chiefly, I imagine, from the large number of primary operations there are still left to be performed in the latter portion of this circle. The percentage of success, 59.7, excluding unknown, shows that there are good reasons why the operation should be favoured; and in- contestibly proves that, if not an absolute necessity, it is, at least, a wise precaution. Tour. 16. I was on tour for the four months of December, January, February, and March; but as the particulars of how I was employed during the time are summarized in the employment and inspection returns accompanying this report, I will not do more here than give a gene- ral detail of the vaccinators and their work as I visited each. In October and No- vember I examined the work of Assistant Vaccinator Jaithalall Gunputram, who is constantly stationed in Dohud as he has to do the vernacular work of the office. He was working with the animal lymph, which gave very fine vesicles. His returns were correct and his register neatly kept. In December I visited at Jhallode Apprentice Vaccinator Pursotum Dyaram; at Godra Vaccinator Ballajee Purburam ; at Kallole Assistant Vaccinator Mahashunker Cassiram, and at Hallole Apprentice Vaccinator Dajee Kaiwulram. With the first man I found the returns and register quite correct; but they were kept so slovenly that I had to fine him and give him a severe reprimand for what was evidently the result of pure carelessness. With the second man I found a mistake in one of the monthly returns, he having entered as successful a name that should have been entered as unsuccessful. This he explained as a clerical error, and on examination I found such to be the case, as the name was properly entered in his own register. As this was the only mistake I discovered, after a searching examination, and as I was otherwise satisfied with the neatness and order of his register, I let him off with a warning to be more careful in future. His lymph was good, but I never- theless replaced it by animal lymph. The third man had just returned from sick leave when I visited him, and had no lymph, it having been lost during his absence. I started it again for him by vaccinating a number of children at Weizulpoor from a calf. What I saw of his previous work satisfied me, and his returns were correct.
49 The fourth man I found just recovering from a fit of illness, during which time his lymph went bad. I started it again for him by vaccinating some children from calves. His previous work was satisfactory, and his returns were correct. In the month of January I examined the work of the Sunkeira Mcewas' vaccinator, went to Nandode in Rajpeepla to look after the duftar of the late vaccinator Fukhur Mahomed, deceased, and see what returns, if any, he had left; the work &c. of the Chota Oodeypoor vaccinator, the two Barrea vaccinators, and some old work of General No. 253. I was satisfied with the work and the correctness of the returns in every case. In the month of February I again examined the work &c. of the Jhallode Vaccinator, and that of the man employed by the Soonth and Kuddana States. In the former case I was satisfied with the work, as also with the improvement made in the keeping of his register. In the latter case I found the man absent without leave, for which I had him dismissed, giving his place at the same time to a candidate whom I found in charge of his work. Both in Jhallode and Rampoor I vaccinated a number of children with lymph from the heifer. In the month of March I examined the work of both the Loonawarra vaccinators, that of the Ballasinore vaccinator, and some old work of the Godra vaccinator. I found the work good and the returns correct in each instance. After this I returned to Dohud, having visited and inspected the work of every vaccinator in the Circle, with the exception of the two Rajpeepla men, who shall however, be amongst the first to be inspected next year. Small-pox. 17. I have received no returns of small-pox during the year, and from their absence and the non-receipt of any reports, with one excep- tion, of its appearance, I am inclined to the belief that the Circle has had a comparative immunity from the disease this year. The exception was a report I received in the month of November from Jambooghora, where it was said to have broken out. I immediately directed the Hallole vaccinator to proceed there and commence work, and from his reports I gather that there were only a few sporadic cases and that it again disappeared without assuming the form of an epidemic or spreading to the neighbouring districts. I got no other report of its presence, and did not notice any evidence while on tour of its having appeared amongst the people, though I travelled through the greater part of the Circle. Dispensaries. 18. There are two dispensaries in this Circle, one at Godra supported from the Local Funds, and the other at Barrea supported out of the revenues of that State. The Godra dispensary is in charge of a Sub-Assistant Surgeon, and was opened for the treatment of patients in October last. It is very nicely situated, being built on an isolated knoll on the banks of the river. As a building it is both compact and solid, but is, I venture to submit, some- what unsuited for the purpose of a dispensary. However, some improvements I believe are in course of consideration, and amongst others the erection of a ward for the reception of in-patients, which will render it more adapted to the requirements of a large place like Godra. I found it well supplied with medicines and instruments,
50 which were well arranged and kept. The books and records were all kept in a most neat and orderly manner, and reflected the greatest credit on the then Sub-Assistant Surgeon, Mr. C. Pestonjee, for his tidy and business-like habits. The daily average attendance was between 40 and 50, with every prospect of an increase to that number as the fact of its existence becomes more generally known. Mr. Pestonjee resigned the service in March, and was succeeded by Sub-Assistant Surgeon Suruplall Balluckram. Since the change I have again had an opportunity of examining the dispensary, and am quite satisfied that it will lose nothing while in charge of the present incumbent. I visited the dispensary during the hours of attendance, and was much pleased with the amount of attention Mr. Balluckram paid to his cases individually ; and the fair know- ledge he seems to possess of medicine. Being his first independent charge he is naturally a little diffident, but I have no doubt he will do much better as he gradually attains that confidence in himself which time and experience can alone give. The Barrea dispensary is in charge of an ex-Hospital Assistant; and at present occupies a house in the Bazaar. A building however is. in course of erection for its reception, and when completed will be a very compact one of its class. When passing through Barrea on my tour I examined this dispensary, and was very well satisfied with the neatness and order with which both medicines and instruments were kept. The daily average at- tendance appeared to be about 50. No vaccination was carried on in connection with it, heretofore, but by permission of Major Barton, I have directed the Hospital As- sistant to commence vaccination, and sent him lymph for that purpose. The getting up of this dispensary was altogether the act of the Political Agent, who saw and felt how necessary something of the kind was in a place so unhealthy. I believe that it is in contemplation to establish a dispensary also at Loonawarra, where it is very much required. Sanitation in Towns and Districts. 19. While on tour the fact came very forcibly to my notice what an amount of suffering and mortality might be staved off by some one with power to enforce a few of the simplest rules of sani- tation. I speak chiefly of the rural population, and the villages and hamlets they inhabit, amongst whom there was an amount of sickness in the past year, extraordinary even in these unhealthy districts. As I said in an earlier part of this report, for the few months subsequent to the monsoon the people suffered from malarious fever to an extent previously unknown, and it was fatal to such an extent that, in one small village of about 25 houses, I was told thirteen children died from it in about two months. The presence of the fever is easily accounted for by the late and increased fall of rain, and the superabundance of rank vegetation produced by it, and can scarcely be helped, as long as cultivation is as confined as it is. But that the people should suffer to such an extent from it is remediable, and might I think be easily managed if they could be only induced to keep the spaces around and between their houses free from this rank vegetation. In the scattered Bheel villages this would be no very difficult task, as most of the houses are either detached or semi-detached, and they are generally speaking by the end of the rains partly hidden from view by the rank
51 overgrown weeds that seem to bury them in every direction. One can easily fancy what would be the result of these weeds being left to swelter in a fierce October sun ; and how dangerous to existence must be the atmosphere impregnated with their effluvium. I think myself their removal and suppression would tend materially to lessen the amount of sickness in these districts, together with some attention to the drinking water. What I would suggest is52 many parents destroy their children's vesicles. This is doubly mischievous. It not only robs us of lymph, but lessens the protection to a child; and should in the course of events this particular child become attacked with small-pox, blame is laid at the door of vaccination, more especially should the attack prove at all dangerous or fatal53 their use. The object of their going to a station in preference to being operated on at their own houses is to prevent the unwelcome inspection visits of the vaccinator for fear he should take lymph from their children's arms; the more distant, therefore, the station, the better suited it is for their purpose of concealment. No amount of as- surance on our part to respect their scruples and leave them unmolested could reassure them. They were perfect strangers to animal vaccination. Long experience had taught them that we had no alternative but to take lymph from successfully vaccinated children to keep vaccination going, and they would not believe that we could get a sufficient supply of lymph from heifers. 3. The same fear that makes the people prefer station vaccination, makes them give us false addresses. This gives our vaccinators a considerable amount of unneces- sary and useless trouble ; many ultimately remain unseen, and their results consequently, unknown. Ignorant and illiterate as they generally are, they cannot very well be blamed for this natural anxiety to save their children the pain and themselves the trouble and annoyance of going all the way to the station, and being detained there for some time. I beg to go even beyond this, and assert that something much worse than pain is often the result of the taking of lymph from a child. They cannot be made to understand that the very safety of their children which they so much desire and are anxious for, requires that the result be seen by persons competent to judge of the success or failure of the operation. They have seen perhaps their own children vac- cinated, and whether seen or not by the vaccinator afterwards, they have been all the same-protected from small-pox. This is their experience ; and it is enough for them to know that, irrespective of the vaccinator seeing the result, vaccination does protect, and has protected many. They do not care to know more. The progress of the vaccine vesicles in successful cases of vaccination, is very often chequered owing to the carelessness and inattention of the parents ; but notwithstanding all this, the protection given by vaccination must have been very great to have so much secured the confidence of the people. This is a cheering and hopeful sign, and by and by, should I continue to succeed in obtaining with our animal lymph similar results to the present, I hope and fully expect to be able to inspire still more confidence, and make them as anxious to have the result ascertained as they are now for the operation. For the same experience that makes them now view with suspicion and distrust all the movements of the vaccina- tors, will convince them that their scruples and prejudices are really respected, and no harm possibly comes by bringing the child for the inspection of the vaccinator. 4. For all this however, I would still urge the necessity of a compulsory Vacci- nation Act. For it will take time before the general public is fully reassured, and during this time many valuable lives will unnecessarily be sacrificed. Besides, except in the fisherman caste, better known as Kolies, the Act will not exert any pressure upon any body, at least pressure that would be felt as a grievance or as an encroachment on the liberty of the subject. The Act will simply have the effect of stimulating them a little, rousing them from their natural apathy, indifference, and improvidence, as the
54 presence of small-pox itself always does, and force them to take in time the step which possibly through procrastination they would delay till too late to be of any use. The fishermen have all along, to a man, refused to accept vaccination ; they are located in places thickly populated by other classes, and are very filthy in their habits. Their places are the very hotbeds of diseases of a contagious nature ; and small-pox finding a ready field attacks them mercilessly, and each attacked person becomes the focus and frightful source of effluvium, which is rapidly disseminated all around, and attacks the poor neighbours who, though desirous of getting their children vaccinated, are so surprised by the sudden and unexpected presence of small-pox amongst them, that their energies become completely paralyzed. Besides the presence of small-pox revives in them the sleeping embers of old superstitions and prejudices respecting this disease. Small-pox is no less a personage than that terrible goddess &quot;Devi,&quot; whose dread presence is made known in the shape of the eruption on the skin. To do ought to thwart or obstruct her proceedings, is to incur her displeasure, and any thing is welcome but this calamity. When, therefore, small-pox has made its appearance in a house, all the unprotected persons residing therein, whether members of the same family or not must remain unprotected till the fiat of the dread Deity goes forth, and is made known by the persons either contracting the disease, which is very often the case, or remaining unattacked till the 22nd day after the first appearance of the variolous papules in the first attacked person. On this day the attacked person is taken with great pomp and ceremony to the temple of &quot; Shitala,&quot; the guardian Goddess supposed to have a mollifying influence on small-pox, and for whose propitiation vows are taken during the progress of the disease, which are made good to her on this day. The particular ceremony of the occasion having been gone through, the company return and feast, and from that time, the unprotected, if any, are at liberty to get themselves vaccinated. There are not wanting those who, foolish-like, go the absurd length of abstaining from vaccination, should small-pox appear even in the lane in which they reside. How vitally important then it is, to see that all the unprotected are vaccinated in time to be spared all after bad consequences, difficulties and annoyance. Compulsory vaccination alone can do this. As it is, already a year has been allowed to pass without taking any active steps in the matter; and that terrible, yet preventible scourge of humanity, has been permitted to number among its victims some 556 precious lives in the year 1870. Prevalence of small-pox. 5. Small-pox has been present more or less all through the year. It was at its acmé in April and May, when it carried away 122 and 130 persons respectively ; from June it began to decline, till in January 1871 there were only 6 deaths from this cause. From February, however, it again began to make head, and in March 1871 numbered as many as 61 victims. Altogether there were 556 deaths from small-pox during the course of the year 1870, a number certainly but one-third of what it was during 1869, but yet considerable enough to make one feel concerned at such a loss of human life.
55 6. Though small-pox prevailed all over the Island, the number of deaths varied very much in the different localities. The following table shows the different districts and sub-districts, with their populations as ascertained by the census of 1864, and the number of deaths that took place in them from small-pox during 1870 :56 and coax the poor Hindoos, Concanees and others into bringing their children to the station to be vaccinated. Not so, however, with the Deccan Ghatees, who will not be persuaded readily. The Mussulmans also neglect vaccination, and in consequence suffer much from small-pox and die in numbers. A mortality of 174 out of 556, or a percent- age of 31.3 in a population only one-sixth of the whole of Bombay, is not a trifling matter. There were 1,822 Mahomedans vaccinated during the year, mostly at the station. 7. Sewree, Worlee, and Colaba also stand prominently in regard to their number of deaths from small-pox. Worlee, a small out-of-the-way place, having a population a trifle more than Mahim, near which it is situated, has a mortality double that of Mahim ; whilst Sewree having only one-fourth the population has a mortality almost three times as much as that of Mahim ; and Colaba with an equal population, has four times as many deaths. But this will not be wondered at when it is known that the greater part of this mortality was amongst the fishermen, who inhabit these places in great numbers. 8. Patient perseverance no doubt will be able to achieve much. With abun- dance of animal vaccine virus we will be in a position to cope with small-pox and ob- stacles to vaccination with better hopes of success than heretofore. The introduction of the Compulsory Vaccination Act, would however have given the death blow to all unreasonable opposition, and would pave the way for the speedier extension of vaccination. Increase. 9. During the year under report, 11,500 vaccine operations were performed, besides 246 re-vaccinations, being an increase in the primary vaccinations alone of 2,2/8. The increase was chiefly owing to our having abundance of vaccine lymph always ready at hand, and to our being enabled to carry on door to door vaccination. Sex, caste and age. 10. Of the primarily vaccinated, 6,729 were males, 4,771 females; 853 Chris- tians, 7,962 Hindoos, 1,822 Mahomedans, 703 Parsees, and 160 of other castes ; 3,833 under, and, 7,667 above one year old. Result. 11. Of the total primary operations, 8,358, or a percentage of 86.68, were successful; 1,284 unsuccessful; and in 1858 the result was unknown, as the persons operated upon could not be found afterwards. The percentage of success is a little more than in the previous year, and would have been still greater, if the repeated failure of the animal virus during the first half of the year had not contributed to swell the number of failures. Re-vaccination. 12. Almost all the re-vaccinations performed during the year and which amounted to 246, were performed with the lymph from the cow direct. Of these 152, or a percentage of 66.3 proved successful; 77 failed ; and in 17 the result could not be ascertained.
57 Lymph. 13. Our lymph was of very good quality throughout the year, and especially so during the latter half, when human lymph of first trans- mission from the cow gave us vesicles scarcely equalled, except perhaps, by the vesicles we were in the habit of seeing during the first three months after the introduction of animal vaccination here. Indeed my experience of the past 15 months has shown me that the first and even second transmission of human lymph is if anything more active and energetic in its effects in the human subject, and produces larger and fuller vesicles than the lymph taken direct from the cow. In former years it was constantly observed, that during the hot and rainy seasons vaccine lymph here showed a great tendency to degenerate, and that sometimes to such an extent as almost to put a stop to our work, and make us helplessly dependent on the supplies of lymph from Europe and the Mofussil. Nothing of the sort occurred during the whole year under report. This better state of things is solely owing to animal vaccination. Animal Vaccination. 14. Flushed with recent success, success that for the time appeared perfect in every respect, I wrote in my last annual report, in exultant tones about our animal vaccine operations, notwithstanding the warning note in the shape of failure of operations in some of the heifers supplied by the Municipal authorities. I was, however, doomed to sad, though as it afterwards proved, temporary, disappointment, which, while it lasted, made me extremely anxious about our ultimate success. Heifer after heifer proved a failure. Not that the opera- tion did not take well in the calf58 tion had taken very well indeed in 24. Here and there an insertion or two had failed, but for all that, the protection of the system was, in my opinion sufficient. It often happened, also, that the failure was not a complete one. Out of some 10 or 12 or more children vaccinated, perhaps in one or two a vesicle or two only would show themselves59 fully continuous this time. Out of 48 heifers inoculated, the operation failed only in 7, several of which were inoculated with preserved lymph, some received from Dr. Blanc, and some from our own stock. Of these failures, two took place in December, 4 in January, and only one in February. The one inoculated on the second of that month, whilst of the other 10 inoculated during the same month, and 13 in March, not a single one failed. During the year, I have inoculated 115 heifers. Of these 27 were supplied by the Municipality, 25 of them being paid for from the Cowasjee Jehan- gier grant; 19 belonged to private individuals, two or three only of whom required any remuneration to be paid to them for the use of their animals ; 39 were bought by ourselves, either at Bandora or Coorla, and were afterwards sold by public auction ; and 30 were supplied to us by a cattle merchant, who entered into a contract to supply us with a heifer every sixth day, for 8 months, at a certain fixed price. The expenses on account of animal vaccination, including all charges, amounted to Rs. 645-9-3 ; or Rs. 5-9-9 for each animal. Stunned and stupified as it were by the repeated and. unaccountable failures, I scarcely thought about the desirability of keeping a record of our animal vaccine operations, which would be so extremely useful for future reference. From the month of November, however, I began to keep an account of the inoculations of the heifers, noting the date of operation, nature of the lymph used, general health and state of the skin to be operated upon, progress of the operation, and the result of the use of the lymph in the human subject. Simultaneously with this I began to keep a separate register of persons vaccinated with animal lymph, and to personally ascertain the progress and result of each vaccination, visiting the vaccinated persons as often as possible for this purpose. My object in taking all this trouble was to gather an amount of facts and gain personal experience which would enable me to speak with some degree of confidence on the subject of animal vaccination, as to how far it could be trusted in cases of emergency or at all. In doing this, how- ever, I had not calculated the labour. The work was an up-hill one. Children were vaccinated by dozens in all parts of the Island. Many through their fears of lymph being taken, took care to try and keep out of my way. Notwithstanding these drawbacks, however, I patiently persevered till the increased extent of the field of operations, both as regards the number of vaccination and places, made it physically impossible for me to watch personally the progress of every operation performed. I, however, never allowed a single opportunity of witnessing the progress and result of an operation to pass unavailed of. In this way, I must have during the last 15 months personally observed and noted the results of several hundreds of operations which I performed on the children of my friends, relatives, acquaintances, patients and neighbours, who naturally came under my close and attentive observation. But besides these, many European children, whose houses could be easily found, on account of correct addresses, were also seen ; and also many Parsee children. During the last month, not a few from amongst the general public brought their children to me for inspection, though the number of those not per- sonally seen by me was still considerable. The result of all this was that, in cases
60 where there was an intelligent, careful and attentive watching of the inserted lymph first, and of the resulting vesicles afterwards, there was scarcely a single instance of failure, or doubtful case. Of course there were instances in which one or two of the punctures did not take; but the vesicles that did make their appearance appeared to me from the severity of their local and constitutional effects, to be quite sufficient to give the necessary protection from small-pox. In my last report I stated that animal vaccination was kindly received by the community of Bombay. There were a few dissentient voices at the commencement, but they were, before long, all silenced. This year, however, there has again been a cry against it, strange again from the Europeans. Their disinclination is, however, simply on the score of the violence of the effect. Two cases were mentioned to me where the severity of the local and constitutional irritation had proved all but fatal. In one indeed it was thought a fortunate circumstance that only one out of four punctures made had taken, or else in all probability the result would have been fatal.* During an experience of some 15 months, based as it is on the personal observation of several hundreds operated upon, and which included not a few children of those nearest and dearest to me, I came across only three cases, where there really were serious conse- quences as the result of the operation. In one Erysipelatous inflammation attacked the arm, and thence extended all over the trunk and lower extremities. In the 2nd the arm was very much inflamed and swollen, together with the glands in the axilla, and there was a considerable amount of febrile disturbance for some days. In the 3rd the child had badly scratched the vesicles and a deep, inflamed sore was the result, and there was considerable tumifaction of the arm also. All the three, however, got ulti- mately well without much difficulty. In making these statements, I do not by any means deny the possibility of serious, nay fatal, consequences attending the use of animal lymph, in unhealthy and weakly constitutioned children, but it would be more as the result of the peculiar state of the system than the use of cow-lymph ; and human- lymph, possessing the necessary amount of effectiveness and activity would, under similar circumstances, in my opinion, lead to similar results. Bad results from the use of animal lymph, therefore, would rather prove the carelessness of the operator, who was remiss in his duty of selecting his subject, and the blame would attach to him more than to the lymph he had misused. The inference, however, is undeniable61 that animal lymph should be used at the earliest practicable age, say from 2 to 4, or 6 months at the latest, to save all unpleasant consequences. And it is a fortunate cir- cumstance that this is so, for any scheme of compulsory vaccination must make it imperative on parents to get their children vaccinated before they are 6 months old. 15. Before concluding my report, I would beg to express my sense of the many obligations I am under to Dr. Hewlett for his ready help, and to Dr. Blanc for his having kindly given me supplies of animal lymph which he took the trouble to obtain from Belgium. 16. The principal event of importance in connection with the Presidency Vac- cination Department is the bodily transfer of the whole of my establishment to the Municipality, and the addition to it of 5 vaccinators and 8 peons, bringing the whole number up to 11 vaccinators and 11 peons. The local Superintendent alone draws his pay from the Imperial treasury. KUTCH. One Native Assistant Superintendent, and three Native State Vaccinators under Mr. DORABJEE HURMUSJEE, G.G.M.C. Population 400,000. Total cost Rs. 580. Average cost of each successful vac- cination, 1 rupee and 2 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 610 ...... ...... 550 90.1 1870-71............ 648 38 ...... 571 92.1 During the year under report, commencing from 1st April 1870 and ending on 31st March 1871, there were 648 vaccinations performed by the vaccinators and at the Bhooj and Mandvee dispensaries. For the first two months of the year there were only two vaccinators, of which one was stationed at Moondra and the other was moving about different towns and villages. During the third month their number was in- creased by two more, one of them was however found unfit for duty, and was dismissed in the course of a month. The station vaccinator left his service at the end of the year 1870, for higher emoluments, so there remained only two vaccinators at the beginning of 1871, one of whom unfortunately fell sick and was on leave for about a month. Two more vaccinators were then entertained, but one of them submitted a
62 false monthly return, for which he was fined and dismissed, the other was discharged, as he was found quite incapable of working amongst the people of the villages. Since then I have engaged two more, and hope to see the four vaccinators working well from the beginning of the next official year. With these changes amongst them it was naturally to be expected that the progress of the work should be very slow, but on comparing the total number of persons vaccinated this year with that of the previous one, it gives a balance of 38 operations in favour of the present year. Of the 648 persons vaccinated there were 571 successful, 49 unsuccessful and doubtful, and 28 were those who escaped observation after the operation. Sex. 2. There were 363 males and 285 females. Caste. 3. There were 393 Hindoos, and the rest, 255, were Mussulmans. Cost. 4. The cost of each successful case was Rs. 1-0-2. Lymph. 5. The lymph used throughout the year was very good. I sent for a supply from Bombay from Mr. Anunta Chandroba, and it has acted exceedingly well. I have not been obliged to send for a fresh supply since, as it still answers the purpose very well. Small-pox. 6. A few cases of small-pox were reported as having occurred here and there during the latter part of the year. Cases of measles, how- ever, are found almost in every house.
63 EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS AND OTHERS. POONA. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major R. G. LORD, M.D. Population (portion of Poona) 30,000. Total cost Rs. 240. Average cost of each successful vaccination 4 annas and 2 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70 ......... 1,565 ...... ...... 1,323 85.0 1870-71.......... 1,055 ...... 510 900 85.3 The annual return of vaccination to close of official year (31st March) is forwarded in compliance with directions from the Superintendent General of Vaccination, though the vaccinator was transferred for duty under the Superintendent of Vaccination, Central Circle, from the 1st March 1871, and his monthly returns of work have been forwarded to that office since the 1st July 1870. A reference to last annual report will supply information as to amount and source of salary, extent of charge &c. There has been a falling off in the number of operations both this year and last, and a proportionate increase in the average cost of each case, which this year gives 4 annas and 2 pies as the expenditure for every successful case. The difficulty in procuring children for vaccination, without the assistance of a peon, is stated to be the cause of paucity of operations. The lymph has been of good quality, and a supply always available when asked for. 14 vac
64 There has been no prevalence of small-pox in the civil portion of the station throughout the year, and only one case, received from the cantonment bazaar, was admitted into the Sassoon hospital during that period. NASSICK. One Municipal Vaccinator, under Honorary Assistant Surgeon B. BURN, in Medical charge. Population 23,000. Total cost Rs. 252. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 13 annas and 4 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 476 ...... ...... 424 89.l 1870-71........... 486 10 ...... 301 82.0 Vaccination has been confined during the past year to the town of Nassick alone, and has been performed by the Municipal vaccinator only ; consequently the number of vaccinations in the present return is much less than in former returns, containing the total work of the Government vaccinator and that of the Municipality. The total number vaccinated during the past year is 480, of which 62 were unsuccessful, 117 not seen after the operation, and 301 ascertained to have succeeded. Taking the numbers given of successful and unsuccessful cases, and allowing those not subsequently seen to bear the same proportion, the failures will be 17.1 per cent., a very high ratio. The operations of the year just closed are less favourable than those of the preceding year, the cause of which, from my knowledge of the former and present vaccinator, and an inspection of the monthly results of work, I should be inclined to attribute to the more strict and correct formation of the returns for the past than for the preceding year, than to any actual difference in the results as relates to the percentage of unsuc- cessful cases. 2. The decrease in the numbers vaccinated has been on two occasions officially brought to the notice of the President of the Municipal Commission by the Superinten- dent of Vaccination of the Central Circle, and inquiries have been made respecting it. It seems to be owing to the caprice of the people themselves, upon whom vac- cination is in no way compulsory, and the vaccinator having no assistance from the Native authorities in obtaining the children whom he knows have not been vaccinated,
65 owing to the refusal of the parents to have the operation performed, and frequently being left without fresh lymph, by the children being sent away to a village on the very morning of the day he wanted them, to obtain lymph for others, the difficulties in the way of his operations have been very great; so much so, that he has sent in the resignation of his office, which I would recommend the acceptance of, as, although I believe him to be a good and honest man, with a sufficient knowledge of his duties, he may possibly want the energy and perseverance necessary to ensure success, and would suggest that another be appointed in his place. 3. The lymph has appeared to be good during the past year, and the vesicles have shown a healthy appearance. 4. The registration of births has been commenced within Nassick during the present year, and this will tend to give an idea of the actual disproportion of the number of children vaccinated to those born. From the 1st January to the 31st March, 138 births have been registered, and during the same period 125 children were vaccinated. Of course these 125 vaccinations may have consisted of but a small pro- portion of the children born during this period, but in time, allowing for early deaths in infancy, an approximate result may I think be arrived at. 5. Small-pox commenced to prevail in the town towards the latter end of February last, and has continued up to the present time, but not in a virulent form, nor does it spread very quickly, 28 cases in all having occurred since its commence- ment, with 5 deaths, in children, who had not been vaccinated. DHURRUMGAUM. Operations performed by Mr. Apothecary W. WAITE, Khandeish Bheel Corps. Population......... No Cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 167 ...... ...... 165 98.8 1870-71............ 215 48 ...... 200 94.0 Vaccination and re-vaccination have progressed very favourably in the Khandeish Bheel Corps during the past year, and with, I am happy to say, very good success, as will be seen from the very small number of failures. 117 children of all ages, varying from 3 months to 5 years, were vaccinated. Of these 100 were of the Bheel Corps, and
66 17 of followers. 111 cases proved successful, and only 2 unsuccessful and 4 doubtful. These latter were again vaccinated, and the result was favourable. The number of un- successful (including the doubtful) cases to successful, it will be observed, is very small, 5.4 per cent., being 3.8 over that of the preceding year, which showed 1.6 per cent. A greater number of children by 50 were vaccinated during the previous year ; but this is easily accounted for by a larger number of children being absent from head quarters who invariably accompany their parents when proceeding on outpost duty in the dis- tricts, and thereby lose the chance for some time to come of being vaccinated. It must not be presumed that because fewer children have been operated upon this year, that vaccination in the Bheel Corps is on the decline ; on the contrary, it has been most strenuously persevered in, and carried on with great care and regularity during the year; and if the re-vaccinations are taken with the vaccinations, it will be seen that a greater number by 48 have been operated upon this year than is recorded during the period embraced in the former report. It was, I may remark, with some difficulty and a good deal of persuasion that the men of the Bheel Corps could be brought to submit to the operation of re-vaccination, which was commenced on the 29th of August last, from which date up to the end of March 1871, 98 cases were operated upon. Of these 89 proved successful, and only 9 unsuccessful; the number of unsuccessful cases to successful is exceedingly small, being 9.2 per cent. The very great success attained in re-vaccination throughout the period embraced, cannot be easily accounted for, and is I admit unusual, and consequently may seem doubtful, yet the statement rendered is nevertheless true, and accurate, for every person brought forward for re-vaccination was closely and carefully examined by myself, and I can safely state that none but those from the age of 10 years and upwards, and bearing distinct and indisputable marks of previous vaccination, were ever subjected to the operation. Four persons, who in infancy were attacked mildly with small-pox, were re-vac- cinated, and are included in the number of successful cases. Vaccination and re-vaccina- tion in the Bheel Corps at Dhurrumgaum is always performed by myself and assistant from good and healthy lymph, a supply of which is kept in the hospital. It is gratifying to have to report again, during another year, the total absence of small-pox from amongst the children of the corps, and that only a few mild cases are stated to have occurred in the town of Dhurrumgaum. No casualties were reported. SHOLAPOOR. One Government Vaccinator, under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon G. Y. HUNTER (on leave) ; Assistant Surgeon LEGGETT (Officiating). Population 28,646. Total cost, Rs. 220. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 3 annas and 8 pies.
67 Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70 .............. 9-19 ...... ...... 802 89.6 1870-71 ............... 1,018 69 ...... 948 93.1 The total number of cases vaccinated during the year by the Government vacci- nator in the town and suburbs of Sholapoor, as shown in the above table, exhibits an increase of 69 as compared with the preceding year. During the period under review, there have been two vaccinators at work in the town of Sholapoor and their joint labours raise the total of vaccination to 2,075. The second vaccinator is employed by the Municipality and furnishes his report thereto. Vaccination is practised continually in the City, and once a week the children are brought to the Civil Hospital by the Government vaccinator for my inspection. In nearly all the cases which came under my observation the vesicles were well formed and the lymph of good quality. The vesicles, though normal in character, were somewhat smaller during the rainy than in the other seasons. The vaccinator is willing, diligent, and well-behaved. I am happy to be able to state that no epidemic occurred during the last year. The Government vaccinator was transferred to Barsee district on 1st March last, and now there is only one vaccinator who is employed by the Municipal Committee. SHOLAPOOR CHARITABLE DISPENSARY. Operations performed by NURSOO GORAPA, 3rd Class Hospital Assistant, in charge of Dispensary. Population 28,646. No Cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Succssfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............... 201 ...... ...... 164 86.3 1870-71............... 312 111 ...... 281 92.4
68 The number of persons vaccinated during the year was 312, being an increase of 111 above that of the year 1869-70. Of these 152 were males, and 160 females. There were 8 Christians, 243 Hindoos, 60 Mussulmans and 1 Parsee. 127 of these being under and 185 above one year old. The operation in 281 proved successful, 23 unsuccessful and doubtful, and 8 unknown. It was performed every week on Wednes- days. The lymph used was generally good, and the vesicles were normal in size and appearance. No measles or any other epidemic prevailed during the year under report. The average number vaccinated every week was six. BELGAUM. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major G. G. MAITLAND, F.R.C.S.; Surgeon Major SYLVESTER, M.D. (Officiating). Population 35,973. Total cost Rs. 240. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 6 annas and 1 pie. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............... 627 ...... ...... 611 97.4 1870-71............... 639 12 ...... 626 97.9 A review of the work performed by the Station vaccinator during the past official year exhibits a very slight increase in the number vaccinated as compared with the previous year's operations, the actual number being 627 in 1869-70 and 639 in 1870-71, the percentage of success being nearly the same in each year, that for the last year being 97.9, and for the previous year 97.4. It was hoped that from the fact of a peon being permanently attached to the vaccinator to assist in procuring the subjects for operation and in verifying the results of the same, a considerable increase in the number of vaccinations would be observed, and I am unable to explain why this has not been the case. The supply of lymph has been abundant and of good quality throughout the year, and the success which has resulted may, I believe, be attributed to the almost universal practice of arm-to-arm vaccination, by which the propagation of cow-pox by means of glasses, tubes, &c., has been rendered unnecessary. The result of the vaccinator's work has been carefully inspected at stated intervals, and with few exceptions the vesicles have been found of normal appearance, rarely presenting any exceptions to the perfect characters of the pock, and running a regular course.
69 I believe the climate of Belgaum, from the absence of extreme temperatures, to be particularly favourable to the success of vaccination, and although it has been sup- posed that atmospheric moisture is inimical to vaccination, I have observed no falling off in the percentage of successful operations during the heavy and protracted rains which fall in Belgaum during the monsoon season. A few cases of modified small-pox occurred in the Cantonment during April and May of the past year, and one case of that disease from the Lascars' lines was admitted for treatment into the Civil and Staff Hospital (was accommodated in a tent). In addition to the operations performed in the villages within a radius of 5 miles from Belgaum, 153 persons have been vaccinated within the limits of the Cantonment, of which 146 were successful. The vaccinator is an experienced man, and though somewhat advanced in age, is active and zealous in the performance of his duty, and I have reason to be satisfied with the manner in which he has performed the work entrusted to him. DHARWAR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon M. M. MACKENZIE. Population 30,000. Total cost Rs. 240. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 6 annas. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............... 835 ...... ...... 718 85.9 1870-71 ............... 848 13 ...... 763 90.4 The vaccination report for the past official year shows an increase of 13 total vaccinated over that of the preceding year. 763 were successful, giving a percentage of 90.4 as compared to 86.0 of the preceding year. The greatest number of monthly vaccinations occurred respectively in May, June, January, July, November, and February, giving 82, 82, 77, 72, 72, and 72. The supply and quality of lymph has always been fully kept up, and a tube filled with a little lymph has been sent every week to the Superintendent of Vaccination, Southern Circle.
70 According to the monthly report forwarded by the Collector's department I am glad to be able to state that there has been a great falling off in the number of small- pox cases in the Dharwar Collectorate. While 1859-70 gave a total of 658 cases, the nine months ending 31st December 1870 gave only 378, a considerable reduction ; for the remaining 3 months of the official year 1870-71 the monthly reports have not been received. The greater number of small-pox cases occurred in the months of July, August, and June, respectively 61, 55, and 53. KARWAR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon S. B. HALLIDAY (Acting). Population 9,975. Total cost Rs. 240. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 7 annas and 2 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the precoding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 733 ...... ...... 604 86.0 1870-71 ............ 783 50 ...... 535 68.3 The total number vaccinated during the year 1870-71, amounts to 783, being 50 more than the year preceding. Of these 441 are males and 342 females. 535 were successful, and 248 unsuccessful, including those doubtful. The percentage of success is 68.3. Considering the population is only 9,975 the total number vaccinated could not be expected to be more, and the vaccinator sometimes is obliged to go beyond the municipal limits of the town in search of children with a view of keeping up the supply of lymph. The inhabitants of Karwar have still great objections to get their children vaccinated under one year of age, and again great prejudice prevails amongst the community against allowing the lymph to be taken from the arm of the successfully vaccinated children, they think that the protective virtue of vaccination would be lost if the lymph be removed from the arm. This I consider interferes greatly with the practice of vaccinating children direct from arm-to-arm, and in several instances the children were vaccinated with preserved lymph. 52 persons were re-vaccinated, out of which 21 proved successful and 31 unsuc- cessful. Endeavours have been made to induce persons to be re-vaccinated, by explain-
71 ing to them the benefit arising from it, but as the practice has only been recently introduced, the people have little faith in its protective power. Small-pox was prevalent to a very limited extent in the neighbourhood of the town. 17 deaths have been reported. All these cases with the exception of a few were protected by vaccination. The disease did not last long, and no sanitary measures were necessary to arrest its progress. The lymph employed was good throughout the year, and the vesicles were well developed and normal. KULLADGHEE. One Municipal Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon SELIM MYER SALAMAN, M.A., M.D. Population 15,000. Total cost Rs. 146. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 7 annas and 3 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 651 ...... ...... 651 100. 1870-71 ............ 370 ...... 281 321 91. During the year 1870-71, 370 persons have been vaccinated by the Municipal vaccinator in a population of 15,000 at Kulladghee and surrounding villages, at a total cost of Rupees 146, including pay of vaccinator and contingencies, at the average cost of 7 annas and three pies for each vaccination, this sum being paid by the Municipality of Kulladghee. 2. The very large falling off in the number of persons vaccinated is probably due to the fact that most of the children had been previously vaccinated. 3. The lymph used is of good quality, the vaccinations are as far as practicable performed from arm-to-arm. 4. There have been no cases of small-pox either in Kulladghee or the surround- ing villages. 15 vac
72 KOLHAPOOR. One Native State's Vaccinator under Mr. Apothecary G. SINCLAIR, in Medical charge Civil duties. Population 110,000. Total cost Rs. 399. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 2 annas and 1 pie. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70........... 3,165 ...... ...... 3,107 89.8 1870-71............ 3,476* 310 ...... 2,959* 96.73 an excellent example by being re-vaccinated himself, along with the adult members of his household. I am hopeful that the small beginning now made will go on steadily increasing, and that much of the apathy and opposition now manifested will be over- come by explaining to the educated classes the importance of re-vaccination in affording additional security against small-pox if successful; whilst failure only affords an assurance that the original vaccination has been so complete that its prophylactic influence still renders the person insusceptible to small-pox. 8. The quality of the lymph has been uniformly good throughout the year. Latterly however the vesicle has not presented the usual healthy, large, and well- shaped appearance, nor has the character of the resulting cicatrix been as well marked as could be desired. As already stated, a fresh supply of lymph has been obtained from Mr. Raby, the Superintendent of the Circle. 9. The conduct of the vaccinator has been satisfactory. He is a very expert operator, and I have every reason to be satisfied with his work, as well as the trust- worthiness of his returns. 10. I have no improvement to suggest. 11. The annual vaccination return of the Kolhapoor dispensary is herewith for- warded. It shows an increase in the number of operations during the past year, being 431 against 367, or an increase of 64 ; of these, 99 per cent. were successful. The proportion of children under 1 year has been 39.9 per cent. 12. Vaccination has also been regularly practised amongst the families of the Kolhapoor Infantry whenever subjects could be obtained. 122 children were vacci- nated; of these only 89, or in the proportion of 73 per cent. only proved successful, owing to the degeneration of the lymph. 13. Re-vaccination has been extensively practised in the corps. Every adult male and female has been operated upon, with the following results. Of 460 subjects bearing cicatrices of previous vaccinations, 287, or a proportion of 62.4 per cent. proved successful, and out of 211 persons who were protected by small-pox either inoculated or natural, 59, or a proportion of 28 per cent., were successfully re-vaccinated. Of course the results were more or less modified in many of these cases, whilst in others the vesicles were as perfect and characteristic as those observed in primary vaccination. 14. 167 prisoners in the Kolhapoor jail were also re-vaccinated during the year, and 70 of the number or a proportion of 42 per cent. were successful. The result in 15 of the number is not known, in consequence of their release soon after they were operated upon. 15. Small-pox appeared in Kolhapoor and in one of the villages of the Kurwur Petah during the past month (March), but as already stated the disease was less prevalent than it had been during the preceding year.
74 TANNA. One Municipal Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon W. C. KIERNANDER (Acting). Population 10,581. Total cost Rs. 252. Average cost of each successful vac- cination 6 annas and 8 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 324 ...... ...... 300 92.5 1870-71............ 632 308 ...... 597 94.4 Vaccination has been carried on during the year with very satisfactory results, there being only 35 unsuccessful cases out of 632 vaccinations ; of these 329 were done in the surrounding districts and 303 in the town. It appears to me that more should be done, and that the vaccinator's attention should be less directed towards the surrounding districts as he is a servant of the Municipality. His pay is the same as it was three years ago, 20 Rupees per mensem. There has been no small-pox during the year. The lymph has been good and the supply regularly kept up. The vaccinator is a willing, hard-working individual, and has a great deal of opposition to put up with in order to get the people to allow their children to be vaccinated, and even if they do allow it, they frequently break the pus- tules before the lymph can be obtained from them. BANDORA. Operations performed by Sub-Assistant Surgeon A. DESOUSA, in charge Dispen- sary. Population 7,746. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase Decrease. 1869-70............ 102 ...... ...... 70 76. 1870-71............ 247 145 ...... 201 80.
75 During the year ending 31st March 1871 the total number of vaccinations and re-vaccinations performed amounts to 247, being an excess of 145 over the previous year. Most of the vaccinations were performed in January, February, and March, agreeably to Circular No. 166, dated 14th May 1870, from the Superintendent of Vaccination, Western Circle. The number of operations performed at each sitting varied from 12 to 44, according to the number of applicants. To secure a regular supply of lymph for subsequent operations some of the children belonging to St. Joseph's Convent at Bandora were at first vaccinated, and it was subsequently kept up, both at the dis- pensary and the Convent on every succeeding Friday, the lymph being for the most part obtained from the latter institution. The percentage of success obtained during the year under report is a very fair one, namely 79.8. The appearance of the vesicle on the 7 th day, and its progress from the commencement have been satisfactory. Small-pox was not seen here except during the month of March last, when a few cases appeared in a sporadic form in the town. No cases however presented themselves for treatment; the inhabitants generally speaking have a great prejudice against allowing this disease to be medically interfered with. CALLIAN. Operations performed by Sub-Assistant N. DUNJEEBHAI, in Medical charge Dispensary. Population 8,000. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success, ex- cluding unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 43 ...... ...... 32 80. 1870-71............ 113 70 ...... 103 96.2 The number of persons vaccinated during the year under report was 113, out of which four cases were re-vaccinations, while during the previous year the number was 43. The people are now beginning to understand the benefits of vaccination. By vaccinating in the months of December and January last, as directed by the Superin- tendent of Vaccination Western Circle, in Circular No. 166 of the 14th May 1870, the results were more satisfactory than usual, as there was a higher percentage of successful cases, being 96. this year instead of 80. last year, and the field for selecting
76 good vesicles from was greater, as fifteen or twenty children were vaccinated at one sitting instead of two or three children at one sitting in weekly vaccinations. There were four cases of re-vaccinations in children vaccinated successfully before, among which one case was successful. There was no epidemic of small-pox in the town, or admission into the Dispensary from that cause. BHEWNDY. Operations performed by Sub-Assistant Surgeon SHAMRAO JAGHANATH, L.M., in charge Dispensary. Population 10,000. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70 ............ 39 ...... ...... 24 82.7 1870-71 ............ 77 38 ...... 52 69.3 The total number of vaccinations performed during 1870-71, compared with the total number of the previous year, shows an increase of 38. Fifty-two proved success- ful, two unknown, and the rest, 23, unsuccessful; thus giving 69.3 percentage of suc- cess : a ratio of success inferior to the one obtained in the previous year. 2. Fresh lymph to start vaccination was obtained from the Superintendent of Vaccination Western Circle ; that Officer kindly forwarded vaccine lymph both in a capillary tube and on seven ivory points. The lymph on the ivory points succeeded well, and produced large and full vesicles; the liquid lymph in the tube failed completely. 3. The return shows only one operation in excess of children vaccinated. 4. No re-vaccinations were performed during the year. 5. The people of Bhewndy, both Hindoos and Mahomedans, though not averse to vaccination yet entertain great and strong prejudices against allowing us to take lymph from the arms of their children, and this objection on their part I have not as yet been able to overcome, but I trust that I will be able to impress upon the com- munity the harmlessness and necessity of this practice. 6. In conclusion I beg to bring to notice that I have done my best to impress the benefits of vaccination upon the people of this place, and I am happy to say that I have succeeded in vaccinating most of the children of a caste of the Hindoo population of Bhewndy greatly prejudiced against vaccination.
77 ALIBAGH. Operations performed by Sub-Assistant Surgeon PEREIRA, in charge Dispensary. Population 4,704. No cost. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70 ............ 161 ...... ...... 136 84.4 1870-71............ 275 114 ...... 266 97. During the year under report (embracing a period of nine months only) 273 persons received vaccination and two were re-vaccinated. This number compared with that of the preceding year (1869-70) shows an increase of 114 operations. Of the 273 vaccinations 264 were successful, and 9 unsuccessful, showing a percentage of 96. successful cases. Two re-vaccinations were performed successfully during the year. Fresh lymph was invariably used, and its purity and goodness were proved by the success attending vaccine operations. The year under report was peculiarly exempt from the prevalence of the small- pox disease. The benefit and immunity conferred upon the people by the practice of vaccina- tion is admitted and believed in by the people of the town as well as of the adjacent villages ; objection is at times raised on account of days being those of their religious observance, or on account of certain unfavourable seasons. The lower classes object purely on account of the expense they have to undergo, for 21 days, in performing the worship of the goddess which presides over small-pox when a person is vaccinated in their house. The Kolee section, proverbially wanting in intelligence, and devoted to superstition, rarely receive vaccination. Once I represented this matter to the District Magistrate with regard to a neighbouring village, called Wursolee, and by his per- suasion the children of that village were vaccinated. Vaccination was performed, during the 9 months, on every 7th or 8th day. In accordance with the instructions received from the Superintendent of the Circle, vac- cination was stopped from the close of December last. Two seasons in the year have lately been fixed for performing vaccination. These seasons, I beg to observe, are not those at which people here are anxious to receive vaccination. The hot season of the year is the one in which they readily accept vaccination, probably through fear of the small-pox breaking out. This limiting of vaccination to two seasons in the
78 year will perhaps affect the total number of annual vaccinations. Every endeavour will however be made to give due notice to the people of the town and the neighbour- ing villages, through the Civil authority, of the time when vaccination is to be opened, and I hope there will be a good gathering of recipients at each of these two seasons. RUTNAGHERRY. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon C. JOYNT, M.D. Population 20,789. Total cost Rs. 231. Average cost of each successful vaccination 8 annas and 3 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 1,188 ...... ...... 847 72.2 1870-71 ............ 619 ...... 569 443 71.5 During the year under report the number of vaccinations performed in Rutnagherry and its immediate neighbourhood was considerably below that of the year preceding, and also lower than the average of late years. It is not easy to offer a satisfactory explanation of this decrease. Undoubtedly there still exists in this neighbourhood a great reluctance on the part of parents, and especially female parents, to have their children vaccinated. The Station vaccinator who was employed under the Civil Sur- geon until the 28th of February, was deficient in tact as well as energy, and failed to secure the confidence of the community. He was discharged on the vaccinators being made subordinate to the Circle Superintendent, on the 1st March. The vaccinator sent by the Superintendent appears to possess more energy, and I hope that the ensuing year will show better results than the past. Besides the vaccinations shown in the return, 2 European children were success- fully vaccinated. Throughout the year the lymph was of variable quality, sometimes good, at other times indifferent. During the visit of the Superintendent several children were vacci- nated direct from the cow, but a failure resulted in each case. Small-pox prevailed in several talookas about Rutnagherry during the year, but was much less prevalent in the Town and immediate neighbourhood than in the year 1869-70.
79 DAPOOLEE. Operations performed by or under the direction of Honorary Assistant Surgeon A. POLLARD, in charge of Civil Hospital. Population 9,000. No Cost. Years. Total. Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 348 ...... ...... 288 82.8 1870-71............ 413 65 ...... 341 82 During the year 1870-71 there were 413 operations performed at the Station of Dapoolie ; of which number 9 were re-vaccinations of persons previously vaccinated with success, and two children were primarily operated upon twice each ; there has consequently been only 411 persons actually vaccinated, including the re-vaccinations. When compared with the preceding year this shows an increase of 63 persons vac- cinated, and a still greater increase of 159 over that of the year 1868, which may be looked upon as a sign that the people are becoming more alive to the benefits derived from vaccination. During the first half of the year, vaccination was carried on almost uninterrupt- edly in Dapoolie and the surrounding villages some miles distant, but during the latter part, my operations have been confined to the Camp of Dapoolie and a few villages in the immediate neighbourhood, as my Dispensary servant, who has been taught to vaccinate, could not be spared to vaccinate at a distance ; the District vaccinator doing the work I am unable to perform. During the months of December and January and the greater part of February no vaccination was performed. In the month of February 1871 small-pox appeared in the village of Julgaum, which is about a mile from the Camp, and about 20 children are reported to have been attacked, of which 3 died. Upon inquiry I find that those children had been vaccinated. Vaccination was at once commenced in this village and is now being carried on, re-vaccination being performed also, on those who will undergo the operation. VINGORLA. Operations performed by or under the direction of Mr. Apothecary MUNDAY, in charge Dispensary. Population 10,618. No cost. 16 vac
80 Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70........... 296 ...... ...... 275 95.8 1870-71 ............ 463 167 ...... 453 97.8 The total number vaccinated during 1870-71 was 463, viz. 253 males and 210 females, of which 243 were under one year, and 220 above one year old. 453 proved successful and 10 unsuccessful, giving a percentage of successful cases of 97.8. Vacci- nation has been performed in my presence by the Native Medical Pupil attached to the Civil Hospital. The population of the Town is upwards of 10,000, not including 300 Civil Establishment and 166 Native Police. The only cost is for two lancets, found by Government. There is an increase of 167 in the number vaccinated, compared with the preceding year. 2. The lymph has been good throughout the year. 3. Improvement might be made if the children could be collected at an ap- pointed place in the town. 4. No small-pox occurred during the year. 5. In consequence of instructions received, vaccination was persevered in during the months of December 1870, January and part of February 1871 ; all the children that could be found unprotected were vaccinated at their dwellings, except the Banians, who positively decline to submit to it. All appear to be of opinion that re-vaccination is not necessary. SURAT. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. J. GANE. Population 90,000. Total cost Rs. 328. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation, 3 annas and 9 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 1,680 ...... ...... 1,523 96.7 1870-71 ............ 1,602 ...... 78 1,371 94.9
81 1,602 persons were vaccinated during the past year, being a decrease of 78 as compared with the previous year. No re-vaccination has taken place. There is great difficulty in collecting children for vaccination, particularly amongst the Parsees. Animal vaccination was carried out by Dr. Colah during the month of October, afterwards by Sub-Assistant Surgeon Dossabhoy ; but it was obliged to be abandoned for the want of funds. There is one great drawback to the carrying out of animal vaccination which I fear will not easily be overcome. I allude to the difficulty in procuring children for vaccination in the early morning. Mothers cannot be persuaded to bring their children at an early hour. I hope, however, when Dr. Colah returns to Surat that he will continue his experiments on animal vaccination, and with greater success. I learnt from Sub-Assistant Surgeon Dossabhoy that a few cases of small-pox had occurred in the City during the past month, but no cases have come under my observation. Vaccination has been carried on during the past year by the vaccinator under my immediate supervision, and I have much pleasure in bearing testimony to the satisfactory way in which he has conducted his duties. AHMEDABAD. Two Municipal Vaccinators under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon Major D. WYLLIE, M.D. Population 150,000. Total cost Rs. 552. Average cost of each successful vaccination, 1 anna and 9 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 4,047 ...... ...... 3,881 96.8 1870-71............ 5,429 1,382 ...... 5,007 96.7* 89.482 The primary vaccinations numbered 3,527 and re-vaccinations 1,902. Classed by sex the primary vaccinations were 1,829 males and 1,698 females, 2,211 being under one year and 1,366 over that age. The ratio of successful cases was 96.7 per cent, as against 96.9 in the previous year. Of the re-vaccinations aggregating 1,902, the ages ranged from 4 to 35 years, the majority however being under puberty. Full half (1,125) were males. As respects results, 89.4 per cent. were returned as successful, and while most presented perfect vesicles, others for obvious reasons were modified, and some doubtless spurious. Fresh lymph was introduced at the beginning of the year, and it has continued active and good throughout, the resulting vesicles, especially in primary cases, being well formed and distinctive, and with very rare exceptions corresponding to the number of lymph insertions made, ordinarily three in each arm. The cicatrices also have pre- sented characteristic foveation. Both vaccinators have conducted their duties satisfactorily. They are steady, industrious, painstaking men, and I am glad to mention that within the past few weeks they have had an incentive to additional exertion in an increase of pay, from rupees 12 to 20 each, granted by the liberality of the Municipality. One performed 2,728 vaccinations, and the other 2,701. The largest number of operations was in May when they aggregated 555, the least in November when they fell to 402. There was no small-pox throughout the year to give a stimulus to vaccination, nor on the other hand was there any infantile epidemic to delay progress up to the commencement of last month, when cases of measles and hooping-cough began to appear, and the former ailment is now widely prevalent. Animal vaccination was begun here by Dr. Colah in November last, and thereafter carried on by Mr. Sub-Assistant Surgeon Ruttonjee Hormusjee, whose account of his proceedings I beg herewith to forward. Although the utmost care and attention were taken to ensure success, the experiments nevertheless resulted unfavourably. In this, however, there are no grounds for regret, as animal vaccination, with its many uncertainties and drawbacks, could never be advantageously employed in the case of a community already enjoying the benefits of an efficient system of arm-to-arm vac- cination, nor ever be necessary where an abundance of humanized lymph is at all times available, as there has been in this city for the past 20 years. Mr. Ruttonjee, as will be seen, operated on 202 children, and 47 of the number completely failed, 41 in transferring lymph from the animals, and 6 in transmission from child to child. The vesicles were at first very small and few, one or at most two, resulting from six insertions. In these respects, however, they gradually improved after several transmissions, although to the last their appearance was spurious, and maturation premature, the edges ill-defined and the central depressions indistinct. The cicatrices were equally unsatisfactory. In three-fourths of the number examined, the surface was perfectly smooth, without the slightest trace of any depression ; while in
83 the remainder there were here and there some slightly foveolated,but only very partially and imperfectly at most. I do not consider that any of these children are protected, and concur with Mr. Ruttonjee that all must be revaccinated. This experience I trust will be accepted as conclusive of the inutility of animal lymph, at least as regards this city, believing as I do, that any further experiments in the same direction would probably give rise to distrust, and thus prove detrimental to the interests of legitimate vaccination. REMARKS on a few experiments made on the subject of Animal Vaccination by Sub- Assistant Surgeon RUTTONJEE HORMUSJEE, in Medical charge Baicherdass Dis- pensary in Ahmedabad. This subject was commenced at the request of Dr. Muncherjee Byramjee Colah, Superintendent of Vaccination, Northern Circle, who handed over to me an inoculated heifer on the 12th November 1870. From this date up to the 12th February 1871, thirteen heifers have been inoculated. The lymph was supplied once by Dr. Mun- cherjee himself, twice by Dr. Blanc, and twice by Mr. Anunta Chundroba of Bombay. When lymph was transferred from one heifer to another, it was invariably done on the 6th day after the operation. Mostly valvular punctures were made, but a few incisions were also tried. The short experience I lately had on the subject seems to show that the former are to be preferred to the latter. 2. I would next give a summary of the results. From the 12th November to the 7th December 1870, six heifers were inoculated, one after another, under the hope that by passing the lymph through a succession of calves the success of the process might be ensured. The result however was different. The first four heifers took the inoculation very well, especially the 3rd and the 4th, but in the fifth, the vesicles were small and few in number. In the sixth the failure was complete ; only a few of the punctures were elevated into so many small pimples and nothing more. It would thus seem that the lymph, first used on the 12th November, lost its effects gradually by passing through the bodies of six heifers, and here may be said to be the end of the first series of experiments. The lymph was lost, and nothing further could be done until a fresh supply of lymph was obtained from Bombay. 3. But as just mentioned, the 3rd and the 4th heifers took the inoculation very well; well marked and large vesicles were obtained. Opportunity, therefore, was for the first time taken to vaccinate some children with the lymph of these heifers. Between the 27th November and the 2nd December 1870 twenty-five children were vaccinated. But all these proved failures without an exception, as will be seen in the appended table. It may therefore be inferred that the lymph was good enough to bring out vesicles on the heifers, but when transferred to the human subject, its good- ness failed.
84 4. On the 27th December 1870, Mr. Anunta Chundroba kindly forwarded twelve tubes charged with heifer-lymph. The next day a heifer was procured and the lymph used in twelve punctures, all of which failed. 5. On the 8th January 1871 Dr. Blanc forwarded to me twelve ivory points. This lymph also failed. But the same Officer sent to me six more tubes on the 14th idem, and this succeeded very well on a heifer. On the 6th day the lymph of this heifer was transferred to another heifer and this succeeded most admirably. On the 25th January therefore an opportunity was taken to vaccinate some children. Ten children were vaccinated ; of these three succeeded and seven failed. 6. But from the last successful heifer another was inoculated on the 25th and from it another on the 31st January. That of the 25th was a partial success, but the last one was a failure. Here again the lymph seems to have lost its effects by passing through the bodies of five heifers, although on the third heifer the result was quite successful. 7. On the 7th February Mr. Anunta Chundroba sent me a second supply of lymph in six tubes. The lymph of these as well as some other which I had myself collected from a previous successful heifer, was used on a fresh heifer, but the result was not successful; very few really good vesicles rose, from which three children were vaccinated with success on the 12th February. 8. It will thus be seen from the above account, or from the appended table, that up to the 12th February 1871 fifty-three children were vaccinated directly by the heifer lymph; of these twelve proved successful, at all events vesicles formed, which were somewhat inferior to the ordinary Jennerian vesicle, as more particularly stated below. 9. At this stage an idea occurred to me that the lymph of these somewhat infe- rior vesicles might improve by passing successively through the bodies of several children, and with this view the lymph, which was obtained from the arms of the twelve children, alloded to in the last paragraph, was propagated till about the 25th March 1871, when it was found that from the 12th November 1870, the date of the commencement of these experiments, up to the last operation with the new lymph, 202 children had been vaccinated. Of these 47 were failures and the rest (155 cases) succeeded in so far as vesicles resulted, but they were not typical. They matured on the 7th day instead of the 8th day ; thus they were one day too early in maturing. Besides this, when the scabs fell off, the resulting cicatrices were found to be perfectly smooth, with a few rare exceptions in which depression was present. 10. Hence on comparing the appearances of the vesicle produced by the new lymph with those resulting from the current human lymph, there was no doubt left as to the inferiority of the former ; the latter invariably producing well developed Jennerian vesicles with the characteristic depressed cicatrix. For the above reasons, further vaccine operations with the new lymph have been put a stop to. Hence also arises the necessity of re-vaccinating all the two hundred and two children alluded to in the last paragraph, with the old or current human lymph.
85 11. The attached is a table showing the dates on which vaccinations were per- formed on children, with their results. It is taken from the registers of the two Municipal vaccinators, in whose monthly returns these vaccinations were included. TABLE showing the number of Vaccinations performed with animal lymph in the Baicherdass Dispensary, Ahmedabad. Dates on which Vaccinations were performed. Total Vaccinated. Number of Vesicles that rose. Failed. Total. 27th November ................... 11 ...... 11 11 28th Ditto............... 4 ...... 4 4 2nd December ............ 10 ...... 10 10 25th January ............ 10 3 7 10 31st Ditto ............ 7 2 5 7 1st February 1871 .................. 2 2 ...... 2 5th Ditto ............ 4 ...... 4 4 7th Ditto ............ 2 2 ...... 2 12th Ditto ............ 3 3 ...... 3 13th Ditto ............ 3 2 1 3 14th Ditto ............ 2 2 ...... 2 18th Ditto ............ 1 1 ...... 1 19th Ditto ............ 4 4 ...... 4 20th Ditto ............ 5 5 ...... 5 21st Ditto ............ 3 3 ...... 3 24th Ditto ............ 1 1 ...... 1 25th Ditto ............ 2 2 ...... 9 26th Ditto ............ 11 11 ...... 11 27th Ditto ............ 8 8 ...... 8 28th Ditto ............ 4 3 1 4 3rd March 1871 ............ 3 3 ...... 3 4th Ditto ............ 4 4 ...... 4 5th Ditto ............ 19 19 ...... 19 6th Ditto ............ 9 9 ...... 9 7th Ditto ............ 5 5 ...... 5 10th Ditto ............ 2 2 ...... 2 11th Ditto ............ 10 10 ...... 10 12th Ditto ............ 11 9 2 11 13th Ditto ............ 11 9 2 11 14th Ditto ............ 5 5 ...... 5 17th Ditto ............ 1 1 ...... 1 18th Ditto ............ 4 4 ...... 4 19th Ditto ............ 13 13 ...... 13 20th Ditto ............ 8 8 ...... 8 Total ...... 202 155 47 202
86 GODRA. Operations performed by Sub-Assistant Surgeon SARUPLAL BALLUCKRAM, in charge Dispensary. Population.......... No cost. Years. Total &quot;Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1870-71............ 116 116 ...... 94 84. In furnishing this brief report of vaccination for the last six months, I have the honour to state that 115 persons were primarily vaccinated in all; of these 95 were suc- cessful, 18 unsuccessful or doubtful, and of two nothing is known. The percentage of successful cases excluding those unknown from the total was 84 in primary vaccina- tions. There was only one case of re-vaccination, and that was successful. The Dispensary has been opened only lately. I have often heard mothers complaining that they do not want to have their children vaccinated during the hot season; and for this they give a peculiar explanation, that children vaccinated in this season suffer generally from small-pox. From my short experience I can say that the people on the whole understand the benefits of vaccination, and bring their children for vac- cination very willingly. The Bhoras87 Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decreasc. 1869-70 ............ 996 ...... ...... 895 98.9 1870-71............ 796 ...... 200 793 99.8 There has been a considerable decrease in the number of vaccinations performed during the past year. I thinkhowever that this is only temporary, and is attributable to the absence of the usual number of subjects in the town owing to the fact of few children having been left unvaccinated whose parents were willing to submit them for operation. The number may probably rise again during the next year. Vaccination has been carried on without intermission twice every week from arm-to-arm ; the supply of lymph has therefore been quite regular. Its quality has been excellent, and its resulting vesicles every thing that could be desired, with few exceptions. I have not noticed any signs of degeneration of our lymph, which produces most excellent vesicles in subjects with fair skins, especially if the weather be favourable. It is creditable to the vaccinator that he has maintained an uninterrupted supply of lymph in two sets of vaccinated subjects every week without receiving any from other places. 2. The village officials have given proper assistance to the vaccinator since my last report. 3. I believe that a large number of Brahmin and Marwaree children are unvaccinated. No amount of persuasion will induce some of these people to submit their children for operation. I have little doubt that, were an epidemic of small-pox to occur in the place, many children of the classes mentioned would be attacked. 4. The vaccinator has been paid by the Municipality during the year. 5. Only one case of small-pox has occurred in the town so far as I am aware ; there has certainly been no epidemic. AHMEDNUGGUR. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon H. T. DANN, B.A. Population 40,000. Total cost Rs.......... Average cost of each succesful vac- cination annas and pies. 17 vac
88 Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 1,045 ...... ...... 978 93.6 1870-71............ 1,100 55 ...... 1,001 96. I have much pleasure in bringing before you the present vaccination report, showing as it does an increase in the actual vaccination of 1870-71 over that of the previous year. The numbers stand respectively 1,045 and 1,100, being an increase of 55 operations, and also in 1869-70 only 219 were vaccinated in the camp and canton- ment against 251, being an increase of 32. The largest number of vaccinations were made in the months of March, May and August, the latter showing 106. The results were, successful 1,001, unsuccessful 73, unknown 26. No small-pox has occurred during the past year. KOTREE. One Municipal Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon J. ROCHE, M.D. Population 20,626. Total cost Rs. 268. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 5 annas and 8 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 784 ...... ...... 707 93.2 1870-71 ............ 1,065 279 ...... 955 95.2 There is an increase in the number vaccinated in the past year, as compared with the preceding, of 279. Vaccination has progressed favourably, and has only been objected to by some Cutchees and Parsees. Their reasons are that small-pox is one of the means of punishment used, and especially presided over by Sitla Mata, the female spouse of Sheva Devi, or Mahadev, hence the names Sitla and Matha. I will take the liberty of introducing here a few remarks on animal vaccination. There are some
89 Hindoos who consider lymph analagous to milk, a secretion, and will be delighted to have cow-lymph inserted in their skin as a conservative against small-pox. The majority and all the higher caste Hindoos look on lymph as modified or altered blood, and not only will refuse to have that of the cow introduced into their bodies, but will use all their influence to have animal vaccination discontinued if it be introduced, lest the lymph from the arm of a child, which they would not otherwise object to, may be related to that from the cow. 2. The lymph throughout the year has been good. 3. I am not aware that any improvement can be made, and I am informed that already influential members of the Hindoo community of Hydrabad and Kotree have been deliberating to petition against the introduction of animal vaccination. KURRACHEE. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Assistant Surgeon N. HOPKINS. Population 100,000. Total cost Rs. 313, of which Rs. 180 was paid by Govern- ment and the rest by the Municipality. Average cost of each successful vaccination 2 annas. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceeding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 3,933 ...... ...... 3,422 91.9 1870-71............ 2,765 ...... 1,168 2,405 94.8 This year's returns contrast very unfavourably with the last year's. The decrease is due to the former vaccinator (who had for many years worked very satisfactorily) neglecting his work, and which ultimately compelled me to have him discharged from the Service for misconduct. The present vaccinator appears to be anxious to give satisfaction, but the number vaccinated is far below the last year's, but I hope that as he gets more used to the people, he will be able to show an improvement in this respect. 2. Small-pox was prevalent for three months in this year.
90 ADEN. One Government Vaccinator under the Civil Surgeon, Surgeon R. W. JAMES, M.D. Population 25,000. Total cost Rs. 216. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation 5 annas and 11 pies. Years. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of success. Increase. Decrease. 1869-70............ 844 ...... ...... 692 81.9 1870-71............ 691 ...... 153 582 84.2 There has been a decrease during the year in the total number vaccinated, and in consequence the cost of each vaccination is increased by nearly 5 pies. No slaves were brought to Aden by Her Majesty's Steamers, and as small-pox ceased during the month of May, the two great causes of the increase during the preceding two years were want- ing. During a short time in May the supply of lymph failed, but the Superintendent Medical Department afforded me some in tubes lately received by him from England; it turned out very good, and to this cause I attribute a successful percentage of 84.2.
TABLES OF VACCINATION RETURNS, &c., FOR 1870-71.
92 A.93 P. S. TURNBULL, M.D. ... ... 1 2,293 1,604 Nassick 775 54,825 Malliganm ... 1,141 1,115 8 2,065 50 ... 133 674 1,583 3,162 23 71 2,256 16 17 4 37 98.9 48.5 1,340 ... ... 1 1,919 2,703 966 88,537 Baglan ...... 1,044 873 ... 1,828 53 ... 36 333 1,584 1,887 7 23 1,917 2 ... ... 2 99.6 100. ... ... ... ... ... 1,248 19,778 Nangaon ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 769 401 47,868 Sawergaon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2,402 1,683 718 59,678 Dindoree .... 977 1,017 1 1,810 9 ... 174 327 1,667 1,907 57 30 1,994 353 25 30 408 97.1 93.3 ... ... 2 8 3,036 2,418 Sholapoor Collectorate. 1,672 146,245 Sholapoor ...... 1,571 1,464 ... 2,359 345 ... 331 1,744 1,291 2,846 60 129 3,035 ... ... 1 1 97.9 ... ... ... 1 3,012 2,402 1,200 82,535 Marheh......... l,582 1,430 ... 2,520 129 ... 363 419 2,593 3,012 ... ... 3,012 ... ... ... ... 100. ... ... ... 1 2,431 2,875 1,680 84,826 Kurmulla ..... 1,288 1,143 ... 2,193 104 ... 134 220 2,205 2,237 97 97 2,431 ... ... ... ... 96.2 ... ... ... 1 796 537 616 80,126 Punderpoor ... 401 395 ... 705 23 ... 68 416 380 670 61 65 796 ... ... ... ... 91.6 ... ... ... 1 937 792 616 60,486 Sangola ....... 463 474 ... 815 48 ... 74 216 721 735 35 167 937 ... ... ... ... 95.4 ... ... ... 1 537 2,293 1,167 113,972 Barsee ....... 259 273 ... 457 49 ... 31 231 306 313 41 183 537 ... ... ... ... 87.2 ... ... ... 2 6 3,313 ... Khandeish Collectorate. 759 63,672 Dhoolia ...... 1,751 1,494 5 2,917 199 3 121 1,459 1,786 3,222 5 18 3,245 55 13 ... ... 99.8 80.8 ... ... 1 1,952 384 874 111,305 Sowda ......... 940 1,012 ... 1,776 103 ... 73 1,453 499 1,752 90 110 1,952 ... ... ... ... 95.1 ... ... ... 1 623 1,572 323 51,060 Nusseerabad .. 313 309 ... 584 36 ... 2 204 418 582 10 30 622 ... 1 ... 1 98.3 ... ... ... 1 2,487 ... 459 68,202 Errundole ..... 1,271 1,031 3 2,144 102 ... 53 400 1,902 2,130 81 91 2,302 132 2 51 185 96.3 98.6 ... ... 1 2,203 ... 518 55,266 Jamnair ...... 1,164 1,039 ... 1,971 138 ... 94 396 1,807 2,203 ... ... 2,203 ... ... ... ... 100. ... ... ... 1 746 770 762 26,698 Seerpoor ...... 386 360 ... 730 16 ... ... 389 357 687 50 9 746 ... ... ... ... 93.2 ... ... ... 1 1,867 ... 474 34,506 Shadah......... 973 894 ... 1,834 33 ... ... 92 1,775 1,804 3 60 1,867 ... ... ... ... 99.8 ... ... ... 1 159 ... 1,286 21,550 Tulloda......... 85 74 ... 149 6 ... 4 14 145 142 16 1 159 ... ... ... ... 89.8 ... ... ... 136 2,218 640 36,541 Nundurbar ... 73 63 ... 129 7 ... ... 11 125 135 1 ... 136 ... ... ... ... 99.2 ... ... ... 1 956 ... 449 35,631 Chaleesgaon.. 467 489 ... 865 49 ... 42 252 704 953 ... 3 956 ... ... ... ... 100. ... ... ... 1 88 1,176 1,234 46,128 Pimpulanair ... 40 48 ... 88 ... ... ... 32 56 86 2 ... 88 ... ... ... ... 97.7 ... ... ... 924 404 539 68,853 Pachora......... 474 450 ... 852 18 ... 54 425 499 889 30 5 924 ... ... ... ... 96.7 ... ... ... 1 672 ... 504 41,843 Chopra......... 374 296 1 595 15 ... 59 67 603 664 1 5 670 2 ... ... 2 99.8 100. ... ... 1 2,422 2,231 538 73,415 Amulnair...... 1,211 1,170 ... 2,200 112 ... 69 383 1,998 2,252 64 65 2,381 28 3 10 41 97.2 90.3 ... .. 1 1,911 ... 506 56,706 Virdul ......... 939 972 ... 1,386 86 ... 439 385 1,526 1,798 ... 113 1,911 ... ... ... ... 100. ... ... ... ... ... 827 566 69,569 Bhusawul...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sattara. Collectorate . 432 105,661 Sattara ......... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2,104 1,609 400 74,568 Tasgaon ...... 1,196 904 ... 1,812 137 ... 151 1,855 245 2,081 13 6 2,100 4 ... ... 4 99.3 100. ... ... 1 1 761 339 896 53,870 Jawlee ......... 378 383 ... 677 6 ... 78 220 541 709 44 8 761 ... ... ... ... 94.1 ... ... ... 1 1,193 539 802 82,857 Waic ............ 589 604 ... 1,017 26 ... 150 454 739 1,089 62 42 1,193 ... ... ... ... 94.6 ... ... ... 1 1 730 870 840 77,051 Khotow ......... 365 365 ... 668 29 ... 33 251 479 686 27 17 730 ... ... ... ... 90.2 ... ... ... l 2 877 1,877 720 77,750 Walwa ........ 480 397 ... 838 35 ... 4 273 604 840 29 8 877 ... ... ... ... 96.6 ... ... ... 1 2 1,144 1,251 632 62,564 Man ............ 583 561 ... 942 30 ... 172 306 838 1,052 42 50 1,144 ... ... ... ... 96.1 ... ... ... l 2 1,835 2,199 487 121,694 Karrar ......... 1,044 788 ... 1,702 34 ... 96 71 l,761 1,785 19 28 1,832 3 ... ... 3 98.9 100. ... ... l 1 1,166 972 720 77,750 Khanapoor ... 588 576 ... 1,021 69 ... 71 595 569 1,044 120 ... 1,164 2 ... ... 2 89.7 100. ... ... 1 1 2,225 2,789 810 97,403 Patun............ 1,112 1,113 ... 1,077 18 ... 230 303 1,922 2,051 20 154 2,220 ... ... ... ... 99. ... ... ... l 1 984 875 584 53,586 Malseerus ..... 534 443 ... 848 116 ... 13 401 576 792 101 84 977 3 3 1 7 88.6 50. ... ... l 1 920 1,074 350 71,974 Koregaon ...... 459 461 ... 830 29 ... 61 242 678 857 35 23 920 ... ... ... ... 96. ... ... ... l 1 1,341 1,612 Native States. 960 26,167 Peint............ 676 624 ... 1,282 13 ... 5 545 755 1,152 142 6 1,300 17 21 3 41 69. 44.7 ... ... l 1 1,185 1,023 420 61,000 Akulkote ...... 622 557 ... 897 165 ... 117 294 885 1,054 93 32 1,179 6 ... ... 6 91.9 100. ... ... l 1 920 887 1,044 111,729 Bhore .......... 495 424 ... 820 9 ... 90 140 779 908 8 3 919 1 ... ... 1 99.1 100. ... ... l 1 843 925 1,620 56,845 Jutt ...... 404 437 ... 786 49 ... ... 380 461 802 35 4 841 2 ... ... ... 95.8 100. ... ... 1 1 249 481 266 58,980 Attapadee ..... 152 97 ... 246 ... ... ... 30 219 249 ... ... 219 ... ... ... ... 100. ... ... ... 1 1 1,173 1,093 512 49,314 Phulton ....... 576 552 ... 950 58 ... 120 599 529 1,032 90 6 1,128 17 25 3 45 92. 40.4 Total. ... ... 65 56 87,123 75,494 49,154 4,753,493 44,452 41,513 58 75,619 3,692 5 6,591 26,387 59,578 79,037 3,177 3,751 85,965 824 190 144 1,158 96.1 81.2 1,340
94 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccina- tions were per- formed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of Talooka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases.exclud- ing thosc&quot;un- known&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parscc. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Re-Vacci- nation. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. ... ... 2 2 Vaccinators in the Superintendent's Office. Sq. Miles. SOUTHERN. Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 2,043 1,740 Belgaum Collectorate. 1,440 100,038 Belgaum ...... 1,079 959 50 1,927 17 ... 44 272 1,766 1,929 57 52 2,038 5 ... ... 5 97.1 100. 2,043 ... ... 1 1 1,300 404 910 114,226 Sumpgaum ... 695 605 ... 1,101 173 ... 26 267 1,033 1,111 102 87 1,300 ... ... ... ... 91.5 ... 1,300 ... ... 1 1 2,281 1,735 1,404 100,885 Pursghur...... 1,204 1,077 ... 2,078 186 ... 17 311 1,970 2,272 6 3 2,281 ... ... ... ... 99.7 ... 2,281 ... ... 1 1 1,485 1,579 1,872 83,707 Gokak......... 844 641 2 1,373 110 ... ... 772 713 1,428 32 25 1,485 ... ... ... ... 97.1 ... 1,485 ... ... 1 1 1,887 1,738 2,592 200,487 Chickoree...... 1,026 861 ... 1,694 144 ... 49 219 1,668 1,845 16 26 1,887 ... ... ... ... 99.1 ... 1,887 ... ... 1 1 1,842 1,435 l,196 63,808 Beedee ......... 1,012 830 78 1,582 130 ... 52 725 1,117 1,675 94 73 1,842 ... ... ... ... 94.6 ... 1,842 ... ... 1 1 640 227 2,400 90,029 Uthnee......... 335 305 ... 544 70 ... 26 259 381 620 19 1 640 ... ... ... ... 97. ... 640 ... ... 1 1 1,931 1,710 Dharwar Col- lectorate. 428 102,980 Dharwar ...... 1,062 869 ... 1,721 183 ... 27 254 1,677 1,912 12 7 1,931 ... ... ... ... 99.3 ... 1,931 ... ... 1 1 862 1,472 567 84,6106 Nowlgoond ... 473 369 ... 764 61 ... 17 133 709 805 31 6 842 1 15 4 20 96.2 62. 862 ... ... 1 1 1,230 1,366 341 76,999 Bunkapoor ... 655 575 ... 966 230 ... 34 127 1,103 1,099 53 78 1,230 ... ... ... ... 95.3 ... 615 ... ... 1 1 1,383 1,410 295 60,799 Hangul......... 769 607 ... 1,152 224 ... ... 17 1,359 1,230 121 25 1,376 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,383 ... ... 1 1 1,692 860 310 94,583 Hooblee......... 913 779 3 1,458 168 ... 63 256 1,436 1,659 26 7 1,692 ... ... ... ... 98.4 ... 1,692 ... ... 1 1 921 333 403 73,082 Ranebednoree ....... 525 396 ... 719 198 ... 4 11 910 826 58 37 921 ... ... ... ... 93.4 ... 921 ... ... 1 1 1,047 564 403 69,804 Koade ......... 606 423 ... 956 73 ... ... 12 1,017 937 65 27 1,029 14 2 2 18 93.5 1,047 1,047 ... ... 1 1 854 947 403 83,047 Kurjagee ...... 469 385 ... 736 102 ... 16 49 805 793 23 38 854 ... ... ... ... 97.3 ... 854 ... ... 1 1 1,406 1,459 524 45,386 Kulghutgee... 778 678 20 1,247 151 ... 38 194 1,262 1,445 11 ... 1,436 ... ... ... ... 99.2 ... 1,456 ... ... 1 1 523 618 366 64,828 Roan ............ 264 259 ... 512 11 ... ... 248 275 466 24 33 523 ... ... ... ... 95.1 ... 523 ... ... 1 1 684 725 1,350 104,101 Dumbul ...... 355 329 1 624 59 ... ... 140 544 617 51 16 684 ... ... ... ... 92.3 ... 684 ... ... ... ... ... ... North Canara Collectorate. 360 40,133 Carwar......... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1,269 1,308 660 84,038 Coompta ...... 693 576 38 1,035 26 ... 120 88 1,181 1,145 107 17 1,269 ... ... ... ... 91.4 ... 1,269 ... ... 1 1 1,447 1,245 400 80,388 Honore......... 804 640 144 1,203 86 ... 11 80 1,364 1,382 55 7 1,444 3 ... ... 3 96.1 100. 1,447 ... ... 1 1 379 676 550 52,843 Sircy ............ 265 114 ... 375 4 ... ... 4 375 363 13 3 379 ... ... ... ... 96.5 ... 379 ... ... 1 ... 624 581 640 29,621 Yellapoor...... 362 253 10 571 30 ... 4 29 586 542 27 46 615 7 ... 2 9 95.2 100. 624 ... ... 1 ... 260 323 594 33,112 Siddapoor ...... 157 103 ... 250 10 ... ... 2 258 252 4 4 260 ... ... ... ... 98.4 ... 260 ... ... 1 1 885 1,152 1,110 47,450 Hulliall......... 433 400 28 706 128 ... 21 221 662 870 10 3 883 2 ... ... 2 98.8 100. 885 ... ... 2 l 1,892 2,643 Kulladghce Collectorate. 2,376 97,891 Bagulkote ....... 954 937 1 1,660 173 ... 57 823 1,068 1,796 53 42 1,891 1 ... ... 1 97.1 100. 946 ... ... ... ... ... ... 864 85,703 Hoougoond ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 655 ... 1,350 81,643 Baghewaree . 347 308 518 89 ... 48 94 561 525 51 79 655 ... ... ... ... 91.1 ... 655 ... ... 1 1 1,552 1,714 1,555 108,696 Badamee ...... 847 705 ... 1,474 68 ... 10 889 663 1,481 22 49 1,552 ... ... ... ... 98.5 ... 1,552 ... ... ... ... ... ... 726 74,887 Moodebehall . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 450 4,407 1,683 95,986 Indee...... 218 232 ... 394 52 ... 4 134 316 351 78 21 450 ... ... ... ... 81.8 ... 450 ... ... 1 ... 874 ... 1,555 98,990 Sindghee ....... 445 427 ... 701 138 ... 33 183 689 827 23 22 872 ... 2 ... 2 97.2 ... 874 ... ... ... 1 ... 1,022 1,386 64,020 Beejapoor....... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
95 J. RABY, ... ... 1 1 1,005 772 Native States. Southern Maratha States. 1,207 173,388 Sanglee ...... 526 479 ... 908 97 ... ... 511 404 954 47 4 l,003 ... ... ... ... 95.3 ... 1,095 ... ... 1 1 916 983 574 79,799 Meeruj, 1st.. 479 437 ... 807 101 ... 8 552 364 901 ... 15 916 ... ... ... ... 100. ... 916 ... ... 1 1 455 408 197 47,060 Do. 2nd.. 243 212 ... 432 23 ... ... 261 104 452 3 ... 455 ... ... ... ... 99.3 ... 455 ... ... 1 1 481 176 271 29,786 Koorundwar, 1st ........... 258 223 3 422 49 ... 7 61 420 464 14 3 481 ... ... ... ... 96.8 ... 481 ... ... 1 1 294 384 177 32,890 Do. 2nd .. 151 143 ... 206 51 ... 37 63 231 279 11 4 294 ... ... ... ... 96.2 ... 294 ... ... 1 1 696 686 317 49,829 Moodhole ...... 354 342 ... 659 37 ... ... 31 665 553 109 34 696 ... ... ... ... 83.5 ... 696 ... ... 1 1 883 769 189 33,000 Ramdroog .. 463 420 ... 808 30 ... 45 121 762 845 16 22 883 ... ... ... ... 98.1 ... 883 ... ... 1 1 357 454 Unkn. 120,051 Jumkhundee. 203 154 ... 318 39 ... ... 188 169 323 33 1 357 ... ... ... ... 90.7 ... 357 ... ... 1 ... 123 ... Do. Unkn. Savanoor ..... 64 59 ... 64 57 ... 2 4 119 112 3 8 133 ... ... ... ... 97.3 ... 123 ... ... 1 1 1,442 1,611 Kolapoor State. 360 14,748 Keshalghur... 758 648 ... 1,288 29 ... 125 166 1,276 1,397 30 15 1,442 ... ... ... ... 97.8 ... 1,442 ... ... 1 1 841 896 567 43,543 Echulkurnjee. 426 398 ... 731 51 ... 42 566 258 784 39 1 824 12 5 ... 17 95.2 70.5 841 ... ... 1 1 1,152 689 252 31,287 Kagull ...... 670 482 8 1,108 36 ... ... 394 758 1,146 6 ... 1,152 ... ... ... ... 99.4 ... 1,152 ... ... 1 1 1,365 1,221 486 73,393 Gudhingluz... 765 600 5 1,310 29 ... 21 252 1,113 1,355 6 4 1,365 ... ... ... ... 99.5 ... 1,365 ... ... 1 1 1,185 1,375 486 29,845 Bowrah ......... 577 571 ... 996 23 ... 129 211 937 1,024 59 65 1,148 4 32 1 37 94.5 11.1 1,185 ... ... 1 1 1,984 1,566 540 66,463 Pannalla ...... 1,013 912 ... 1,774 16 ... 135 665 1,260 l,886 23 16 1,925 47 7 5 59 98.7 87. 1,984 ... ... 1 1 1,335 1,518 900 54,794 Bhooderghur. 685 650 ... 1,302 5 ... 28 132 1,203 1,332 3 ... 1,335 ... ... ... ... 99.7 ... 1,335 ... ... 1 1 992 1,026 243 105,022 Sheerole .......... 543 449 ... 914 73 ... 5 629 363 984 3 5 992 ... ... ... ... 99.6 ... 992 ... ... 1 1 535 544 180 21,653 Torgull......... 324 211 ... 498 21 ... 16 ... 535 530 5 ... 535 ... ... ... ... 99. ... 535 ... ... 1 1 763 943 598 24,484 Auzara......... 363 376 5 696 9 ... 29 199 540 692 37 10 739 10 10 4 24 94.9 50. 763 ... ... 1 1 3,476 3,165 506 114,445 Kolapoor Peta and Station. 1,438 1,198 3 2,510 123 ... ... 618 2,018 2,524 103 9 2,636 455 385 ... 840 96. 54.1 3,476 ... ... 1 1 544 1,032 Munici- palities. ...... 35,278 Hooblee ...... 288 256 6 411 124 ... 3 92 452 490 50 4 544 ... ... ... ... 90.7 ... 544 ... ... 1 1 313 334 ...... 8,891 Beejapoor ...... 166 147 ... 278 35 ... ... 138 175 269 35 9 313 ... ... ... ... 88.4 ... 313 ... ... 1 1 637 668 ...... 26,366 Belgaum ... 333 304 1 563 17 1 1 336 301 617 19 1 637 ... ... ... ... 97. ... 637 ... ... 1 1 374 637 ...... 6,032 Kulladghee ... 214 160 1 289 49 ... 35 161 213 321 45 8 374 ... ... ... ... 87.7 ... 374 Total. ... ... 56 52 56,496 57,259 96 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccina- tions were per- formed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of Talooka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those &quot;unknown&quot; from the Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parscc. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cination. In Re-Vaccina- tion. 1870-71. 1869 70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71 1869-70. Sq. Miles. WESTERN- continued. H. J. BLANC, M.D., Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 6/12 9/12 1,288 2,685 Colaba. 334 58,264 Mangaum ...... 677 602 ... 1,159 40 ... 80 392 887 1,262 17 ... 1,279 9 ... ... 9 98.6 100. ... ... 15/12 12/12 2,937 2,587 436 77,329 Mhar ............ 1,506 1,410 ... 2,587 16 ... 313 354 2,562 2,909 7 ... 2,916 19 2 ... 21 99.7 90.4 ... ... 11/12 ... 1,469 ... 243 51,801 Penn ............ 780 660 ... 1,291 14 ... 135 547 893 1,322 86 32 1,440 26 3 ... 29 93.9 89.6 ... ... 11/12 ... 1,750 ... 171 32,360 Roha ............ 891 841 ... 1,666 30 ... 36 573 1,159 1,604 53 75 1,732 18 ... ... 18 96.8 100. ... ... 12/12 12/12 4,523 4,599 Rutnagherry. 800 104,674 Chiploon ...... 2,271 2,142 ... 3,382 387 ... 644 425 3,988 4,356 57 ... 4,413 86 24 ... 110 98.7 78.1 ... ... 15/12 12/12 3,531 3,217 1,206 105,318 Dapoolee ...... 1,506 1,440 2 2,335 113 ... 496 712 2,234 2,828 54 64 2,946 513 64 8 585 98.1 88.9 ... ... 11/12 13/12 3,395 4,395 Unkn. 74,899 Deogur ......... 1,815 1,512 ... 3,006 82 ... 239 448 2,879 3,179 75 73 3,327 39 4 25 68 97.6 90.7 ... ... 9/12 12/12 1,551 2,223 Do. 50,874 Gohaghur ...... 769 702 ... 1,390 81 ... ... 112 1,359 1,399 9 63 1,471 70 5 5 80 99.5 93.3 ... ... 11/12 8/12 3,174 1,803 800 97,856 Malwan ......... 1,592 1,539 63 2,946 7 ... 115 503 2,628 3,099 32 ... 3,131 43 ... ... 43 98.9 100. ... ... 12/12 8/12 1,681 1,701 824 106,917 Rajapoor ...... 1,829 1,763 ... 3,157 136 ... 299 612 2,980 3,370 138 84 3,592 50 34 5 89 90. 59.5 ... ... 10/12 4/12 2,397 1,004 1,296 87,280 Rutnagherry. 1,113 1,138 ... 1,801 111 ... 339 440 1,811 2,031 28 192 2,251 76 63 7 146 99.6 54.6 ... ... 15/12 7/12 4,483 1,457 Unkn. 74,246 Sungmeshwar 2,288 2,105 ... 3,672 126 ... 595 747 3,646 4,261 63 69 4,393 62 27 1 90 98.5 69.6 ... ... 3/12 14/12 399 2,148 Native State of Johar. Do. 8,000 Johar ............ 211 188 ... 399 ... ... ... 98 301 376 20 3 399 ... ... ... ... 91.9 ... ... ... 12/12 12/12 4,754 5,873 Native State of Sawunt Warree. Do. 158,853 Sawnnt War- ree. 2,313 2,171 94 4,299 91 ... ... 773 3,711 4,104 343 37 4,484 178 89 3 270 92.2 66.6 Total. ... ... 25 20 59,372 45,093 Unkn. 1,694,868 29,643 27,602 551 51,553 1,541 25 3,575 12,878 44,367 53,697 1,754 1,794 57,245 1451 498 178 2,127 96.8 74.4 2,375
97 NORTHERN. MUNCHERJEE BYRAMJEH COLAH, M.D. ... ... 1 1 ... ... One Vaccinator in Superitendent's Office. ... ... 1 1 2,894 1,373 Ahmedabad Collectorate. 344 236,782 Duseroe ...... 1,338 1,244 23 2,418 45 1 95 1,601 981 2,305 107 170 2,582 215 71 26 312 95.5 75.1 1,708 ... ... 1 1 l,925 2,839 421 49,468 Sanund......... 888 875 ... 1,558 93 ... 112 1,280 483 1,602 100 61 1,763 104 40 18 162 94.1 72.2 ... ... 2 2 4,559 4,841 653 110,462 Veerungaum . 2,192 1,918 ... 3,654 155 ... 301 3,006 1,104 3,661 211 238 4,110 134 217 98 449 94.5 63.6 ... ... 1 2 3,291 4,121 672 102,488 Dholka ......... 1,094 987 ... 1,783 119 ... 179 1,681 400 1,986 3 92 2,081 1048 4 158 1,210 99.8 99.6 ... ... 2 2 4,410 4,144 1,081 122,161 Dhundhooka . 2,031 1,727 ... 3,217 313 ... 228 2,449 1,309 3,556 136 66 3,758 488 129 35 652 96.3 79.0 ... ... 2 2 3,004 3,831 543 92,358 Prantaje ...... 1,286 1,186 ... 2,256 164 ... 52 1,704 768 2,195 157 120 2,472 325 127 80 532 93.3 71.9 ... ... 1 1 3,018 3040 Kaira Collectorate. 156 59,768 Memoodabad. 1,166 967 1 1,803 130 ... 199 1,587 546 1,991 57 85 2,133 717 90 78 885 97.2 88.8 ... ... 1 1,237 208 62,677 Matur............ 523 419 ... 710 87 ... 145 550 392 892 22 28 942 250 23 22 295 97.5 91.5 ... ... 1 2 3,647 6,163 200 76,221 Neriad ......... 1,788 1,421 ... 2,591 342 ... 276 2,331 878 2,967 107 135 3,209 303 86 49 433 96.5 77.8 ... ... 1 1 3,187 2,218 270 71,714 Kuppudvunj . 1,568 1,375 ... 2,532 287 ... 124 2,238 715 2,686 101 156 2,943 181 14 49 244 96.3 92.8 ... ... 1 l 2,019 2,034 178 55,922 Thasra ......... 926 785 ... 1,412 166 1 132 1,280 431 1,624 55 32 1,711 244 47 17 308 96.7 83.8 ... ... 1 2 3,309 5,198 223 108,576 Anund ......... 1,733 1,436 ... 2,812 197 ... 160 2,256 913 2,935 89 145 3,169 112 15 13 149 97.0 88.1 ... ... 1 1 3,456 4,743 161 90,293 Borsud ......... 1,663 1,448 ... 2,747 105 ... 249 2,587 524 2,910 137 64 3,111 259 52 34 345 95.5 83.2 ... ... 1 1 2,395 2,447 Broach Collecto- rate 298 64,511 Broach ......... 1,233 1,059 1 1,398 598 ... 285 1,888 394 2,071 51 160 2,282 87 18 8 113 97.5 82.8 ... ... 1 1 2,520 2,158 875 74,951 Juraboosur ... 1,347 1,092 ... 1,936 346 1 126 1,193 1,246 2,188 86 165 2,439 48 14 25 87 95.2 77.4 ... ... 1 1 2,134 1,656 224 34,024 Ahmode......... 640 540 ... 948 204 ... 23 709 471 931 157 92 l,l80 31 13 10 54 85.5 70.4 374 32,327 Wagra ......... 443 428 ... 703 106 ... 12 431 440 765 60 46 871 21 3 5 29 92.7 87.5 ... ... 1 1 1,499 1,854 406 71,873 Unklesur ...... 684 683 ... 1,001 269 12 85 1,028 339 1,182 139 46 1,367 70 49 13 132 89.4 58.8 ... ... 1 1 1,639 1,153 Surat Col- lectorate. 336 70,531 Oolpar ......... 829 728 3 1,409 78 15 52 467 1,090 1,346 103 108 1,557 49 27 6 82 92.8 64.4 ... ... 1 1 1,401 1,700 94 28,144 Chowrasee ... 651 590 ... 1,026 102 1 112 651 590 1,084 80 77 1,241 90 57 5 160 93.1 63.2 ... ... 1 1 1464 1,947 188 35,411 Mandvee ...... 711 700 ... 1,436 3 2 ... 660 781 1,289 107 45 1,441 15 6 2 23 94.4 71.4 ... ... 1 1 1,932 1,669 221 61,311 Bardolee 956 828 ... 1,664 43 3 74 703 1,081 1,686 71 27 1,784 110 26 12 148 96.0 80.8 ... ... 1 1 1,618 2,802 175 64,233 Soopa............ 811 709 ... 1,322 88 2 108 810 710 1,342 103 75 1,520 54 21 23 98 92.8 72.0 ... ... 1 1 l,975 2,522 167 49,103 Chicklee ...... 925 834 ... 1,494 109 1 105 811 948 1,716 21 22 1,759 152 55 9 216 98.7 73.4 ... ... 2 1 2,027 1,663 225 71,972 Bulsar ......... 959 970 ... 1,722 80 3 124 672 1,257 1,609 136 184 1,929 70 21 7 98 92.2 76.9 ... ... 1 ... 1,833 1,721 103 41,604 Bugwara...... 674 634 ... 1,230 7 1 70 797 511 1,223 42 43 1,303 336 108 81 525 96.0 75.6 ... ... 1 1 791 1,936 ......... Unknown. Deesa Canton- ment or surrounding Villages...... 437 323 14 676 48 4 18 490 270 748 11 1 760 11 15 5 31 93.5 42.3 ... ... 1 1 1,957 3,233 Pahlunpoor State. 6,041 304403 Pahlunpoor... 1,012 921 ... 1,579 190 1 163 651 1,282 1,857 27 49 1,933 24 ... ... 24 93.5 100.0 ... ... 1 1 l,l53 268 Dhanera ...... 604 505 ... 1,018 43 ... 48 393 716 899 139 71 1,109 29 12 3 44 86.5 70.7 ... ... 1 1 960 2,149 Kakhrej......... 482 340 ... 808 4 ... 10 323 499 815 4 3 822 137 ... ... 138 99.5 100.0 ... ... 156 Deodur......... 96 60 ... 156 ... ... ... 24 132 156 ... ... 156 ... ... ... ... 100.0 ... ... ... ... Tehrwara...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 623 1,777 Wow ......... 258 246 ... 426 13 ... 65 157 347 495 31 13 504 81 37 1 119 98.2 65.6 ... ... 1,213 Thmrrad ...... 452 551 ... 895 13 ... 95 376 627 909 31 13 1,003 156 83 1 240 96.8 65.2 ... ... 1 1 1,183 1,079 Santulpoor ... 518 441 ... 808 77 ... 74 39 920 939 6 14 909 171 22 31 224 99.3 88.0 ... ... 164 Morevara...... 77 84 ... 155 4 ... 2 6 155 159 2 ... 161 3 ... ... 3 98.7 100.0 ... ... 155 Warye ......... 73 50 ... 106 13 ... 4 8 115 109 8 6 123 25 4 3 32 93.1 86.2 ... ... Charchut ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jujham......... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bhabhur ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Soeegaum...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95.6 ... ... ... 1 1 916 1,057 Rhadunpoor... 504 412 ... 748 145 ... 23 294 622 733 33 150 916 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1,222 2,627 Mahee Kanta. 4,000 27,157 Watruckkauta 546 529 ... 998 53 ... 24 603 472 905 92 78 1,075 119 15 13 147 90.7 88.8 ... ... 1,304 27,743 Bavesee ...... 649 597 2 1,128 19 ... 97 725 521 1,150 68 28 1,246 39 15 4 58 94.4 72.2 ... ... 554 17,887 Kuttosun...... 281 267 ... 475 32 ... 41 335 223 505 34 9 548 5 1 ... 6 94.5 83.3 ... ... 3 3 617 26,105 Rhevur......... 295 214 ... 450 5 ... 54 200 301 474 15 20 509 102 1 5 108 96.9 99.0 ... ... 4,249 5,584 177667 NaneeMarwar 2,136 1,982 ... 3,749 172 ... 197 1,953 2,160 3,616 273 229 4,118 108 10 13 131 92.9 91.5 ... ... 1 1 1,029 1,597 32,039 Sabur Kanta. 529 442 ... 878 45 ... 48 538 433 927 19 25 971 50 ... 8 58 97.9 100.0
98 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vacchia- tors. Total Number of Persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccina- tions were per- formed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of Talooka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successsful Cases.exclud- ing those&quot;un- known&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total- Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cination. In Re-Vacci- nation. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. Sq. Miles. NORTHERN99 SIND. J. WILLIAMS, M.D., ... ... ... ... 1,920 1,696 Shikarpore Col- ... 30,000 Oobaoro ...... 1,136 859 ... 160 1,632 ... 203 801 1,194 1,952 12 31 1,995 12 1 2 15 99. 92. 2,555 ... ... ... ... 1,168 494 ... 32,000 Shikarpoor ... 642 526 ... 164 981 ... 23 643 525 1,167 ... 1 1,168 ... ... ... ... 100. ... ... ... ... ... 1,631 1,210 ... 30,000 Sukkur......... 895 700 ... 374 1,151 ... 70 888 707 1,587 ... 8 1,595 13 16 7 36 100. 44. ... ... ... ... 2,380 2,375 ... 35,000 NowsheroAbro 962 832 ... 375 1,376 ... 43 1,352 442 1,720 17 57 1,794 122 379 85 586 99. 24. ... ... ... ... 2,023 1,759 ... 63,000 Larkhana...... 1,182 836 ... 183 1,652 ... 183 1,300 718 1,968 5 45 2,018 7 2 4 13 99. 77. ... ... ... ... 1,688 ... ... 40,000 Ratadehra ... 967 687 ... 270 1,328 ... 56 583 1,071 1,625 10 19 1,654 14 10 10 34 99. 58. ... ... ... ... 2,658 2,396 ... 40,000 Kumbur ...... 1,361 1,277 ... 361 2,187 ... 90 1,133 1,505 2,610 21 7 2,638 10 8 2 20 99. 55. ... .. ... ... 907 ... ... 20,000 Soojawul ...... 494 402 ... 51 833 ... 12 434 462 895 ... 1 896 5 3 3 11 100. 62. ... ... ... ... 1,191 668 ... 28,000 Nusseerabad.. 654 537 ... 103 1,072 ... 16 411 780 1,173 16 2 1,191 ... ... ... ... 98. ... ... ... ... ... 532 333 ... 14,000 Labdarya ...... 288 244 ... 56 458 ... 18 336 196 524 6 2 532 ... ... ... ... 98. ... ... ... ... ... 115 1,915 ... 15,000 Tiger ...... 71 44 ... 9 106 ... ... 44 71 115 ... ... 115 ... ... ... ... 100. ... ... ... ... ... 2,031 675 ... 30,000 Mehur ...... 1,079 856 ... 320 1,560 ... 55 556 1,379 1,914 5 16 1,935 74 21 1 96 99. 77. ... ... ... ... 2,288 1,505 ... 25,000 Kukkur ...... 1,167 962 ... 173 1,819 ... 137 1,235 894 2,048 14 67 2,129 67 51 41 159 99. 56. ... ... ... ... 1,111 1,102 Hydrabad Collectorate. ... 80,000 Hydrabad ...... 599 508 ... 130 893 ... 84 446 661 1,082 4 21 1,107 ... ... 4 4 97. ... ... ... ... ... 1,454 ... ... 40,000 Goonee ......... 439 342 ... 31 709 ... 41 183 598 765 ... 16 781 389 178 106 673 100. 68. ... ... ... ... 3,837 3,220 ... 45,000 Tanda ......... 1,201 1,054 ... 161 1,991 ... 103 530 1,725 2,225 6 24 2,255 783 593 205 1,581 99. 56. ... ... ... ... 1,814 1,214 ... 35,000 Bage Tanda... 937 877 ... 187 1,274 ... 353 425 1,389 1,646 43 125 1,814 ... ... ... ... 97. ... ... ... ... ... 1,575 2,286 ... 42,000 Buddeen ......... 588 525 ... 172 820 ... 121 217 896 1,077 8 28 1,113 227 159 76 199 99. 60. ... ... ... ... 938 1,589 ... 20,000 Digri...... 381 358 ... 61 616 ... 62 219 520 727 1 11 739 111 72 16 199 99. 60. ... ... ... ... 3,508 795 ... 46,000 AllyarTanda.. 1,694 1,304 ... 456 2,084 ... 458 632 2,366 2,968 17 13 2,998 224 206 80 510 99. 52. ... ... ... ... 2,760 2,666 ... 40,000 Shahdadpoor.. 1,327 801 ... 370 1,562 ... 196 675 1,453 2,125 3 ... 2,128 587 41 4 632 99. 93. ... ... ... ... 1,162 ... ... 40,000 Halla ............ 688 468 ... 194 856 ... 106 215 941 1,125 ... 31 1,156 ... 5 1 6 100. ... ... ... ... ... 353 2,733 ... 40,000 Sukkrund ...... 229 119 ... 54 292 ... 12 197 151 343 3 2 348 ... 5 ... 5 99. ... ... ... ... ... 2,280 332 ... 42,000 Mora ......... 1,213 1,057 ... 420 1,716 ... 134 669 1,601 2,246 13 11 2,270 9 1 ... 10 99. 90. ... ... ... ... 1,926 1,741 ... 50,000 Nowshera Feroza ...... 1,080 846 ... 215 1,572 ... 139 951 975 1,814 70 42 1,926 ... ... ... ... 96. ... ... ... ... ... 1,489 2,369 ... 33,000 Khandiara ... 845 635 ... 236 1,219 ... 25 748 732 1,473 5 2 1,480 5 4 ... 9 99. 55. ... ... ... ... 2,100 ... ... 25,000 Meerpoor Khass ......... 999 818 ... 326 846 ... 645 264 1,553 1,757 11 49 1,817 100 82 101 283 99. 54. ... ... ... ... 1,845 1,495 Frontier Upper Sind. ... 33,000 Jacobabad ... 983 807 ... 98 1,672 ... 20 892 898 1,778 3 9 1,790 39 15 9 63 99. 72. ... ... ... ... 633 683 ... 25,000 Kusmore ...... 345 269 ... 1 606 ... 7 260 354 609 1 4 614 9 8 2 19 99. 53. ... ... ... ... 2,136 2,147 ... 27,000 Thoule ........ 1,202 934 ... 139 1,930 ... 67 1,192 944 2,125 1 10 2,136 ... ... ... ... 99. ... ... ... ... ... 499 1,362 Thurr and Parkur. ... 40,000 Oomerkote ... 264 212 ... 27 249 ... 200 88 388 470 ... 6 476 13 8 2 23 100. 61. ... ... ... ... 1,260 3,277 ... 21,000 Kippra ...... 490 368 ... 35 676 ... 147 119 739 789 2 67 858 217 114 71 402 99. 65. ... ... ... ... 3,527 1,515 ... 50,000 Nuggur Parkur ...... 1,243 973 ... 496 1,079 ... 641 225 1,991 1,903 2 311 2,216 347 4 960 1,311 99. 98. ... ... ... ... 2,266 483 ... 40,000 Dipla ............ 1,208 923 ... 458 1,248 ... 485 78 2,113 2,116 ... 75 2,191 28 33 2 63 100. 45. ... ... ... ... 1,864 ... ... 30,000 Saghur ......... 699 600 ... 80 1,122 ... 106 226 1,082 1,293 1 14 1,308 282 173 101 556 99. 61. ... ... ... ... 1,052 ... ... 25,000 Mittee ......... 431 390 ... 271 247 ... 303 103 718 712 ... 109 821 131 63 37 231 100. 67. ... ... ... ... 1,757 1,260 Kheirpoor State. ... ... 110,000 Kheirpoor ...... 926 679 ... 315 1,236 ... 54 581 1,024 1,444 104 57 1,605 20 143 1 164 93. 12. Total. 2 3 32 32 81,887 63,204 ...... 63,000 1,745,000 39,883 31,855 16 9,275 56,064 4 6,379 24,568 47,170 69,199 739 1,809 71,738 4895 2994 2260 10,140 98 62. 2,555 KATTIAWAR. Surgeon BUTLER; ... ... 1 1 1,821 1,918 Saiela ......... ... 57,000 Saiela ......... 919 893 ... 1,656 80 ... 76 411 1,401 1,755 26 31 1,812 6 3 ... 9 98.5 66.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... Choora ...... ... ...... Choora ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Choteyla ... ... ...... Choteyla ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1,062 1,759 Wankaneir ... ... 46,000 Wankaneir ... 538 510 ... 728 256 ... 64 855 ... ... ... 4 1,048 11 1 2 14 96.2 91.6 ... ... 1 1 1,759 1,812 Vithulghur. ... 42,000 Vithulghur ... 841 811 ... 1,516 39 ... 97 823 829 1,594 25 33 1,652 42 37 28 107 98.4 55.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... Limre Byat . ... ... Wurode ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Moolee ...... ... ... Moolee ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tulsana ...... ... ... Tulsana ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 867 992 Bugusra .. ... 27,000 Bugusra ...... 450 417 ... 801 64 ... 2 72 795 708 48 51 867 ... ... ... ... 92.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kurreana.. ... ... Kurreana...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vasavur .. ... ... Vasavur.. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
100 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccina- tions were per- formed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of Talooka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those &quot;un- known&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C D. A. B. C D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsucccsful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parscc. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above l year. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cination. In Re-Vacci- nation. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. KATTIAWAR101 E. R. BUTLER, M.D., Surgeon; Acting ... ... 1 1 1,521 1,823 Limree ...... ... 60,000 Limree........ 697 667 ... 1,118 182 ... 64 836 528 1,308 24 32 1,364 98 50 9 157 98.2 67.1 .. ... 1 1 1,611 1,335 Jailpoor ...... ... 77,560 Tailpoor........ 698 535 ... 888 342 ... 3 642 591 1,103 104 26 1,233 329 38 11 378 91.3 89.6 ... ... 1 1 1,569 1,518 Wulla........ ... 16,000 Wulla........... 824 715 ... 1,400 66 ... 73 142 1,397 1,525 14 ... 1,539 25 5 ... 30 99.3 83.6 ... ... 1 1 1,249 835 Dussara ...... ... 38,100 Dussara ...... 658 591 ... 1,148 97 ... 4 412 837 1,207 28 14 1,249 ... ... ... ... 97.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bujjana ...... ... ...... Bujjana ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... Jeenjoowara ... ...... Jeenjoowara. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Wunode...... ... ...... Wunode ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 1 1 1,526 1,305 Drangdra... ... 34,000 Drangdra ...... 799 705 ... 1,350 74 ... 80 726 778 1,421 69 14 1,504 21 1 ... 22 98. 95.4 ... ... 1 ... 443 ... Do. ........ ... 26,000 Hulwud........ 242 201 ... 399 13 ... 31 236 207 381 48 14 443 ... ... ... ... 88.8 ... ... ... 1 1 1,429 1,358 Luktur ...... ... 28,000 Luktur ...... 714 621 ... 1,231 30 ... 74 405 130 1,278 32 25 1,335 48 39 7 94 97.5 57.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... Wndwan Byat...... ... ...... Wudwan Byat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1,413 1,305 Bantwa ...... ... 48,400 bantwa ...... 673 568 ... 838 271 ... 132 736 505 1,222 10 9 1,241 159 7 6 172 99.2 95.8 ... ... 1 1 852 1,195 Wudwan .. ... 48,000 Wudwan ..... 437 415 ... 791 19 ... 42 426 426 782 45 25 852 ... ... ... ... 94.5 ... ... ... 1 1 1,277 1,005 Deedan...... ... 11,200 Deedan...... 659 549 ... 1,024 178 ... 6 322 886 1,182 7 19 l,208 52 3 14 69 99.4 94.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... Jafferabad. ... ...... Jafferabad .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... Joonaghur. ... ...... Nogshree ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1,517 l,574 Rajcote ...... ... 26,000 Surdhar ...... 798 664 ... 1,172 159 ... 131 671 791 1,357 26 79 1,462 45 7 3 55 98.1 86.5 ... ... 1 1 1,365 1,410 Jhusdun .. ... 43,208 Jhusdun ...... 671 659 ... 1,175 74 ... 81 944 386 1,301 4 25 1,330 30 1 4 35 99.6 96.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... Kotra ......... ... ...... Kotra ......... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Babra...... ... ...... Babra............ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 1 1 1,168 1,231 Pallytana... ... 50,000 Pallytana....... 606 492 ... 1,065 28 ... 5 346 752 1,098 ... ... 1,098 31 39 ... 70 100. 44.2 ... ... 1 1 1,061 1,351 Porebunder. ... 60,000 Porebunder... 525 474 ... 907 71 ... 21 23 976 933 59 7 999 62 ... ... 62 93.3 100. ... ... 1 1 382 230 Mallea...... ... 12,000 Mallea ......... 192 181 ... 326 45 ... 2 117 256 255 75 43 373 4 3 2 9 77.2 57.1 ... ... ... ... ... 912 Omitted in January 1870. Total. 2 2 46 44 57,766 54,979 28,000 1,592,468 29,631 25,910 ... 46,723 6,642 ... 2,176 21,568 33,973 51,393 2,533 1,615 55,541 1661 413 151 2,225 93.6 80. 1,255 REWA KANTA. Assistant Surgeon T. CODY. ... ... 1 1 1,733 2,370 Punch, Mahals. 625 51,427 Godra ............ 850 866 ... 1,494 156 1 65 690 1,026 1,650 58 8 1,716 13 4 ... 17 96.6 76.4 1,277 ... ... 1 1 1,318 2,361 325 42,673 Dhohud......... 592 524 1 983 85 ... 47 507 609 964 116 36 1,116 62 121 19 202 89.2 33.8 ... ... 1 1 1,342 1,721 150 29,000 Kalole ......... 661 581 ... 1,138 39 ... 65 839 403 1,096 99 47 1,242 60 14 26 100 91.7 81. ... ... 1 1 1,201 1,350 200 22,527 Jhalode ......... 564 564 ... 1,099 17 ... 12 287 841 943 102 83 1,128 21 30 22 73 90.2 41.1 ... ... 1 1 902 1,674 375 23,111 Halole ......... 398 402 ... 554 3 ... 243 338 462 796 ... 4 800 87 11 4 102 100. 88.7 ... ... 2 2 3,040 2,073 Rewa Kanta Native States. 1,736 ...... Loonawara ... 1,507 1,533 ... 2,722 162 ... 156 663 2,377 2,902 101 37 3,040 ... ... ... ... 96.6 ... ... ... 2 2 4,508 3,068 4,500 ...... Rnjpeepla...... 1,229 1,251 ... 2,424 56 ... ... 904 1,576 2,420 34 26 2,480 22 5 1 28 98.6 81.4 ... ... 2 2 4,010 2,098 1,600 ...... Barrea ......... 1,936 2,065 ... 3,456 30 ... 515 487 3,514 3,640 184 177 4,001 6 2 1 9 95.1 75. ... ... 1 1 1,110 434 400 ...... Ballasinore ... 528 522 ... 921 89 ... 40 308 742 935 74 41 1,050 33 20 7 60 92.6 62.2 ... ... 1 1 651 706 3,000 ...... Chota Oodey- poor ......... 300 324 ... 591 ... ... 42 181 452 482 110 41 633 17 1 ... 18 81.4 94.4 ... ... 1 1 582 1,136 900 ...... Soonth and Kuddana ... 281 282 ... 548 15 ... ... 44 519 419 33 111 563 4 14 1 19 92.6 22.2 ... ... 1 1 757 651 400 ...... Sunkeira Me- was ......... 382 365 ... 729 18 ... ... 201 546 653 46 48 747 8 2 ... 10 93.4 80. Total. ... ... 15 15 19,154 19,642 14,211 70,600 (Estimate). 9,237 9,279 1 16,659 670 1 1,185 5,449 13,067 16,900 957 659 18,516 333 224 81 638 94.6 59.7 1,277 PRESIDENCY. ANUNTA CHANDROBA, Sub-Assist. Surgeon. ... ... 11 6 11,746 9,222 Bombay Island. 19 816,562 Bombay ...... 6,729 4,771 853 7,962 1,822 703 160 3,833 7,667 8,358 1,284 1,858 11,500 152 77 17 246 86.6 66.3 1,068
102 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number or Persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native States in which Vaccina- tions were per- formed during the year. Population of Area included in last column. Name of Talooka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those &quot;un- known&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons Vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsce. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cination. In Re-Vacci- nation. 1870-71 1869-70 1870-71 1869-70 1870-71 1869-70 KUTCH. DORABJEE HORMIUSJEE, G.G.M.C. Sq. Miles. 1 ... 3 3 648 610 Native State of Kutch Unkn. 400,000 Bhooj, Mandavee Moondra, Anjar &c. 363 285 ... 393 255 ... ... 160 488 571 49 28 648 ... ... ... ... 92.1 ... 216 BARODA TERRITORY. J. S. RIMINGTON, Surgeon Major. 1 1 23 23 23,659 22,383 Baroda District. Unknown. Baroda Dis- tricts ............ 13,203 10,456 ... 21,165 1,984 ... 510 * * 21,774 999 886 23,659 ... ... ... ... 95.6 ... 1028.6 Grand Total.. 6 5 326 298 491,605 447,767 245,739 216,724 1,951 349,135 83,798 841 26,738 157,671 281,133 428,580 16,944 16,939 462,463 18,478 6,738 3,926 29,142 96.2 73.2 150.8 * The Ages in the Baroda Circle not having been given, the total of above and under one year does not agree with the total of Primary Vaccinations.
103 A.104 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence. MONTHS. District in which operations chiefly conducted in each Month. Total Number Vaccinated. RESULTS. Total. Average percent- age Successful, excluding those unknown. Success- ful. Unsuc- cessful and Doubtful. Unknown. WESTERN CIRCLE. April 1870 .... Whole Circle... 4,233 4,065 99 69 4,233 97.6 May 105 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence. MONTHS. District in which operations chiefly conducted in each Month. Total Num- ber Vacci- nated. RESULTS. Total. Average percent- age Suc- cessful, excluding those unknown. Successful Unsuc- cessful and Doubtful. Unknown SIND CIRCLE. April 1870.... Whole Circle .... 6,316 5,475 518 323 6,316 May 106 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence MONTHS. District in which operations chiefly conducted in each Month. Total Num- ber Vacci- nated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percent- age Suc- cessful, excluding those unknown. Successful Unsuc- cessful and Doubtful. Unknown. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. April 1870.... Island of Bombay. 812 586 88 138 812 87. May 107 A.108 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total. Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of of each successful case. A.109 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. A.110 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. B.111 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. B.112 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- ccssful case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. B.113 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of success excuding, those un- known from the Total. Cost or each suc- cessful case. Rs a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. C.114 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. D.115 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost or each suc- cessful case. D.116 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage or Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost or each suc- cessful case. D.117 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total Number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- ccsful case. KUTCH CIRCLE. D.118 A.B. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. 21 vac
120 B.121 South- J. RAHY, Assist- ... ... 1 1 793 733 Karwar Town. 10,437 Civil Hospital... 455 342 113 583 92 ... 4 57 740 541 203 53 707 ... ... ... ... 73. ... 761 ... ... ... ... 30 157 Yellapoor 122 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle of Medical Superintend- ence. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent of Dispensary. No. of Native Super- intendents of Vac- cination attached to the Dispensary. No. of Vaccinators attached to the Dispensary. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, PoliticalAgency, or Native State for the population of which the Dis- pensary is provided. Population of Area included in the last column. Name of Dispensary or Civil Surgeoncy. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases,exclud- ing those &quot; unknown&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C D SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cinations. In Re-Vaccina- tions. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. SIND. J. WILLIAMS, M.D., Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 2,765 3,933 KurracheeTown 100,000 Civil Hospital... 1,697 1,068 61 805 1,761 34 104 1,036 1,729 2,405 209 151 2,765 ... ... ... ... 92. ... 2,765 ... ... ... ... ... 240 Do. Jail... ...... Jail do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 160 38 Do. ... ...... Dispensary ... 145 ... ... 15 130 ... ... ... 145 87 58 ... 145 7 8 ... 15 60. 46. ... ... 1 1 2,060 2,162 Hydrahad Town. 40,000 Civil Hospital ... 1,332 722 41 1,009 977 ... 27 1,025 1,029 2,024 18 12 2,054 5 1 ... 6 99. 99. 2,060 ... ... 1 1 1,666 1,224 Shikarpoor 123 KATTIAWAR. Surgeon E. R. BUTLER; (Acting) Sur- geons SHEPHERD and BLOMFIELD. ... ... ... 1 ... 1,215 Rajkote Town... ...... Civil Hospital... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38 4 Wudwan ......... 500 Dispensary ...... 17 21 ... 21 8 ... 9 14 24 37 1 ... 38 ... ... ... ... 97.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 102 96 Joonaghur ...... 1,000 Manickwara do. 50 52 ... 88 14 ... ... 15 87 95 7 ... 102 ... ... ... ... 93.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... Bhownuggur ... 500 Sonapoora do. 11 8 ... 18 1 ... ... 12 7 17 2 ... 19 ... ... ... ... 89.4 ... ... Total ... ... ... ... 1 159 1,315 2,000 78 81 ... 127 23 ... 9 41 118 149 10 ... 159 ... ... ... ... 93.7 ... ... ADEN. J. JAMES, M.D., Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 691 844 Aden ............... 25,000 Civil Hospital... 525 166 26 69 208 37 351 150 541 582 109 ... 691 ... ... ... ... 84.2 ... 691 PRESIDENCY. ... ... ... ... ... 63 Bombay ............... ...... House of Cor- rection ......... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60 Do. ............... ...... County Jail ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... REWA KANTA. Assistant Sur- geon T. CODY. ... ... ... 116 ... Godra Town ...... ...... Dispensary ...... 60 55 ... 49 62 ... 4 86 29 93 20 2 115 1 ... ... 1 82.3 100. ... Grand Total. ... ... 15 17 27,538 32,473 15,252 11,309 659 17,109 7,716 279 798 11,401 15,160 23,133 2,324 1,104 26,561 472 425 80 977 91. 52.6 1,167
124 TABLE No. VI. VACCINATION in the BOMBAY ARMY. Number Vaccinated. Europeans. Natives. Total. European Army for 1870-71 ......... Regiments .................. 710 7 717 Lines ..................... .. 209 209 Bazaars ........................ .. 34 34 Total.... 710 250 960 Native Army for 1870-71 ............ Regiments ........................ 16 2,155 2,171 Lines ..................... 2 319 321 Bazaars ........................ 2 92 94 Cantonment Bazaars ............... 149 2,480 2,629 Ordnance and other Departments ...... 12 95 107 Staff and Details ..................... .. 1,276 1,276 Total.... 181 6,417 6,598 Grand Total.... 891 6,667 7,558 TABLE No. VII. SUMMARY of Employment Returns of Superintendents of Vaccination for the Year 1870-71. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.125 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.126 WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent. 127 KATTIAWAR CIRCLE. Superintendents.Vaccination. No. 2399. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 30th August 1871. Letter from the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, No. 2817, dated 24th July 18712 over those maintained in the preceding year. The Municipality of Bom- bay has during the year under report engaged 11. The Superintendent General recommends that Municipal assistance should be given in the form of a money subsidy, and that the Municipalities should have no control over the vaccinators. His Excellency in Council is inclined to doubt the ex- pediency of this proposal, and considers that much good may be effected, especially in Mofussil towns, by the direct personal interest the members of the Municipality may take in the way in which the vaccinator carries on his duties. It is not long ago that Dr. Pinkerton reported an instance of the Municipality withholding a vaccinator's pay because they considered he had been idle. 5. During the year under report the scheme for the entire re-organiza- tion of the Department has been matured, and has since come into operation. The principal features in the new organization are the multiplication of the number of vaccinators and the exercise of a closer supervision over them. Besides those employed by Municipalities, each Talooka will have a separate vaccinator for the benefit of the rural population, and a competent well-paid Native Assistant Superintendent will be appointed to each Collec- torate. These arrangements, from which the very best results may confidently be anticipated, have been brought about by the Local Funds paying for the Talooka or rural vaccinators, and thus enabling the additional Superinten- dents to be paid for by Government. His Excellency in Council desires to express his acknowledgments to those Presidents of the Local Funds Com- mittees who have readily acquiesced in and given their support to this most important change. 6. The Collectors and their Assistants have invariably co-operated heartily with the Vaccination Department, but they will now have a more direct interest in seeing that the Local Funds contributions are utilized to the utmost. Perhaps the most useful and direct form which their assistance can take is that of seeing that the village officers keep the lists and vaccina- tion registers correctly and punctually. They should also insist upon timely intimation being given of the outbreak of small-pox in any particular locality, in order that the attention of the Assistant Superintendent may be specially directed to its suppression. 7. The success of the new system will entirely depend upon the manner in which the European Superintendents exercise a direct personal control over the Assistants. The Superintendent General expresses himself satisfied
3 with the manner in which the Superintendents have travelled over and visited their charges. But His Excellency in Council considers that the present Table No. VII. requires amendment, and the extent of attention that has been paid by the Superintendent to each Collectorate and to each Talooka should be shown. Several Collectorates have apparently not been visited at all during the past year. 8. His Excellency in Council has read with interest Mr. Anunta Chun- droba's account of his proceedings in connection with the introduction of animal vaccination into the Town of Bombay. The zeal with which he has acted is deserving of much praise. The Secretary of State will be requested to communicate through the proper channel the thanks of this Government to Mr. Warlomont, of Brussels, for his kindness in furnishing supplies of animal lymph. 9. The Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, has noticed with dissatisfaction the little progress that has been made in Dispensary vac- cination. He is requested to issue a Circular to all Medical Officers in charge of Dispensaries informing them that vaccination is not one of the least im- portant parts of their duty, and that inattention to it will be severely noticed. It would be well perhaps to require duplicate copies of the periodical returns to be sent direct to his Department. 10. There is no reason to suppose that the practice of inoculation is prevalent, and with the increased facilities now offered for vaccination, it is hoped that it will soon entirely disappear. A Bill for rendering vaccination compulsory in the Town and Island of Bombay is now under the consideration of Government. 11. His Excellency in Council has much pleasure in according his en- tire satisfaction at the manner in which Dr. Pinkerton and the officers under him have conducted their duties. (Signed) W. H. CROWE, For Chief Secretary to Government. To The INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. The REVENUE COMMISSIONER, N. D. The REVENUE COMMISSIONER, S. D. The COMMISSIONER IN SIND. The MUNICIPAL COMMISSIONER for the CITY OF BOMBAY.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SINDH FOR THE YEAR 1871-72. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS, FORT. 1872.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SINDH FOR THE YEAR 1871-72. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS, FORT. 1872.
No. 4234 OF 1872. Bombay, 11th December 1872. FROM THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, GENERAL DEPARTMENT. SIR,2 9. It can scarcely be anticipated that the increased establishment should make itself felt, in the better quality of the work done, so soon after its or- ganization. 10. But in the matter of infant vaccination, which is of great importance, probably the next report will show an improvement, as the Táluká Vaccinators have now an area, to work over which will be more manageable than has been the rule heretofore. It will also be possible for these men to be in possession of useful information as regards the relative locality, population, and annual number of births in the táluká villages in which they have to work. 11. It will be interesting in the next report to enter into details as to a few specimen tálukás, to show how the new organization succeeds, and whether it is even yet sufficiently strong to cover the ground within a year, which should be the object of every Vaccinator in the táluká allotted to him. 12. Much of the success of the new scheme will depend upon the zeal and intelligence of the &quot; Assistant Superintendents &quot; and in the judgment display- ed by the Medical Officers in charge of Circles in utilizing their services. 13. Government would probably think more highly of these latter officers, who are emplyed for so many months in the year in the districts amongst the people, if they could exert themselves to acquire a knowledge of the language of the people. 14. The influence of Superintendents would be greatly increased there- by, and complaints and misunderstandings lessened. 15. There has been an improvement in dispensary vaccination during the year, the increase over the previous year being 4,095. 16. The lymph in general use is reported to have been of an average kind. 17. The use of &quot; animal lymph&quot; has been very considerable in Bom- bay, and has been extended to Púna and Sakkhar. 18. As the protective power of this lymph is by no means proved to be the same in degree as that known to be possessed by &quot; human lymph,&quot; it is of importance to note what is said of it in the report. 19. In the large city of Bombay it is said that the number of vaccina- tions has increased over the previous year by 3,710, and the Local Superintend- ent observes &quot; our percentage of success has considerably improved owing to the excellent cow-lymph always in use during the year, the percentage of the year being 81.8, whilst that of the preceding year was 86.&quot; The improve- ment is not apparent from the figures.
3 20. The facility with which animal lymph can be used is well shown in the report of the Local Superintendent, and he is convinced (after an expe- rience of 28 months) that animal vaccination has done a great amount of good in Bombay, and is capable of doing the same almost to an unlimited extent in future, and then he proceeds to describe the extensive and very fatal epi- demics of small-pox which have been the scourge of the city for the past two years. 21. As out of 12,094 operations 8,200 were performed with animal lymph, that is, more than 0/3rds, it is desirable to gain information of the protective power of the lymph used in these cases, and it will be well to make a report on this point next year, especially in reference to the statement that the same localities were attacked in both of two epidemics in the 2nd year in spite of previous small-pox and, it is presumed, active vaccination. 22. It is a good sign that Native Princes are beginning not only to permit but to encourage vaccination in their States. Instances are found in Kátthiáwád, Kolhápur, Janjirá. 23. Considering the many changes amongst the Executive Officers during the year, and the difficulty inseparable from the starting a new organi- zation with untrained men, the work of the year has been creditable to the Superintendent General of Vaccination and the Executive Officers. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. WRIGHT, Inspector General, Indian Medical Department.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1871-72. This is the Fourth Annual Report by the Superintendent General of Vaccination. Division. 2. The Report is divided as follows :( ii ) Causes of Increase. 4. On account of numerous changes and transfers, involving interrup- tion of work, which took place in the month of August, I was apprehensive that, though the Vaccine Establishment had been increased, there would be a decrease in the number of operations. Fortunately these fears have not been realized. When an increase in the establishment takes place, especially when the in- crease is effected in the middle of the year and the operators added are raw and inexperienced, it is a very difficult matter to show anything like a correct comparison between that and the preceding year. This difficulty I labour under in this report. However, on careful consideration, I think the com- parison will be best shown by contrasting the average cost of each successful operation; and taking into consideration the numerous interruptions to work occasioned by the entire re-organization of the establishment, and the large number of raw and inexperienced vaccinators entertained, I think the compari- son is in favor of the year under report. The cost of each successful operation was annas 6-1 in the past, and annas 6 in the previous year( iii ) Establishments. 1871-72. 1870-71. Superintendent General. Superintendent of Circles. Assistant Super- intendents. Clerks. Vaccinators. Peons. Superintendent General. Superintendent of Circles. Assistant Super- intendents. Clerks. Vaccinators. Peons. Imperial......... 1 8 24 9 3 52 1 8 ... 1 143 161 Local Fund ... ... ... ... ... 197 197 ... ... 2 1 39 40 Municipal ........ ... ... ... ... 51 43 ... ... ... ... 51 42 Native States... ... 2 3 1 119 110 ... 2 4 1 118 124 Total... 1 10 27 10 370 402 1 10 6 3 351 367 This table shows an increase in the number of vaccinators amounting to 19. But of these, many were employed for a month or two only, and none of them carried on work independently previous to the 1st September. This was in consequence of the necessity for having them thoroughly instructed. No greater evil can befal vaccination than the appointment of inefficient and ill-instructed men. One or two such, I regret to say, were appointed in the Sindh Circle, but they were soon removed, and I have taken precautions to prevent such an occurrence in future. Total Expenditure. 7. The total expenditure by the Vaccine Department during the past year amounted to Rs. 1,84,459, an increase of Rs. 14,408 over that of the preceding year. This increase is fully accounted for by the larger establishment main- tained since August last, and by several vaccinators on the Municipal Establish- ment, appointed towards the end of the year 1870-71, having been on duty during the whole of the past year. The following table shows the cost of main- tenance of each establishment, and the cost of each successful operation :( iv ) Thus it appears there has been an increased expenditure in every estab- lishment except the Imperial. The decrease in the latter is due (a) partly to. the saving effected by the re-organization of establishment sanctioned in Government Resolution No. 1203, of the 9th May 1871, and (b) partly to the medical officers officiating as Superintendents having been of lower rank, and consequently drawing smaller pay. Average cost of each successful operation. 8. Each successful operation by Government establishment cost Rs. 1-4-9, or more than double last year. It should be borne in mind, however, that during eight months of the year,( v ) Age. 11. I regret my inability to report an increase in the number of children vaccinated under one year of age. The number per cent. is this year 34.5 against 36.3 last year. This is the more to be regretted, because there was a considerable falling off last year also, and I fear there will not be much improvement in this respect for two or three years to come( vi ) between the operations of the past and previous year in each Circle. The following shows the increase and decrease in each:( vii ) however, die without being vaccinated, and in all probability the number of those left to be operated on would not exceed 60,000. The excess of vaccina- tions over births is no doubt due to arrears of work having been overtaken : but these and other matters, in this and other Circles, shall be thoroughly investigated as soon as the results of the Census of February last are known. Average percentage of success in Circles. 15. The following Statement shows the percentages of success in primary and re-vaccination in each Circle, the averages of the whole combined and those of the Dispen- saries :( viii ) objects. Though these appointments have been abolished, I may state that the municipal towns will be as much attended to as before. The Sángolá Táluká of the Sholápur Collectorate formerly was part of the Sátárá Zilhá, and the vaccinator maintained there was on the same footing as the Sátárá vaccina- tors, and the appointment was abolished in August last for the same reason. 17. Notwithstanding that the number of vaccinators was the same in the past as in the previous year, the number of persons vaccinated in the former amounted to 60,676 or 24,180 in excess of the latter. The following shows the increase and decrease according to Circles. Increase. Decrease. 1. Central Circle.............................. 3,400 ...... 2. Southern ( ix ) ciation by the people of the benefits conferred by vaccination, increased interest in the subject taken by the civil officials, and to the tact and energy of the Superintendent, Dr. Gordon. Vaccination in Native States. 18. During the past year vaccination has been carried on in Native territory with much success. 155,714 persons were operated on against 138,972 in the preceding year,( x ) assisted by the Political Agent, attained the desired object. The main points of the scheme submitted by Dr. Blanc to the Native Chiefs, through Colonel Anderson, were (a) reduction; (b) re-distribution; and (c) gradation of the establishment: the latter on the same principle as was followed by Dr. Pinkerton in re-organizing the general Vaccine Establishment. Generally the scheme, as drawn out by Dr. Blanc, is an admirable one; but had it been previously submitted to this office for sanction, as it ought to have been, there are two proposals of which I could not have approved, and which, in my opinion, ought not to have been made; and on a copy of the scheme being afterwards forwarded to this office, I signified my disapproval of them to Dr. Blanc. They are these, viz.:( xi ) very many of whom steadily object to it, the only result of the issue of such orders will be falsification: especially by the less reliable members of the establishment. The population of Káthiáwád is, in many places, sparse, and the villages far between. To enable a vaccinator to overtake so many villages yearly, it would be necessary to throw aside arm-to-arm vaccination altogether, and to resort to the use of preserved lymph: the consequence of which would be deterioration, if not absolute loss of lymph. Besides, were each vaccinator to operate on 300 children per month, or 3,600 per annum, the result would be a total number of 118,800 operations per annum, or more than double the estimated number of births; and even taking Dr. Blanc's minimum, the result would be 79,200, or fully 25,000 in excess of births. As Dr. Blanc has repeated these instructions in his report for the past year, I have been obliged to take notice of them here, in order to show that they do not meet with my approval. Assistant Superintendent of Vaccination, Kolápur State. 22. The next change to which I shall allude is the appointment of an Assistant Superintendent for the Kolápur State and its Dependencies. The vaccinators em- ployed therein number eleven, and on account of the large size of the Southern Circle the superintendence of these men has not been so close as could be wished. To remedy this, Dr. Robb recom- mended, and Colonel Anderson, the Political Agent, approved, the appointment of an Assistant Superintendent on the same pay as those lately appointed on the Imperial Establishment. Previous to assuming charge, the man nominated is undergoing thorough instruction. Much credit is due to Colonel Anderson and Dr. Robb in the matter of this appointment, and I anticipate a great im- provement in the quantity as well as quality of the work of the vaccinators. Janjirá. 23. Many endeavours have of late years been made to induce the Khán of Janjirá to employ a vaccine establishment and to put a stop to inoculation, which was actively carried on in his territory. It may be well to state that the Khán's territory is situated in the Northern Konkan, and that its northern boundary is only 25 miles from Kolába Light House, Bombay; that the area is said to be 324 square miles, and the estimated population 70,000. With no very sanguine expectation of success I, through the Political Agent, after pointing out to His Excellency the dangers of inoculation, not only to his own subjects, but to the population of the surrounding British territory and the City of Bombay, the benefits to be derived from vaccination properly carried on, its harmlessness, the strongly and frequently expressed wishes of His Excellency the Governor in Council, and the small expenditure necessary for maintaining a vaccine establishment, suggested that he should maintain a vaccinator of his own. In reply, Mr. Larcom, the Assistant Political Agent, said that the Khán had informed him that he, personally, had no objections to the employment of
( xii ) a vaccinator, but that he had submitted the question to the heads of villages, and that they had unanimously reported their desire that things should be allowed to remain as they were: the people having no wish for vaccination, preferring the old method, viz., inoculation. On receipt of this reply, I pointed out that, as a large number of His Excellency the Khán's subjects yearly visited the neighbouring British territories for the purpose of getting their children vaccinated, it appeared to me that the village officers must have misinterpreted the wishes of the people, and at the same time I urged that His Excellency should test the matter by appointing a vaccinator experimentally for one year. The amount asked for was granted on condition that one of His Excellency's own subjects be instructed and appointed. This, I am happy to say, has been done, and the man, aided by Mr. Larcom's influence, is now carrying on vaccine operations very successfully. In my letter No. 992, dated 20th November 1871, I had the honour to report this very desirable result for the information of Government, and at the same time to suggest that Govern- ment would be pleased to communicate their thanks to His Excellency the Khán, for acceding to their wishes, and to Mr. Larcom for the very great assistance rendered in carrying the matter to a successful issue. Government, in their Resolution No. 3667, of the 9th December 1871, were pleased to act on this suggestion. 24. Since the vaccinator commenced work, Mr. Larcom has done much to remove obstructions and generally to facilitate operations. On the suggestion of Mr. Cody, Circle Superintendent, Mr. Larcom has prevailed on His Excellency the Khán, not only to issue a proclamation prohibiting inoculation in Habsán, but to notify that vaccination shall in future be the only legal means of pro- tecting the lives of his people from small-pox, and that every person carrying on inoculation within his territories will be punished. The necessity of having the vaccinator thoroughly instructed delayed the commencement of opera- tions, but this will be compensated for in future by better and more reliable work. Under Mr. Cody's and Mr. Larcom's fostering care, I feel sure vacci- nation in Janjirá, will prosper, and that at the end of the year His Excellency the Khán will see cause for continuing his support to it. Dispensary Vaccination. 25. Statement No. V. shows a decrease of 13,418 in the number of persons vaccinated. But this is only apparent. In reality, there is an increase in the number vaccinated at dispensaries, for in the statement of the previous year the work of 15 station vaccinators was included. The appointments of these men were abolished from the 1st of March 1871, and consequently their work is not included in the return of this year. Excluding the work of these men for the purpose of comparison, 10,220 was the number of vaccinations per- formed by dispensary officers in the year 1870-71. The total vaccinations in the year under report were 14,315( xiii ) year. Much has been done in the past year by the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, to promote zeal and activity among the officers in charge, and on several occasions I have impressed on Circle Superinten- dents the necessity for doing their utmost to promote vaccination by this means. The Inspector General, in his Circular No. 1003, of the 21st March 1872, has ordered that vaccine stations convenient to the people be fixed in every dispensary town, and the officer in charge, assisted by a dispensary servant, shall personally perform the operations; and I have requested Circle Superintendents to bring to notice the name of every dispensary officer who, he considers, does not carry out the orders of Government and the Inspector General in this matter. The neglect of these orders by Mr. Sub-Assistant Surgeon Wáman Wásudeo, in charge of the Hubli Dispensary, was recently the subject of special warning by the Inspector General. The following statement shows the increase and decrease in the work performed at dispensaries, according to Circles, after deducting the work of the station vaccinators from the Returns of 1870-71 :( xiv ) Vaccine Institu- tion from which received. Vaccine Circle in which tested. NUMBER OF Summary of remarks on the Vesicles by the Superintendents. Tubes tested. Children operated on. Punctures or scratch- es made. Resulting vesicles. Central Vac- cine Institu- tion of Scot- land. Central .......... 4 4 12 12 Good......... Lymph re- ceived and tested in the month of June. Southern ....... 4 2 10 10 Very good... Western ...... 3 4 25 23 Very good... Northern ....... 4 2 10 5 Indifferent... Sindh............ 4 8 24 12 Fair ........ Total....... 19 20 81 62 National Vac- cine Institu- tion, London. Central .......... 4 5 29 26 Excellent ... Lymph re- ceived and tested in the month of November. Southern............ 3 8 35 23 Very good... Western ......... 3 1 6 5 Not good ... Northern ....... 4 2 11 10 Good......... Sindh............ 4 3 13 10 Good......... Káthiáwád ... 4 4 23 15 Very good... Rewá Kántá... 3 3 18 14 Very good... Total...... 25 26 135 103 National Vac- cine Institu- tion, London. Central .......... 4 5 22 14 Verv good... Lymph re- ceived and tested in the month of January. Southern............ 4 4 24 16 Very good... Western ......... 2 2 11 2 Not good ... Northern ....... 3 2 11 10 Very good... Sindh............ 3 3 19 12 Good......... Káthiáwád ... 2 2 6 4 Very good... Rewá Kántá 2 2 12 9 Very good... Presidency ... 2 2 11 6 Good......... Total...... 22 22 116 73 Grand Total...... 66 68 332 238 Thus 332 punctures or scratches were made in the arms of 68 children with lymph from 66 tubes, and the result was 238 vesicles more or less charac- teristic. Of the 68 children operated on, 7 only were absolute failures. The above shows very satisfactory results. Lymph propagated from this source was distributed by Circle Superintendents to the majority of their subordin- ates, and largely made use of by them, during the year. 28. Regarding the deterioration of lymph in this country, I am of opinion that it is due more to refusals on the part of the people to allow it to be drawn from the arms of their children, and to the want of care exercised by the vaccinator, than to any influence of climate. Given a really good and
( xv ) careful vaccinator, always in good health, with plenty of healthy and willing subjects for operation, no objection on the part of the people to allow vaccine lymph to be taken from the arms of their children, and I feel sure the virus will continue good and active. But seeing that such conditions are not always attainable, I am of opinion that these annual supplies of lymph from England should be continued. Lymph in general use. 29. The lymph in general use throughout the year has been quite as good as in former years. As above indicated fresh supplies were distributed to a large num- ber of the vaccinators. In fact, in some Circles it has almost been renewed. Dr. Keith informs me that nearly every vaccinator and dispensary officer in Sindh has been supplied with lymph such as that alluded to in the concluding portion of para. 27, and Dr. Gordon, of the Central Circle, reports to much the same effect. Purity of lymph. Inoculation of syphilis. 30. Regarding the purity of lymph, perhaps it will be remembered that a few months ago a Pársí gentleman of good position brought very grave charges against a subordinate member of the Vaccine Establish- ment in Bombay. The charges were, gross want of care in the selection of lymph, the syphilitic inoculation of his child through lymph drawn from a child then suffering from that disease, and the consequent death of his child. These charges were not supported by any direct evidence, merely by the opinions of Medical Officers who had never seen the vaccinifer, and who judged solely by the appearances of the disease from which the child suffered. After a most careful, and, as far as could be, (considering that the case was not brought to notice till fully 8 months after the vaccination of the child,) searching investigation, His Excellency the Governor in Council was pleased in Resolu- tion No. 1162, of the 11th March 1872, to decide that &quot; a very full and exhaustive inquiry has been made into the circumstance of the vaccination and subsequent death of the child of Mr................, and His Excellency the Governor in Council is compelled to concur in the opinion expressed by the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, that it has not been establish- ed.&quot; Such reports, however, show how very careful the members of the Vac- cination Department should be in the selection of lymph, and generally in the performance of their duties. One result of the inquiry has been to show the necessity for a proper registration of vaccinifers. In the month of December I issued a circular giving directions for the careful selection of lymph, proper performance of the vaccine operation, what to do and what to avoid doing, as well as for the formation of an additional column in the vaccinator's register, showing, opposite the name of every child vaccinated, the register number of the vaccinifer. This circular was translated into Maráthí, Gujaráthí, Sindhí, and Kánadí languages, lithographed and issued to every Assistant Superintendent,
( xvi ) Vaccinator, and Dispensary Officer in the Presidency for their guidance. Circle Superintendents were also requested to see that their subordinates were care- fully instructed in, and warned as to the consequences of neglect of these rules. Animal Vaccination. 31. Three supplies of &quot; animal&quot; lymph were received from M. Warlo- mont, of Brussels, but, unlike the supplies of the previous year, all failed. Fortunately, however, our supply did not fail, and during the whole year animal vaccination was carried on very sucessfully under the judicious and careful superintendence of Mr. Anantá Chandrobá. During the present outbreak of small-pox it has been an invaluable source of lymph supply, and but for it, in the absence of compulsory vaccination, the utmost endeavours of the Department would have been fruitless, so strong is the objection of the people generally to allow lymph to be taken from the arms of their children. In all 130 heifers were inoculated, and out of these 2 only failed. Such results speak well for the activity of the lymph and the manner in which Mr. Anantá has performed this very responsible duty. 32. Animal vaccination has also been practised in other places than Bombay. In Puna, Mr. Bálkrishna Chintobá, and in Sakkhar, Honorary Assistant Surgeon Leahy have successfully practised it( xvii ) Thus in every month of the year small-pox has prevailed in Bombay. In the beginning of the year, the severe outbreak then prevailing, had by the month of August nearly subsided ; but in the month of January following it again broke out with increased virulence, and in March so severe was it that I was obliged to suggest to Government (a) that the amount allowed by the Municipality on account of animal vaccination should be increased, so as to admit of our inoculating one calf daily instead of, as usual, every sixth day, and thus ensure the plentiful supply of pure vaccine lymph ; (b) that increased facilities be given for the transmission of lymph by the vaccinators in the Mofussil direct to the Local Superintendent by post; (c) that, to enable the Health Officer to carry out Act VI. of 1867, a place for a Sanitarium should be appointed by Government as soon as possible; and (d) that a Compulsory Vaccination Act should be passed without delay. These recommendations His Excellency the Governor in Council was pleased to approve of, and I am glad to say that small-pox is now on the decline. 35. Throughout the Deccan, especially in the larger towns, small-pox appears to have been general, but not very fatal. A few local outbreaks were brought to notice, and immediate measures taken for their suppression : one, in the village of Khándas, in Táluká. Karjat, of the Tháná Collectorate, where prompt measures were successfully taken by Mr. Cody for stamping out the disease; another, in the Native State of Káthí, north of Khándesh, where a vaccinator was sent and arrangements for the vaccination of the people made by Dr. Gordon ; a third outbreak was reported at Máhijí, in Khándesh, during the fair annually held there. Here also Dr. Gordon made the necessary arrangements. In the Sindh and Northern Circles very few cases are said to have occurred. Some cases of measles were reported under the name of small-pox in the former Circle. But in the absence of statistics nothing positive can be stated, and I think that measures should be taken to supply the Department with some reliable information. An attempt with this object was made a few years ago, but without success. Perhaps the Sanitary Commissioner might be able to give the number of deaths in each mortuary Circle. Conduct of Vaccinators. 36. The conduct of the vaccinators generally has been good. In the Central Circle, Dr. Gordon says he has seldom had occasion to complain of them. &quot; Small fines have been imposed for disobedience of orders and laziness, but most of them have devoted themselves to their work with assiduity and perse- verance.&quot; One man was dismissed for absence without leave, one discharged on account of continued sickness, and three of the senior vaccinators were pensioned. In the Southern Circle their conduct is reported to have been creditable. One man resigned, one died, and two were dismissed( xviii ) In the Western Circle, Mr. Cody reports rather unfavorably of the vaccinators of the Tháná and Kolába Zilhás, principally for indolence and carelessness. Dr. Mancherji Colah reports unfavorably of a few men in the Northern Circle. Two were dismissed and one resigned. Of the vaccinators in Sindh, Dr. Keith reports that their conduct, with few exceptions, has been very good. Three were dismissed. Dr. Blanc reports very unfavorably of the character of the vaccinators of the Káthiáwad Circle in his temporary charge, and says that, &quot; with one or two exceptions, a more untrustworthy and indolent set of men it would be difficult to find.&quot; As to the indolence, Dr. Blanc appears to be mistaken: for the returns of the Káthiáwád Circle show that on an average the vaccinators performed 1,927 operations per man, which, with the exception of the Western, is much larger than the average of any other Circle, and is fully 500 opera- tions per man above the average of. the whole Presidency. With regard to their untrustworthiness I may state that they were reported on favorably by Dr. Shepherd in the previous year. The reports on the conduct of vaccinators in the Rewá Kántá and Pre- sidency Circles are favorable. Assistant Superintendents. 37. This grade was created in the month of August last, and as yet we have not had time to test fully their utility, but during the current year I hope to be able to collect materials from which to form an opinion. In the mean time, I may state that the special reports regarding them by Dr. Gordon, of the Central Circle, Dr. Blanc, of the Káthiáwád Circle, Mr. Cody, of the Western Circle, Dr. Mancherji, of the Northern Circle, and Dr. Haliday, of the Rewá Kántá Circle( xix ) ment have been kept very busily engaged, more especially as I had at one time charge of the offices of the Superintendents of the Central and Western Circles in addition to that of the Superintendent General. 39. In the Resolution of Government on the Annual Report on Vacci- nation for the year 1870-71, para. 7, it is stated that &quot; His Excellency the Governor in Council considers that the present Table, No. VII., requires amendment, and the extent of attention that has been paid by the Superin- tendent to each Collectorate and to each Táluká should be shown.&quot; In accordance with this, I have altered Statement No. VII. so as to show the name of every Táluká and Native State in the Presidency, and the amount of attention paid to each by the Superintendent of each Circle and his assistants, separately and collectively, and I trust it will be found intelligible. A column showing the number of persons vaccinated during the year is added, so as to show a comparison between them and the total number inspected. The following Statement shows the totals of each Circle according to the old form :( xx ) Assistance by the Civil Authorities. 40. The Civil Authorities generally have rendered great assistance to the officers of this Department, and have shown increased interest in the operations carried on. Village Registers of Vaccination. 41. Regarding the advisability of the adoption of a system of Village Vaccine Registers I have not the slightest doubt, and have long advocated it, not only as a means of insuring truthful and accurate Returns, but as a permament record. Shortly after joining the Vaccine Department in the year 1864, I addressed myself to this subject. At that time registration of vaccine operations was no doubt carried on, but so irregularly and imperfectly as to be of no use whatever ; there was nothing to ensure their permanence or correctness; none of the numerous forms in use were suitable : so after much consideration I came to the conclusion that nothing short of the intro- duction of a new and uniform system of registration properly carried out would succeed. A new form was constructed, and each of the Collectors were requested to issue instructions for their being regularly kept by Village Officers; and to Mamlatdárs, directing them to stamp the leaves of the Register Book in the same manner as is done with the Revenue Account Books. This was done, and no difficulty experienced. Below I give the form of Register then adopted, and now in use, in every town and village in the Cen- tral Circle ; and I beg here to quote para. 15 of Dr. Gordon's Report to show how useful they have been found, and how complete the system now is in the Central Circle. &quot; The system of village vaccination and small-pox registers is now almost complete within this Circle, except in some parts of the Sátárá Collectorate into which the registers have only been lately introduced. During my tour, I only found one village in which they were wanting, and that was mainly owing to late changes of the Village Officers. These registers are looked upon as part of the village records, and no ' daftar' is considered complete without them. They are not only valuable as a check upon the vaccinators, but are most useful records of the progress of vaccination in the villages, and are always easily accessible to the Revenue Officers, most of whom, I am glad to say, examine them along with the other village papers.&quot; The form is as follows:( xxi ) Register of Vaccination, Village Táluká Collectorate No. Child's Name. Father's Name, Surname, and place of which a resident. * Caste. Sex. Age. Date of Vaccina- tion. Signature of the Vaccinator. ( xxii ) Statements, and ensures an accurate and permanent village record for use hereafter for statistical purposes. One thing wanted is an authoritative decision by Government, directing that these Registers be kept in every village throughout the Presidency and Sindh; and, to make them as permanent as possible, that the books be stamped and kept with as much care as those of the Revenue Accounts. 44. The last column of the Register was introduced by me with these objects:( xxiii ) Karáchí, by steamer, to Bombay in December. In the month of January I went on tour in Gujaráth, visited Ahmadábád and the neighborhood. Thence to Mahmudábád in the Kaira Collectorate, where I met Dr. Mancherji, and visited several villages around. Work generally good. Leaving Mahmudá- bád in company with Dr. Mancherji, I travelled, viâ Súnj, to &quot;Wadthal. Visited Wansolí; saw the results of the use of lymph received from England, and found it successful. From Wadthal we marched to Alíná, where we examined the work and fresh lymph of the Nariád Táluká vaccinator. The work of the current month was good, but that of the previous three months was middling only. As many of them had been performed by the sepoy, the vaccinator was warned. From Alíná we moved on to Thásrá. Here I met Mr. King, the First Assistant Collector, and consulted him about the Nariád Municipal Vac- cinator, whose pay the Committee had reduced to Rs. 12 per mensem. Mr. King kindly promised to do what he could regarding it, and his pay was afterwards restored to its former amount. The work in Thásrá was fair. The Mámlatdár, Mr. Dáráshá Dosábháí, appears to take an interest in vaccination, as well as other matters, and gave every assistance during my stay in his táluká, for which I beg to thank him. From Thásrá I moved to Pálí, where I crossed the Mahi River, and thence, viâ Tooá-kán-kán, marched to Godhrá in the Panch Maháls, where I met the Superintendent of the Rewá Kántá Circle, Mr. Long , inspected his office records (which were not so satisfactory as could be wished), examined the Dispensary and the work of the Táluká vaccinator. From Godhrá I went to Kalol, and thence through the Barodá territory to Barodá, where I met the late Surgeon-Major Rimington, and consulted him regarding vaccination in His Highness the Gáíkawár's territories. Leaving Barodá, I returned to Púná in the end of February. In the beginning of March I again visited Bombay, where small-pox was very prevalent; thereafter went by steamer to Harní in the Southern Konkan, where I joined Mr. Cody, then on tour. Thence we went to Dápulí, inspected the Dispensary and performed vaccinations in the town, which were satisfactory. From Dápulí we travelled to Khed, Kashelá-kowtá, and Poládpur. Everything I saw was satisfactory. Leaving the Western Circle, I was obliged to return to Púná as speedily as possible, and I did so viâ the Pár Ghát and Máhábaleswar. In the end of March small-pox still continuing unabated, if any thing increasing, I was emergently called to Bombay to concert measures for the promotion of vaccination. These measures are noticed in para. 34 of this Report. P. S. TURNBULL, M.D., Assistant Surgeon, Acting Superintendent General of Vaccination, Bombay Presidency. Púná, 25th June 1872.
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORTS OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF CIRCLES. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 Changes in the Department. 2. During the period under report all Government Vaccinators were transferred to the Local Funds, and a Native Assistant Superintendent was appointed to each collectorate. The previous staff of Itinerant Vaccinators has been increased from 31 to 63. Every táluká in this Circle has a vaccinator, and in those tálukás where the Municipal Committees maintain a vaccinator of their own there are two. This had long been represented as requisite, and its accomplish- ment will in a short time render our system of vaccination as perfect as can be hoped for, without having recourse to legislation. Percentage of Success. 3. The average percentage of success in all the establishments is 95.1. This has been calculated upon the total number of operations, and is therefore about one per cent. below that of the previous year. It is, I am of opinion, still too high, as some of the vaccinators are not sufficiently careful in filling up their returns. . Re-vaccination. 4. The practice of re-vaccination, which is yet in its infancy in India, has been ex- plained to the people, in accordance with the orders of Government, Circulars on the subject having been issued to all vaccinators about two years ago. The number of re-vaccinations performed was 1,381, but I am not prepared to say that all these were re-vaccinations, in the proper accep- tation of the term. Sex. 5. Of the total number of primary operations, 54,148 were males and 51,068 were females ; giving a percentage of 51.4 and 48.6 respectively. This is almost the same as the previous year, and needs no special remark. Age. 6. The percentage of operations on children under and above one year is about the same as for 1870-71, being 30.3 and 69.7 respectively. Expenditure. 7. The total expenditure has been Rupees 31,018-2-3. Of this sum there was paid3 considered the best qualified to fill the appointments. From the tact, activity, and carefulness they have exhibited in the performance of their duties, I consider Dr. Turnbull's selection to have been most judicious, and that the seniors, who have grumbled, were less fitted for these appointments than the junior members of the establishment. They have been most careful to bring all matters in connection with vaccination within their districts to my notice, and their reports on the conduct, character, and work of the vaccinators have been, to the best of my knowledge, perfectly unbiased and trustworthy. They have all of them worked well, and the number of villages visited and children inspected by each is very creditable. Lymph. 9. The lymph generally has been active and of good quality. Occasionally I have found a vaccinator with very good lymph in one village and very indifferent in another, the result of having vaccinated from a non-typical vesicle the previous week. This in almost all instances occurs, not from carelessness, but from the unavoidable cause of being unable to obtain all the children previously vaccinated to select from. Frequently the only alternative for the vaccinator is to let the lymph die out in that village, or to vaccinate from an indifferent vesicle : the latter is too often adopted. During my tour, I have been careful to impress upon all vaccinators the extreme importance of thorough vaccination. Three supplies of English lymph were received during the year, and from this 14 children were vaccinated, the result in each case being successful. From these, tubes were charged and distributed to all the Assistant Superintendents, and to many of the vaccinators. Lymph has been supplied on requisition to all the stations within the Circle, and to Aurangábád, Hingoli, Jáiná, Hoshangábád, Akolá, and Máu. Reports of its success were received from all, except Akolá, where it failed. Small-pox. 10. So few returns have been sent in that it would be useless to show the number of cases in a tabulated form ; but, I am of opinion, that small-pox did not prevail to any great extent till January 1872. Since then numerous reports and applications for vaccinators have been made, and from these it appears that the disease has been more or less epidemic in half the tálukás in the Circle. These reports and applications from the Natives themselves show how much the prophylactic is appreciated. Vaccination is extensively resorted to, and with the measures now adopted, for preventing the spread of the disease, I trust the worst is past, although the present season is favorable to the progress of the malady. Animal Vaccination. 11. During the past year I have had no opportunity of carrying on animal vaccination as I only took charge of the appointment on the 23rd Septem- ber, and left for the districts on the 10th October. The work has been, and is still, carried on with variable success at Púna by Sub-Assistant Sur-- geon Bálkrishna Chintobá, whose report is appended. He has, however, many difficulties to contend against both in procuring heifers and children to vaccinate. As the Natives become familiar with this method of vaccination, I doubt not but they will appreciate its many advantages, more especially those who labor under the impression that the prophylactic influence of the vesicle is diminished by extracting lymph from it. Conduct of Vaccinators. 12. The Assistant Superintendents have been reported on separately. Speaking generally, I have seldom had occasion to complain of the vaccinators. Small fines have been impossd for disobedience of orders, or laziness, but most of them have devoted themselves to their work with assiduity and perseverance. The Deputy Superintendents have occasionally recommended the transfer of a vaccinator who did not appear to get on with the people, otherwise no unfavorable reports have been submitted. Three of the oldest vaccinators were pensioned during the year.
4 One was dismissed for being absent without leave, as he had committed the same fault on a previous occasion. One was discharged on account of continued sickness. No casualties occurred. Inoculation. 13. No report of inoculation has been received, and if such a practice is still carried on, it must only be to a very limited extent. Husband's Tubes. 14. Almost every vaccinator in this Circle can charge these tubes efficiently, but their use is never allowed to supplant arm-to-arm vaccination when such is available. Unless these tubes are good, and of small calibre, it is very difficult to charge them. I regret to say that those lately received from the Medical Stores have been hard, brittle, and of large calibre. Registers. 15. The system of village vaccination and small-pox Registers is now almost complete within this Circle, except in some parts of the Sátárá Collectorate, into which the Registers have only been lately introduced. During my tour, I only found one village in which they were wanting, and that was mainly owing to late changes of the village officers. These Registers are looked upon as part of the village records, and no &quot; daftar&quot; is considered complete without them. They are not only valuable as check upon the vaccinators, but are most useful records of the progress of vaccination in villages, and are always easily accessible to the revenue officers, most of whom, I am glad to say, examine them along with the other village papers. Vaccinifer's name. 16. The new method, lately introduced, of showing in the vaccinator's Register the name of every child from whose arm lymph is taken, and those vaccinated from any particular child, is, I consider, a great improvement. We can now trace the history of our lymph, for months back, without any difficulty. By this means we will be able to convince parents (who are so ready to point to vaccination as the cause of all diseases, which may affect their children for the next year) of their error in laying the whole blame on diseased lymph. In November last a case was reported to me by Mr. Crowe, the Second Assistant Collector of Sholápur, in which the parents of a child, belonging to Hipargí, alleged that an eruption, which was at that time over the body, had appeared shortly after vaccination. No description was given of the erruption, but as Mr. Crowe considered it to be a suspicious case, I requested that the matter might be minutely inquired into5 Native States. 18. There has been a decided improvement in vaccination in Native States: there being an increase during the year of 473. More atten- tion has been paid to the subject by the Chiefs them- selves, but until such time as they consider it a necessity to have their subjects protected, the vaccinators will have up hill work. Native States' vaccinators have not individually per- formed so many operations as those under Local Funds : but then they do not get the same assistance from the village officials. No vaccinator has as yet been entertained for the small Sates to the north of Khandesh, but the matter is now under consideration. Small-pox of a virulent type was reported by the Political Agent to be very prevalent in the Kathi State, and a Local Fund vaccinator was sent there, as a temporary measure. Municipalities. 19. There are now 16 Municipal vaccinators in this Circle, being fewer by 3 than during 1870-71: four appointments having been abolished, and one made during the year. Notwithstanding this, there is an increase in the number of operations of 3,400. On the appointment of a vaccina- tor to each táluká by the Local Funds, two Municipal vaccinators were reduced in the Sátárá and one in the Sholápur Collectorates, and I understand that the General Municipal Committee of the former intend reducing the number by other two. Sátárá has been for a long time a well-vaccinated district, and it is probable that one vaccinator in a táluká will be sufficient. I have still the same complaint to make against many of the Municipalities, namely, the want of interest in vaccination shown by individual Native members of the Committee. Having voted the vaccinator's pay, they seem to think that there is nothing more to be done. Dispensaries. 20. The decrease shown under the head of Dispensaries has arisen on account of the transfer of all vaccinators attached to Civil Hospitals to the Itinerant branch. Subordinates in charge of Dispen- saries have shown a marked improvement, still Dispensary vaccination is not in so satisfactory a state as could be wished. At this I am not very much surprised, because the inhabitants of the larger towns (unless when small-pox is raging) are so indifferent as to whether their children are protected, or not, that they will only accept vaccination at their own doors. At some' few Dispensaries the Medical pupils occasionally travel through the streets and vaccinate persons at their houses. I am sorry to say that not a few of the Hospital Assistants are rather indifferent vaccinators, and, not being able to charge tubes, have great difficulty in keeping up their lymph. Half the vaccinations performed by the late Hospital Assistant at Irandol were found to be unsuccessful, and he had returned the greater number of them as successful. Tour. 21. I have not considered it necessary to give a detailed resumé of my tour, as all the requisite informa- tion will be found in the new No. VII. Form. Aid from Civilians. 22. I take this opportunity of acknowledging the aid which I have invariably received from the Revenue and Police officers.
6 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.7 vaccinated ought very soon to reach a minimum. Provided the children are healthy, the quality of lymph under one year is preferable to that over one year ; and I was sorry to find some vaccinators using lymph taken from adults. Decrease. 3. In the Table heading this report, the decrease shown against the Government establishment is an apparent one only, and is accounted for by the transfer to the Local Funds, as noticed in para. 1 above. When taken in connection with the Local Funds' increase, the figures show a total increase of 11,131 persons vaccinated, exclusive of Dispensaries. Increase. 4. The increase is due partly to increased exertions on the part of vaccinators, partly to the work of a few additional vaccinators, and partly, no doubt, to the imposition of fines by my predecessor, Dr. Roche, for carelessness and negligence. This has stimulated vaccinators to work, and has produced an increase in the number of operations ; but it must remain in a measure doubtful whether the quantity and the quality of the work have advanced pari passu. Lymph. 5. In November of last year, lymph in tubes was received from the Superintendent General of Vaccination sent from England. Of 8 operations performed by Abdul Kadar in the Superin- tendent's presence, 1 was unsuccessful ; the vesicles on the sixth day were reported 'very good' in 6, and 'good' in 1 ; 34 punctures resulted in 23 vesicles, or 2 in 3. In January I received some tubes from the Superintendent General of Vaccination, to be tested. I myself operated on a few selected children with very indifferent results. Dattu Balappa, of Hubli Táluká, to whom one of the tubes was given, also reported unfavorably on the lymph. 6. Over the Circle generally the lymph in use has been reported good. Some of what I have been able to examine personally did not seem to be so good as it ought to have been, especially what was preserved on plates. Plates. 7. A large proportion of the Vaccinators whose work I have inspected, employ plates without understanding how to use them, and this, too, although each vaccinator has been supplied with a Marathí Circular of instructions from the Superintendent General, regarding the essential points of vaccination. I do think many of the unsuccessful operations and imperfect protec- tions given are from the use of indifferent lymph badly kept. I have seen vaccinators charge plates, but the exception is to do it well. They carry them about in their daftars in the most careless manner, as if no more care were necessary after laying on the lymph ; and instead of making use of the lymph so preserved as soon after as possible, they continue to carry it about from day to day, until it becomes useless. 8. On two different occasions, two vaccinators in my presence covered one plate with lymph taken from two children before I could discover the fraud8 Tubes. 10. Failing to procure arm-to-arm vaccination, which is the best of all, tubes pro- perly filled and well sealed will preserve to vaccinators better lymph for a longer time than any of the other methods of storing it; and the very delicacy of the tubes implies a degree of care in their handling which will not be given to plates and points. Vesicles and Cicatrices. 11. The vesicles I have been able to see have on the whole been good, of average size, round, and fairly filled. The cicatrices have been very various9 easily have some special training in the Department. At any rate, if Deputy Superin- tendents are to be chosen from the members of the Vaccination Department they ought to be required to pass some test as to their general and special fitness for the work. I have little particular to say of the men individually, beyond what is well known to those who have had a longer acquaintance with them in the junior grades. They form the subject of special report to the Superintendent General of Vaccination, as called for in his letter No. 1139, of the 22nd December 1871, and therefore it is deemed unnecessary in this report to take notice of each separately. Deputy Superintendent for Native States. 15. Under this head may be noticed the sanctioned entertainment of a Deputy Superintendent for the Kolápur State and its Dependen- cies. In a letter I had the honor to submit to the Political Agent in February, I represented the necessity for a Deputy Superintendent to supervise the States' vaccinators' work more closely than can be done by the Superintendent in the course of his annual tour. I stated that &quot; there is quite as much need in the States as in the Zilhás of the Southern Maráthá Country that a Deputy Superintendent should be employed in furthering the work of vaccination,&quot; the. conditions of appointment to be the same as those respecting the Zilhás' Deputies. The suggestion was at once taken up by Colonel Anderson, the Political Agent, who, after the necessary detailed information had been obtained and due consideration given to the matter, was pleased to sanction the new appointment on the same footing as the other Deputies, except that a peon would be supplied from the Darbar establishment. 16. With reference to the Southern Maráthá States particularly, which are entirely separate from the Kolápur State and Dependencies, the Assistant Political Agent, Major Westropp, stated that &quot;they are too much scattered to favor the idea of a Deputy Superin- tendent&quot; ; but a simple and workable enough suggestion was made, that the Deputy Superin- tendents, whose work borders on these Southern Maráthá States, might, without extra. expense being incurred, be entrusted with the inspection of the States' vaccinators, in addi- tion to their own duties. This subject is under reference meanwhile. A remark in this direction will be found in para. 12, division 5, of last year's report by the Superintendent General of Vaccination. 17. The correspondence regarding this new appointment was submitted to the Superintendent General of Vaccination for his approval, and in a letter of reply he expressed himself as highly pleased that a move had been made in this direction. 18. One Dattu Báláppá, vaccinator in Hubli Táluká of Dhárwár Collectorate, has been recommended for the appointment. I have seen him and his work, and as a shrewd and energetic man, although wanting unfortunately in the educational qualifications referred to above, he is by far the most deserving vaccinator I have met with. I trust he may continue to deserve well in the new position he is about to occupy. Vaccinators. 19. Their conduct has on the whole been creditable during the year. The changes among them by transfer have been frequent. Hari Bálkrishna, Municipal Vaccinator of Belgaon, was dis- missed, and one Káshináth Dhondo appointed instead. Benjamin de Costa, Vaccinator of Hápur, has been dismissed on account of drunkenness, and one Abraham Machado has been appointed in his place. On the recommendation of the Collector of Kanada, a vaccinator has been entertained temporarily in Bhatkal Petha of Honawar Táluká. The arrangement was sanctioned by the Superintendent General; but the Collector is desirous not only to entertain this vaccinator permanently, but to have some supernumerary vaccinators appointed in a zilhá which is 5 V R
10 generally considered unhealthy, and which has frequently to account for vaccinators absent on &quot; sick leave,&quot; so that no difficulty might be experienced in filling up a temporary vacancy. This proposal is meanwhile under the consideration of the Superintendent General of Vaccination. Raghunath Trimbak, Local Fund Vaccinator of Bagalkot, had to be fined one month's pay for entering false names in his register. Hanmant Bhawanrao, Local Fund Vaccinator of Ron, tendered his resignation, and a new candidate, Malhar Mahadeo, has been appointed on 14 rupees a month. One death during the year is recorded11 24. Village officials have had to be reported for their indifference and unwillingness to assist in the work12 Local Funds. 30. The large increase of vaccinated persons under this head must be set against the decrease under the head of Government Establishment, and there still remains an increase of 7,050, taking the totals of the two establishments. This is partly due to the appointment of additional vaccina- tors on the Local Funds, where no Imperial vaccinator was formerly entertained. In Hunu- gundá, Mudebihál, and Bijápur Tálukás of the Kaládgi Collectorate this has been the case; and in Belgáon Táluká, in addition to the transferred Government vaccinator, a second has been entertained since the 1st of August last. In Bankápur, of the two vaccinators. formerly employed by Government and by Local Funds, the former was struck off the list on the 1st of August. In Bágalkot one of the two vaccinators shown against last year was a Municipal Fund vaccinator, and this year he comes into his proper place under that head. Whether or not the operations of both men for last year were totalled together against Bágalkot Táluká I am unable to say. The station vaccinator at Kárwár was reduced, and one appointed on the Local Funds from 1st August. In Bhatkal Pethá, of Honáwar Táluká, a vaccinator has been temporarily appointed. The work required of the táluká vac- cinator could not be overtaken by himself alone, and on. the urgent request of the Collector of Kánadá the Superintendent General sanctioned the extra establishment from the 1st March, and as long as the special services of a vaccinator were required. The Collector was willing to make the entertainment a permanent one. In Bágewádi Táluká of Kaládgi Zilhá, there has been no vaccinator since the 1st of August, so that the work there must be lamentably backward. In the resolution it is said that by some oversight budget provision was made for seven instead of for eight vaccinators in Kaládgi Zilhá. In August provision for support- ing a new vaccinator at Bágewádí was submitted to the Collector, but as yet no sanction has been obtained. Native States. 31. The increase shown and the steady percentage for the year are creditable to the vaccinators. Fines have been inflicted in several cases, for negligence and want of precision in submitting returns. The result has been, greater care and punctuality in carrying on the work generally. Chiefly to the interest in the Department taken by Colonel Anderson and his Assistant, Major Westropp, is the progress of vaccination in the States to be attributed. 32. At Lakmeshwar, an outlying patch of the Miraj State, the work was in a backward condition when I visited the place in February. The people for the most part were very unwilling to give their children to be operated on, and for the following reason which the Mámlatdár explained to me :13 manages the affairs of this State, and that at my visit I was unable to see any work, except such old work as the State school could show. It was explained that on account of the Diwán's absence, it was difficult to get the children together for inspection. The vaccinator, I think, is willing to interest himself in the work, if he met with more encouragement, but he still continues to report unfavorably regarding the people's indifference to vaccination. Dispensaries. 34. There is a decrease in the number vaccinated of about 50 per cent. which is account- ed for in two ways: first, and chiefly, owing to the reduction of three vaccinators working under the Civil Surgeons of Belgáon, Dhárwár, and Kárwár previous to July 1871; secondly, owing to the fact that some of the Dispensaries have had no operations to show, and the general report from Hospital Assistants is that they find it difficult to get children for vaccination. Al- though the work has been comparatively small, the percentage of success (89.9) is very creditable. The Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge of Coomptá Dispensary works steadily, but his percentages are low. No returns are received from Hublí. This is a matter of inquiry meanwhile. The amount of work done by the three vaccinators noticed above, up to the period of their reduction, has been included in the totals of the tálukás to which they were severally appointed. 35. At Athni a new Dispensary has been established, but I am unable to give the exact date of its opening. The Medical Officer in charge has been directed to return monthly to this office a statement of vaccine operations performed by him in the usual form. Many of the returns sent in have been very incorrect, and a deal of trouble has been given in amending some, and in returning others for correction and completion. 36. In passing, I may be allowed to mention the great need felt for a Dispensary some- where in the long stretch of populous country between Hubli and Gadak (which are not far from Dhárwár) and Haliál and Hápur in the Kánadá Collectorate. This felt necessity was the subject of representation to me while at Haverí, of the Karajghí Táluká, by a few influential Natives; and that town itself seemed a most desirable situation for a Dispensary, because it is the meeting point of several tálukás which would derive equal benefit from such an institution. Tour. 37. At the beginning of the official year, Mr. Raby was inspecting the work of vaccinators in the Kolápur State, but early in May he went to England on sick leave. In June Dr. Gordon became Acting Superintendent, and during August he travelled to Dhárwár, inspecting work in Belgáon, Sampgáon, and Dhárwár Tálukás. His march in this direction was chiefly, I believe, for the purpose of instructing, in their new duties, certain of the newly appointed Deputy Superintendents. He returned to Belgáon in the beginning of September, and about the end of the same month, he handed over charge to Dr. Roche During October and November Dr. Roche examined the work of Harí Bálkrishná and Shaik Kádar in Belgáon. In December he was obliged to obtain sick leave to England, and I was appointed to the acting charge. About the middle of the same month, I proceeded on tour, setting out in a north-east direction towards Gokák. The work in this táluká is carried on by an oldish looking man, Dhondí Sidáppá, who can neither read nor write. He showed me lymph on plates and in tubes, which was not at all good-looking, especially that on plates, which seemed to be from over-ripe vesicles. Of the old work done by him, what I saw was characterestic enough. In
14 Gokák town the work was very backward and unsatisfactory for so large a place. The Dis- pensary was inspected, and some little difference between the hospital assistant and the vaccinator, regarding the town work, was settled. The Parasgarh Táluká was next traversed, and much of the work seen had been done by the former vaccinator, Satáppá Govindáppá, by no means so satisfactory as is desirable, The present vaccinator, Rhaiman Abdullá, succeeded in June last, and his work since then was creditable in quantity and quality. In this táluká the indifferenee of village officers was most marked, and rather discouraging. These hindrances were pointed out to Mr. Grey, the Collector, who most willingly looked into the matter. The village officers at fault were personally seen by Mr. Stewart, the First Assistant Collector, who impressed upon these men the great necessity for throwing aside all obstacles to the work, and of aiding the vaccinator in carrying on his operations. The chief work of the season lay in the Dhárwár Collectorate, eight tálukás of which were more or less looked into, and the vaccinators seemed on the whole to be working fairly. Dattu Báláppá, of Hublí Táluká, is a most expert operator, and the vaccinations performed by him were very characteristic. At Hublí Dispensary, the work of Náráyan Báburáo, Municipal vaccinator, was examined ; the recent operations were very fair, but in a large proportion of the old work, the lymph used must have been bad, or the operations must have been care- lessly performed. I was led to understand that the Hubli Dispensary was exempt from the superintendence of the Vaccination Department, and for this reason it was not made the subject of report like the others inspected. In Náigshetikop, of this táluká, no village register had been kept for 1870. In Beldadi, an Inámí village in Dambal Táluká, there was the greatest reluctance to submit to vaccination. There were only two names on the register, and the Inámdár whom I saw, stated that all the villagers were perfectly well and healthy, and that there was no need just then for interfering with their prosperous condition. This was the meaning of his explanation when asked why there should be so much opposition to a work so beneficial. Eshwant Firugojí, of Bankápur Táluká, is wanting, I think, in zeal and energy. The results of his operations, however, are fairly satisfactory. He complains of constant bad health in his táluká, regarding himself and his family, and I have recommended his transfer to Parasgarh Táluká, of the Belgáon Zilhá, in connection with Dattu Báláppá's promotion. At the village of Gangihati no work had been done since 1869, owing, said this vaccina- tor, to his inability to get children when he came to vaccinate. Luckily he had lymph with him, and he accompanied me to this village, where I insisted upon having some children vaccinated. Five were operated on on the 21st February. Promises were made by the village officers that there would be no hindrance to the work, now that it had fairly been set agoing. It was evident from the astonishment and curiosity exhibited by some of the people witnessing the operations that the thing was a novelty in that quarter. It is remarkable that in most of the táluká towns there was greater difficulty in carry- ing on a successful inspection than in small and distant villages. In many, too, during the time of the Jamábandi, it was sometimes difficult to get the assistance of village officers and to examine their registers. They had gone with their village daftars to the camps of the revenue officers and others. The Lingáít caste of Hindús seem to me to have been the most difficult to deal with. But they have now begun to make a move in the general progress of enlightenment, by appreciating the advantages of education, and better things are to be hoped of them in future in the spread of vaccination.
15 Acknowledgements of aid from Civil and Political Officers. 38. My thanks are due to all Civil and Political Officers who have so cordially given their assistance when difficulties had to be overcome. It is to the interest taken by them in the spread of vaccination that much of what success has been obtained is due; and I feel sure, as I had occasion to state to Mr. Robertson, the Collector of Dhár- wár, that almost everything short of compulsion, can be done by Collectors and others to overcome the natural prejudice that still exists regarding vaccination. The Office. 39. During the past four months there has been no Vaccinator employed in the office, as formerly, as Assistant Clerk. The vernacular correspond- ence and the copying work which are considerable, must have borne heavily on the Kárkún's hands, had it not been for the assistance rendered by one Náráyan Bálkrishna, who has been with the office as a volunteer during that time. He writes and speaks English, and so has been of much help. There is work enough to keep an assistant writer busy, and I respectfully beg to suggest that one be sanctioned on some suitable salary.* I have much pleasure in recording the assistance and painstaking care given by Krish- naráo Vyankatesh, the Kárkún, in carrying out the details of the work. During the short time he has been in the Department, his shrewdness and intelligence have made him inti- mately familiar with all the working details. * This was sanctioned by Government in their Resolution No. 1426, dated 25th May 1872.16 WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.17 Decrease. 4. In the Municipal Establishment, a decrease is shown of 327 persons, which decrease may, in my belief, be altogether attributed to the very careless and inattentive way in which the man employed by the Tháná Municipality has hitherto performed his work. He has, however, been placed under the more immediate control of this office since 1st of January, and I hope to be able soon to advise the Municipality of some means to secure for them a better return for the very liberal support they give to vaccination. During the year he has only performed 350 operations, a number that seems simply ridiculous when the wide field for exertion he has is considered, and also one that very inadequately compensates for the good salary he receives. In Panwel and Uran, between which one vaccinator is employed, the year's results are much more satisfactory, and vaccination is in both places making fair progress, and altogether seems to be on a far better footing. Dispensaries. 5. Amongst the Dispensaries there is a decrease this year in the number of operations performed, and the returns from some of them are so very small that their utility as propagators of the pro- phylactic may be questioned. There are, however, four instances where this doubt can scarcely exist, and where I think energy, very praiseworthy and untiring, has been displayed to secure the protection of the people in the vicinity of the Dispensaries by the Officers in charge. I allude to the Officers holding charge of the Dispensaries of Dápulí, Vingurlá, Kalián and Alibág; they, of the twelve Dispensaries included within the limits of this Circle, are the only ones from which any thing like presentable returns have been submitted dur- ing the year. As reports have been submitted from each individual Officer, giving in detail the result of the year's work and the cause of decrease, &c., I will not further allude to them here, but would at the same time bring forward the names of the following Officers as those who have been, in my opinion, the most zealous in furthering vaccination in their neighbourhoods: Honorary Assistant Surgeon Pollard, Mr. Apothecary Underwood, Sub- Assistant Surgeon N. Dhanjibhái, and Sub-Assistant Surgeon M. F. Pereira. Vaccinators. 6. There were 32 vaccinators, including all establishments, employed in this Circle during the year, one of whom, however, was only employed for the last month, and their conduct as a body has not been such as would enable me to report favorably on them. Without particularising or entering into the details of individual cases, I may state that I have had to inflict fines in a good many instances, chiefly for offences that may be considered under the headings &quot; Indolence &quot; and &quot; Carelessness.&quot; Under these remarks I allude more immediately to the men employed in the Tháná and Kolábá zilhás, amongst whom want of zeal is an almost universal failing. The men employed in the Ratnágirí zilhá have given far less trouble, and have performed their duties throughout the year far more zealously. In fact, had a similar amount of zeal been displayed by the Tháná and Kolábá men, the returns would have shown a far greater increase than that I have already called attention to. There was a good deal of sickness amongst the Tháná vaccinators, that superadded to causes just referred to, has occasioned in more than one instance a break of work. When any man had occasion to go on sick leave, a substitute was appointed, but the amount of work performed by these men was in nearly every instance very small, and by no means compensated for the absence of the permanent incumbent. The lymph was lost in every case where these arrangements were made, and as the progress of setting it going again was of a necessity slow, so the returns submitted were proportionately small. The largest number of operations was performed by Head vaccinator Málji Mulekar, in the Málwan táluká, and the smallest by Vishrám Bájí, Máhim táluká. The number of operations performed too by Bábájí Ganojí, of the Wádá táluká, was ridicu- lously small. In fact, I am not at all sanguine that the Department derives any benefit from retaining on its establishment these two last mentioned individuals, and I doubt very much 6 V R
18 a capacity for improvement in either, or that their characters are such as to entertain a hope of their ever becoming useful vaccinators.* Assistant Superintendents. 7. This year Assistant Superintendents, selected from amongst the vaccinators, have been tried for the first time, and the result has been such as to quite justify, I think, the re-organisation that admitted of such appointments. I have found the aid they give in the supervision of the Vaccinators most useful, more particularly as regards the quality of the lymph being used, which cannot, in my opinion, be too often seen and examined. Their utility, too, in testing the accuracy of the returns, I have had some opportunities of witnessing; but where they show to most advantage and render most valuable assistance is when an outbreak of small-pox threatens any of the Districts. A recent outbreak of this disease in the Tháná Collectorate exemplifies what I say, and the good and efficient service rendered at the scene of the outbreak by the Assistant Superintendent, Mr. Máhádeo Vináyak, mainly conduced to confine it to the immediate locality where it ap- peared. A similar service was rendered by the Assistant Superintendent for the Kolábá Zilhá, Mr. Báláji Chálká, who by his energy and forethought, confined an outbreak of small- pox that might have developed into a serious epidemic to very narrow limits and eventually stamped it out. Mr. Bálájí Chawán, of the Ratnágirí zilhá, would have done similarly effi- cient service had such an occasion presented itself. The summary of the employment return which accompanies this report gives in tabular form the amount of work performed for the five months before the close of the year, during which they were actively employed ; but the statement can give but a very faint impression of the real utility their active supervision over the Vaccinators has been, or the amount of security such supervision guarantees for the performance of effective and good vaccination. Such information can no more be gathered from any form of tabular statement than can the amount of real work the Superintendent himself performs in advancing and rendering popular the cause of vaccination within the confines of his Circle. Lymph and Vesicles. 8. The lymph in use throughout the year was reported good on all sides, but I have seen myself, while on tour, one or two instances where I could not consider it so. In the cases I here refer to, the lymph showed a tendency to mature too early, and the vesicles it produced were very small though characteristic This degeneration, I believe, to have resulted through careless- ness in extracting the lymph from an over-ripe vesicle, and I pointed out this fact where necessary, and endeavoured to thoroughly impress the vaccinators with a proper sense of the care and caution that ought to be used when taking lymph, and demonstrated, as well as I was able, the best mode of applying such care and caution. The lymph on the whole was, I consider, good and possessed unimpaired its prophylactic properties, and also gave rich vesi- cles of the characteristic type. Where there was a tendency to degeneration, I believe it was not so much due to any impairment of the lymph itself, so much as to the improper handling it was submitted to. 9. While on the subject of lymph it may not be out of place to here state the difficul- ties that every day, and in every place, are being thrown in the way of obtaining it. They are becoming many and serious, and without in the least wishing for myself the invidious term of prophet of evil, I have no hesitation in saying that in time they will very materially almost vitally affect the supply of it, if some means be not taken to enable the vaccinators to overcome the present objections to allow of lymph being taken from mature vesicles. I do not know what may be the feeling in other Circles on this subject, but in this I know there is a very strong one indeed, and one that has grown apace within the last three years. People readily enough get their children vaccinated, but any attempt to extract the lymph * These two Vaccinators have since been removed from the Vaccination Department.19 from the matured vesicles they show, meets with the greatest opposition20 Re-vaccination. 11. Re-vaccination has made some progress this year, but nearly half the operations under this head have been performed in the Native State of Sáwantwádî, where vaccination has received such an attention hitherto that there are scarcely any arrears left, and so the vaccinator can turn his attention to re-vaccination. Within our own territory the arrears to be cleared off are so great that very little attention can be given to the subject of re-vaccination for some time to come, and so little progress in it need be expected. General Progress. Tháná Collectorate. 12. In giving an outline of the general progress of vaccination during the year, I shall take the different collectorates and Native States com- posing this Circle in detail, and speak of each as I go; and first, I shall speak of the Collectorate of Tháná. If the returns from this Collectorate for this year be compared with the preceding one, they will show a decrease of 71. This, which is after all about the best test we can have, tends to show that vaccination in Tháná has not progressed so satisfactorily as could be wished, for the number of vaccinators employ- ed during the past year was greater by three than that in the year preceding it, and in the face of this increased number of hands the fact of exhibiting a lesser quantity of work demands some explanation. In the paragraph on &quot; Vaccinators'' I called attention to want of zeal on the part of the men of this zilhá, and also stated that sickness prevailed among them to some considerable extent as a body. I think, too, a little weeding out is required, and that the coming year's returns would be advantaged by dispensing with the services of two at least of the individuals, and the employment of new hands who would display some more energy in the performance of their duties. All these causes combined have had a good deal to do with, what I must call, the backward state of vaccination in Tháná this year, and are no doubt the chief cause of its being so. But I think there is still another cause, which tended to. militate against it, and that is a want of cordial support from the Officials and their subordinates. I have had a good many complaints from vaccinators in different parts of the zilhá on this subject, and when I have had occasion to censure any of them for the small quantity of his work, the want of proper assistance from the Village Officers was generally brought forward as their excuse. I, of course, always take an excuse of this kind for what its worth, but here I must say that in some instances I believe there was value attached to such an excuse. I have gone over a good deal of the Tháná Collectorate this year, and, without particularising, I am sorry to say that while doing so I noticed a luke- warmness amongst the District Officials concerning the subject in which I was interested, that, if persevered in, will eventually affect its very vitality. The success of vaccination in each zilhá, as long as it is merely voluntary, will depend altogether on the amount of interest it possesses for, and favor it receives from the authorities ; and where these are at a mini- mum, vaccination is at a minimum also. It is scarcely necessary for me to say that the District Subordinates of the mofussil are as ready and as apt in taking the cue from their masters as the most pampered flunkey, and that they invariably confine their exertions to what they know possesses interest for their immediate superiors. A subject, therefore, that is merely passively tolerated, as vaccination appears to be in Tháná, can scarcely be expected to enlist in its favor the zeal and interest of the District Subordinates, without which its furtherance and general reception cannot make much way amongst the people. Kolábá Collectorate. 13. In the Kolábá Collectorate the returns for this year are not so satisfactory as those submitted in the preceding one. But the differ- ence is so very small, some 500 operations, that vacci- nation can scarcely be said to have lost ground in reality. The cause of the deficiency here is, I consider, altogether due to a less zealous discharge of their duties by the Vaccinators this year than 1870-71. The subject seems to possess just as much interest as hitherto for the authorities, and I do not think the decrease in the amount of work this year can be attri-
21 buted to any flagging of such interest. Neither do I think it attributable to a lessening of the popularity of vaccination amongst the people, or to any growing apathy or indifference on their parts to avail themselves of its benefits. Taken altogether the amount of protection afforded in this zilhá for the year 1871-72, though somewhat less than that given in the year immediately preceding it, is very fair22 beginning of the current year that His Highness the Nawáb, influenced by Mr. Larcom, the Assistant Political Agent, at length looked favorably on the proposal and consented to give an allowance to carry it out. With a view to giving effect to this consent of the Nawáb's, I visited Janjírá at the suggestion of the Superintendent General of Vaccination in the month of February last, and there met Mr. Larcom, in conjunction with whom I appointed a vaccinator to carry on work in the territory for one year, at a remuneration of Rupees 20 per mensem. During this period one or two of the subjects of His Highness are to be taught how to perform the operation, so that when the term for which he has agreed to employ a vaccinator from British territory ends, he may have amongst his own people some who will understand vaccination and be able to practise it. Hitherto the practice of inoculation has been very much sought after in Janjírá territory ; and there were one or two families who made a regular profession of its practice to whom it has the only ostensible means of livelihood. It was proposed at first that one of these people should be instructed in vac- cination ; but the man that presented himself to me was so very illiterate and was altogether so poor a subject that I had no hesitation in pronouncing him unfit for such a purpose. In dismissing him I endeavoured to impress on him a sense of the serious danger his insidious practice of inoculation was to the people, and how far it went to foster and keep alive amongst them the loathesome disease of small-pox. I did not think, however, that my speech would have much effect, and so addressed a letter to the Political Agent, in which I called attention to the danger this man's practice was to the people, and at the same time requested that His Highness the Nawáb might be solicited to put some restraint on him, and thus avert in some measure the evils likely to occur to his subjects from his practice. Dur- ing my visit to Janjírá I communicated personally with Mr. Larcom on this subject, but he seemed to think it would be injudicious just then to press the matter on His Highness' attention after the concession he had already made, and more particularly as these people, on whom it was proposed to lay the restraint, possessed vested rights in and received certain remuneration for the practice of inoculation, neither of which His Highness, he thought, would readily set aside. Subsequently, however, I received the following letter from Mr. Larcom on this subject, and as it speaks for itself, better than any thing I could say, I have no hesitation in giving it in full here: &quot; In connection with the introduction of vaccination into this territory, I now have the honor to report for your information, that on my represent- ing to H. E. the Nawáb of Janjirá how very beneficial the prevention of inoculation would be, H. E. the Nawáb has issued orders that it be stopped, and the Mahálkaries have received orders to prevent the former practice of inoculation, and the persons practising it have been warned that for the future they are not to inoculate any one.&quot; From this it will be gathered that vaccination will at least get a fair trial in Janjírá, and I am hopeful, from the progress that it has already made, though short the time since its start, that it will eventually work its own popularity amongst the people and be sought after generally, to the exclusion of inoculation, when it becomes known how safe is its practice and how great the amount of protection it affords. I cannot conclude these remarks about the introduction of vaccination into Janjirá without stating my conviction that it is entirely owing to the exertion and interest taken in the subject by Mr. Larcom, the Assistant Political Agent, that I am thus able to take so hopeful a view of it. It was by his influence that His Highness the Nawáb was induced to set aside the sum he has for the furtherance of the object, and it was his exertions in explaining to the people the great and lasting advantages to be derived from vaccination, that induced them to adopt it so readily. I am naturally diffident in making any suggestion with regard to this matter, but I think it would be only just that all the labour and trouble he has had in furthering this humane object should be brought prominently to the notice of Government and that they should receive all due acknowledgment.* * This was done and acknowledged in Government Resolution No. 3667 of the 9th December 1871, and it does not appear necessary to do it again.23 Sáwantwádí. 17. In Sáwantwádí vaccination this year has been making steady safe progress, as indeed it has been for some years past. The vaccinator employed here has been devoting his attention a good deal to the subject of re-vaccination, and under this head he exhibits a total number of 1,078 operations, of which number 770 or 72.9 per cent. are reported as successful. Taking the primary and re-vaccinations together, a total number of 4,769 operations are exhibited as the result of the year's work, and if the excess operations 121 be taken from this, it will be found that there have been 4,648 persons operated on during the year. This quantity of work amongst a population estimated under 1,60,000 speaks for itself as to the interest taken in vaccination by the authorities here, and shows how universal such interest can make the operation amongst the people. Small-pox. 18. Small-pox showed itself in some villages of the Tháná Collectorate this year, and in one it raged to some considerable extent, and would have continued to rage, or probably spread unchecked, had its presence not been discovered by Mr. Winter, Assistant Collector, when on tour. As soon as I received notice of the presence of the disease, I directed the Assistant Superintendent for the Tháná Collectorate to proceed to the scene of its appearance24 further allude to this subject here. I may, however, state that I contracted a very severe attack of fever in the Panwel Táluká about the close of November, and that its effects hampered my movements considerably for the 5 or 6 weeks subsequent to its first appearance. Office. 21. Before I conclude this report, I may state that I have found the acquisition of an English writer in the office of the greatest assistance, in as much as he enables me to devote more time to what, after all, should be the chief object of the Superintendent's care, the quality of the work being performed in his Circle. The clerk employed in this office, Sadáshiva Sábájí, has been most attentive and industrious during the year, and, considering his newness to the work and the amount of moving about we had, the regularity with which he has kept his returns and records is highly creditable. If, however, this great advantage has been conferred by the recent re-organisition, a counterbalancing disadvantage has been effected by the doing away with one of the peons. Formerly there were four peons employed as being attached to the Superintendent, and then it was found that even with that number they held no sinecure. Now there are only three peons, and any one who knows what amount of work they have to perform in carrying notices to Patels of villages; in aiding in the collection of children for inspection; in having to carry the &quot;Tapál&quot; to and from the nearest Post Office, often 10 or 12 miles, or even more, distant; and in various other offices, there is scarcely need to mention, will readily agree that this number is too small. I think four men are about the lowest complement that could carry on the work with any regularity and despatch, and I would therefore beg to recommend that an additional peon be sanctioned on the Superintendent's Office Establishment, in order to bring it up to that number or its former strength.
25 NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent. 26 decrease in the work of all vaccinators is attributable to these two causes, to which may be added stoppages in work on account of sickness of some vaccinators, and the dismissal of others, as also to the extreme idleness of a few noticed at the end of this report. Total of Work. 3. The total number of operations performed during the year is 83,845; of these 79,456 were primary vaccinations, and 4,389 were re-vaccina- tions. The number of successful operations is 75,590. Percentages of Success, Age, and Sex. 4. The following are some of the important percentages:27 me. These are working since August last, and it is yet too short a time to say any thing- positive about them, or to expect good results from their supervision. Of one thing I fear, that, being selected from among the vaccinators, these Deputy Superintendents may not have that moral courage to take such notice of the faults of the vaccinators in their charge as may be necessary, and hence may prove to be deficient in necessary authority over the vaccinators. On the other hand, I confidently believe that their supervision will lead to a great improve- ment in the quality of our vaccinations. Small-pox. 11. The whole year was marked by an absence of small-pox. Solitary cases occurred in large cities only. About the close of the year, a few cases were heard of in Ahmadábád and Broach, but the localities were immediately attended to28 Dhanduká and Dholká Tálukás, examining the Dholerá, Dhanduká, and Dholká Dispensaries as well as the work of the táluká and municipal vaccinators. From Dholká I travelled to Ahmadábád and Veramgáon to examine the work of the municipal vaccinator. After Christmas, I left Ahmadábád and travelled through Dascroí Táluká, of Ahmadábád Zilhá, and Mátar Táluká, of Kaira Zilhá, and by the middle of January brought my camp to Máhmudábád, where the Superintendent General of Vaccination joined me. Travelling together from Máhmudábád to Wadthal, Aliná, and Thásrá the work of four vaccinators was examined. About the close of January the Superintendent General left my districts for Godhrá. The whole of February was spent in travelling through Kairá Zilhá. The work of all its vaccinators and some of the dispensaries was examined. In the early part of March, I crossed the Mahí and entered Broach Districts, and by the close of the year was able to inspect the work of three tálukás and one dispensary. During this tour in all the work of 24 Government vaccinators, 1 Native State, and 5 Municipal vaccinators, and of 8 Dispensaries was examined. My travelling extended over 2,507 miles, 303 villages have been visited, and 14,586 children inspected. Changes among Vaccinators. 17. Consequent upon the appointment of four vaccinators as Deputy Superintendents four vacancies occurred; these were filled up by the tranfers of four men from the Káthiáwád Circle. Hargowan Bechar, the municipal vaccinator of Dholká, was dismissed the service for extensively falsifying the returns of September, October, and November. Sukdeo Laxmirám, Local Fund vaccinator of Umreth, in Kaira Zilhá, was dismissed for general inefficiency, bad work, and dishonesty. Premsing Gangásing, municipal vaccinator of Veramgáon, is a very idle and indifferent vaccinator, and to conceal his indolence has been very cunningly entering false names in his returns. His dismissal is sanctioned, and his place as well as those of Dholká, Umreth, and Bánsdá will be shortly filled up. Conduct of Vaccinators. 18. Four vaccinators of the Local Fund Establishments, viz., Harjíwan Wishwanáth, of Prántej; Harichand Bháskarji, of Dhanduká; Mayárám Dullabhrám, of Mándvi; and Anuprám Sewakrám, of Balsár; and four men of the Native States' Establishment, viz., Jáfar Fájal, of Pálanpur Superintendency, and Govindráo Bá'ájí, Mangal Pitámbar, and Jiwarám Chaturbhuj, of Mahí Kántá Agency, have been markedly very idle and negligent. The decrease this year would not have been so much had they shown more attention to their work. With these exceptions the vaccinators as a class have worked well, and.' have conducted themselves properly.
29 SINDH CIRCLE. Superintendent.30 Age. 5. The percentages of operations on persons below and above one year of age is respec- tively 38.8 and 61.2, against 34.2 and 65.7 of the previous year, showing an appreciable increase in the number of operations on infants. Success. 6. The percentage of success is somewhat higher in the past than in the previous year, the numbers being 96.4 in the former, and 94.9 in the latter year. Quality of lymph in general use. 7. With very few exceptions the lymph in use has been excellent, having been changed when necessary with Animal and Privy Council lymph. In the month of November Privy Council lymph received through the Superintendent General was used at Shikárpur successfully, and by the end of March it had been distributed over the whole Province, and the vesicles resulting being superior to those of the old lymph it was preferred. Now I think the lymph in Sindh will compare favorably with any in the world! In the town of Mírpur, where Alá Baksh was operating, I saw vesicles31 The Mukhtiárs, it is true, give help but of what sort? A peon or a policeman is sent, who drives or drags the people to the vaccinator. On occasions I have seen them brought up crying, weeping, and protesting emphatically against this, yet the children of their Chiefs and Native Officials are exempted. If vaccination is made compulsory with one rupee or even eight annas fine for those who had not their children vaccinated before the completion of their first year of age, the rich and the Government Officials would take the lead, and the poor people would follow merrily and there would not be a murmur in Sindh. Truthfulness of Returns. 11. With few exceptions the vaccinators' returns are, I believe, truthful. When inspecting Jámat Mall's work I found that he had entered fourteen false names. Murád. 12. I regret to have to bring to notice a practice of extorting money from the people. This practice has been carried on for many years, and is far too common among the vaccinators. I have myself seen instances of it, and have succeeded in some cases in putting a stop to a system so unjust. I have informed all the District Officers in Sindh of the prevalence of this obnoxious practice, and asked their advice as to its criminality or otherwise. They have unanimously condemned it as illegal and declared their determination to punish any one proved to be guilty of such extortion. I may state that a circular was issued, informing the vaccinators of the danger of continuing the levy of Murád and my determination to prosecute every one who does so after this date. Inoculation. 13. No case of inoculation has been reported during the year, and the practice seems to have been discontinued in Sindh. Small-pox. 14. Sixty-three cases of supposed small-pox were reported, but on enquiry they turned out to be measles. When at Shikárpur on tour small-pox was reported in the village of Márí. I went to see for myself and found the little boy and girl, whose names were given, playing amongst the sand with nothing the matter with them. Their parents said they had nándí mái, or measles. Inoculation of Syphilis through Vaccination. 15. I have never seen any person inoculated with syphilis through vaccination ; it has not taken place in Sindh. Conduct of Vaccinators. 16. As far as their work is concerned, the conduct of the vaccinators has, with few exceptions, been very good, but towards the people it has not been so praiseworthy. Assistant Superintendents. 17. I have reported Mr. Hásá Mall, 2nd class Assistant Superintendent, for falsifying his returns, but as his case is still subjudicê, I need say no more of it at present. One of the probationary Assistant Superintendents, named Mehar Chand, not being fit for promotion, will not be confirmed, and will, consequently, return to his former appointment in Haidarábád.* I am of opinion that these men will do very well if they are very sharply looked after. Thanks due to Authorities 18. I must tender my best thanks to Honorary Assistant Surgeon Leahy for carrying on Animal Vaccination through the cold weather, and for giving me invaluable assistance in distributing Animal lymph throughout the province. Also to Dr. MacRury, Civil Surgeon, for taking charge of the Privy Council lymph at Shikárpur, and for filling tubes, and thus distributing it to the * This man has since been remanded to duty as a vaccinator.32 vaccinators, as well as sending me supplies when on tour. But I am sorry that I cannot extend thanks further on towards the Frontier of Jacobábád, where, of all places, vaccination should be carried forward with greatest vigour. From the political state of the Frontier, migrations are constantly taking place from the Khán's territory, where small-pox is endemic, inoculation is always carried on, and whence small-pox might be introduced any day even into the cantonment. By order of Deputy Inspector General Dr. Miller, I sent lymph in capillary tubes to the Medical Officer in charge of the Jacobábád Hospital, but I regret to report that he failed to propagate it.
33 KATHIA'WAD CIRCLE. Superintendent.34 propose to remove them all except one, who is to be retained for Rájkot Town and Camp, because the number of vaccinators now maintained by the Native Chiefs is ample for the Káthiáwád Circle.' &quot; At para. 14 of the same letter the Superintendent General says . . . . ' and it would also give two Native Assistant Superintendents to Káthiáwád, the Chiefs of which now maintain sufficient vaccinators for that Circle.' &quot; Dr. Blomfield, at the time Officiating Superintendent of Vaccination in Káthiáwád, in his letter No. 19 of 1871, dated 10th May, informed the Superintendent General of Vaccination that it would not be prudent to withdraw all the Government vaccinators. I would suggest, he says, ' that two vaccinators be retained in the Circle for general duty as there are many Grassias and petty Chiefs who do not entertain a vaccinator, and also many outlying villages of the larger Chiefs in which it will be difficult to conduct the work, unless there is some one available for the duty.&quot;In his letter No. 162 of 1871-72, dated 15th May, the Superintendent General of Vaccination informed Dr. Blomfield, ' that Government have decided to retain only one vaccinator in your Circle.' We have consequently to deal with an accomplished fact; Dr. Pinkerton is so far correct; the number of vaccinators maintained by the Native Chiefs is sufficient, but to this should be added35 &quot; (c.)36 All the Representatives of the Native States in Káthiáwád agree to the following Resolution :37 Western Division. 1 Vaccinator on Rs. 25 per month ... ... ... Rs. 25 1 38 &quot; (i.)39 If I insisted and took steps to ensure that the vaccinators did their work well, I deemed it equally my duty to stand by them and see that they received the full value of their labour. In most parts of Káthiáwád it was the custom to grant certain batta to the vaccinators. This had been withheld since the vaccination department had been made over to me by the Native States. The vaccinators from idling and sending in imaginary returns were made to work, and punished if lazy ; or if their registers were found incorrect. But to work more and receive less pay is not encouraging, and as I have stated, several vaccinators resigned and more would have done so, had not Colonel Anderson issued instructions to the Native States not to withdraw the batta they formerly gave. In most instances this recommenda- tion was not attended to, and complaints still reached me on the subject; I pointed out that, according to the present management, there were no more Bháwanagar, Jámnagar, Dharol, &c., vaccinators, but that all were now Káthiáwád vaccinators, and that the men were so distributed, that the whole population of Káthiáwád would reap the benefits of vaccination ; but I greatly feared that this desirable end might not be obtained, and that many localities would probably remain neglected, unless some understanding were arrived at on the question of batta with all the Native Chiefs and Landlords of Káthiáwád. Let us suppose, I said, that &quot; A has been vaccinating in a district where he receives batta, and that he removes to another district, where no batta is given ; it is not probable that he will long carry on his work in these villages.&quot; I accordingly proposed that whilst a man be working in a given locality the Chief or Landlord should give him the batta he is entitled to. I had occasion to bring this question to the notice of the Kárbhárí of Wallá, and that Officer objecting to batta in kind, promised to give, as compensation to the vaccinators, whilst working in his territory, a sum of Rupees 5 per mensem. I accordingly suggested that some such arrange- ment should be accepted, so that the vaccinators should not be put to a loss, whatever might be the locality where their work might call them. After consulting together, the Representatives of the Native States agreed to the follow- ing Resolution :40 almost exclusively effected in the Bháwanagar State, consequently most of the other Native States receive actually the services of a greater number of vaccinators than they did formerly (with the exception of Bháwanagar), whilst their expenditure in cash is the same. I brought prominently to the notice of the Political Agent that I had never proposed to do away with batta, and that I had no idea when I accepted to distribute and pay the men, that ergo, batta would be discontinued; I remarked that I had proposed to make a saving of a few hundred rupees, but not of nearly six thousand. I have much pleasure to record that through Colonel Anderson's assistance I obtained, as compensation to the vaccinators, a further grant of Rs. 1,900. This allows to each man a monthly sum of Rs. 5 in lieu of batta. Batta in kind will no more be issued, and a regular payment will be made instead. The Native States gain certainly by the arrangement, but the vaccinators should be well pleased to receive a bi-annual remittance of Rs. 30 each, instead of the batta in kind, which, at all times, was a cause of disputes and quarrels, and which was frequently withheld. As I had given myself much trouble to obtain this increase of pay, I considered that it was only just that the bad men should not profit by it. It is true that I gave it to all for the first six months, because I found that few, if any, would be entitled to it if I made my rules retrospective, so allowing by-gones to be by-gones for this time only, I had the following notification published in the Agency Gazette :41 in his too. If you can send me details of the plans you intend to carry out, I will send them to Government, and request that they may be sent on to the Government of India, and I would advise you to send the sketch to Colonel Anderson for submission to Government through the Political Department too. It is a great step and cannot be too well known; we will have reason to be proud of it if you succeed, and I have no doubt of it.&quot; It is almost too soon to be able to show the results of my scheme, so far I can claim for it, that the men are better distributed and better paid; that the majority work well, and that the falsification of Register is a far less frequent occurrence ; that small districts where no vaccinations had ever been performed are now protected; and that Village Registers of vaccination are being gradually introduced all over Káthiáwád. The Barodá Káthiáwád State. In the province of Káthiáwád, apart from the Native States, there are large districts belonging to Barodá. For these some vaccinators are entertained by the Barodá Darbár, but they are under no real supervision, and their work is never inspected. I proposed to Colonel Walker, the Assistant Political Resident in the Káthiáwád Barodá territory, that his vaccinators should be placed under the Superintendent of Vaccination in Káthiáwád. That officer approved of my suggestion, and wrote twice on the subject to the Political Resident at Barodá, but no answer was ever received to his recommendations on the subject. There is another part of Káthiáwád which is not visited by the Superintendent of Vaccination in Káthiáwád. I refer to the tálukás of Gogo, part of Pátri, &c., which belong to the Ahmadábád Collectorate, these might well be placed under the Superintendent of Káthiáwád, and thereby the Superintendent of the Northern Circle relieved from visiting a distant part of his Circle. Lymph. The lymph I saw was good, some very good. Most of the recent work I inspected was also good, and this speaks also in favor of the good quality of the lymph. Mr. Kánojí Jayarám and Mr. Ranchoddás Mangaldás both found, on their tour of inspection, vaccinators who were working with bad lymph; they at once started a fresh supply, which was favorably reported upon. I made some experiments with vaccine lymph, diluted to ten times its volume with pure glycerine and filtered water ; the result was very encouraging and worthy of notice. On one occasion 19 children were vaccinated, with three tubes of lymph, diluted with glycerine and filtered water ; the result was 16 successful and 3 unknown. Cicatrices. The following tabular statement bears on the quality of the cicatrices 1 observed during my tour. I took notes of 11,341 cases :42 Dispensary Vaccination. The Government Dispensaries are situated at the three British stations at Wadwán, Mánikwádá, and Songarh. The British stations are small camps. Wadwán, since the railway is being- built, is increasing in importance. Municipal Vaccinators. Of late a few Municipalities have been established in some of the larger towns of this province. The experiment is too recent to allow us to suggest that vaccinators be entertained by them. I believe that hereafter, there will be no difficulty in getting municipal vaccinators sanctioned by some of the larger Municipalities43 register to a considerable extent, but did so when small-pox prevailed to a great extent in the very districts he was visiting. He was also found to have been working with perfectly effete lymph. Some men were suspended for a few months, and another chance given to them, others were fined. The vaccinators understood at last that the days of otium cum dignitate were over, and some set to work diligently and honestly, others resigned. There can be no doubt that the quality and the quantity of the work performed have very greatly improved, and when all will feel thoroughly convinced that good men are promoted and rewarded, and that bad men are fined, suspended, or dismissed, then only will the majority strive to give satisfaction. Candidate Vaccinators. When I found with what bad material I had to work with, I at once set to train young men for the department. Three have already been appointed, and others are in training, and will soon be ready to fill up any vacancy that may occur. A candidate is attached to this office for a month, so that we may judge of his conduct and character ; after that period, if the opinion formed be favorable, he receives Rupees 4 a month as sustenance allowance, and he is sent to learn his work under a good vaccinator. He remains with him for a couple of months, and when he is reported fit for duty, he is again attached to this office, where his knowledge is tested, and, if approved of, he is appointed to the first vacancy that occurs. By this time all the men in the department have had fair warning, and false entries to any extent, or working with bad lymph will not be tolerated any longer; further leniency would be deemed weakness, and the good name of the department could but suffer in the opinion of the Native Chiefs. All the vaccinators are well paid ; the lowest pay is Rupees 14, batta Rupees 5, a peon Rupees 7, total Rupees 26; whilst others draw Rupees 32, even some Rupees 42, includ- ing the pay of their peons. With such good pay we should have first-rate men, and were I to remain in this Circle I would most certainly have them. Tour. During my tour I visited the centre, the east, the north, and west of Káthiáwád; it would take another couple of months to visit thoroughly the south. I could here but repeat myself were I to enter again into details; any important remarks that my tour might call for have been noticed in the body of the report. Civil Authorities and Native Chiefs. I beg to record here the great assistance I always received from Colonel Anderson, the Political Agent in Káthiáwád; to his support and co- operation is certainly due the introduction of the present improved position of the Vaccine Department in Káthiáwád. My best thanks are also due to Mr. Percival, the Joint Administrator of Bháwanagar; he has always been foremost in favor- ing the progress of vaccination, and he has very materially assisted the reform of the Vac- cination Department. All the Representatives of the Native States have always willingly responded to any suggestion of mine, and they have all, without a single exception, afforded me the help and assistance I required from them.
44 REWA KA'NTA CIRCLE. Superintendent.45 Caste. 4. The following table shows the Castes of the total number of primary vaccinations :46 Establishment. 12. The five vaccinators for the Panch Mahals were paid for the months of April and May by Government, but since that time have been paid by the Local Funds. The 10 vaccinators in the Rewá Kántá are paid, as formerly, by the Native Chiefs, but there frequently seems to be much delay in paying these men, and a long correspondence has been passing through this office about it; and, through the exertion of Major Barton, the Political Agent, these vaccinators have just received more than a year's arrears of pay47 PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. Local Superintendent.48 Persian Gulf. In the same way members of the Sassoon family were all re-vaccinated; and though they all bore very large scars of previous vaccinations, in some instances, performed at Bagdád, the operation proved successful in all, and with vesicles in some of an excellent appearance. 6. It is a curious fact, worthy of being noted, and carefully observed in future, that Natives do not take re-vaccination at all so easily and well as Europeans. In the instance of the employés of the Dockyard, of the many scores of Natives re-vaccinated, none, beyond a few individuals here and there, proved successful, though they were vaccinated at the same time, with the same lymph, and with the same care by me as the officers and crew of the &quot; Magpie&quot; and others, that took the disease so well. It may be that more of the Natives are protected by a natural attack of small-pox than Europeans, who have vaccination only to fall back upon. Possibly, want of proper attention and care to prevent the lymph being rubbed off, which it is liable in these men of work to be, in a dozen different ways, is at the bottom of it. More information on the subject, however, is needed before one could pronounce any decided opinion on it. Lymph. 7. The Lymph in use throughout the year was of the best quality. Animal vaccination does not only give us an abundant supply of excellent lymph, but has made us quite independent of any assist- ance from the mofussil, which formerly was always indispensably necessary during every hot and monsoon season. Several tubes of English lymph were supplied by the Superintendent General of Vaccination. With one exception they all proved successful; but as our own lymph was good and genuine enough to require any replacement, no care was taken about it. Animal Vaccination. 8. We have been singularly successful with our animal vaccination during the past year. Some 130 heifers were inoculated, and, with two exceptions only, they were all successful. Of the two failures one occurred in a heifer inoculated on Wednesday, the 12th of April 1871. The heifer was healthy-looking ; the skin was pretty clean and clear ; and the lymph used to inoculate with was partly fresh and partly preserved in capillary tubes. The other failure, occurred in a small heifer, inoculated on the 8th day of May 1871. In this, however, the skin was much irritated and abraded; and, consequently, the lymph, though fresh, could not have any effect. With these two exceptions, all the operations proved successful, not in the animals alone, but their lymph took well in the human subject. The following table shows the number of heifers inoculated in each month with the result of the operations :49 increasing knowledge of, and acquaintance with, the subject, the results would go on improving. The lymph, however, continues to be as capricious in its effects as before. What appears to be excellent lymph and derived from a genuine-looking vesicle often fails. Not that this failure is complete. Out of some 10 or 12 vaccinated, perhaps one or two only take, and then only in one or two places; but the lymph from these vesicles is as effective as could be desired. In other instances, what appears to be indifferent lymph, from dried-looking vesicles, proves successful in every case in which it is used. Why this is so I have not been able to ascertain; nor would I be in a position to do so satisfactorily till I shall have had an opportunity of personally seeing and watching every case operated upon with this lymph. Then only can any deductions be drawn, and any systematic rules of practice, based on scientific principles, be framed for future guidance. Compulsory vaccination and inspection alone can assist us in this respect. In the meantime it is enough for the authorities to know that an experience of 28 months has fully convinced me that animal vaccination has done a great amount of good to Bombay, and is capable of doing the same, almost to an unlimited extent, in future ; and that it has become a necessity which cannot at all be dispensed with. 9. All opposition to the use of animal vaccine lymph, from every quarter, has completely ceased; and all receive it not quietly but eagerly50 RACE OR CASTE. Budhists, Jains. Brámhans. Bhátiás. Hindús of other Castes. Hindús Out-caste. Musalmans. Pársís. Jews. Native Christians. Indo-Europeans. Europeans. Negro-Africans. Total Deaths. Number of Deaths from Small-pox . . 19 12 10 307 33 176 8 2 23 2 3 6 601 LOCALITIES. Mándvi Kámáthipurá. Umbarkhádí. Chakhlá. Bhuleshwar. Kumbhárwádá. Khárá Táláo. Dongaríf. Khetwádí. Parel. Mázagáon. Market. Fort, Northern. Dhobí Taláo. Phanaswádi. Máhim. Kolábá. Girgaum. Tárwadí. Esplanade. Wálkeshwar. Mahálaxumi. Chawpátí. Shiwrí. Warlí. Non-resident and Unknown. Total. Number of Deaths from Small-pox ..... 91 91 85 48 40 36 30 24 24 21 18 15 12 11 9 9 8 5 4 3 3 2 1 1 1 9 601 It will be seen from the last year's report that the localities that have now suffered most, are almost the identical ones that suffered so terribly last year. The protection of the last year's epidemic was not sufficient to lessen the mortality in these places, from this cause, this year ; unmistakably showing that way that the deaths this year must have been amongst the new- born infants. Can there be anything more convincingly clear that there is an amount of apathy, improvidence, carelessness, and indifference, almost amounting to culpable negligence on the part of the Natives, regarding the well-being of their children ; and that legislative interference is absolutely and indispensably necessary to avert such a terrible and wanton sacrifice of infant life ? Yet, year after year is allowed to pass, getting its victims by hun- dreds, without let or hindrance, without taking any action in the matter. Conduct of Subordinates. 12. In conclusion, I have to state that the conduct of the subordinates has been good.
51 KUTCH CIRCLE. One Native Assistant Superintendent, and 10 Native States' Vaccinators. under Mr, DORA'RJI' HORMASJI, G.G.M.C. Population, 4,00,000. Total cost, Rs. 1,426-4-4. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation, 14 annas and 7 pies. YEAR. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1870-71.......... 691 ...... ...... 582 84.2 1871-72.......... 1,706 1,015 ...... 1,563 93.9 In submitting the report on vaccination for the official year 1871-72, it gives me much pleasure to say that the number of operations performed this year has reached more than two and a-half times as much as that of the preceding three years, as will be evident from the accompanying table :52 With a staff of 10 vaccinators, 4 maintained at the expenses of His Highness the Ráo, and 6 by the Bháyáds, it is expected that the progress of vaccination during the next year will still be more favourable. Out of 1,706 persons vaccinated, 1,563 were successful; 100 unsuccessful; and 43 did not come under observation after the operation. Of these there were 982 Hindús and 698 Musalmans. Lymph. The lymph used throughout the year was good; its supply was received from Mr, Anantá Chandrobá and Dr. Blanc: the supply from the former acted well, while from the latter failed. Many cases of small-pox are known to have occurred here and at other places.
53 ADEN. One Municipal Vaccinator under Assistant Surgeon G. W. R. HAY, M.D. Population, 32,000. Year. Total Vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully Vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those Unknown. Increase. Decrease. 1870-71 ........................ 691 ...... ...... 582 84.2 1871-72 ........................ 446 ...... 245 370 82.7 The lymph used during the year has been of very good quality, and the general charac- ter of the pustules excellent. I am unable to account for the decrease, except that small-pox not having been prevalent, the people have not been frightened into allowing their children to be vaccinated. There is an increasing dislike to the operation, and unfortunately only persuasion can be used. The vaccinator Anant Vitthal has given satisfaction during the year, but I am of opinion that a Mahomedan will succeed better. The bulk of the civil population being Musalmans. The following figures show the mortality from small-pox during the year 1871-72 :54 Out of the aggregate number of cases, viz., 621 (including persons of different castes, as detailed in the annexed return), 260 were successful, 98 unsuccessful, and 263 unknown. From subsequent observations of a great number of cases abovementioned as unknown, which presented vesicles as characteristic and as satisfactory as those shown in the column &quot; Success- ful,&quot; and also from the reports received regarding the effects produced in the rest of them, I am led to believe that almost the whole of the unascertained number had succeeded; so that, to be on the safest side, taking three-fourths of that number as successful, the ratio of the successful cases comes to about 82.3 per cent. on the whole number vaccinated. Consider- ing that its introduction is comparatively recent, the result appears to me to be encouraging and satisfactory. Fresh lymph from an inoculated heifer, from 6 to 15 months old, was always used, and the resulting vesicles were larger, better formed, and more distinctive than those produced by the insertion of humanized lymph. Cicatrices showing a marked depression in the centre presented, invariably, the characteristic foveation. The experiments which were made by the transmission of animal lymph from arm-to-arm were attended with better results than those in which the pure human lymph was used. A close and careful observation, although extending over a limited period, not exceeding (20) twenty months, in the practice of animal vaccination, has confirmed me in the belief that generally it affords better protection to human life than humanized lymph, and am further induced to remark that if it is carried on for some time with patient and persevering application, it will not fail in all probability to result in its ultimate success. When small-pox had prevailed fearfully in the camp and city, from the month of January to March last, I observed that several persons vaccinated from arm-to-arm were subject to it, though not severely ; but not a single person vaccinated from animal lymph was affected by it, except in three or four cases in which children were vaccinated with animal lymph a day or two previous to being attacked by small-pox, and which, of course, failed on the children's catching the small-pox severely. I had but very seldom occasion to suspect a failure from any defect in the lymph, but in some instances dry weather causing coagulation of the lymph at the point of the lancet, the insufficiency of the lymph, or an improper insertion of the same in punctures at the time of transferring it either to the human subject or to another heifer conspired, in my mind, to be the causes for failure in bringing about vesicles of the typical form. During the past year, I have inoculated 83 heifers, and have failed in 8 of them. These failures made me anxious, and I could not account for them satisfactorily to myself except that the calves might have been previously inoculated, or the causes enumerated in the above paragraph might have operated in bringing them about. It is to be regretted that, generally in the mofussil, the people whom we have to deal with for the purposes of vaccination, are ignorant and illiterate, and although they are not, generally speaking, averse to it, yet not unfrequently the vaccinators or peons have to contend with the unyielding opposition of some of them, who, having prejudices against it, thwart the most sanguine endeavours on the part of the vaccinators in the promotion of the cause of vaccination. Again, there are others who appreciate the value of vaccination inasmuch as it saves lives dear to them, and they there- fore bring their children some miles to be vaccinated. But after they are operated on, and as soon as the parents are sure that the operation will not have to be repeated, they leave their permanent or temporary abodes without the knowledge of the peons, for fear that the lymph would be taken from their children's arms. No amount of persuasion of reasoning could dispel their groundless fears, nor could they be brought to an understanding that it would be for the welfare of their own offsprings, that they should show them to the Medical Officer, who alone can decide whether the object of the vaccination was fully attained or not.
55 Hence there has been great difficulty in ascertaining accurately the result in each operation which is of paramount importance, and which will not, I apprehend, be accomplished until Government is moved to render, by enactment, vaccination compulsory. The difficulty and vexation in procuring and retaining heifers for operation is not the less felt, although a liberal compensation is offered and paid to their owners for the loan of them for a week or 10 days. To prevent removal from the dispensary of the calves by acts of violence on the part of their ignorant owners during the past year, I was obliged to have them brought to my own place of residence, by which I had the satisfaction to find that the animals were better taken care of with regard to their proper and regular feeding and water- ing. By this arrangement the evil, although partially abated, was, I am sorry to say, not entirely and effectually removed; for on one occasion, just at the time of the operation, a calf was forcibly carried away by its owner from my house, and when the aid of the police authority was invoked they distinctly gave me to understand that, under the existing regula- tions, they could not afford the assistance asked for. Some of the evils and difficulties attendant upon the ignorant and illiterate state of the people, coupled with the superstitious manners and customs prevailing in this part of the Circle, and which cannot be fully known except by the persons concerned, are graphically described by the Superintendent of Vaccination, Central Circle, at page 8, para. 2, of the printed report for the year 1870-71. In spite of the favorable result above given, on the introduction, for the first time, of animal vaccination, I am grieved to observe the uncharitable remark made by the Superin- tendent General in the report quoted above at page 30, para. 36 : &quot; After the rains were over, Sub-Assistant Surgeon Bálkrishna Chintobá, who is in charge of the Charitable Dispensary in Púná, continued the practice for some time, but finally lost his lymph, and also, I think, his inclination to be troubled with animal vaccination,&quot; especially so when the amount of trouble and anxiety I had to undergo in addition to those incident to my usual dispensary duties are taken into consideration. In conclusion, I have to acknowledge, with thanks, the receipt of lymph kindly sent by Dr. Anantá, and also his valuable advice, personally given while he was here on leave for a few days, regarding the keeping of a sufficient quantity of lymph in reserve for cases of emergency.
TABLES OF VACCINATION RETURNS, &c., FOR 1871-72. 11 V R
58 A.59 CEN P. S. TURNBULL, M.D., Assistant Surgeon. 1 1 2,324 1,919 Násik 2,620 96,084 Báglán..... 1,185 1,139 .. 2,245 49 .. 30 360 1,964 2,274 16 43 2,333 .. .. .. .. 99.3 .. 2,324 1 .. 376 .. 1,404 26,305 Nándgám .... 186 182 1 341 9 .. 17 58 310 332 3 35 370 8 .. .. 8 99.1 100.0 376 1 .. 347 .. 480 70,522 Sáwargáon .. 161 186 .. 327 5 .. 15 90 257 340 10 5 355 .. .. .. .. 97.1 .. 347 1 1 928 2,402 560 63,105 Dindorí..... 478 444 .. 859 10 .. 53 256 666 912 28 5 945 5 1 .. 6 97.0 83.3 928 1 .. 11 7 11,582 11,742 9,668 6,63,036 5,842 5,618 25 10,311 384 2 738 2,882 8,578 10,381 359 813 11,753 69 16 37 122 94.8 81.1 1,052 1 .. 2 2 3,927 3,036 Sholápur Collectorate. 1,672 1,46,245 Sholápur .... 1,973 1,950 4 2,904 575 2 438 1,697 2,226 3,628 201 210 4,039 2 2 .. 4 94.7 50.0 1,963 1 1 1,876 3,012 1,200 82,525 Máráh.... 1,007 868 .. 1,644 92 .. 139 511 1,364 1,710 135 37 1,882 .. .. 1 1 92.6 .. 1,876 1 1 1,309 2,431 1,680 84,826 Karmalá.... 663 637 1 1,157 125 .. 17 73 1,227 1,264 22 14 1,360 2 2 .. 4 98.2 .. 1,300 2 1 2,415 796 616 80,126 Pandharpur. 1,302 1,678 .. 2,063 91 .. 226 1,200 1,180 2,013 146 279 2,438 25 7 3 35 93.2 78.1 1,207 1 1 854 937 616 60,486 Sángolá.... 444 409 .. 756 47 .. 50 285 568 648 78 153 879 1 .. .. 1 89.2 100.0 854 2 1 2,820 537 1,167 1,13,972 Bársí........ 1,429 1,377 4 2,357 164 .. 281 1,273 1,533 2,296 67 449 2,812 4 8 2 14 97.1 33.3 1,410 1 .. 9 7 13,192 10,749 6,951 5,68,180 6,818 6,319 9 10,881 1,094 2 1,151 5,039 8,098 11,559 649 1,142 13,350 32 17 6 55 94.6 65.3 1,465 1 .. 2 2 3,625 3,313 Khándesh Collectorate. 749 63,672 Dhúliá...... 1,764 1,794 2 2,831 207 2 518 1,674 1,884 3,556 56 2 3,614 66 1 .. 67 98.4 98.5 1,812 1 1 1,657 1,952 874 1,11,395 Sáwada...... 810 827 .. 1,544 60 .. 33 980 657 1,553 83 41 1,677 19 1 .. 20 94.9 95.0 1,657 1 1 501 623 323 51,060 Nasirabad .. 24 245 .. 447 35 .. 3 312 173 445 7 37 489 13 1 2 16 98.4 92.8 501 1 1 1,538 2,487 459 68,262 Irandol.... 775 665 .. 1,340 64 .. 36 285 1,155 1,338 39 85 1,462 78 3 17 98 97.1 96.2 1,538 1 1 1,834 2,203 518 55,266 Jamner...... 918 924 .. 1,686 82 .. 66 354 1,480 1,832 2 .. 1,834 .. .. .. .. 99.8 .. 1,834 1 1 1,113 746 762 26,698 Sherpur .. .. 516 531 .. 999 48 .. .. 267 780 1,038 163 9 1,210 64 1 1 66 86.4 98.4 1,113 1 1 425 1,867 474 34,306 Shahade ..... 218 207 .. 421 4 .. .. 16 409 391 33 11 435 .. .. .. .. 92.2 .. 425 1 l 281 159 1,286 21,550 Talode ...... 147 134 .. 266 15 .. .. 7 274 268 6 13 287 .. .. .. .. 97.8 .. 281 1 508 136 640 36,544 Nandurbár .. 283 225 .. 488 13 .. 7 203 305 456 38 51 545 .. .. .. .. 92.3 .. 508 1 1 2,165 956 449 35,631 Chálisgáon .. 1,097 1,068 .. 1,831 158 .. 176 450 1,715 1,991 47 159 2,197 .. .. .. .. 97.6 .. 2,165 1 1 545 88 1,234 46,128 Pimpalnair.. 256 262 .. 462 19 .. 37 170 348 513 24 3 540 24 3 .. 27 95.5 88.8 545 1 1,046 924 539 68,853 Páchora .... 572 460 .. 950 71 .. 11 380 652 1,022 10 6 1,038 13 .. 1 14 99.0 100.0 1,046 1 1 1,678 672 504 41,843 Choprá ...... 891 717 .. 1,459 78 .. 81 331 1,277 1,575 19 18 1,612 45 17 8 70 98.8 72.5 1,678 1 1 1,554 2,422 538 73,415 Amalnair.... 771 758 .. 1,346 50 .. 134 265 1,264 1,448 138 59 1,645 17 2 6 25 91.2 89.4 1,554 1 1 2,541 1,911 506 56,706 Virdal ...... 1,209 1,131 .. 1,617 116 .. 607 190 2,150 2,166 130 198 2,434 76 20 105 201 94.1 79.1 2,541 1 .. 651 .. 566 69,569 Bhosáwal.... 305 346 .. 581 15 .. 55 404 247 583 45 36 664 .. .. .. .. 92.8 .. 651 1 .. 17 14 21,662 20,459 10,431 8,61,098 10,764 10,294 2 18,257 1,033 2 1,764 6,288 14,770 20,115 840 728 21,683 415 49 140 604 95.9 89.4 1,274 1 .. 2 .. 3,272 .. Sátárá Collectorate. 432 1,02,736 Sátárá..... 1,737 1,521 15 2,709 164 .. 370 1,102 2,156 2,991 118 198 3,307 9 2 3 14 96.2 81.8 1,636 1 1 2,517 2,104 400 14,568 Tásgaon ... 1,359 1,156 .. 2,056 144 .. 315 1,557 958 2,273 60 203 2,536 2 .. .. 2 97.4 100.0 2,517 1 1 2,170 761 896 53,870 Jáwli....... 1,050 1,119 .. 1,953 7 .. 209 324 1,845 2,050 42 77 2,169 .. 1 .. 1 97.9 .. 2,170 1 1,216 1,193 802 85,857 Wái ....... 607 609 .. 1,040 23 .. 153 332 884 1,141 62 15 1,218 .. .. .. .. 94.8 .. 1,216 1 1 1,413 730 840 77,051 Khataw ... 722 690 .. 1,166 41 .. 205 345 1,067 1,357 34 21 1,412 1 .. .. 1 97.5 100.0 1,413 2 1 2,623 877 720 77,750 Wálwá..... 1,334 1,289 .. 2,350 184 .. 89 721 1,902 2,432 30 173 2,635 .. .. .. .. 98.7 .. 1,311 1 1 1,431 1,144 632 62,564 Mán ....... 679 752 .. 1,135 32 .. 264 418 1,013 1,257 116 68 1,441 .. .. .. .. 91.5 .. l,431 2 1 3,278 1,835 487 1,21,694 Karhad ..... 1,675 1,595 .. 2,842 89 .. 339 483 2,787 2,976 164 169 3,309 7 1 .. 8 94.7 87.5 1,639 2 1 2,266 1,166 720 77,750 Khánápur .. 1,208 1,058 .. 1,965 68 .. 233 861 1,405 1,994 240 99 2,333 .. .. .. .. 89.2 .. 1,133 1 1 1,671 2,225 810 97,483 Pátan ..... 821 849 .. 1,475 13 .. 182 298 1,372 1,491 24 182 1,697 1 .. .. 1 98.4 100.0 1,671 2 1 2,072 984 484 55,588 Málsiras .. . 1,090 973 .. 1,773 74 1 213 913 1,150 1,973 88 53 2,111 8 1 .. 9 95.3 88.8 1,036 2 1 2,087 920 350 71,974 Koregám ... 1,185 980 .. 1,835 62 .. 188 821 1,261 1,851 58 189 2,098 .. 2 .. 2 96.9 .. 1,043 1 .. 18 10 26,016 13,939 7,673 8,96,685 13,387 12,591 15 22,299 901 1 2,762 8,175 17,803 23,786 1,033 1,447 26,266 28 7 3 38 95.8 80.0 1,445 .. .. 1 1 1,592 1,185 Native States. 420 61,000 Akalkot ... 858 734 .. 1,219 240 .. 133 299 1,293 1,367 136 130 1,633 .. .. .. .. 90.9 .. 1,592 1 1 846 1,341 960 26,167 Penth ...... 366 387 .. 752 1 .. .. 273 480 705 201 .. 906 50 40 3 93 77.8 55.5 846 1 1 1,066 920 1,044 1,11,729 Bhor....... 552 514 .. 972 5 .. 89 188 878 1,020 21 25 1,066 .. .. .. .. 97.9 .. 1,066 1 1 943 843 1,620 56,845 Jat.......... 465 478 .. 851 63 .. 29 405 538 939 5 .. 944 .. .. .. .. 99.4 .. 943 1 1 735 249 266 58,980 A'tpadi.... 377 358 .. 652 26 .. 57 186 549 714 10 11 735 .. .. .. .. 98.6 .. 735 1 1 1,002 1,173 512 49,314 Phaltan ... 488 454 .. 793 33 .. 116 570 372 766 91 117 974 24 29 7 60 89.3 45.2 1,002 .. .. 6 6 6,184 5,711 4,822 3,64,035 3,106 2,925 .. 5,239 368 .. 424 1,921 4,110 5,511 464 283 6,258 74 69 10 153 92.2 51.7 1,030 Grand Total of the Cen- tral Cir- cle. 6 .. 85 65 1,06,392 87,123 49,722 47,65,931 54,148 51,068 174 99,204 5,177 19 9,642 31,973 72,243 96,214 4,759 6,359 1,07,332 705 255 216 1,176 95.2 78.4 1,251
60 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total number of persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of Taluka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot;Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. EBN. Acting61 SOUTH J. RABY, Assistant Surgeon ; 1 .. 1,112 .. Ka- Collec- 547 76,937 Mudebihál .. 615 496 .. 851 190 .. 70 138 973 881 133 128 1,142 1 .. .. 1 86.8 100.0 1,112 1 1 756 450 831 97,114 Indi ........ 407 348 .. 579 139 .. 37 167 588 662 51 47 760 .. 1 .. 1 92.8 .. 756 1 1 1,117 874 793 99,269 Sindghi...... 590 527 .. 896 154 .. 67 156 961 1,087 28 19 1,134 .. .. .. .. 97.4 .. 1,117 2 1 1,417 313 845 78,163 Bijápur ...... 741 643 .. 1,148 199 .. 37 347 1,037 1,274 63 52 1,389 12 19 2 33 95.2 38.7 708 1 .. 11 8 10,711 6,110 5,489 7,41,521 5,557 4,908 5 8,749 1,321 .. 390 2,377 8,088 9,611 543 523 10,677 107 112 44 263 94.6 48.8 973 .. .. 1 1 646 1,005 Native States, Southern Maráthá States. 1,207 1,73,383 Sánglí ...... 350 293 .. 577 65 .. 1 285 358 575 37 32 644 2 1 .. 3 93.9 66.6 646 1 1 1,086 916 574 79,799 Miraj, 1st .... 602 484 .. 847 182 .. 57 632 454 1,085 1 .. l,086 .. .. .. .. 99.9 .. 1,086 1 1 396 455 197 47,060 Do. 2nd .... 253 143 .. 379 17 .. .. 178 218 396 .. .. 396 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 396 1 1 585 481 271 29,786 Kurandwád 1st. 280 304 .. 418 71 .. 95 65 519 498 49 57 604 .. .. 1 1 91.0 .. 585 1 1 387 294 177 22,890 Do. 2nd 213 174 .. 343 37 .. 7 69 318 366 14 11 391 .. .. .. .. 96.3 .. 387 1 1 1,539 696 317 49,829 Mudhol .... 757 780 .. 1,400 137 .. .. 13 1,524 1,100 366 75 1,541 2 .. .. 2 75.0 100.0 1,539 1 1 1,138 883 189 33,000 Rámdrug.... 572 559 .. 1,049 82 .. .. 144 987 1,085 14 32 1,131 6 .. 1 7 98.7 100.0 1,138 1 1 827 357 Unkn. 1,20,051 Jamkhandí .. 468 358 .. 665 78 .. 83 271 555 368 158 345 871 .. .. 1 1 69.9 .. 827 1 1 312 123 Unkn. Unkn. Sávanúr .... 174 135 .. 179 112 .. 18 7 302 271 34 16 321 1 2 .. 3 88.8 33.3 312 .. .. 9 9 6,916 5,210 2,932 5,55,798 3,669 3,230 .. 5,857 781 .. 261 1,664 5,235 5,744 673 568 6,985 11 3 3 17 89.5 78.5 768 .. .. 1 1 1,744 1,442 Kolhápur States. 360 14,748 Vishálgarh .. 916 825 .. 1,462 28 .. 251 229 1,512 1,704 25 23 1,752 3 .. .. 3 98.5 100.0 1,744 1 1 1,224 841 567 43.543 Ichalkaranjí.. 608 616 .. 1.128 96 .. .. 468 756 1,169 45 64 1,268 .. .. .. .. 96.2 .. 1,224 1 1 1,467 1,152 202 31,287 Kágal ...... 769 685 .. 1,209 56 .. 189 309 1,145 1,366 32 88 1,486 9 4 .. 13 97.7 69.2 1,467 1 1 1,185 1,365 486 73,393 Gadhinglaj .. 636 549 1 1,143 39 .. 2 116 1,069 1,120 69 .. .. .. .. .. .. 94.1 .. 1,185 1 1 863 1,185 486 29,845 Báurá ...... 471 392 .. 863 .. .. .. 108 755 759 53 51 863 .. .. .. .. 93.4 .. 863 1 1 1,595 1,984 540 66,463 Panálá 833 746 .. 1,388 2 .. 171 374 1,205 1,575 4 4 1,583 15 1 .. 16 99.7 93.7 1,595 1 1 1,060 1,335 900 54,794 Buthargarh.. 598 455 .. 1,014 25 .. 14 142 911 948 64 48 1,060 2 4 1 7 93.6 33.3 1,060 1 1 1,268 992 243 1,05,022 Shirol ...... 692 576 .. 1,133 93 .. 42 516 752 1,233 37 35 1,305 .. .. .. .. 97.0 .. 1,268 1 1 636 535 180 21,653 Torgal ...... 348 288 .. 573 59 .. 4 26 610 608 12 25 645 .. .. .. .. 98.0 .. 636 1 1 1,143 763 598 24,484 Aijrá........ 597 546 8 1,066 41 .. 28 442 701 1,132 13 9 1,154 .. .. .. .. 98.6 .. 1,143 1 1 3,345 3,476 506 1,14,445 Kolhapur Pe- thá& Station. 1,411 1,319 2 2,433 107 .. 188 669 2,061 2,623 92 25 2,740 379 229 7 615 96.0 62.3 3,345 .. .. 11 11 15,530 15,070 5,118 5,79,677 7,879 6,997 11 13,412 564 .. 889 3,399 11,477 14,237 446 362 15,045 408 238 8 654 96.9 63.1 1,411 Grand Total of the Sou- thern Circle. 4 .. 62 67 67,627 56,496 26,209 40,39,079 35,053 30,975 570 56,273 6,195 1 2,989 13,451 52,577 60,048 4,180 3,200 67,428 919 583 140 1,642 93.4 61.1 1,090 WESTERN. H. J. BLANC, M.D., Surgeon; Acting62 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total number of per- sons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native state in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of Taluka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccina- tor. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. WESTERS63 NORTH MANCHARJI BERAMJI 1 .. 1 1 2,521 3,018 Kairá Col- lectorate. 156 59,768 Mahmudábád 1,237 1,095 .. 1,898 283 4 147 1,672 660 2,158 58 116 2,332 144 25 20 189 97.3 85.2 2,521 1 1 2,736 1,237 208 62,677 Mátar ...... 1,452 1,100 .. 2,226 172 .. 154 1,388 1,164 2,319 105 135 2,559 93 41 50 184 95.6 69.4 2,736 2 2 3,695 4,401 200 1,01,221 Nariád ...... 1,915 1,662 1 2,904 390 3 279 2,009 1,568 3,375 109 93 3,577 71 30 17 118 96.8 70.2 1,847 1 1 1,849 3,187 270 71,714 Kapatbanj ... 948 785 .. 1,368 286 .. 79 1,235 498 1,624 32 79 1,735 77 21 18 116 98.0 78.5 1,849 1 1 1,449 2,019 178 55,922 Thásrá...... 743 673 .. 1,030 200 .. 186 853 563 1,382 20 14 1,416 32 1 .. 33 98.5 96.9 1,449 2 1 2,996 3,309 223 18,576 Anand ...... 1,442 1,228 .. 2,400 140 .. 130 1,812 858 2,432 114 135 2,681 222 50 54 326 95.5 81.6 1,498 1 1 3,128 3,456 161 90,293 Borsad...... 1,503 1,246 1 2,406 90 .. 252 1,790 959 2,322 353 74 2,749 268 86 25 379 86.8 75.7 3,128 1 .. 9 8 18,374 20,627 1,396 4,60,171 9,240 7,789 2 14,232 1,561 7 1,227 10,759 6,270 15,612 791 646 17,049 907 254 184 1,345 95.1 78.1 2,041 1 .. 1 1 2,139 2,395 Broach Col- lectorate. 298 64,511 Broach...... 1,047 1,042 .. 1,504 446 .. 139 1,563 526 1,917 37 140 2,094 43 3 4 50 98.1 93.4 2,139 1 1 773 511 .. 25,000 Broach City.. 394 377 3 415 281 72 .. 441 330 607 78 102 787 2 .. .. 2 88.6 100.0 773 1 1 2,767 2,526 375 74,951 Jambusar .. 1,446 1,300 .. 2,076 443 .. 227 1,343 1,403 2,596 13 148 2,757 7 3 11 21 99.5 70.0 2,767 1 1 1,566 2134 224 34,024 A'mod ...... 760 705 .. 1,088 214 .. 163 850 615 1,314 96 57 1,467 67 19 15 101 93.1 77.8 1724 158 374 32,327 Wágrá ...... 80 68 .. 146 2 .. .. 80 68 128 19 3 150 10 .. .. 10 87.0 100.0 1 1 1,892 1,499 406 71,873 Anklesar .... 907 894 .. 1,373 270 5 153 1,124 677 1,653 64 125 1,842 52 31 8 91 96.2 62.6 1,892 1 .. 5 5 9,295 9,065 1,677 3,02,686 4,634 4,386 3 6,602 1,656 77 682 5,401 3,619 8,215 307 575 9,097 181 56 38 275 96.3 76.3 1,859 1 .. 1 1 1,355 .. Surat Col- lectorate. .. 90,000 Surat City .. 726 625 9 1,108 133 67 34 549 802 1,125 108 118 1,351 3 .. 1 4 91.2 100.0 1,355 1 1 1,096 1,401 94 28,144 Chorási ...... 561 523 1 1,000 27 21 35 696 388 924 88 79 1,091 9 1 2 12 91.3 90.0 1,096 1 1 1,376 1,639 336 70,531 Ulpár ...... 713 657 .. 1,095 67 4 204 571 799 1,299 55 32 1,386 3 3 .. 6 95.9 50.0 1,376 1 1 1,514 1,618 175 64,233 Jalálpur .... 720 744 1 1,309 78 5 71 637 827 1,353 42 73 1,468 31 9 10 50 96.9 77.5 1,514 1 1 1,199 2,027 225 71,972 Balsád ...... 598 593 .. 1,131 30 1 29 474 717 992 96 107 1,195 7 1 .. 8 91.1 87.5 1,199 1 1 852 1,464 188 35,411 Mándvi .... 448 404 .. 820 21 .. 11 363 489 818 20 18 856 .. .. .. .. 97.6 .. 852 1 1 1,538 1,975 167 49,103 Chikli ...... 725 767 .. 1,356 114 3 19 889 603 1,418 42 38 1,498 32 10 4 46 97.1 76.1 1,538 1 1 2,573 1,932 221 61,311 Bárdoli...... 1,244 1,237 .. 2,343 80 4 54 808 1,673 2,398 56 42 2,496 67 20 5 92 97.7 77.0 2,573 1 1 1,588 1,833 103 41,604 Párdi ...... 769 785 .. 1,431 19 6 98 747 807 1,372 105 85 1,562 25 1 8 34 92.8 96.1 1,588 1 .. 9 9 13,091 13,889 1,509 5,12,309 6,504 6,335 11 11,593 569 111 555 5,734 7,105 11,699 612 592 12,903 177 45 30 252 95.2 79.7 1,454 .. .. 1 1 3,206 1,957 Pálanpur Superintendency. 1,188 1,53,448 Pálanpur .... 1,704 1,499 .. 2,264 567 .. 372 1,273 1,930 3,124 30 49 3,203 3 .. .. 3 99.0 100.0 3,206 1 1 695 1,153 1,012 16,550 Dhánerá .... 366 329 .. 656 7 .. 32 541 154 673 2 21 696 .. .. .. .. 99.7 .. 695 1 1 997 960 1,080 37,903 Kákhrej .... 513 465 .. 866 72 .. 40 593 385 862 42 76 980 15 3 1 19 95.3 83.3 997 150 495 19,833 Deodar ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 162 7,470 Teharwádá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 827 623 382 23,213 Wáw ........ 382 402 .. 657 26 .. 101 313 471 783 1 .. 784 32 11 .. 43 99.8 74.4 1580 753 1,243 1,989 44,642 Tharád ...... 397 352 .. 660 16 .. 73 486 263 743 2 4 749 4 .. .. 4 99.7 100.0 1 1 51 1,183 472 13,706 Sántalpur .. 27 24 .. 43 .. .. 8 38 13 50 .. 1 51 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 945 31 164 78 6,727 Morewádá .. 17 14 .. 29 2 .. .. 22 9 29 1 1 31 .. .. .. .. 96.6 .. 739 155 362 20,229 Wárye...... 374 352 .. 581 108 .. 37 269 457 593 52 95 740 5 4 4 13 91.9 55.5 .. .. 157 4,116 Charchat .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 636 Jajhám ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 124 .. 162 5,792 Bhábhar .... 64 60 .. 121 2 .. 1 69 55 124 .. .. 124 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. .. .. 322 10,236 Sulgám ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1,569 916 1,225 91,713 Rádhanpur.. 794 764 .. 1,361 99 .. 98 519 1,039 1,287 23 249 1,559 7 3 1 11 98.2 70.0 1,569 .. .. 6 6 8,992 8,510 9,086 4,56,214 4,638 4,261 .. 7,238 899 .. .. 4,123 4,776 8,268 153 496 8,917 66 21 6 93 98.1 75.8 1,498 .. .. 1 1 1,203 1,222 Mahi Kánthá Agency. 4,000 42,300 Wátrakkánthá 648 536 .. 1,060 40 .. 84 573 611 965 168 70 1,203 8 7 4 19 85.1 53.3 1203 .. 1,304 33,777 Bávesí ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 427 554 22,876 Katosan .... 240 187 .. 348 41 .. 38 296 131 397 16 15 428 .. .. .. .. 96.1 .. 427 1 1 3 617 30,114 Rhevar...... 3 .. .. 3 .. .. .. 2 1 .. 3 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 1 1 2,905 4,249 2,05,136 Náni Márwád 1,426 1,469 .. 2,573 91 .. 231 1,330 1,565 2,581 202 144 2,927 8 .. 2 10 92.7 100.0 2,905 1 1 1,524 1,029 41,590 Sábar Kántha 835 661 .. 1,252 154 .. 90 628 868 1,423 28 49 1,500 20 6 2 28 98.0 76.9 1,524 .. .. 5 5 6,062 8,975 4,000 3,75,793 3,152 2,853 .. 5,236 326 .. 443 2,829 3,176 5,366 417 278 6,061 36 13 8 57 92.8 73.4 1,212
64 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total number of persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of Taluka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. N. (Continued.) M.B.COLA, M.D. .. .. 1 1 1,659 1,828 Cambay. .. 79,019 Cambay .... 867 760 .. 1,393 162 2 70 1,127 500 1,610 .. 17 1,627 19 8 5 32 100.0 70.3 1,659 .. .. 1 1 1,307 2,051 Dharmpur .. 25,000 Dharmpur .. 641 648 .. 1,262 2 2 23 196 1,093 1,178 63 59 1,300 18 .. .. 18 94.9 100.0 1,307 .. .. 1 1 762 89 Bánsdá .. .. 22,000 Bánsdá ...... 411 351 .. 762 .. .. .. 80 682 718 15 29 762 .. .. .. .. 97.9 .... 762 .. .. 3 3 3,728 3,968 1,20,019 1,919 1,759 .. 3,417 164 4 93 1,403 2,275 3,506 78 105 3,689 37 8 5 50 97.8 82.2 1,242 Grand Total of the Nor- thern Circle. 4 .. 50 52 80,018 93,754 21,517 30,37,253 39,506 36,224 57 63,457 7,129 211 4,876 42,276 33,454 69,362 3,159 3,605 76,126 3,227 666 395 4,288 95.6 82.8 1,600 SIND. Acting65 J. WILLIAMS, M.D., Assistant Surgeon 1 .. 2,445 2,658 Shikárpur 44,233 Kambar .... 1,396 1,139 .. 115 2,261 .. 39 1,876 1,169 2,423 11 11 2,445 .. .. .. .. 99.5 .. 2999 .. 554 907 20,000 Sujáwal .... 298 256 .. 25 519 .. 10 269 285 553 .. 1 554 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 1 .. 976 1,191 23,879 Nasirábád .. 563 413 .. 127 828 .. 21 403 573 918 37 21 976 .. .. .. .. 96.1 .. 1958 .. 982 532 14,000 Labdarvá .... 539 443 .. 110 835 .. 37 337 645 948 19 27 994 .. .. .. .. 98.0 .. 1 .. 1,667 115 15,000 Tiger or Thuri 928 734 .. 150 1,481 .. 31 575 1,087 1,566 56 52 1,674 3 2 .. 5 96.5 60.0 1667 .. .. 2,031 46,462 Mehar ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1,558 2,288 24,255 Kakkar...... 330 725 .. 206 1,337 .. 12 1,090 465 1,516 8 35 1,559 3 .. .. 3 99.4 100.0 1,553 1 .. 15 .. 21,785 24,860 16,483 6,84,023 12,245 9,357 12 3,204 17,282 .. 1,104 11,137 10,465 20,827 416 511 21,754 132 26 25 183 93.0 83.5 1,452 1 .. 1 .. 2,281 1,111 Haidarábád Collectorate. 9218 76,827 Haidarábád.. 1,183 1,009 .. 318 1,766 .. 108 629 1,563 2,164 2 27 2,193 47 24 18 89 99.9 66.1 2,231 1 .. 1,826 .. 30,000 Haidarábád 1,142 654 22 798 942 3 31 1,083 713 1,781 11 4 1,796 25 5 .. 30 99.3 83.3 1,826 1 .. 207 1,454 25,064 Guni........ 32 39 .. 9 144 .. 18 63 108 154 1 16 171 17 11 8 36 99.3 60.7 931 .. 724 3,336 Tándá ...... 346 302 .. 66 508 .. 74 291 357 616 3 29 648 27 33 16 76 99.5 45.0 1 .. 1,011 1,814 26,003 Bága-ká-Tán- dá ........ 524 479 .. 78 678 .. 247 452 551 960 1 43 1,004 8 .. .. 8 99.9 100.0 1,011 1 .. 1,556 1,575 34,860 Baddin ...... 798 654 .. 122 1,176 .. 154 546 906 1,426 10 16 1,452 56 36 12 104 99.3 60.8 1,556 1 .. 1,124 938 33,343 Digri ........ 591 510 .. 192 792 .. 117 552 519 1,057 9 39 1,105 21 .. 2 23 99.1 100.0 1,124 1 .. 2,457 3,508 49,879 Alhar-ká-Tán- dá ........ 1,290 1,063 .. 366 1,740 .. 252 529 1,829 2,216 37 122 2,375 37 30 32 99 98.3 55.2 2,457 1 .. 2,367 2,760 38,589 Sháhdádpur.. 1,148 814 .. 265 1,519 .. 178 742 1,220 1,962 74 .. 2,036 322 70 13 405 96.3 82.1 2,367 1 .. 2,605 1,162 69,763 Hálá........ 1,244 959 .. 396 1,650 .. 157 520 1,683 2,067 5 136 2,208 249 11 142 402 99.7 95.8 2,605 1 .. 2,149 353 39,959 Sakkrand .... 1,133 806 .. 226 1,659 .. 54 763 1,176 1,853 12 86 1,951 151 45 14 210 99.3 77.0 2,119 1 .. 1,867 2,280 45,275 Morá........ 986 802 .. 228 1,482 .. 78 572 1,216 1,734 29 38 1,801 59 10 10 79 98.3 85.5 1,867 1 .. 1,880 1,926 52,892 Naushahrá Ferozá .... 1,043 816 .. 209 1,526 .. 124 845 1,014 1,763 44 63 1,870 16 .. 5 21 97.5 100.0 1,880 1 .. 2,275 1,489 37,7214 Khamdiárá .. 1,214 1,030 .. 391 1,803 .. 50 1,018 1,226 2,204 16 33 2,253 15 12 4 31 99.2 55.5 2764 .. 489 2,100 14,709 Mirpúr Khás. 258 199 .. 168 173 .. 116 97 360 453 .. 4 457 11 8 13 32 100.0 579 1 .. 13 .. 24,818 26,306 9,218 5,74,887 12,982 10,191 22 3,832 17,558 3 1,758 8,702 14,471 22,410 254 656 23,320 1,061 295 289 1,645 98.8 78.2 1,909 .. .. 1 .. 2,291 1,853 Frontier Upper Sindh. 2009 35,000 Jacobábád .. 1,232 1,048 .. 70 2,186 .. 24 970 1,310 2,228 5 48 2,281 10 1 .. 11 99.7 90.9 2501 .. .. 633 15,000 Kasmar .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 210 2,136 25,000 Thúl........ 116 94 .. 54 150 .. 6 142 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. .. .. 1 .. 2,501 4,622 2,009 75,000 1,348 1,142 .. 124 2,336 .. 30 1,112 1,378 2,138 5 48 2,491 10 1 .. 11 99.7 90.9 2,501 1 .. 1 .. .. .. Thar and Parkar. 12,729 2,25,000 Chachrá .... 521 447 .. 611 125 .. 232 271 697 912 93 .. 1,005 76 11 .. 87 90.7 87.3 1,055 1 .. 2,166 499 Umarkot .... 1,145 989 .. 253 1,132 .. 749 475 1,659 2,046 72 23 2,141 2 28 2 32 96.6 6.6 2,166 .. .. .. 1,260 Kiprá ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 564 3,527 Nagar-Párkar 213 154 .. 81 154 .. 137 102 270 363 3 6 372 .. .. 192 192 99.1 .. 564 1 .. 1,231 2,254 Diplá ....... 665 528 .. 235 624 .. 334 117 1,076 1,136 22 37 1,195 15 21 2 38 98.9 41.6 1,231 1 .. 1,101 1 864 Sangarh .... 615 460 .. 110 904 .. 61 130 945 1,039 17 26 1,082 25 1 .. 26 98.3 96.1 1,101 1 .. 1,010 1,052 Mitti....... 405 305 .. 140 300 .. 270 79 631 694 15 6 715 15 9 276 300 97.8 62.5 1,010 1 .. 6 .. 7,127 10,456 12,729 2.25,000 3,569 2,833 .. 1,430 3,239 .. 1,783 1,174 5,278 6,190 222 93 6,510 133 70 472 675 96.5 65.5 1,187 .. .. 1 1 2,180 1,769 Native States. .. 1,10,000 Khairpur .... 1,320 860 1 438 1,511 230 741 1,439 1,770 411 232 .. .. .. .. .. 81.1 .. 2,130 Grand Total of the Sindh Circle. 4 2 43 32 77,171 81,887 56,548 20,95,910 41,579 32,153 140 11,347 56,445 40 5,760 28,626 45,106 70,473 1,818 2,110 74,401 1,737 723 979 3,439 974 70.5 1,607 12 V R
66 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total number of person Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of Taluka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. KATHIAWAD. Acting67 E. R. BUTLER, M.D., Surgeon; 12/12 1 1,829 1,249 Jinjíwádá 225 22,309 Dasará ...... 940 889 .. 1,599 152 .. 78 582 1,247 1,820 17 2 1,839 .. .. .. .. 99.0 .. 1,829 Jinjiwádá .. Bajáná ...... 12/13 1 2,094 1,365 Native States. 208 40,000 Jasdan ...... 1,100 914 .. 1,835 147 .. 62 906 1,138 2,001 63 22 2,086 49 1 .. 50 96.9 98.0 2,094 12/12 1 2,327 1,521 238 75,000 Limdi ...... 1,203 1,085 .. 2,072 96 .. 120 999 1,289 2,234 40 20 2,303 20 19 .. 39 98.2 51.2 2,327 5/12 1 627 1,429 164 35,000 Lakhtar .... 305 313 .. 564 18 .. 36 183 435 605 7 6 618 7 2 .. 9 98.8 77.7 627 1/12 1 22 382 99 15,000 Máliá ...... 9 11 .. 19 1 .. .. 13 7 14 4 2 20 1 1 .. 2 77.7 50.0 22 4/12 .. 453 .. 130 20,000 Muli ........ 236 196 .. 393 4 .. 35 254 178 418 8 6 432 11 3 7 21 98.1 78.5 453 b .. .. .. 36 2,000 Pátri........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11/12 .. 1,886 1,821 184 33,000 Súelá ........ 923 860 .. 1,621 76 .. 86 566 1,217 1,731 14 38 1,783 93 6 4 103 99.1 93.9 1,886 c .. .. .. 48 3,000 Sudámrá .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. d 1 .. 1,759 19 7,500 Vitthalgarh.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11/12 1 1,878 1,062 382 50,000 Wakáner .... 979 887 .. 1,496 330 .. 40 910 956 1,818 33 19 1,870 1 11 .. 12 98.2 8.3 1,878 10/12 1 1,534 852 171 60,000 Wadwan .... 794 722 .. 1,415 33 .. 68 574 942 1,465 57 27 1,549 14 4 .. 18 96.2 77.7 1,534 10/12 1 1,577 1,569 140 20,000 Walláh...... 853 724 .. 1,413 86 .. 78 385 1,192 1,529 21 27 1,577 .. .. .. 98.6 .. 1,577 c .. .. .. 36 5,000 Wanod...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 10/12 12 17,351 14,978 3,192 5,07,809 8,943 8,053 .. 15,262 1,009 .. 725 6,472 10,524 16,396 505 290 17,191 278 68 12 358 97.0 80.3 1,964 Southern Division. 12/12 1 1,991 1,277 Bábráwár. 25 4,000 Didan ...... 998 941 .. 1,721 205 .. 13 545 1,394 1,844 23 72 1,939 43 1 8 52 98.7 97.7 1,991 Jáfr3bád .... 12/12 1 2,260 1,413 Bantwa .. 70 30,375 Bántwá...... 1,088 915 .. 1,620 335 .. 48 727 1,276 1,986 35 3 2,024 245 7 5 257 98.2 97.2 2,260 7/12 1 1,100 867 Bagusrá.. 70 11,628 Bagusra .... 581 519 .. 903 178 .. 10 339 761 1,100 6 .. 1,106 .. .. .. .. 99.4 .. 1,100 Manikwara .. a .. .. .. Bilká.... 55 10,880 Bilká........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12/12 .. 2,555 1,611 Jaitpur .. 233 37,950 Jaitpur...... 1,327 1,094 .. 1,831 493 .. 97 832 1,589 2,348 71 12 2,431 82 51 1 134 97.0 61.6 2,555 3/12 .. 247 1,133 Junágarh. 3,250 3,11,500 Chorwád .... 162 85 .. 223 24 .. .. 120 127 247 .. .. 247 .. .. .. 100.0 .. 247 12/12 .. 2,184 1,342 Junágarh ..... 1,226 956 .. 1,662 414 .. 106 634 1,548 2,100 88 .. 2,188 .. 2 .. 2 95.9 .. 2,184 5/12 .. 734 1,581 Kutiáná .... 409 323 .. 674 53 .. 5 182 550 732 7 .. 739 1 1 .. 2 99.0 50.0 734 12/12 .. 1,747 1,249 Mangarul .. 910 837 .. 1,369 299 .. 79 197 1,550 1,747 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 1,747 12/12 .. 2,269 475 Uná ........ 1,199 1,054 .. 1,921 332 .. .. 653 1,600 2,241 37 5 2,283 18 4 1 23 98.3 81.8 2,269 b 1 .. 380 Pattan...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6/12 .. 701 .. Viráwal .... 369 332 .. 529 172 .. .. 135 566 658 41 2 701 .. .. .. .. 94.1 .. 701 4/12 .. 450 .. Visáwadar .. 257 188 .. 412 33 .. .. 72 373 404 37 4 445 5 .. .. 5 91.6 100.0 450 8 1/12 9 16,238 11,328 3,703 4,06,333 8,526 7,244 .. 12,865 2,538 .. 367 4,436 11,334 15,407 345 98 15,850 394 66 15 475 97.8 85.6 2,008 Northern Division.68 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total number of per- sons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were perform- ed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of Taluka or Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding these &quot;Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. KA THIA WA'D69 REWA KA'NTA'. T. CODY, Assistant Surgeon; Acting70 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total number of per- sons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency or Native State in which Vaccinations were perform- ed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of Taluka of Town. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Mussulman. Parsee. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. KUTCH. DORA'BJI' HORMASJI', G.G.M.C. 1 1 10 3 1,706 648 Native State of Kutch. 6,764 4,00,000 Bhuj, Mándvi, Mundrá, Anjíár, &c. 908 772 .. 982 698 .. .. 457 1,223 1,547 91 42 1,680 16 9 1 26 94.4 64.0 170 ADEN. G. W. R. HAY, M.D., Assist. Surgeon. .. .. 1 .. 446 .. Aden.... .. 32,000 City of Aden. 325 121 2 32 71 2 339 93 353 370 76 .. 446 .. .. .. .. 82.9 .. 446 Grand Total.. 26 6 370 329 5,26,402 4,91,605 2,02,506 1,92,84,110 2,69,429 2,38,300 2,855 3,82,609 89,333 935 31,997 1,74,522 3,33,207 4,72,729 21,530 20,053 5,14,312 11,366 4,767 2,596 18,729 95.6 70.4 1,411 Details of Column 5. Total No. of persons Vaccinated ........ 5,26,402 Deduct persons Re-vaccinated ....... 18,673 No. of persons primarily Vaccinated .. 5,07,729 Details of Primary Vaccinations. Total No. of operations (Col. 9, D.)...... 5,14,312 Deduct persons Vaccinated ............ 5,07,729 No. of operations in excess of persons .. 6,583 Details of He-vaccinations. Total No. of Operations (Col.10, D.) ....... 18,729 Deduct persons Vaccinated ................. 18,673 No. of operations in excess of persons .... 56
71 A.72 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence. MONTHS. District in which operations were chiefly conducted in each Month. Total number Vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percen- tage Suc- cessful, excluding those &quot;Un- known.&quot; Successful Unsuc- cessful, in- cluding &quot;Doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. NORTHERN CIRCLE. April 1871 ...... Whole Circle ...... 7,409 6,772 305 375 7,452 956 May 73 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence. MONTHS. District in which operations were chiefly conducted in each Month. Total number Vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percen- tage Suc- cessful, excluding those &quot;Un- known.&quot; Successful. Unsuc- cessful, in- cluding &quot; Doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. REWA RANTA. April 1871...... Whole Circle ..... 1,600 1,511 86 63 1,660 94.6 May 74 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Super- intendence. MONTHS. District in which operations were chiefly conducted in each Month. Total number Vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percen- tage Suc- cessful, excluding those &quot; Un- known.&quot; Successful. Unsuc- cessful, in- cluding &quot; Doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. KUTCH CIRCLE. April 1871 ...... Portions of the Circle ...... 63 50 10 3 63 83.3 May 75 A.76 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number. Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. A..77 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. A.78 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. B.79 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. B.80 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. B.81 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. C.82 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. C.88 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage if Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. C.84 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. D.85 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. D.86 1 2 3 4 5 6 Santioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. D.87 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vacci- nated. Percentage of Success excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each Suc- cessful Case. D.88 A.B. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. 15 V R
90 B.91 SOUTHERN. J. RABY, Assistant Surgeon; Acting92 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle of Medical Superinten- dence. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent of Dispensary. No. of Native Supts. of Vaccnation attached to the Dispensary. Number of Vaccina- tors attached to the Dispensary. Total number of persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State for the popula- tion of which the Dispensary is provided. Population of Area included in the last column. Name of Dispensary or Civil Surgeoncy. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Musalman. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. NORTHERN93 J. WILLIAMS, M.D.. Assistant .. .. .. .. 97 402 Thar and Tárkar. Mittí...... 2,000 Do. .. 40 25 .. 57 8 .. .. 42 23 64 1 .. 65 8 23 1 32 98.4 25.8 97 .. .. .. .. 80 232 Nagar Par- kar. 1,200 Do. .. 32 21 .. 7 46 .. .. 23 30 44 9 .. 53 27 .. .. 27 83.0 100.0 80 .. .. .. .. 16 .. Umarkot .. 5,000 Do. .. 12 4 .. 16 .. .. .. 9 7 14 2 .. 16 .. .. .. .. 87.5 .. 16 .. .. .. .. .. 37 Kiprá .... 2,000 Do. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Fron- tier Upper Sindh. Jacobi- bád. 15,000 Do. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Circle Total .. .. .. .. 3 2,099 9,376 2,65,800 1,170 807 .. 1,043 915 4 15 1,023 954 1,743 143 91 1,977 68 46 8 122 92.4 59.6 131 KA'THIA'WA'D. E. R. BUTLER, M.D.,Surgeon; Actg94 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle of Medical Superinten- dence. Name and Rank of Superin- tendent of Dispensary. No. of Native Supts of Vaccination attached to the Dispensary. Number of Vaccina- tors attached to the Dispenssary. Total number of persons Vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State for the popula- tion of which the Dispensary is provided. Population of Area included in the last column. Name of Dispensary or Civil Surgeoncy. PRIMARY VACCINE OPERATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot;Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Musalman. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. KUTCH. DORA BJI' HORMASJI', G.G.M.C. .. .. .. .. 241 152 Kutch, Native State. Bhúj...... 21,700 Civil Hospital. 133 108 .. 115 126 .. .. 81 160 225 16 .. 241 .. .. .. .. 93.3 .. 241 .. .. .. .. 495 41 Màndví.... 35,000 Dispensary ... 271 209 .. 242 238 .. .. 181 299 436 17 27 480 14 1 .. 15 96.2 93.3 495 Circle Total.. .. .. .. .. 736 193 56,700. 404 317 .. 357 364 .. .. 262 459 661 33 27 721 14 1 .. 15 95.2 93.3 368 Grand Total .. .. .. .. 15 14,315 27,733 18,47,229 7,521 6,271 360 9,868 3,238 128 198 5,563 8,229 11,998 1,135 840 13,973 349 134 41 524 91.8 72.2 .. Details of Column 5. Total No. of persons Vaccinated .......... 14,315 Deduct persons Re-vaccinated .......... 523 No. of persons primarily Vaccinated .. 13,792 Details of Primary Vaccinations. Total No. of operations (Col. 9, D.)...... 13,973 Deduct persons Vaccinated .............. 13,792 No. of operations in excess of persons .. 181 Details of Re-vaccinations. Total No. of operations (Col. 10, D.)...... 524 Deduct persons Vaccinated ............ 523 No. of operations in excess of persons .. 1
95 C.96 NATIVE ARMY. Number of Vacci- nators. Total No. of persons Vaccinated. Strength. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases,exclud- ing those unknown from the Total. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. RESULT. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. Europeans. Natives. Total. Males. Females. Christians. Hindús. Musalmans. Pársís. Other Castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful and Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and Doubtful. Unknown. Total. In Primary Vaccination. In Secondary Vaccination. Regiments ........................... ... ... 4,599 2,171 709 31,108 31,817 919 996 62 1,489 296 ... 68 1,246 669 1,779 273 8 2,060 1,269 1,386 29 2,684 86.6 47.7 * Camp Followers ......... 3 4 2,722 4,427 1,751 40,551 42,302 1,458 1,179 189 1,738 632 59 19 2,066 571 2,432 216 74 2,722 54 28 3 85 91.8 65.8 Total.... 3 4 7,321 6,598 2,460 71,659 74,119 2,377 2,175 251 3,227 928 59 87 3,312 1,240 4,211 489 82 4,782 1,323 1,414 32 2,769 89.5 48.3 * Regimental Lines or Bazar and Cantonment Bazar. Details of Column 2. Total No. of persons Vaccinated ............... 7,321 Deduct persons Re-vaccinated .................. 2,769 No. of persons primarily Vaccinated.. 4,552 Details of Primary Vaccinations. Total No. of operations (Col. 8) ............... 4,782 Deduct persons Vaccinated ..................... 4,552 No. of operations in excess of persons.. 230 Details of Re-vaccinations. Total No. of operations (Col. 10) ............... 2,169 Deduct persons Vaccinated ........................ 2,769 No. of operations in excess of persons... ...
97 RETURN of SMALL-POX in NATIVE ARMY for 1871-72. Remained. Admitted. Total. Recovered. Died. Remaining. Total. Previously Vaccinated. Regiment.............................. Males ...... 2 34 36 23 ... 13 36 36 Females ... 5 17 22 20 ... 2 22 17 Children.. 1 27 28 21 3 4 28 21 Regimental Lines Bazars ............ Females ... 2 4 6 3 1 2 6 2 Females... ... 3 3 ... ... 3 3 3 Children.. 4 6 10 6 ... 4 10 9 Total ...... 14 91 105 73 4 28 105 38 16 V R
98 STATEMENT No. VII. SUMMARY of the Diaries of Superintendents of Vaccination and their Assistants, for the Year 1871-72. Name of Number of Sta- tions visited. Number of Travel- ling days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Vil- lages visited. Number of Vaccinated Children inspected. Total number of Children Vaccinated during the year 1871-72. REMARKS. Circle. Superintendent Assistant Super- intendent. Collectorate. Táluká. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Super- intendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Asistant Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant. Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. TRAL. Acting99 CEN P. S. TURNBULL. M.D., Assistant Surgeon Bálájí Ganesh. Sholápur. Sholápur ............... .. 4 1 .. 22 22 .. 277 277 .. 44 44 .. 2,280 2,280 3,927 Máráh...................... .. 2 2 .. 11 11 .. 130 130 .. 21 21 .. 646 646 1,876 Karmálá.................... .. 2 2 .. 22 22 .. 365 365 .. 43 43 .. 1,517 1,517 1,300 Pandharpur .......... .. 2 2 .. 8 8 .. 51 51 .. 16 16 .. 785 785 2,415 Sángolá .................. .. 1 1 .. 5 5 .. 43 43 .. 10 10 .. 125 125 854 Bársí ............................ .. 2 2 .. 20 20 .. 254 254 .. 39 39 .. 1,728 1,728 2,820 Native State. Akálkot.......... .. 1 1 .. 2 2 .. 36 36 .. 5 5 .. 182 182 1,592 Bálkrishna Gopál. Khandesh. Dhulia.................... .. 2 2 .. 19 10 .. 170 170 .. 38 38 .. 1,367 1,367 3,625 Sáwda.................. .. 1 1 .. 9 9 .. 91 91 .. 18 18 .. 527 527 1,657 Nasirábád .................. .. 1 1 .. 5 5 .. 63 63 .. 10 10 .. 232 232 501 I randol .............. .. 1 1 .. 2 2 .. 24 24 .. 3 3 .. 541 541 1,538 Jámner .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,834 Sherpur .............. .. 2 2 .. 16 16 .. 139 139 .. 31 31 .. 308 308 1,113 Sháháde .................. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 425 Talode .................... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 281 Nandurbur.................... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 508 Chulisgáon.............. .. 1 1 .. 9 9 .. 96 96 .. 19 19 .. 857 857 2,165 Pimpalnair .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 545 Páchorá ................ .. 1 1 .. 17 17 .. 162 162 .. 34 34 .. 713 713 1,046 Chopda .................... .. 1 1 .. 14 14 .. 107 107 .. 27 27 .. 662 662 1,678 Amalnair .............. .. 2 2 .. 8 8 .. 143 143 .. 17 17 .. 1,142 1,142 1,554 Virdal .................... .. 2 2 .. 8 8 .. 84 84 .. 17 17 .. 1,044 1,044 2,541 Bhosáwal ................ .. 1 1 .. 5 5 .. 91 91 .. 10 10 .. 123 123 651 Bálkrishna Rájárám. Sátárá. Sátárá ...................... 2 .. 2 2 .. 2 26 .. 26 14 .. 14 406 .. 406 3,272 Tusgáon ............ .. 2 2 .. 9 9 .. 75 75 .. 17 17 .. 780 780 2,517 Jáwli ............ 8 .. 8 11 .. 11 91 .. 94 34 .. 34 423 .. 423 2,170 Wáí.................... 2 .. 2 2 .. 2 26 .. 26 2 .. 2 109 .. 109 1,216 Khatáw .............. .. 2 2 .. 12 12 .. 152 152 .. 24 24 .. 825 825 1,413 Wálwá.................. .. 1 1 .. 6 6 .. 55 55 .. 13 13 .. 827 827 2,623 Mán................ .. 2 2 .. 12 12 .. 117 117 .. 25 25 .. 634 634 1,431 Karár ................ .. 3 3 .. 15 15 .. 189 189 .. 32 32 .. 1,513 1,512 3,278 Khunápur ............ .. 1 1 .. 16 16 .. 185 185 .. 33 33 .. 994 994 2,266 Pátan .............. .. 1 1 .. 7 7 .. 80 80 .. 15 15 .. 948 948 1,671 Málsiras .............. .. 2 2 .. 10 10 .. 97 97 .. 19 19 .. 693 693 2,072 Koregáim.................. .. 1 1 .. 13 13 .. 107 107 .. 26 26 .. 824 824 2,087 Native States. Bhor............ .. 1 1 .. 6 6 .. 56 56 .. 13 13 .. 173 173 1,066 Jat .................. .. 2 2 .. 11 11 .. 159 159 .. 23 23 .. 438 438 943 Atpadi .......... .. 3 3 .. 3 3 .. 91 91 .. 5 5 .. 225 225 735 Phaitan ................ .. 2 2 .. 13 13 .. 94 94 .. 26 26 .. 480 480 1,002 1 6 6 53 103 156 103 661 767 1,144 7,011 8,185 149 1,326 1,475 3,427 39,759 43,186 1,06,392 SOUTHERN. J. RABY, Assistant Surgeon ; Acty.-JOHN ROBB. M.B. do. Venkatráo Subráo. Belgáon. Belgáon ...................... 2 11 13 13 27 10 76 278 354 3 37 40 390 618 1,008 3,695 Sampáon.................... 1 8 9 3 15 18 24 248 272 4 34 38 79 955 1,034 1,392 Parasgurh............ 4 6 10 12 12 24 115 243 358 19 37 56 785, 782 1,567 1,113 Gokák .............. 4 9 13 7 19 26 85 177 262 11 16 27 235 218 453 1,752 Chikodi ........................ 3 21 21 3 33 36 41 221 262 1 17 18 52 759 811 1,202 Bidi .................. .. 3 3 .. 20 20 .. 197 197 .. 27 27 .. 803 803 2,168 Athni ................ .. 5 5 .. 16 16 .. 202 202 .. 44 44 .. 650 650 1,001 Southern Maráthá States. Sángli .......... 1 9 10 1 18 19 4 .. 4 1 .. 1 12 .. 12 646 Miraj.......... 1 2 3 1 8 9 13 .. 13 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1,482 Kurandwád.... .. 3 3 .. 6 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 972 Mudhol.......... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,539 Rámdrug ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,138 Samkhaudi .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 827
100 Name of Number of Sta- tions visited. Number of Travel- ling days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Vil- lages visited. Number of Vaccinated Children inspected. Total number of Children Vaccinated during the year 1871-72. REMARKS. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Super- intendent. Collectorate. Táluká. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Super- intendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. SOUTHERN101 WESTERN. H. J. BLANC, M.D., Surgeon; Acting102 Name of Number of Sta- tions visited. Number of Travel- ling days. Number of Miles travelled Number of Vil- lages visited. Number of Vaccinated Children inspected. Total number of Children Vaccinated during the year 1871-72. REMARKS. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Super- intendent. Collectorate. Táluká. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Super- intendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. NORTHERN103 SINDH. J. WILLIAMS, M.D., Assistant Surgeon ; Acting104 Name of Number of Sta- tions visited. Number of Travel- ling days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Vil- lages visited. Number of Vaccinated Children inspected. Total number of Children Vaccinated during - the year 1871-72. REMARKS. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Super- intendent. Collectorate. Táluká. By Superinten- dent. By Assissant Su- perintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Super- intendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. By Superinten- dent. By Assistant Su- perintendent. Total. WA'D. Acting105 KA'THIA ' E. R. BUTLER, M.D., Surgeon ; Kánojí Southern Kutiáná .......... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 734 Mangarul ............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,747 U'ná.............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,269 Pattan .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Viráwal .................. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 701 Visáwadar ............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 450 Ranchoddás Mangaldás. Western Division. Dharol.............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,450 Dráphá ............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 604 Dhorájí ................ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 576 Gondal ............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,033 Upletá ............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 700 Gadká.............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Gawrídhar .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Táliá Diwani ............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Kotrá Sunguní .......... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 554 Morví .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,838 Tankárá ................ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 472 Bhunwad................ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 805 Jodhpur .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Júdíá ................ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 449 Khambáliá ................ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,647 Kondurná .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Nawánagar ............ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,220 Pál .................. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Rujkot ................ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4,158 Wasáwar .............. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Porbandar ................ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,677 1 2 4 77 54 131 130 332 462 15,82 2,850 4,432 286 512 798 12,189 14,762 26,951 69,446 REWA' KANTA . T. CODY, Asst. Surgeon. Actg.Vaccination Reports. No. 114. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 13th January 1873. Letter from the Inspector-General, Indian Medical Department, No. 4234, dated 11th December 1872.2 6. The decrease in vaccinations of children under one year of age is noticed by Government with regret, the percentage being 34.5 as against 36.3 last year. 7. The circles in which there has been the largest increase of operations are the Central, Southern and Káthiáwád, while there has been a considerable decrease in the Northern and Sindh Circles. In the Northern, the decrease is explained by reduction of establishment, and in Sindh, the Superintendent, Dr. Keith, says it is partly accounted for by the numerous transfers neces- sitated by the re-organisation, and partly by the almost total absence of small-pox during the year. 8. The increase of 24,180 in the number of Municipal vaccinations and of 16,730 in vaccinations in Native States is very satisfactory. In the City of Bombay the increase in the number vaccinated by the Municipal establishment was 3,711. Government trust that the district officers will continue to impress upon Municipalities the benefits derived from successful vaccination. In Káthiáwád much credit appears due to Dr. Blanc for the change of system so successfully carried out. Government concur, however, with Dr. Turnbull that the control of operations in the Province should still rest with the Super- intendent-General, and the personal allowance of Rs. 50 per mensem to the Superintendent of the Circle should not have been made without the sanction of Government. A report should be submitted whether the Superintendent still receives the allowance. 9. The introduction of vaccine operations into the territory of the Khán of Janjirá is viewed by His Excellency in Council with much satisfaction. 10. The Dispensary returns at first sight show a falling off, but in reality there was an increase of 4,095 in the number of vaccinations. The Deputy Inspectors-General of Hospitals when on tour should invariably report any instance of neglect which they may notice on the part of Dispensary officers in this important part of their duties. 11. The Sanitary Commissioner will be requested to supply the Superin- tendent-General with monthly returns of the deaths from small-pox in each mortuary circle. 12. In regard to village vaccination registers the attention of the Com- missioner in Sindh and the Revenue Commissioners will be drawn to paragraphs 41 to 45 of the report, and they will be requested to state whether they con- sider there is any objection to the general adoption of the forms. 13. Government fully concur in the remarks of the Inspector-General, Indian Medical Department, as to the importance of the Superintendents of Circles acquiring a knowledge of the language of the district in which they are
3 employed, and desire that their attention may be drawn to the orders published in the Government Gazette of January 28th, 1869, under which rewards are granted to medical officers in civil employ for passing in the vernaculars. 14. The results obtained from the lymph received from England will be brought to the notice of the Home authorities. His Excellency in Council requests that the Superintendent-General will give his particular attention to the observations in paragraphs 18 to 21 of Dr. Wright's letter relative to the protective power of animal lymph, and submit a special report on this import- ant question. 15. His Excellency in Council concurs with Dr. Wright that the work of the year appears generally creditable to the Department, and the acknow- ledgments of Government are due to Dr. Turnbull for the zeal and success with which he has discharged his duties. E. W. RAVENSCROFT, Acting Chief Secretary to Government. To THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. With copies of Dr. Wright's letter. THE COMMISSIONER IN SINDH. THE REVENUE COMMISSIONER, N. D., THE REVENUE COMMISSIONER, S. D., THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, BOMBAY, THE MUNICIPAL COMMISSIONER FOR THE CITY OF BOMBAY, THE ACCOUNTANT GENERAL, THE POLITICAL DEPARTMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT, ALL COLLECTORS, INCLUDING COLLECTORS AND POLITICAL SUPERINTENDENTS IN SINDH, AND THE FIRST ASSISTANT COLLECTOR IN CHARGE PANCH MAHALS, THE SECRETARY OF STATE (BY LETTER).
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1872-73. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1873
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1872-73. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1873.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND FOR THE YEAR 1872-73. This is the fifth annual report by the Superintendent General of Vac- cination, Bombay Presidency. Divisions of the Report. 2. As usual the report is divided into (a) a general statement of the working of the Department, (b) extracts from the reports of Circle Superintendents, (c) tabu- lated statements showing in detail the operations of the Department in each Circle and in the Bombay Army, and (d) summaries of the diaries of Circle Superintendents and Assistant Superintendents. 3. Whether as regards the number of operations performed, or the ge- neral working of the establishments throughout the year, the report I now submit must be a favourable one. That the vaccinators have worked well, and that the officers of the Department generally have zealously performed their duties, will, I think, be clear from the report and its accompaniments. 4. The following table shows the number of persons vaccinated during the past and the preceding year :( ii ) Thus the returns of the past year show an increase of 39,239 persons over the preceding year. The increase is distributed as follows:( iii ) Average operations per man. 7. The average number of persons operated on by each vaccinator exceeds that of the preceding year by 95. This appears to me to be a good test of the amount of work done; and, as I said in my last report, I think this, with the number of successful operations per man, is the best test of the efficient working of the Department. Regarding the latter I shall have more to say in detail here- after. Suffice it to say, for the present, that the quality of the work has been as good as heretofore ; and, taking into consideration the altered system of regis- tration, the percentage of success met with, has been up to that of former years. The number of operations per man, for the past three years, is shown below, and, as will be seen, the past compares not unfavourably with the previous years, especially so when we consider the large number of young, and therefore less experienced, vaccinators employed since 1st August 1871( iv ) 10. The total sanctioned expenditure was Rs. 2,32,511. Of this Rs. 2,10,795 have been expended. The expenditure is, therefore, Rs. 21,716 within the sanctioned amount. Average cost of each suc- cessful operation. 11. Taking the Presidency as a whole, but excluding the operations done at dispensaries, and by Army Medical Officers, for which no special expenditure is incurred, the average cost of each successful operation is annas 6( v ) number of operations on infants, under one year of age, for the past five years:( vi ) or 1 per cent. more than the average for the past five years. Calculated by the new method, the percentage of success for the past year is 94.6 or 1 per- cent. less than last year. 17. I have shown, I think satisfactorily, that the success attained in the past year has been quite up to that of former years. I may also add that I think the results recorded are more exact; accounted for by closer and more frequent inspection, ensuring better lymph and consequently better work. Percentage of Population vaccinated. 81. It may be interesting here to record that 510,582 persons were pri- marily vaccinated with success, i.e., 2.67 per cent. of the total population are reported to have received protection. 19. Having shown the general results of the year's operations, I now proceed to exhibit the results of the working according to Circles and esta- blishments. The following shows the total number of persons vaccinated in each Circle, the increase and decrease as compared with the preceding year, and the percentage of the population operated on:( vii ) This table shows an increase in the number vaccinated in all Circles except those of Sindh, Rewá Kánthá and Kutch. In these exceptions the de- crease is small. Had Dr. Williams been in charge throughout the year I feel certain that, as far as the Sindh Circle is concerned, the result would have been otherwise. The supervision during the first half of the year was, I think, somewhat lax, and to this I attribute the decrease. The Northern Circle shows the largest increase, but it scarcely makes up for the very large decrease shown in the preceding year. Next in order comes the Central Circle, which has steadily progressed for several years, and close upon it follow the Barodá Káthiáwád, and Western Circles. In the last column of the above table I have shown the percentage of the population vaccinated, and, as will be seen, in three of them, it exceeds the estimated number of births. In this respect the Káthiáwád returns are very high. No doubt this is due to arrears of work, but I do not see how such figures can be maintained for more than a few years. If the population is correctly given, and the proportion of births to population is the same as in Europe, there must be a decrease in the number vaccinated, two or three years hence, if not earlier, in the Sindh and Káthiáwád Circles. With regard to the per- centages of the Central, Western, Northern, Rewá Kánthá, and Presidency Circles, they appear to be slightly within the estimated number of births. So also with the Southern Circle. The latter Circle is behind all the others ; why I am unable to say. But the fact remains. The number vaccinated is only half the number of births. I feel sure that there is nothing existing in the shape of extraordinary opposition or unusual indifference to vaccination, to prevent a larger amount of work being done, and during the past few months I have been endeavouring to effect a change in this respect. Some of the men, nearly one-half of them, I am sorry to say, are indolent, and will re- quire the most watchful, intelligent, and strict supervision, to bring them into regular and active working order. I trust that Mr. Raby will effect something towards this end during the current year. 20. The highest Circle average number of operations per man is that of the Káthiáwád Circle, with 2,289 operations. The lowest, that of the Southern Circle, with 1,094 operations. Percentage of success at- tained in Circles. 21. The average percentage of success attained in Circles and in Dis- pensaries is shown in the following table, and, if compared with that of the previous year, it will be seen that in a few of them the percent- ages are slightly lower, due entirely to the new method of registration noticed in para 16:( viii ) Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. 1. Central Circle... ... 94.3 Average 94.6 ... 69.5 Aver- age 66.9 2. Southern do. ... ... 91.6 ... 59.9 3. Western do. ... ... 94.0 ... 66.8 4. Northern do. ... ... 95.5 ... 76.9 5. Sindh do. ... ... 97.2 ... 69.3 6. Káthiáwád do ....... 96.0 ... 71.6 7. Rewá Kánthá do. ... ... 96.9 ... 77.9 8. Presidency do. ... ... 89.0 ... 44.1 9. Barodá do. ... ... 92.9 ... 91.5 10. Kutch do. ... ... 94.3 ... 88.8 11. Aden do. ... ... 71.6 ... ... Dispensaries ... ... 91.1 ... 54.3 22. For purposes of comparison it may be well here to add a table show- ing the percentage of success, as recorded by the vaccinators, for primary and re-vaccinations combined, and that ascertained from actual inspection by the Superintendent of each Circle. The following table shows this comparison omitting those Circles in which no inspection work is done by the Superin- tendents :( ix ) the number of persons vaccinated, and in the latter from the number of opera- tions performed, i.e., the former by the old and the latter by the new method explained in para 16. Why the percentage, as ascertained by the Superin- tendents, should have been lower in the Southern and Káthiáwád Circles, I am unable to explain. The difference is not great in case of Káthiáwád, but in the Southern Circle it amounts to 21.5 per cent. This shows a far from satisfactory state of affairs. An enquiry is being instituted into the matter. It may not improbably be due to want of correctness in the inspection reports of the Assistant Superintendents, two of whom were found unfit for appoint- ment permanently, and were remanded to their former duties. As far as the other Circles are concerned, they are, I think, satisfactory. Local Fund Vaccina- tion. 23. There is a very satisfactory increase under this head. As there are now only two vaccinators paid from the Imperial Funds, I. shall, in consideration of the opera- tions performed under this head, join these with those performed under Local Funds. The number vaccinated by these two men is 3,465, and that by the Local Funds Establishment 317,516 = 320,981, an in- crease over the preceding year of 10,969 persons. The following shows the increase and decrease in each Circle as compared with the preceding year:( x ) 24. The appointment of an itinerant vaccinator to each táluká was a grand improvement, and its influence will soon be felt, especially in the Deccan, where the establishment has always been particularly weak. The advantages of having a vaccinator permanently in each Táluká, or Rural Registration Circle, appear to me to be these( xi ) The only decrease worthy of notice is that of the Central Circle, which is due to the abolition of the appointments in the tálukás of Mán, Khatáo and Koregám of the Sitárá Collectorate and of Sángolá in the Sholápur Zilhá. These abolitions, which were noticed in the report of last year, were car- ried out in the middle of 1871-72, and consequently the returus for the first half of the year were included in the statement of that year. Against these municipalities there is nothing shown in this year's statement. 27. Against these reductions there is a slight set off in the shape of a vaccinator appointed to some towns of the Juner Táluká, Puna Zilhá. The towns in question are Náráyangáon and Utur, towns in which the strongest op- position exists and always has existed to vaccination. In 1867, with the assist- ance of Mr. Claude Bell, C. S., in charge of the district, I made an endeavour to overcome this opposition, and we partially succeeded. But time appears to have blunted the people's sense of responsiblity in the matter, for they are reported to be as passively obstructive as ever. The man appointed per- formed 286 operations only; but what can be expected of a man who receives only Rs. 8 per mensem ? To overcome the prejudices of the inhabitants of Náráyangáon and neighbourhood, the services of a man of considerable experi- ence, energy, tact and perseverance are necessary. I need scarcely say that per- fection is not likely to be obtained on Rs. 8 per mensem. The pay was fixed without reference to this Department. 28. The increases shown in the Northern and Presidency Circles are very satisfactory, but I find it difficult to assign the cause. In the latter case it is, perhaps, due to the prevalence of small-pox; no less than 1,637 persons having died from that disease during the past official year. Hitherto the method of registering vaccine operations in the city of Bombay according to Registration Circles, as ordered by the Government of India, has not been carried out. I, therefore, directed the Local Superinten- dent of Vaccination to have this done for the year under report and future years. A reference to Statement No. I will show that this has been done, and that it is a great improvement in the old method of merely showing the total of the whole Circle. Vaccination in Native States. 29. Vaccination has made very good progress in Native States during the past year. With the same number of vaccina- tors at work, the returns show an increase of 27,627 over the previous year. The following table shows the increase and decrease according to Circles. As will be seen, there is an increase in all the
( xii ) Circles except two, i.e., the Central and Sindh Circles, in which the decrease is very small indeed :( xiii ) This state of matters appears to have continued for some years, and I think it would be well were Government to bring the matter to the notice of His Highness the Ráo. The total expenditure in the Kutch Circle during the past year has been 2,188 Rupees ; of this Rs. 1,410 were paid from the Kutch State Treasury, and Rs. 778 by the Bháyáds. I would recommend that the whole of the money be collected in the State Treasury and formed into a Vaccine Fund, as was done last year in Káthiáwád, and that the number and pay of the establishment should be as follows :( xiv ) said to have an area of 1,044 square miles, and the population of 117,729. From its size, its population, the difficulty of travelling, its proximity to such a large city and cantonment as Púná, and the fact that inoculation is actively carried on in it, I am of opinion that at least two vaccinators are necessary. At present there is only one. During the past year an attempt was made to in- duce the authorities to entertain a second man, but without success. The Kárbhári thought that, instead, the present vaccinator's pay might be increas- ed, as an inducement to do more work, forgetting that one man, however well paid, cannot do the work of two. As was to be expected, there has been no increase in the number of operations performed. I shall again draw the attention of the authorities to this subject. Dispensary Vaccinations. 34. Though the number of operations performed at dispensaries, by Dispensary Medical Officers, is in excess of the previous year by 3,636, and though at many of them fair progress has been made, yet I do not consider that, as a whole, the officers in charge have done as much as they might have. No doubt they have other duties to perform, but these are not more important than their vaccination duty, and the latter, if properly performed, need not much interfere with the former, an hour or two once a week being all that is required for that purpose. It has always appeared to me strange that where an ordinary district vac- cinator, a man generally of little education and small pay, has few difficulties to contend with, officers in charge of dispensaries( xv ) In many cases the operations are not performed by the Sub-Assistant Surgeon or Hospital Assistant himself, the duty being delegated to some raw apprentice or peon attached to the dispensary. 35. I am of opinion that every medical pupil and student for the ap- pointment of Sub-Assistant Surgeon should, during the period of their attendance at the Grant Medical College, be required to attend the Byculla Vaccine Station, once weekly, for the purpose of being instructed by Mr. Anantá Chandrobá both in animal and human vaccination. Also that no one should be appointed to the medical charge of a dispensary until he has passed a satisfactory examination in the art of vaccination, or at least until he has procured a certificate of efficiency from the Vaccination Department. Were some such regulation enforced, we should hear less of bad vaccination at dispensaries, and of the inability of the officers in charge to vaccinate. 36. On examining the returns made by some of these men it will be seen how utterly impossible it is for them to keep up a supply of lymph. Seventeen of them performed on an average less than five operations monthly, about one primary vaccination per week ; and of the total of 105 dispensaries the returns of 25 only exceed the weekly average of five operations per man. 37. As vaccinators are held responsible for vaccination in their respec- tive tálukás and towns, so I think should dispensary officers be held responsi- ble for vaccination in the towns in which dispensaries are situated. They should have entire charge in towns in which a municipal vaccinator is not employed. 38. The increase in the number vaccinated at dispensaries is, I think, in a great measure due to Inspector General's Circular No. 1003 of the 21st March 1872, directing the officers in charge to fix vaccine stations in their re- spective towns, at places convenient for the people, and there to perform operations personally and with regularity, instead of dragging the people up to the dispensary, which in some cases is situated outside the town; but where there is a municipal vaccinator that should not relieve them of the responsibility of doing all they can to promote the spread of vaccination. Vaccination in Goádar. 39. Vaccination has been carried on throughout the year by the apothe- cary in charge of the Goádar Agency, in Goádar and the neighbourhood, on the Mekrán Coast. In a population of 6,000 souls, 326 persons were vaccinated, with percentage of success of 82.9. Vaccination in Bushire. 40. Lymph was furnished to Dr. Waters, the Civil Surgeon of Bushire, and vaccination was successfully introduced and carried on there. I am, however, unable to give the necessary. details: no return having been received in this office.
( xvi ) Re-vaccination. 41. The returns of the past year, at first sight, show a considerable fall- ing off in the number of persons re-vaccinated. This, however, I do not think, indicates any retrograde movement. It is, I think, due to greater correctness in the returns. Former incorrectness was mentioned by Dr. Pinkerton in para. 33 of his re- port for 1870-71, and the greater correctness of the returns of the past two years is due to the circular issued by him, and referred to in the above para- graph, as well as to the closer scrutiny to which the returns of the vaccinators and dispensary officers are now subjected. 42. In some Collectorates re-vaccination appears to make good progress ; especially so in the Ratnágirí Collectorate, where 2,695 operations were per- formed. In the Ahmadábád and Khedá Collectorates, also, the number re- vaccinated has been large, and the number re-vaccinated at the dispensaries is more than double that of the preceding year. Quality of Lymph. 43. All the Superintendents report the lymph havingbeen kept in an active state throughout the year. As usual, in a case here and there it failed, but principally owing to the illness, dismissal, or death of the vaccinator, not to climatic causes. Vacci- nators are, or should be, encouraged to report the deterioration or failure of lymph ; and, unless when the failure is found, on investigation, to be due to carelessness, no one should be punished for it. Generally where failure did occur, the lymph was renewed at once, either by transmission of lymph in hermetically sealed tubes by post, or by the vaccinator procuring it from the neighbouring táluká. Formerly, when vaccinators were &quot;far between,&quot; the latter method was difficult, but always the most satisfactory. Now, however, that each táluká has its vaccinator, no difficulty is, or need now be, expe- rienced. As usual, large supplies have been sent to officers both in and beyond the limits of the Presidency, but, as a rule, no replies are received detailing the result of its use, unless when it happens to have failed and more is wanted. This, I think, is unfortunate, because valuable information might be accumulated regarding the best methods of transmitting lymph by post in this country. English Lymph. 44. Two supplies only were received during the year( xvii ) suggest. Nothing in its general appearance indicated that it was otherwise than good:( xviii ) 46. In the letter of the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, forwarding my report for the year 1871-72 to Government, some doubts were thrown on the protective power of animal lymph, and Government in their Resolution thereon, para. 14, directed me to investigate, and submit a special report on the subject. That report has been submitted, and in it will be found all the information regarding the protective power of animal vaccination./ as practised in Bombay, which as yet I have been able to collect. Meagre though that information be, it is yet entirely in favour of the protective power, purity, and trueness of the virus in use. 47. Out of 1,637 deaths from small-pox in the city of Bombay, during the past year, information as to the vaccination or otherwise of 679 is given by the Registrars. Of these 31, or 4.5 per cent., are reported to have been vaccinated, but at least two of these are doubtful cases. This cannot be said to be a high percentage, especially when it is considered that some, at least, had been unsuccessfully operated on, and, therefore, could not be considered protected by vaccination. 48. Seventeen medical practitioners, resident in Bombay, were asked, in writing, by Mr. Anantá, if they had ever seen or heard of an undoubtedly authentic case of small-pox after vaccination with animal lymph, and none of them could give the name of a single person. Mr. Anantá has paid great attention to this subject, and he has not the least doubt as to the protective power of cow-lymph. 49. Provided the origin and purity of the lymph in use is correct and good, I myself cannot see what doubt there can be in the matter, for the lymph styled animal and human are from the same source originally. The lymph in use in Bombay was introduced by Dr. Blanc, and its origin and purity are vouched for by him. I have seen the vesicles in a great many cases, both in Bombay and Púná, and I must say they were excellent; large, well-formed, unbilicated, and, on fair skins, of pearly appearance. 50. During the past year 241 calves were inoculated: 233 with the animal lymph in general use, and 8 with lymph received from M. Warlomont of Brussels. Of the former, 228 or 97.8 per cent., were successful; of the latter, 2 or 25 per cent., succeeded. This shows that the infective power of the lymph continues undiminished. Inoculation of Small-pox. 51. That this very injurious practice is still carried on, is evident. Se- veral cases were reported during the year. One of these occurred in Kelví Máhim, Tháná Col- lectorate, and others in the Native States of Bhor and Dharmpur and in the province of Káthiáwád. Inoculation in Kelví Máhim. 52. The case at Kelví Máhim was a very melancholy one, and one which, in my opinion, ought to be taken notice of by Government.
( xix ) A. dispensary has lately been started at Kelví Máhim, and in December last the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge, while in search of children for vac- cination, discovered that a number of them had been inoculated. Among these were the children of the Pátil of Kelvi Mahim. Mr. Tribhuvandás Mohandás immediately brought the matter and the children to the notice of the Mámlatdár. That officer, however, took no notice of it, and did not ever report it to the Collector of the district. Immediately on its coming to my knowledge I addressed the Collector of Tháná, and requested him to investi- gate the case, and take what notice of the conduct of the Mámlatdár and Pátil might seem to him fit. In reply Mr. Walker Robertson informed me that, on representation of the Superintendent of Vaccination Western Circle, the matter had been enquired into, and he forwarded to me a copy of his letter to the address of the Revenue Commissioner Northern Division with the decision of that officer thereon. In the former Mr. Robertson says( xx ) 54. It will be seen that the Pátil in this case, as I know frequently happens, gave active support to the inoculator, and actually had his own chil- dren vaccinated. Also that the Mámlatdár knowingly permitted the opera- tions to be carried on. It appears to me that this is a matter which requires the immediate attention of Government. With a vaccinator in every táluká, and in many tálukás a municipal vaccinator as well in addition, there can be no objection to making the inoculation of small-pox matter a penal offence. That it is dangerous to life there can be no doubt, and that the men who prac- tise it are aware of this is certain. That the prohibition of it would do good to the progress of vaccination, in some districts, is also certain; for, then, the people would learn that Government are desirous of putting a stop to it al- together. Whereas at present they appear to think it is tolerated, if not approved. Inoculation in Dharmpur. 55. In the beginning of the year the vaccinator employed by the Rájá of Dharmpur reported to the Superintendent of Vaccination, Northern Circle, that inoculation was being carried on in the State. Dr. Colá at once brought the matter to the notice of the Darbár, through the Political Agent. In reply Mr. Shaw Stewart wrote as follows:( xxi ) Inoculation of other diseases. 58. During the year one case of supposed inoculation of another disease was reported as having occurred in the Kolábá Zilhá. I at once asked Mr. Cody to make a full investigation into it personally. He did so, and arrived at the conclusion that the child did not die from vaccination. The father made a statement to that effect before Mr. Cody and the Mámlatdár. Small-pox. 59. Returns of deaths from small-pox for the months of January and March only have been received in this office. I am, therefore, unable to give statistics of the mor- tality from this disease during the past official year, except for the city of Bombay, the return for which was courteously furnished me by the Health Officer of that city, From the reports of the Superintendents, small-pox appears to have been very general, but to have prevailed principally in the Frontier Districts, in the Collectorates of Ahmadábád, Khedá and Khándesh ; the southern portion of Gujaráth appears to have escaped, Dr. Wyllie, Civil Surgeon of Ahmadábád, is of opinion that the disease was imported from Márwád. This seems to be most likely, and is in accordance with known facts. In Khándesh, also, the disease seems to have been imported ; in this case from the Central Provinces where small-pox is said to have prevailed extensively. Small-pox prevailed in other parts of the Presidency, but not in an epidemic, severe, or fatal form. Sindh appears to have been particularly free from its ravages. Small-pox in Bombay. 60. During the past year 1,637 persons died in the city of Bombay from small-pox( xxii ) Localities. Deaths from Small-pox. Number of Children vaccina- ted April 1872. May ( xxiii ) Truthfulness of Vaccinators' Returns. 62. I think I may safely say that the returns of the past year will, in point of correctness, compare favourably with those of previous years. This is due to the closer and more frequent supervision to which the vac- cinators know their work and registers are now subjected. But, in some places, there is still a good deal wanted to ensure correctness. In last year's report I advocated the introduction of a particular kind of village vaccination regis- ter, as a means of preventing falsification of records. I fear, however, that the method therein detailed cannot be carried out in some parts of the Presidency, especially in Sindh. In Sindh there is no village system such as we have in the Deccan and elsewhere. I feel, however, that something must be done in that province to ensure correctness of the returns, especially on the Frontiers. During my tour in Sindh, in the past year, I observed that the names of a large number of persons are shown in vaccinators' registers who were said to be inhabitants of foreign territory, or to belong to other villages or distant places in Sindh. These may be correct, every name ; but that they are so we have no thoroughly reliable evidence. When the Superintendent or As- sistant Superintendent come to make their inspections, such persons are always absent. And as the Pátil is almost invariably illiterate, I feel certain that neither he nor any one else, however intelligent he may be, can remember the names of the vaccinated strangers. This is especially the case in the larger towns. This subject has engaged and is engaging my attention. Conduct of the Vaccinators. 63. During the year under report, the vaccinators, as a body, have conducted themselves and their duties satis- factorily. In the Central Circle three men died, one was dismissed for falsification, one for absence without leave, one for continued inefficiency, and a fourth resigned. In the Southern Circle one was dismissed for falsification, one absented himself, and one resigned. In the Western Circle one was dismissed for continued inefficiency, one resigned, and one died. In the Northern Circle one was pensioned, one died, and one was dismissed. In the Sindh Circle two were dismissed for falsification of returns. In the Káthiáwád Circle five men were dismissed( xxiv ) Assistant Superintendents. 64. After an experience of a year and a half of the working of the Department since its reorganization by Dr. Pin- kerton in 1871, it seems necessary to give some details as to the utility or otherwise of the newly-formed grade of Assistant Superintendent. Of 24 men originally appointed, 20 having, on the expira- tion of the probationary period, been pronounced &quot; fit,&quot; were confirmed in their appointments, one is still on probation, and the remaining three remanded to their former duties. Of those so remanded one was employed in Sindh, and was noticed in para.37 of last year's report. The other two belonged to the Southern Circle, and were much below the average vaccinator in intelligence. Of the 21 remaining, the Circle Superintendents report favourably of all, except one or two. Judging from the experience gained in my tours during the last two years, and from reports, special and otherwise, by Circle Superintendents, I think we have fair reason to be satisfied with the work performed by these men. It cannot be expected that men appointed to new situations, and to perform new duties, will become in such a short period thoroughly efficient; like all men they are fallible, and it would be strange were they to perform the duties im- posed upon them without mistakes of some sort or other. These men have been found particularly useful in (a) their frequent visits to vaccinators, and the inspection of their work ensuring greater regularity and better lymph; (b) detecting falsification or incorrectness of registers, and thus ensuring greater exactness in the annual statements ; (c) promoting the spread of knowledge of vaccination among the people and the subordinate Government officials, and instructing young vaccinators as to the manner in which they can, with best effect, conduct their duties and relations with the village officers and the people, especially where difficulties are met with and opposition encountered; (d) assisting dispensary Medical Officers in the same way; (e) stamping out outbreaks of small-pox : they can be on the spot at once, and with the assistance of the vaccinators of the neighbouring tálukás and the officers of the affected villages can operate emergently and with effect; (f) being constantly on the move the work of vaccinators is inspected at all seasons of the year, and as the vaccinators are never aware when it is to be in- spected, they are obliged to pay greater attention to it and the preservation of the lymph. 65. The following is the summary of the special reports submitted to this Office, by Superintendents, regarding qualifications and usefulness of the Assistant Superintendents in their respective Circles. Central Circle. In this Circle there are six men, and all of them, since their appointment, have performed their duties very satisfactorily, more especially the Assistant Superintendents of the Púná and Sátárá Zilhás. In the Sholápúr, Násik and Khándesh Collec- torates, outbreaks of small-pox occurred, and were speedily extinguished by
( XXV ) the prompt and effective measures taken by these men. All of them have been found useful in instructing the young vaccinators appointed, on the re- organization of the establishment in August 1871, and in smoothing the way where difficulties were met with. They have also given effective aid in col- lecting and storing good lymph for transmission, by post, to vaccinators wherever required, and to a very large number of applicants, Medical Officers, and others, both within and beyond the Presidency. Southern Circle. There are four Assistant Superintendents in this Circle. Two of these were found unfit, and were remanded to their former duties. The other two are confirmed in their appointments. The Superintendent is of opinion that none of these men have sufficient education and intelligence for such appointments. He, however, considers that the two men who have been confirmed in their ap- pointments have done their work fairly well. No instance in which they were found useful is given. Western Circle. There are three Assistants in the Western Circle. Of these two have per- formed their duties most willingly and satisfactori- ly, and in an active and intelligent manner. The third at first did not do well, but he is now improving. They have been found very useful in testing returns, ensuring a supply of good lymph, and in instruct- ing the vaccinators. In a few instances irregularities, on the part of vaccina- tors, have been brought to light by them. Northern Circle. There are four Assistant Superintendents in this Circle. The Superin- tendent anticipated a great deal of good from these men, as inspectors of the vaccinator's work ; but to a certain extent only have his anticipations been realized. The fact that they were selected from among the vaccinators does not, he thinks, inspire the vaccinators with a sufficient degree of respect for them, and consequently &quot;their instructions are often disregarded, and good advice given at one visit is found at the next, not to have been attended to.&quot; Of these, however, such notice taken as will gradually enforce attention. In the early part of the current natural year small-pox was almost universal in the Khedá Zilhá, and called forth all the energies of the Assistant Superintendent. From actual personal observation Dr. Colá is able to say that, during the critical period, the Assist- ant Superintendent worked with praiseworthy zeal and industry, and was successful in stamping out the disease wherever he went. Had opportunities occurred, Dr. Colá is sure that the other Assistant Superintendents would have proved as useful as the Khedá. Assistant Superintendent. 4 vac
( xxvi ) Sindh Circle. There are four Assistant Superintendents in the Sindh Circle. Of instances in which these men are useful, Dr. Williams enumerates some of those mentioned in para. 64. But he reports rather unfavourably as to the activity and intelligence of two of them. The Assistant Superintendent of the Shikárpur Zilhá, who, last year, was reported on unfavourably, is this year held up as quite a model Assistant; active, intelligent, and possessed of great tact and judgment. He was successful in discovering and bringing to notice the absence, without leave, of two young vaccinators, in detecting very extensive falsifications, carried on for some time past, by the vaccinator of H. H. Mir All Murád. He is also reported to have stamped out an outbreak of small-pox in Sáidpur, to have pointed out that &quot; a certain mír &quot; was employing an inocu- lator, and, finally, to have fearlessly exposed every wrong doer. Of the other Assistants, the one employed in the Thar and Párkar District is reported to have done very good work, and to have improved and much extended vaccina- tion in that Political Superintendency. Káthiáwád Circle. The report on the two men employed in this Circle is very favourable. Dr. Butler found them useful, particularly in the propagation of good lymph, in the verification of returns, in the teaching of vaccinators generally, and in the suppression of outbreaks of small-pox. At Wadwán and Lakhtar, where much difficulty was experienced, an Assistant was deputed to arrange matters. This was done with much tact, and to the entire satisfaction of Dr. Butler. Rewá Kánthá Circle. The Assistant Superintendent employed has not had any opportunity of prominently distinguishing himself, nothing unusual having occurred to call forth his latent energies. He has, however, done his work well. Superintendents. 66. Changes among the Superintendents have been fewer than in the preceding year. Still they have been many. In the month of June Dr. Butler resumed charge of the Káthiáwád Circle, and has since remained in charge. Surgeon Lewis and Dr. Robb until the month of May were in charge, respectively, of the Central and Southern Circles. In that month they exchanged appointments. Dr. Williams resumed charge of the Sindh Circle from Dr. Keith in Novem- ber. In the other Circles the Superintendents were in charge throughout the year. 67. Statement No. VII. shows the amount of attention which has been paid by Superintendents and their Assistants to each táluká and zilhá, as far as the travelling and inspection are concerned. The following table shows the total of each Circle as given in this Statement:( xxvii ) Name of Number of En- campments. Number of travel- ling days. Distance travelled in miles. Number of Villa- ges visited. Number of vac- cinated Children inspected. Superintendent. Circle. Mr. Lewis and Dr. Robb ... ... ... Contral ... 67 133 1,397 222 9,609 Dr. Robb and Mr. Lewis ... ... ... Southern ... 68 111 1,295 151 4,933 Mr. Cody ... ... ... ... ... Western ... 67 112 1,400 193 5,752 Dr. Mancharjí ... ... ... ... Northern ... 54 166 2,050 414 13,640 Drs. Keith and Williams... ... ... Sindh... ... 143 271 2,770 635 13,890 Drs. Blanc and Butler ... ... ... Káthiáwád ... 75 148 1,828 309 23,736 Mr. Haliday... ... ... ... ... Rewá Kanthá... 31 121 921 215 6,799 Total ... 505 1,062 11,661 2,139 78,359 I do not think, however, that this table shows at all well, nor is it possible to show, the amount of real work performed. As far as the first two columns are concerned, no doubt they do so, but not the others. For instance, the faci- lities for travelling vary much( xxviii ) them. The latter can only give a very general idea of the state of vaccination in a village, and is of little or no value as a test of the correctness of the vac- cinator's register. However in this way a large number of villages can be visited, and children seen, with much less trouble and exposure to weather. For comparison with the table above given I show below the number of names tested by each Superintendent by reading over the names:( xxix ) vaccinator should visit every village in the táluká within the year, and this without reference to the number of villages, and the area of the district in his charge. In my opinion it is impossible to lay down arbitrary rules of this na- ture without injuriously affecting the quality of the work performed. Many things( xxx ) to meet the Superintendent of the Rewá Kánthá Circle. I examined his office records (which were not so satisfactory as might be) and work in several vil- lages. I also enquired into the conduct of one of the State vaccinators, then under suspension, and sanctioned his dismissal. From Rájpiplá I returned through the Rájpiplá State to Ankleshwar. Thence, by train, I went to Bom- bay, and made inquiries regarding vaccination in the Presidency Circle. There- after visited the Western Circle, and in company with Mr. Cody travelled through the Alibág and Pen tálukás of Kolábá Zilhá and a part of the Tháná Zilhá, visiting the villages as well as the Pen Dispensary en route. During my tour I saw some good work, and found Mr. Cody's office in a satisfactory state. As far as vaccination is concerned, at least, the Pen Dispensary stands much in need of improvement. In a population of 6,514 only 53 successful operations were performed during the past year. This gives less than five oper- ations per month and only one per week. Shortly after leaving the Western Circle, in the month of January, I proceeded to Karáchí by steamer, from Karáchí to Kotrí by rail, and thence viâ Haidarábád, Ghotáná, Gulám Alijo Tándá, Digrí, Ján Mahammadjo Ghot of the Haidarábád Collectorate, and Dhadelá and Nabisar, of the Thar and Párkar District, to Umarkot. I there met Dr. Williams, the Superintendent of the Sindh Circle, inspected the office records, which were not very correct for the period antecedent to the return to duty of Dr. Williams ; but, from the date of his resuming charge, he had applied himself with much assiduity to putting things in order, and had so far succeeded. Inspected the dispensary and vaccination in the town of Umarkot. The only remarkable thing I observed was the large number of absentees, many of the names registered were those of children said to belong to other places, and to foreign territory, and it did not appear to me possible to be certain of the correctness of the register (see para. 62). What work I saw was fairly done. Marched through the tálukás of Umarkot, Thar and Párkar District, and Digrí and Haidarábád of the Haidarábád Zilhá, inspect- ing the villages en route, and found the work correct, except in the matter of absentees. Altogether I was more than a month in Sindh, marching almost continuously, and returned to Bombay by steamer early in the month of March. From Bombay returned to Púná, and, having made hasty prepara- tions, proceeded to Belgaum, through the Púná and Sátárd zilhás of the Central Circle. I reached Belgaum on the 18th of March, examined the office of the Superintendent, the Charitable Dispensary, and the work of two vacci- nators. The office and the dispensary were not satisfactory. I also made a strict enquiry into the fitness of the probationary Assistant Superintendents of Vaccination, two of whom had been reported on unfavourably by Mr. Lewis. I found two of them quite unfit for appointment, and directed their return to their former duties. A successor to one of them on probation has been appointed, and another will be so, soon.
( xxxi ) 70. In conclusion I have to apologize for this Report being later than usual in preparation for the press. This delay is due entirely to the delay in the receipt of the report of the Sindh Circle Superintendent and a few of the army returns. But for the late receipt of these, the Report and statements would have been ready for the press quite a month ago. P. S. TURNBULL, M.D., Surgeon, Acting Superintendent General of &quot;Vaccination, Bombay Presidency. Púná, 29th June 1873.
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORTS OF SUPERINTENDENTS OF CIRCLES. CENTRAL CIRCLE. Superintendent.2 Local Funds. 3. In addition to the total increase above, a further increase must be credited to this establishment, corresponding; to the total decrease shown against Municipalities and Native States. The same result is explained by the following figures :3 any place successfully, a peon, specially set apart to assist the vaccinator, is an absolute necessity. Otherwise the efforts of the vaccinator will be fluctuating and uncertain. Native States. 5. The decrease under this head is not considerable comparatively, but there is reason to be dissatisfied with much of the States' work. It is not so much on account of a falling off in the number of operations, as on account of the irregular and uncertain manner in which many of the vaccinators dis- charge their duties. They are frequently in arrears in the despatch of their monthly returns, two or three, it may be, being submitted together, notwithstanding repeated calls from the office; and, again, they do not scruple to leave their duties without reference to the Superin- tendent, if they seem to obtain the Chief's sanction to do so. An improvement would take place if it were carefully impressed upon the Chiefs that they have a responsibility beyond the mere giving a certain sum of money for vaccination purposes. They ought to look for money's worth in the men appointed and in the work they accomplish. Penth, especially, has been backward during the year, and the A'tpadi vaccinator, though not much behind in his work, deserves censure on account of his irregularities. Dispensaries. 6. Dispensary vaccination is still behind but not to any great extent. The officers in charge invariably report the unwillingness of the people to send their children to be operated on, and especially are the parents reluctant to having the fresh lymph taken from their children's arms. Lymph thus becomes exhausted, and operations are interrupted. As far as I have been able to learn, the spirit of Circular No. 1003 of the 21st March 1872, from the Inspector General of Hospi- tals, has been generally acted up to, yet the establishing of certain vaccine stations, for the benefit of the inhabitants, has not resulted in a proportionate increase of operations. The people fail to appreciate the advantages a paternal Government is putting in their very way. It has occurred to me as strange that dispensary officers complain of popular apathy more than the general vaccinators do. With the medical knowledge they are supposed to possess, Hospital Assistants, and others in charge, are in a position to set before the people intelligent- ly the benefits to be derived from successful vaccination. They are, at the same time, many of them, wonderfully inexpert in manipulating the lancet and tubes, and I venture to think that some special training in these particulars would impress them with the idea that the work is as much theirs, and demands as much attention, as the general dispensary duties. They would not, then, have to make the complaint that the ordinary morning work in the dispensary leaves them no time to procure children for vaccination, and that to do so would necessitate closing the dispensary4 maintain its position as the best vaccinated of all the zilhás in the Circle. I may mention, however, that these three men were transferred from the Puna and Nagar and Sholápur zilhás only in the year 1871. Changes. 8. During the year three casualties occurred, four vaccinators were dismissed on account of continued inefficiency, disobedience, or falsifica- tion of returns, and, as noticed above, the municipal vacci- nator of Koregám was reduced, while a new municipal appointment was made in Náráyan- gáum and Utur in Juner Táluká. Except the last mentioned, all of these changes have tended to reduce the working strength of the Department, and presumably the amount of work done. Effective and actual strength. 9. The following figures have been tabulated to show the effective strength of each es- tablishment, in each zilliá, and the actual strength during the year, calculated from the number of monthly returns received :5 time of probation, candidates cannot be made to see that they are framing in another way. All of them hope and pray that they will be &quot; confirmed by your honour in the vacant situ- ation by return of post.&quot; In addition to absolute vacancies, sickness and leaves sometimes account for blank re- turns. With regard to leaves, vaccinators are reminded that such are not granted if small- pox is reported to prevail in their tálukás. Assistant Superintendents. 10. The results of the year under report I think amply justify the employment of this class of men in the Department. As they become more and more acquainted with the precise nature of their duties, and how most successfully to deal with matters that come before them, there will be a marked change in the character and quantity of vaccinators' work. A reference to Table VII, annexed, will show that their labours during the year have been creditable to all of them. Especially worthy of mention are Mr. Trimbak A'nant, of Púná Zilhá, and Mr. Bálkrishna Rájárám, of Sátárá Zilhá, who have shown considerable tact and energy in dealing with several vexed points that have come under their notice. Mr. Dharmá Bápu, who was only temporarily employed in Nagar Zilhá, worked well. He is an old and trustworthy servant of Government, and has had large experience as a vaccinator. But, on account of years, he is not possessed of that activity and endurance which are indispensable to an Assist- ant Superintendent, and he will, therefore, revert to his original appointment as head vaccina- tor in Násik. The Assistantship thus vacant will be filled up by Mr. Kisansing Dowlatsing, the head clerk in this office. He has proved himself a shrewd and intelligent worker in the office, he has on all suitable occasions taken the pains to become thoroughly acquainted with the practical duties of a vaccinator, and he is young and of active habits. His future exer- tions, I trust, will combine to justify the recommendation that has been made in his behalf. It may be necessary here briefly to enumerate the particulars of service in which the Assistant Superintendents have been of special value, in the experience of the past year6 Assistant Superintendent, and vaccination was set agoing at once before any report had come from the village officers through the táluká Mámlatdár. In this place no small-pox register had been kept up. Assistant Superintendents can, where necessary, bring the exertions of at least two vaccinators to bear upon any locality where small-pox has established itself. (3) In cases where young vaccinators have met with difficulties in prosecuting their labours, Assistant Superintendents have been generally successful in smoothing the way for them by explaining to the people the advantages of vaccination, and particularly that no harm can result from taking lymph from the ripe vesicles. (4) They are careful also to see that all village vaccination registers are properly kept and stamped. Where small-pox registers are not kept, report to that effect is made to the Superintendent, who takes steps to bring the neglect to the notice of the Revenue Officers. 11. The proportion of the sexes vaccinated remain almost the same as it was last year,7 Cicatrices. 15. The cicatrices examined in the course of the inspection tour have generally been large, round, and foveated, but varying in number according to the number of original punctures made, and to the proportion of success attending the vaccinator's labours. Some vaccinators make from three to six punctures on one arm only, others three on each arm, and so on, according to their various ideas in the matter. To ensure uniformity, I think the plan would not be a bad one, to direct all vaccinators to make a certain number of punctures on one or both arms, and, I think, six punctures ought to be required of them, three on each arm. There is thus allow- ance made for failures, and, moreover, Superintendents and their Assistants would be able at once to estimate the average quality of a vaccinator's work. As a result of my inspections, I am of opinion that not fewer than three good large cicatrices give sufficient and lasting protection. On one occasion particularly, at the beginning of this season's tour, I was in a position to satisfy myself on this point. In the village of Kámbargáum 87 cases of recent small-pox were reported by the First Assistant Collector of Nagar to be borne on the small-pox register. In going over this register carefully, on the spot, I found that a number of previously vaccinated children had been attacked by small-pox, and where vaccination cicatrices, which averaged two in number, could be distinctly seen, the cases had been no other than very mild ones8 them to the office to be stamped and paged. Where irregularities in keeping the registers were noticed, the case was laid before the proper authorities. Inoculation. 20. About the end of the official year it was reported that this system was being practised in the Native State of Bhor. The Chief wished to know on what grounds, and how he might deal with the case. Through the Political Agent it was communicated to the Chief that the practice was dange- rous to life, and punishable under Chapter XVI., Section 324, of the Indian Penal Code. No further report has been made on this subject. Vaccination-Syphilis. 21. No case of vaccination-syphilis has been reported or discovered during the year. I am doubtful whether it would be possible to demonstrate very clearly a case of this kind, did the necessary conditions of its appearance exist; so common and obscure are skin diseases among a people revelling in filth, and naturally predisposed to hydrophobia in its very literal sense. Aids from Civil and Political Authorities. 22. My acknowledgments are due to all civil and political authorities for the cordial and able assistance they have given to the Department during the year. The late Mr. Duff, Collector of Khán- desh, expressed himself as always anxious to do what he could to further the spread of vaccination. His death is much to be regretted. 23. I would here advert to the auxiliary service to vaccination, which, I believe, could be done through the agency of district schools. If schoolmasters were willing and themselves convinced of the value of vaccination and re-vaccination, they might do much by explaining to their pupils why Government pays so much attention to this matter. A simple and in- structive lesson on vaccination might be introduced into some of the vernacular standards prepared for the use of schools ; and the regular visitations of the Educational Department would be the means of bringing out what the pupils knew and understood on the subject. I am not certain that the pupils would make much way at first with their parents and friends at home, but there would be a quiet and steady sowing of good seed in the minds of the rising generation that could not fail to bear good fruit in time to come. There is a large and grow- ing element of shrewdness and intelligence in those district schools, and it seems a pity not to take advantage of such to foster a work, the importance of which has not yet led the Government to legislate in the matter. Tour. 24. I received charge of the Circle from Dr. Lewis about the end of last travelling season, at the southern limit, and my frequent and hurried marches to Púná did not permit of much more than office work being done on the way. The work of the present district season lay chiefly in Khán- desh, and travelling towards that, several tálukás of Ahmadnagar and Násik were examined. Up to the close of the official year the central and eastern portions of Khándesh were tra- versed, comprising ten tálukás. It was found necessary to leave Chopde aside, because consi- derably beyond my plan of inspection, and the season drawing to an end, left little time to complete the examination of the other tálukás, which lay more directly on my way towards Púná. Khándesh is a very extensive Collectorate, and a whole season's tour could be profitably spent in traversing its sixteen tálukás. It is unnecessary to extend these remarks. The particulars of tour are to be found summarized in Table VII., which is appended. The Office. 25. The entertainment of a second clerk, recommended by Dr. Gordon, was sanctioned by Government during the year. The appointment was filled up on the 1st July 1872, and the present probationary incumbent is a conscientious and painstaking worker, but
9 rather slow. Kisansing Dowlatsing has conducted the duties of head clerk to my entire satisfaction. Regarding the number of peons belonging to the Office Establishment, I gladly endorse Mr. Cody's recommendation in the closing sentence of his last year's report, and for precisely the same reasons he has given for making the recommendation. 26. In conclusion, I venture to express my humble appreciation of Dr. Wright's re- marks in paras. 13 and 14 of his letter submitting the report of last year to Government, Para. 14 especially carries weight with it. To be able to deal personally with village authorities and others concerned, in the course of village inspections, Superintendents ought to be at least colloquially acquainted with the vernaculars of their Circles. Interpretation is all very well in its way10 SOUTHERN CIRCLE. Superintentdent.11 permitting lymph to be taken from the arms of their children. Two supplies of lymph were received from the Privy Council, through the Superintendent General, during the past year. Several children were vaccinated with the first supply when I was in Badámí, but in every case it failed. With the second supply, used in February last at Bijápur, three children were vaccinated, but only one vesicle resulted from 18 punctures. From this good lymph was extracted, and with it five children were successfully vaccinated, as subsequently report- ed by the municipal fund vaccinator. Animal Vaccination. 3. This was not practised in this Circle during the past year. Small-pox. 4. Small-pox of a mild type occurred chiefly in the Kaládgí Zilhá, in the tálukás of Indí, Mudebihál, and Bágewádí; but last January a severe outbreak was reported in the Kánadá Zilhá, which was timely suppressed. Inoculation and Vaccino-Syphilitic Inoculation. 5. No cases of inoculation with small-pox virus, or of introduction of syphilis by means of vaccination, have come to my notice. Assistant Superintendents. 6. These appointments have been given to men who originally entered the service as vaccinators; many of them are, consequently, not suffici- ently efficient for holding such responsible posts. Two out of the five employed in this Circle, including the Kolhápur States, have been reported by me as being unfit for the work ; one, the Assistant Superintendent of Belgaum, Venkatráo Subhráo, being not only physically unfit, but he is not sufficiently intelligent, nor active enough for the discharge of his duties in an efficient manner. The other, Jayarám Krishná, Assistant Superintendent of Kaládgí, has a very imperfect knowledge of Maráthí and Ka- nadf, and has displayed very little zeal for his work. He reverts to his former grade as a vaccinator, and is now employed as such in the Hublí Táluká. Of the three others, although I am of opinion that they have not that amount of education necessary for holding such ap- pointments, still on the whole and under the present circumstances, when it is difficult to find better qualified men, I consider that they have done their work satisfactorily. Conduct of Vaccinators. 7. I have had occasion to impose small fines on several vaccinators, for sending in in- correct returns, at different times during the year. The Bágalkot Local Fund Vaccinator, Raghunáth Trimbak, was fined in 1871-72 by Dr. Robb for falsifying returns. A repetition of this offence was detect- ed during the past year, and he was dismissed the service, as was also Rámchandra Malhár, State Vaccinator of Torgal, for a similar offence and disobedience of orders. A few others have shown some amount of indolence, and were fined. Speaking generally, I consider that the behaviour of the vaccinators in this Circle has been good. Registers. 8. The form of village vaccination register advocated by the Superintendent General is now used in almost every village in this Circle. The form, I consider, is a very useful one, and acts as a valuable check upon vaccinators. Vaccination in Native States. 9. I am glad to state that greater attention is now being paid to the subject of vaccina- tion bythe Native Chiefs. The Chief of Jamkhandi has lately sanctioned the maintenance of a vaccinator in the Kundgal Iláká; the Chief of Miraj, one for Lakshmeshwar ; and the Chief of Sánglí has also consented to appoint a vaccinator for the Shirhátti Iláká.
12 Municipalities. 10. The Gokák Municipality have, at my suggestion, appointed a vaccinator, the work being too heavy to be carried on by the hospital assistant in charge of the dispensary, unaided. The Kaládgí Munici- pality have been, on the other hand, obliged to dispense with the services of the vaccinator, for want of funds. Tour. 11. I commenced my tour early in November, and chiefly inspected the Kaládgí Dis- tricts and some of the bordering Native States, viz., Jam- khandí, Mudhol, and Kurundwád, for the full details of which I beg to refer to the Statement No. VII. Office. 12. A second kárkun has been added to the office permanently, as the work connected with the vernacular correspondence was found to be too much for one kárkun to attend to. The office is allowed only three peons; the number, I think, is insufficient, as I have often experienced great incon- venience when on my tour of inspection, in having the children collected. I would, there- fore, beg respectfully to recommend an increase of the number of peons to four. Civil Authorities. 13. Before closing this report I have much pleasure in recording the great assistance afforded me, at all times, by the civil and poli- tical authorities. Belgaum, 21st April 1873.
13 WESTERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.14 Local Funds Vaccinators. 3. Under this head there were 27 vaccinators employed during the year, viz., 11 in the Tháná Zilhá, 11 in the Ratnágirí Zilhá, and 5 in the Zilhá of Kolábá. This number gives one vaccinator for each táluká in the first and last, while in Ratnágirí there are three men in excess of the number of tálukás comprising it, who have, however, been kept busily employed in the petás of Vengurlá, Khed, and Láujá. The numbers employed in the Ratnágirí and Kolábá Zilhás are quite sufficient for their requirements, but I think the number of vaccinators in Tháná ought to be increased to at least 13. My reasons for making this suggestion, notwithstanding the liberal support that the Local Funds give to vaccination already, are that some of the Tháná tálukás possess petás which included with the tálukás themselves render them too large to be reached by one vaccinator with efficiency; and the opposition met with is such as to greatly curtail work by absorbing much time in efforts to overcome it. Were this opposition not existent, it might be possible to manage with one man to each táluká, but as matters at present stand (and I see no reason to expect a better change), it is out of the power of one individual to answer the requirements of the larger ones. In outbreaks of small-pox, too, I find it nearly impossible to detach, with any degree of security, any of the vaccinators to render assistance ; and in explanation of this I may state that during the monsoon an outbreak of small-pox occurred in the Mokhádá. Petá, Sháhpur Táluká, to the scene of which I directed the vaccinator to proceed. He had, however, but a very short time gone to the petá to work, when I received a report from the Mámlutdár, saying his presence was required in the neighbourhood of the táluká town itself. As Mokhádá, or rather the northern frontier of it, where he was working, was so far removed from Sháhpur, some 50 miles or more, I directed the Kalián vaccinator to proceed to Sháhpur to give assistance, but he had not been there long before he was required to return sharp to his own táluká. A similar event occurred with the vaccinator of Máhim, who was sent to Bassein to render assistance, but who had to return to his own charge after a very short stay. One or two extra men would save the necessity for taking away those named to particluar tálukás, from their own charges, when cases of emergency arise, and there would be plenty of work for them in the hitherto almost unexplored15 Municipalities. 5. As in the previous year, there were only two men employed by Municipalities in this Circle16 increase is so far satisfactory, there is still room for improvement; and the exercise of a little more energy would, I think, in a few instances, be productive of much good. Under this head I would more especially allude to the dispensaries of Pen and Bhiwandí. On the other hand I can testify from personal observation to a strong desire and active exertion being dis- played by those holding the charge of the Sáwantwádí, Kalián, Dápulí, and Alibag dispen- saries, to extend their operations, and thereby afford a considerable amount of protection to the people in their neighbourhood. Reports from all the dispensaries have been submitted with their returns, so that it is unnecessary that I should more particularly allude to them here, as they themselves fully detail the difficulties, &c., encountered in propagating dispensary vaccination during the year. Imperial Establishment. 8. As a separate report is to be submitted on the Assistant Superintendents, in accord- ance with Circular No. 44 of 1873-74, dated 4th April 1873, by the Superintendent General of Vaccination, I will not remark further on them here than to state, that I have, with one solitary instance, found them always ready and punctual in the performance of any duty I may have pointed out. The clerk has been most attentive to his duties, and I have had no reason to com- plain during the year of his neglect of any one of them. He has a good deal to do, for, des- pite all my efforts to curtail correspondence, &c., as much as possible, I find it growing apace. Lymph and Vesicles. 9. The quality of the lymph, as exhibited in the result columns, used throughout the year was apparently less active than that in use during the year 1871-72; but this depreciation, as I think I can fully show, is more apparent than real. In the year 1871-72 the percentage of success for the whole Circle, excluding dispensaries, were 96.4 and 75.1 in primary and re-vaccination respectively, while this year the percentages are shown in either description of operation as 94.08 and 66.8. The chief reason, I entertain, for the lowering of the percentage of success to a still high rate, is not a depreciation of the quality of the lymph, but the result of a more correct rendering of the returns by the vaccinators, consequent on a closer and more frequent inspection of the work, and its comparision with the &quot; results &quot; as recorded. This makes the vaccinator more careful in filling in his register, as he now knows any attempt to make his work appear more efficient than it really is, will be almost certain to suffer detec- tion, and he must reap the consequences. The lymph in use during the year has been both active and good, and the &quot; results &quot; submitted, if they be correct, as I have every reason to suspect they are, prove that, in giving so good a rate of success as 94.08 per centum in primary and 66.8 in re-vaccinations. I have seen the lymph in process of development of nearly every vaccinator whose charge I have visited, and I had only on one occasion to be dissatisfied with it. This instance was in the case of 3rd grade vaccinator Bhiku Rághu, then working in the Ratnágirí Taluká, whose lymph was so bad that I had to order him to stop work till I could replace it; and, as the man ought to have known better than to work with lymph which had been too evidently deteriorating for a time, I fined him heavily. 10. With nearly all the vaccinators I have experienced some difficulty in endeavouring to prevent their taking lymph from vaccinifers before it fully ripens. They invariably count the date on which they vaccinate, as well as that on which they extract the lymph in making their estimate, from dates, and thus when it ought to receive seven clear days it gets but six, much to its deterioration and inefficiency. I think myself that lymph ought to be always taken on the corresponding day of the week succeeding that in which it was used, and this I. have been endeavouring to impress on the vaccinators as I visit them; but I think a ready means of securing this time being given to it, would be to have the days of the week printed on the weekly reports, and let the vaccinator write the dates over them. By this means
17 I could tell easily, from week to week, the time they give their lymph to mature, and be in a position to point out more particularly any want of proper attention to the subject. Animal Lymph. 11. During the monsoon while at Ratnágirí I endeavoured to establish animal vaccina- tion, but I am sorry to say the attempt failed. I inoculated most carefully two calves with lymph received from the Local Superintendent, Bombay, in tubes; but the result in both cases was nil. In one of the calves there was a slight appearance in the case of one of the scarifications inocu- lated with a tube of lymph Sub-Assistant Surgeon Anantá Chandrobá stated he had received from Dr. Warlomont of Brussels, but it was unfruitful as regards lymph. 12. I received a few tubes of animal lymph, once removed, from the Local Superintend- ent of Bombay, which resulted most successfully on use. I entrusted its care to Assistant Vaccinator Ganpatráo Haribá, of the Chiplún Táluká, Ratnágirí Zilhá, a careful and success- ful vaccinator, having seen, myself, the first vesicles resulting from it, and since then I have been able to distribute it in whatever cases I thought the lymph required renewing. These, however, were very few, for although I hold that lymph is very often enhanced in efficiency by renewal from the original source, I do not deem it advisable to repress that which is still giving true Jennerian vesicles, and in consequence I but used the lymph where I thought the vesicles inefficient. 13. Seven tubes charged with vaccine lymph supplied by the Privy Council, were for- warded to me for trial by the Superintendent General of Vaccination, the result of the use of which I here give in detail. Three tubes were forwarded with Superintendent General's letter No. 778 of 1872-73, dated 4th of November 1872, which I used myself on two children on the 11th of the same month. Six punctures were made on each child, three on either arm; but though used most carefully, when the children were seen again on the 18th, or 8th day, there was no sign whatever of the lymph having &quot; taken &quot;. The four other tubes forwarded with Super- intendent General's letter No. 934 of 1872-73, dated 3rd January 1873, were used by the As- sistant Superintendent of the Kolábá Zilhá, Mr.Bálu Chálká, on January 9th,on five children, making six punctures on four, three on either arm, and three punctures on one. On the four first children vesicles appeared, five on one, four on the second, three on the third, and one on the fourth ; and on the fifth child operated on one vesicle appeared. The vesicles on the first three children were very good, and the lymph from them was further extended by means of tubes; the two vesicles on the last two were small, and their lymph was not further used. 14. While on this subject I may state, as I have had occasion to do before, that in maintaining the good lymph the vaccinators have much to contend with in the opposition they meet with in selecting their vaccinifers. Every case does not show sufficiently good vesicles from which to extract lymph, while those which bear such a character are often debarred from the vaccinator by the refusal of parents to allow their children presenting such vesicles being made use of as vaccinifers. Bearing this in mind, and witnessing, as I have often done, how extremely prejudiced the people generally are, I am often surprised to see, and not a little puzzled to understand, how the vaccinators, with such odds against them, manage to get through the quantity of good and protective work they do, and still maintain the prophy- lactic innocent of communicating any evil consequences in its transmission. This would be no matter for surprise were the selections untrammelled; but made as they are, when the well- fed and well-cared for children of the better classes are altogether, I may say, shut out from the roster, I think, I may advance, as some evidence of the keen attention, as a rule, paid to work by the vaccinators, the absence of any accusation as to their operations producing ill consequences. One case was reported to me, it is true, from Rohá Táluká, Kolábá Zilhá, and bore so much of likelihood in the way the matter was put to me, that I at first was convinced of its truth ; but a subsequent personal investigation exposed to me the fact that I had jump- ed at a hasty conclusion, and further that I had yet much to learn of the ingenuity with 3 VAC
18 which a certain class of people will pursue a steady course towards any end they may wish to attain. An infant, it was reported, died about a month after it had been vaccinated, and ill usage by the vaccinator and vaccination were given as the causes of its death. I will not enter into any detail of evidence advanced to sustain this charge, but will merely state that when I came to Rohá I enquired into the matter to the entire exoneration of the vaccinator, though the first receipt of the report made me somewhat prejudiced against him. The fa- ther of the child said the vesicles on its arms had dried up some time before its death, and that fever and not vaccination was the cause of that event taking place. In support of this statement made to me in presence of the Mámlatdár, I had the evidence of the child from whom it was vaccinated, and that of other children for whom it was used as vaccinifer, in none of whom did there appear the slightest sign to indicate that bad lymph had been used, and too the Assistant Superintendent for Kolábá said that he saw the child himself a day or so after it had been used as a vaccinifer, and that then there was nothing unusual in its appearance. Under these circumstances I think I was perfectly justified in exonerating the vaccinator, though the Assistant Collector, Mr. Johnson, who subsequently investigated the case, came to a different conclusion, and gave it as his opinion, that some arrangement had been come to between the father of the child and the vaccinator. Considering that the vaccinator was removed from the táluká, for obvious reasons, immediately after the occur- rence was reported, I do not think any arrangement of this description was at all feasible, and with this remark I shall leave the subject at rest. General progress. 15. In speaking of the general progress I propose taking in detail the different districts into which this Circle is divided, but before doing so it may not be out of place to give a short outline of the Circle entire. It extends from the confines of Damman northward to those of Goá in the south, being limited eastward by the range of the Gháuts, and to the west by an extensive sea board some 250 miles or more in extent. It thus three parts confines Bombay, the only part of that city uncovered by it being its western aspect towards the sea. The result of this is a free radiation of small-pox infection from Bombay whenever it prevails there ; and further a facility of importation of the same infection through the many ports dotting the large sea board by means of incoming foreign craft. The Collectorates comprised within this are, first, Tháná, with the Native State of Jawár ; second, Kolábá, with the Native State of Janjírá; and, third, Ratnágirí, with the Native State of Sáwantwádí. Tháná Collectorate. 16. In the Tháná Collectorate vaccination has retrogressed rather during the past year the number of persons treated being only 15,939, or some 1,515 less than the returns exhibited for the year 1871-72. However paradoxical it may appear, the fact stands that in this district the places where pro- gress and civilization are making greatest strides, vaccination evidently retrogrades, while in the wilder parts, where the people are ignorant in the extreme, it seems to be making steady and sure way. I can only account for this by stating that the people, as I have found them, are much more manageable in the latter places, and that they are more ready to accept any ad- vice offered them. As instances of what I mean I may state that in the large towns such as Tháná, Kalián, Bhewndy, Bássein, Máhim, Dhánu, &c., &c., vaccination makes little way, and that little even only amongst the poorer portion of the population, while small-pox seems to have a permanent habitat amongst their crowded thoroughfares. The children of the well- to-do and supposed to be enlightened portion of the people, are seldom submitted to the vaccinator, and this, as I believe, is not from any want of faith in the prophylactic itself, but merely an indifference on the subject and a knowledge that there is no compulsion in the matter. It is my belief, and not alone mine but that of most of the officials I have conversed with on the subject, who have paid it any attention, that vaccination will never be efficiently carried out in these towns until made compulsory. Another fact I may state that I think has hindered the more general spread of vaccination in the past year was the prevalence of inocula-
19 tion in many of the tálukás. I have received reports of its being carried on in the Bhiwandí Táluká, in Máhim, in Sáshtí and some others, and as long as it is allowed to go on without some punitive deterrent, so long will it undoubtedly prevail. The district officials in the absence of any legal means to strengthen their hands are loathe to interfere, and I must say with good reason, for it would not be over-pleasant to find that on interposing their authority they found it set at defiance. A good case in point occurred in the Máhim Táluká, where the As- sistant Superintendent for the Tháná Zilhá, Mr. Máhádeo Vináyak, brought to the notice of the Mámlatdár that a Kumbhár was inoculating in the táluká, and requested he might be restrained from doing so. The Mámlutdár stated he could not interfere, as the man was committing no crime, and, if he did so, he would be punished on being placed before him in the usual course. I have recently addressed Mr. Robertson, the Collector, on this subject, suggesting that some means might be devised to restrain these people from practising inoculation, and thereby spreading small-pox amongst the people. But, in the meantime, I would ask here if the time has not come when some legal prohibitive steps might be taken against it. The generally received opposition to doing so cannot be said to prevail here, as a glance at the returns will show that complete means of vaccination are decidedly within reach of the people, and while they are so, I think no hardship would be inflicted by enforcing the discontinuance of inocula- tion, which long-existing prejudice amongst many sections of the population induces them to prefer. These two causes, opposition and prevalence of inoculation, have mainly contributed to the hinderance of the spread of vaccination in the Tháná. Collectorate, and I think, too, a general want of cordial support to the vaccinators from the district subordinates has aided them not a little. Village Registers. 17. The keeping of the village registers in this Collectorate is not performed in such a way as to render them in very many instances of the least use. There are some exceptions I must say, but the generality of the taláthis make up their registers either by copying those of the vacci- nators when so permitted, or taking down the names as subsequently given them from me- mory of the pátils. This latter process must of a necessity be defective, for in many of the táluká villages the pátils are a most ignorant and illiterate class of men, while the former defeats one of the chief objects of the village register, a check on the vaccinators' returns. I some time ago addressed the Collector on this subject, and endeavoured to point out the necessity of directing the taláthi's presence in the village during the vaccinator's visit. He agreed with me in deeming the taláthi's presence advisable, but did not think it possi- ble to secure it on all occasions under the existing state of things. Some of the taláthis have as many as fifteen villages in their charge, and taking their many other duties in connection with them into account, he did not think their attendance during the vaccinator's visit always feasible. He, however, said he would order their presence when possible, so that I am in hopes a more efficient village register will be kept in the current year. Jawár Native State. 18. In Jawár, vaccination has been making good progress during the year, the returns from which show an increase over 1871-72 of 656 persons treated, the total number for this year being 1,081. This number is, I think, capable of further extension, which I hope to see in the coming year, as there is yet a good deal of work in arrears to be performed. I noticed this in a recent visit to the State, as also the fact that the work had been hitherto entirely carried on in the two Maháls of Jawár and Dherjí, while that of Gunjár had been left altogether neglected. As far as I could ascertain, there is very little opposition on the part of the people of this State to vaccination, and any retrograde movement will be more attributable to want of energy on the part of the vaccinator than to any other cause, There is one thing, though, to be said, that the district is exceedingly unhealthy during the months immediately succeeding the monsoon, and at that time work is only carried on there with great danger to health. In fact, the same may be said of the northern and eastern tálukás
20 of the Tháná Collectorate, viz., Dhánu, Sholápur, Wádá and Murbád, and those who are unac- climatised, as it were, cannot with impunity visit either district till after Christmas. There were no village registers kept, but I have communicated with the khárbkári on the subject, pointing out their use, &c., and he has promised to make an effort to have them kept, though I fear that will be matter of some difficulty, as there is only one taláthi entertained for each Mahál. Kolábá Collectorate. 19. In the Kolábá Collectorate there has been a falling off in the numbers treated this year to the extent of 1,791, which decrease has been extended over the tálukás of Rohá, Mahád and Mángáon. In the tálukás of Rohá and Mángáon vaccination has, I think, reached its limit, as there are little, if any, arrears to be cleared off. All such work in these two tálukás was got through by the present active Assistant Superintendent for Kolábá, Mr. Bálu Chálká, who when a vaccinator held charge of them, so that now the operations can scarcely exceed the birth rate. An application of mine to the Mámlutdár of Rohá, in the course of the year, for a return of unprotected children under 12 years, elicited the fact that there were but 150 such in the whole táluká ; and the fact that in this táluká, alone, of the whole Circle, the number of the infantile operations exceeds that of childhood and adolescence, is, I think, strong proof of the absence of any arrears. Thus under the heading &quot; under one year &quot; the persons treated were 473 and &quot; over one year &quot; 405. Taking the whole Collectorate the figures under these two headings approximate very closely indeed21 without egotism I may be permitted to say that my presence contributed, somewhat, towards the attainment of this progress. Village registers have been kept here for the first time, and, considering the many difficulties attendant on their introduction, I have to report most favourably of them, in every case where I had to examine the villages in which they were kept. I do not think any inoculation has been carried on ; but I may state with regard to this subject that I was forwarded, for perusal and comment, by the Collector, Mr. Elphin- stone, a petition from a vakil of Dápulí requesting that some inoculators,on whom an embargo had been placed might be allowed to carry on their practice. I wrote to the Collector at some length, pointing out the danger attendant on such practice, and I have no doubt he has acted on my suggestions in returning the vakil his answer. Sáwantwádi Native State. 22. In the Native State of Sáwantwádí vaccination is more universally practised than in any other district of this Circle. I visited the State in the month of May, and got then ocular proof of the very great progress it has made. This very satisfactory state of things may be attributed, in the first instance, to the interest taken in the subject by the Political Superintendent, who spared no pains to induce the general use of the operation, and now, I should say, from my own ob- servation, to free acceptance of it by the people generally. The vaccinator meets with little or no opposition, and the result is, that instead of time being wasted in arguing away nonsensical prejudice, as often happens within the limit of British territory, it is all devoted to work. The number of persons treated during the year was 6,528 as against 4,648 during 1871-72, giving an increase of 1,880. The only fault I have to find with vaccination in this State is that the number of infantile operations forms so small a percentage of the whole ; but here as elsewhere there is immense difficulty met with in trying to induce the people to submit their children for treatment during infancy. Returns. 23. Examining the returns for the whole Circle, it will be found that of the total number of primary vaccinations, or rather of persons primarily vaccinated, viz., 65,934, 33,896, or 51.4 per cen- tum, are males, and 32,038, or 48.6, are females, as against the percentages in 1871-72 of 51.7 and 48.3 respectively. Taking the different castes of the persons treated, the percentages they give to the whole are Christians .9, Hindus 89.1, Musalmáns 4.2, Pársís .2, and out-castes 5.6; while the percentages during the year 1871-72 were22 accept them. The only part of the Circle, as I said before in an earlier part of this report, where they are at all receiving a proportionate amount of favour is in Kolábá, where the work in arrears to be cleared off is comparatively little. Probably, too, the vaccinators themselves, finding a good deal of work to be done amongst children over one year, do not pay that amount of attention to the subject that I would have them. Re-vaccinations. 24. The total number of re-vaccinations performed during the year was, 3,878; of these 2,318 operations, or 66.8 per centum, were returned as suc- cessful. Most of these operations were performed in the Collectorate of Ratnágirí and the Native State of Sáwantwádí. In the former, the presence of small-pox acted as the chief incentive to their acceptance, and in the latter, I believe, they are mainly received on account of the personal interest taken in their performance by the vac- cinator, Jayarám Kánojí. There is plenty of room for re-vaccinations in the Kolábá Zilhá, but as yet they do not make much way there, the people not realizing the necessity for them. Small-pox. 25. Small-pox with more or less severity presented itself in nearly every district in the Circle during the year, and at the present moment prevails widely in the tálukás of Rájápur and Ratnágirí. In the former táluká I noticed its approach myself when travelling in May 1872 in that and the Deogarh tálukás. It was brought in some native boat from Bombay to Vijayádurg, and thence spread itself inlandin spite of every effort to restrain it. This is only one port, however, and I merely mention it as I saw there, myself, how it had been brought. But what occurred there may have occurred at many other ports along the coast, and I have no doubt did so. I saw two boatmen in whom the eruption was then in the sealing stage, and they told me they had contracted the disease in Bombay, and brought it home with them. This they did to some effect, for at that time I saw three persons who were suffering from it. One a young woman of 17 or 18 years of age in whom it showed in the confluent form. I think I can safely say that the Ratnágirí Collectorate was free from the disease in an epidemic form until it was brought down to these different &quot; bundars &quot; from Bombay, and since then not one single táluká has escaped it. In the Tháná Collectorate it also prevailed; but here it is more or less en permanence, being kept alive by the inoculators. However, it got here also a good deal of additional force from the Bombay epidemic, as it did, too, in the Kolábá Zilhá. In fact, as may be gathered from the brief description I gave somewhat earlier of the position of this Circle with regard to Bombay, whenever small-pox at all prevails at the Presidency, I am pretty certain to be inundated with it, and no doubt as time offers I only, too, probably pay out the Presidency in kind. Tour. 26. As Statement No. VII. gives a complete summary of how I was employed during the year, I do not think it will be necessary for me to lengthen out an already far too long report by giving any particulars here of my tour. I will only say that I visited during the year the Native State of Sáwantwádí and every táluká of Ratnágiri, all the tálukás of Kolábá and the Native State of Janjírá, and four tálukás of Tháná. I travelled 1,400 miles, visited 193 villages, and saw 5,752 vaccinated children, nearly all of whose names were called from the register. My inspection work was interrupted during the month of February, portion of which time I was employed specially, and the remainder I was unable to perform any out- door work in conse- quence of illness. 27. I noticed in last year's report the inadequacy of the number of peons allowed to the office, and then requested that they might be made up to their former strength, viz., four. Another year's experience has only confirmed me in the belief of the inadequacy of three men to perform the duties required of them efficiently, more especially during the tra- velling season ; and I would, therefore, again beg to bring forward the subject in the hope that it may receive some consideration. Camp Mallâní, 17th May 1873.
23 NORTHERN CIRCLE. Superintendent.24 Percentages of success, age, and sex. 3. The following are the percentages of success, age, and sex :25 richand Bháskarjí, 2nd grade Local Fund vaccinator of Dhandúká, retired from service from 1st January 1873 on account of continued ill health. Arrangements for filling up his place are under consideration. Conduct of Vaccinators, &c. 9. The conduct of the vaccinators, as regards their behaviour with the people of their tálukás, has been very good ; not a single complaint of any kind has come to my knowledge. But as regards their zeal in keeping up work, I had to find fault with several of the Local Funds' and Native States' men, and had to inflict fines. Of these two men still continue extremely indifferent to work, viz., Govindráo Bálájí and Jivarám Chaturbhuj, both of Mahí Kánthá. Though their pay has been reduced from Rs. 20 to Rs. 14 since December 1871, they have not improved at all in work, and I have already, whilst on inspection in their tálukás, given them notice of dismissal in case they did not improve. Small-pox. 10. A somewhat wide-spread epidemic of small-pox broke out in the northern part of this Circle in the last quarter (January, February, and March) of the year under report. Though I was apprised of the breaking out of the disease about the middle of January, yet, from inquiries subsequently made, I have reason to believe that it first made its appearance about the middle of December 1872. It broke out here and there in nearly all tálukás of Khedá Zilhá, but with consider- able force in the Kasbá towns of Kapatbanj, Nariád, Dákor, Mahudhá and Borsad. In Ah- madábád Zilhá it occurred in three outlying villages (Osmánábád, Khoriád and Sábáspur) of Daskroí Táluká and in one or two villages of Dhandúká, Gogo and Prántej Tálukás only, as well as in the city of Ahmadábád. From Mahí Kánthá reports of the appearance of the disease were received from Idar, Pethápur and Mágodí by the end of March. Súrat and Broach Zilhás have remained free from the disease, though in the cities of Súrat and Broach the occurrence of a few cases has been reported. 11. The outbreak of the disease was sudden, and it made its first appearance with consi- derable virulence in Nariád and Kapatbanj towns. When I received a report of this, I was very far off in Disa, and unable to reach the infected locality in time to be of any use ; but arrangements were made to check the prevalence of the disease, and all the active work of carrying out my instructions fell upon the Assistant Superintendent of the Zilhá, Mr. Par- bhádás Hírjí, who in conjunction with the hospital assistant and the táluká vaccinator checked the disease in a very short time. He carried out my general instructions in other places besides Kapatbanj, and succeeded in checking the disease in the infected localities as they were brought to his notice. Under my instructions, also, he made nominal returns of small-pox cases that occurred in the places he visited, showing26 quiries, viz., (1) to ascertain to what extent small-pox has affected those who were previously vaccinated, and (2) to ascertain the cause of so many cases remaining unvaccinated. The result of my inquiries, together with a compilation of the returns, shall form the subject of a special report. Precautionary Measures. 13. In case the disease travelled southwards, the vaccinators and the Assistant Superin- tendents of Súrat and Broach Zilhás were cautioned to be active and to be on the look out for the appearance of the disease in their charges. In the cities of Súrat and Broach I had &quot; battakis&quot; beaten in all parts of the town, informing the people of the appearance of the disease in other parts of Gujráth, and calling upon them to have all their unprotected children submitted for vac- cination. Punishment of Inoculators in Dharmpur. 14. Dharmpur and Bánsdá were in former years the breeding grounds of inoculators ; the introduction of vaccination in them is, however, produc- ing good results. During the year under report, 3,667 operations were performed. With the progress of vacci- nation, inoculation is being weeded out. About the commencement of the year the Dharm- pur vaccinator reported of inoculation having been carried on, in some villages, by a certain person whom he was able to trace. This report was submitted to the Agent, for transmis- sion to the Darbár, with a request that steps might be taken for the suppression of this dis- gusting work. The result of this reference was very encouraging, and Mr. Shaw Stewart wrote as follows in reply :27 sent of the Rádhanpur and Pálanpur Darbárs. During my late travels through the Superin- tendency I availed myself of an opportunity of calling upon Colonel Phayre, the Political Superintendent, and begged him to give his support. I was promised that the subject would receive his best attention, but soon after my interview he left the Superintendency to take charge of the Barodá Residency. As regards Mahí Kánthá, by date the 27th July 1872, Major P. H. LeGeyt, the Acting Political Agent, informed me that at present he was unable &quot; to obtain from the Chiefs of Mahí Kánthá the increased amount of subscription&quot; required; adding that, after making the personal acquaintance of the Chiefs, he hoped to be &quot; able to effect more towards the desired end.&quot; On account of this hopeful reply I was desirous of meeting Major LeGeyt whilst on my tour through the Mahí Kánthá, but I did not succeed in getting an opportunity of so doing. To have met with the approval of the Political Offi- cers is, I consider, a gain on the side of success, and I hope that the scheme may ultimately receive the consent of the several Darbárs and Thákur Chiefs. Tour. 17. In the beginning of the year I was encamped in Broach. The two months and a half (April, May and half of June) of that fair season were spent in the inspection of Broach and Ankleshwar tálukás of Broach Zilhá and of Ulpád, Mándví, Bárdolí, Chikhlí and Jálalpur tálukás of Súrat Zilhá. The dispensary vaccinations of Ankleshwar, Eláo and Mándví were inspected. I was pleased to find Mr. Lakshuman Anant of Eláo doing good work ; of the amount of pains taken by the other two dispensary officers on vaccination I may simply state that it was nil. I was out on district work again in November, and nearly the whole of the pre- sent fair season has been devoted to the inspection of the vaccinators' work of the Pálanpur Superintendency and Mahí Kánthá Agency; and though everything was not found quite satis- factory, yet the state of vaccination was better than what I had observed on my previous inspection of the States. During the whole tour I examined in all, including dispensaries the work of 28 vaccinators, 13,640 children were inspected, my travelling extended over 2,054 miles, and 414 villages have been visited. Camp Umreth, Khedá District, 23rd April 1873.
28 SINDH CIRCLE. Superintendent.29 forms a large number of operations in European regiments which are not included in his returns. The increase of 356 vaccinations at dispensaries is due chiefly to the addition of Guadar to the list. Collectorates. 3. Taking the several Collectorates, Karáchí shows a decrease of 3,872, Shikárpur 702, Haidarábád 619; whilst Jacobábád has an increase of 719, and the Thar and Párkar 3,472. The large decrease in the Karáchí Collectorate is not so unsatisfactory as at first sight it appears to be, for it occurs entirely in the column for children above one year of age. 4. There was a considerable falling off in the quantity of work done from August to December, owing, apparently, to the great prevalence of sickness consequent upon an unusual- ly heavy rainfall. Strength of Establishment. 5. During the year the establishment was brought up to the strength proposed by Dr. Pinkerton. So that there are four Assistant Superinten- dents* and forty-three vaccinators paid out of Local Funds and five vaccinators paid out by Municipalities, viz. two at Karáchí, one at Haidarábád and one at Shikárpur. The Kotrí municipal vaccinator was dismissed last year, and it was deem- ed unnecessary to replace him, as his work would be performed by the táluká vaccinator. Expenditure. 6. There has been a considerable increase in the ex- pense, viz., Rs. 5,069-3-8 due to the increase in the esta- blishment. Sex. 7. There were 41,430 males and 32,054 females against 41,579 males and 32,153 females (primary vaccina- tions) in 1871-72. The proportion is just the same in both years, viz. 56.3 males to 43.7 females in 1871-72 and 56.4 males to 43.6 females in 1872-73. 8. According to the dispensary returns the proportion of males to females is 1,45130 Age. 11. With regard to age the year 1872-73 shows an improvement, inasmuch as the proportion of children vaccinated under one year of age is greater than in the previous year31 16. The Musalmáns as a rule accept vaccination most readily, but in the larger towns the Hindus predominate, or at least in much larger proportion than in the district; hence the reason that officers in charge of dispensaries have greater difficulties to contend with than the táluká, vaccinators. Goádar. 17. This is the first year that we have received returns from Goádar. The population is given at 6,000, chiefly Musalmán. There were 326 per- sons vaccinated, of whom 73 were under and 232 above one year of age ; 186 males and 139 females ; 2 Christians, 62 Hindús, and 261 Musalmáns; 253 were successfully vaccinated, 52 unsuccessful, and in 20 the result was not known. The total cost has been Rs. 63-12-0 out of a sanctioned allowance of Rs. 150, and the cost of each suc- cessful case 4 annas. 18. It has been found very difficult to establish vaccination at Goádar. Repeated trials with tube lymph failed. A vaccinifer was taken from Karáchí in April 1872, and vaccination was established, but unfortunately in the month of May the lymph waslost. Repeat- ed attempts with tube lymph failed till the month of January, when a few vesicles were pro- duced and vaccination again established. Mr. Menezes, Assistant Apothecary, attributes this difficulty in establishing vaccination to the &quot; constitutional inaptitude of the Goádar people, who are so cachectic and wasted that inactive lymph acts on them with great difficulty.&quot; Even it appears that small-pox contagion is not easily taken by the natives, and when taken, it is of the mildest form. There were fifteen cases of small-pox32 jection to the inoculation of their calves, but the Hindús (Banias) are opposed to the opera- tion, and there is often much difficulty in persuading them to lend their calves for the pur- pose. This is unfortunate, as the greater number of calves in the town belong to Baniás, who also take more care of their animals than the Mahomedans. It would be more satis- factory if the calves could be kept at the dispensary, but there is no shed or other place available wherein they could be secured, and, moreover, they are generally too young to be separated from their mothers. &quot; Last year the town punchayet, which consists entirely of Hindús, called upon me and begged that I would not go on with animal vaccination. In the first place they objected to the pain inflicted on the calves, and they also disapproved of their children being vaccina- ted with lymph taken from calves. I talked over the matter with them, and promised that I would not use their calves when others are procurable, and that their children would only be vaccinated with lymph taken from other children. &quot; The operation, as now conducted, involves very little expense, the cost being about one anna for each calf.&quot; Inoculation of Small-pox. 22. It was reported that an inoculator was at work in the táluká of Rohrí, in the month of January, and on making further inquiry, through the Mukhtiárkár, I was told that he had escaped to Khálat. Small-pox. 23. Through the kindness of the Commissioner in Sindh I am furnished regularly with the Births' and Deaths' Reports of the several Collectorates There have been but few deaths from small-pox within the past year, though many have been reported. This is owing to deaths from measles being returned as small-pox. I have lately shown in a letter to the Commissioner in Sindh why deaths from measles are invariably returned as deaths from small-pox ; and the reason is this that the column headed in English &quot; Small-pox&quot; is in &quot;Sindhi&quot; headed Sitlá, which include all the exanthematous diseases instead of &quot; Vadhí Mátá,&quot; which means small-pox and no- thing else. Sir William Merewether has taken measures to correct this. 24. Small-pox was more or less prevalent in Ketí Bandar and neighbourhood throughout the year, but I hope it will soon be extinguished. There have been a few cases at Táttá and at Karáchí, and more lately in Jacobábád and the tálukás bordering on Khílát, where small- pox has been and, I believe, is very prevalent. I do not think there have been 20 deaths from small-pox in Sindh throughout the year. This speaks volumes for vaccination when, compared with the thousands of deaths from small-pox that occurred, almost annually, before the introduction of vaccination, and when it is considered that Sindh is exposed on every side to invasion by small-pox. This year the disease was brought to Ketí and Karáchí from Kutch and Bombay, and to Upper Sindh from Khílát. Infection by Syphilis. 25. I have not seen nor heard of a single case of infection by syphilis or any other disease. The greatest care is taken in the selection of vaccinifers, for whom there is special column in the regis- ter. Village Registers. 26. These have not yet been introduced into Sindh, nor is their introduction practi- cable into the villages as at present constituted, excepting perhaps in the case of municipal towns. In Sindh there are no responsible village officers, and consequently no one to fill in the registers. We have the &quot; Pátil&quot; and the &quot;Mukhí&quot; as the head respectively of the Hindú and Mu- salmán community, but, in the majority of cases, neither the one nor the other can read or write. I think the introduction of the register very desirable for the purposes mention-
33 ed in para. 43 of the Superintendent General's report on vaccination for 1871-72, parti- cularly &quot; (b) countenance to vaccination, and assistance to vaccinators, by village offi- cials, &c.;&quot; &quot;(c) permanency of the record for future use.&quot; Beside this register should be kept the register of births and deaths in each village, so that any unprotected children might readily be found. I believe the whole subject is under consideration by the Commissioner in Sindh, and I am almost certain that Sir William Merewether will devise some plan to introduce the village register ; but it must be a work of some time to get it into operation over the whole of Sindh. Vaccinators. 27. Speaking generally, their conduct has been very good, and the returns in all in- stances found correct, except those of three junior vaccina- tors, who have been dismissed (one of the three was dis- missed in April 1873). My predecessor, Dr. Keith, produced in the vaccinators a whole- some dread against levying &quot; Murád&quot; ; and though some of the Deputy Collectors, from whom Dr. Keith requested information on this subject, thought that &quot; Murád&quot; was occa- sionally levied, they did not cite a single instance of its being practised. Every vaccinator knows that he is liable to be dismissed if he levy &quot; Murád,&quot; or take money, under any pretence whatever, from the people. Assistant Superintendents. 28. The case of Mr. Hásá Mal, mentioned by Dr. Keith in his report for 1871-72, was ultimately referred to the Inspector-General, Indian Medical Department, who directed that Hásá Mal should return to duty ; and I must say he has worked splendidly. A'sú Mal has worked steadily, Lachman has not had the experience of the two former ; he, therefore, requires to be direct- ed more constantly. Lál Baksh was appointed to replace Mehar Chand on 1st of Septem- ber 1872. From what I personally know and have seen of him since his appointment I believe he will make an excellent Assistant. Tour. 29. During the hot and rainy season Dr. Keith inspected the work of the vaccinators in the tálukás of Karáchí, Táttá, Kotrí and Haidarábád, sometimes along the hill range, at others near the sea. In September he proceeded to Upper Sindh, and saw work in the tálukás of Sakkhar, Shikárpur and Naushahrá. At the end of November I took charge, and went across the Collectorate of Haidaráhád to the Thar and Párkar Districts, and inspected the work of the vaccinators in the tálukás of Haidarábád, Hálá, Alihar-jo-Tándo, Mírpur Khás, Kiprá, Umarkot, Díplá, Mittí, Nagar Párkar and Cháchrá. When in the latter táluká, finding myself close to the border of the Jodpur Native State, I went over to see one of the villages, and found there had never been any vaccination carried on ; the few children whose arms bore the marks of vaccination had been vaccinated in Sindh. Fortunately there had been no small-pox in the district for fourteen years, but should it be introduced amongst them there will be a fearful number of deaths from small-pox. I presume that the other Native States on the east border of Sindh are equally unprotected against small-pox. Cannot the rulers of those States be induced to appoint vaccinators to protect their subjects against small-pox? Returning from Cháchrá I was met by Dr, Turnbull, Acting Superintendent General, at Umarkot. We travelled together as far as Haidarábád and Kotrí. I then made another tour through the south of Haidarábád, the Tándá and the Sháhábandar District. Office. 30. I think I ought to mention that there is considerably too much work to be ac- complished by one clerk. I would suggest that a Munshí be appointed to carry on the vernacular work. My time is now much occupied in doing work, that should be done by the clerk whose time is large- 5 VAC
34 ly taken up by vernacular correspondence, &c., whilst the more important duties of super- intending and supervising have, to a similar extent, to be neglected, or, at least, are very imperfectly done.* I would also point out that the number of peons now attached to my office is quite insufficient for carrying on my work efficiently. Formerly I had a havaldár and four peons (one of whom was paid out of Local Funds) ; now there are only the havaldár and two peons, and for collecting children for inspection this number is quite inadequate. I would, therefore, suggest that two more peons be added to the establishment, at least dur- ing the travelling season.* Thanks to Authorities. 31. I have again to acknowledge the material assistance I have received from the Commissioner, Sir William Morewether, and all the Dis- trict Officers. My thanks also are due to Colonel Dunsterville, particularly as Political Agent of Khairpur; to Colonel Phillips, Collector of Haidarábád; and to Colonel Tyrwhitt, Political Superintendent of the Thar and Párkar Districts. For personal assistance I am much indebted to Major Boulton, Captain Mayhew, and Mr. Tyndall. I am also under great obligation to Dr. Miller, Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals in Sindh, for his constant advice and assistance in connection with vaccination at dispensaries. Karáchí, June 23rd, 1873. * A second clerk and an additional peon for each Circle has since been sanctioned by Government in their Resolu- ion No. 2783 of 7th August 1873.
35 KA'THIA'WA'D CIRCLE. Superintendent.36 3. Dr. Blanc's new distribution of vaccinators did not commence till August, so that for four months of the year the establishment was working on the old plan, and in the early months of the year there was an increase. Indeed, the increase in those four months was in greater proportion than the increase in the last eight months. If the same rate had continued throughout the year,the total would have been 70,000, whereas the total was 69,446 according to Dr. Blanc's returns : and if the time of the year is taken into consideration, viz., April, May, June and July, the hottest months of the year, in which less work is done than in the other seasons, I think, I may safely conclude, that the total would have certainly been more with the old than with the new system. Positively so if the old system had provided 2 Assistant Superintendents. Work performed in 1871-72. Old System. New System. Total 4 months. Average total of 4 months. April............ 23,333 May............... 23,056 June ............. July............... August ............ New system total, 8 months, 46, 113 September ............ October ............ November ............ December ............ January ............ February ............ March ......... My own impression of the real cause of increase is, that the people take more kindly to vaccination, and place less difficulties in the way, and also that the Darbárs earnestly strive to help the spread of vaccination, because they know it is the wish of the Sarkár, and, lastly, to the impetus given by the Assistant Superintendents. 4. Vaccination in Káthiáwád is of very few years' growth. Dr. Lord started it two or three years before I took over charge, and from the year 1864 up to the present time there has been a yearly increase of from 3,699 to 9,671 till 1871-72, when the total culmi- nated in an increase of 11,680 ; but as I shall show farther on (under heading False Entries) and as Dr. Turnbull has already pointed out, that this increase was partly due to false entries. Decrease by Government Esta- blishment. 5. There is very little to be said on this head ; there being only one Government vac- cinator now. For part of the year 1871-72 there were nine. The number vaccinated by this man is 1,967, a very fair quantity, and very nearly equal to the average. Re-vaccination. 6. Re-vaccination is urged upon the people, but with very little success, except in the station of Rájkot and among the Government ser- vants.
37 The total number for 1871-72 was 1,606 ; for 1872-73 it is only 818, showing a falling off of 788. Percentage of Success. 7. The percentage of successful cases reported by the Chiefs' vaccinators is a decimal lower than last year, when it was 96.4. This percentage is much too high, as far as I can judge from what I saw during my inspection tour. The reason of Government Vaccinator Motílál's percentage of success being so small, is on account of the large pro- portion of re-vaccination cases in his return. His percentage of success in primary cases is 89.1, and I consider this to be about the true average for the whole Circle. Motílál's per- centage of successful cases for re-vaccination is only 64.4. This is to be expected, as a great many of these were sepoys, prisoners in the jail, and others who showed good marks of previous protection. Lymph. 8. Lymph was reported &quot; bad &quot; five times and once &quot; indifferent&quot; by the Assistant Superintendents. All these reports were made in the hot months ; the rest of the year it was reported on favourably. During my tour I found the lymph on the whole good, but the vesicles generally small. English Lymph. 9. The English lymph the Superintendent General sent me, turned out extremely well: the children I vaccinated from it myself exhibited the largest and clearest vesicles I have seen, without anareola of inflammation, and caused no distress, and very little itching, to the children. I my- self carried children, vaccinated with this new lymph, into three tálukás, and gave orders to the surrounding vaccinators to obtain a supply from the same source. The lymph is gene- rally propagated from arm to arm, but sometimes, where a child is not available, from tubes filled with lymph from the nearest good supply. 10. I noticed a curious result in the effect of the lymph preserved in tubes, i.e., that the lymph when drawn from the tube did not seem to be all equally efficacious : the lymph that came out first and last was generally inert, the centre part produced good vesicles. Whether this is owing to deterioration produced by the process of securing the ends of the tubes, or whether the true vesicle germ has a tendency to centralise, I cannot say ; but it may explain why lymph is often unsuccessful, and also opens a field for the microscopist. Inoculation. 11. Numerous cases of inoculation came to my notice on tour, but they were none under three years. These cases all occurred on the borders of the Gáíkawád's dominions, and although I tried my best to find out the man, I could not trace him. At Károngá they told me he lived at Gorgat ; I went to Gorgat, there they told me he lived at Gangá ; at Gangá they said he lived at Khambáliá. I have been encamped for four days at Khambáliá and cannot trace him. My own impression is, that he was some itinerant holy man, earning a few pence by this means, for I found that he had generally been paid. In one gaum they told me a woman had inoculated the children. The cicatrices were all on the styloid process of the radius. Small-pox. 12. Small-pox has been very prevalent throughout the whole of Káthiáwád, and in the Mangarnl Táluká assumed an epidemic form. In the remarks made under the heading &quot; tour &quot; you will see someparticulars about this epidemic, and the arrangements made to arrest its progress, inwhich I was ably assisted by Ranchoddás Mangaldás.
38 Small-pox after Vaccination. 13. I saw 97 cases of small-pox after vaccination, the cicatrices being most unmis- takeable, and many other registered cases in which small- pox had followed ; but, as 1 could not detect the vaccina- tion cicatrices, I do not acknowledge them, as in all probability they were unsuccessful cases of vaccination. The number is not large, considering that I saw 23,736 cases of vaccina- tion, being at the rate of 4 in every 1,000 cases vaccinated. Assistant Superintendents. 14. I find the Assistant Superintendents of great assistance ; most particularly are they useful in superintending the propagation of good lymph. It is impossible for the Superintendent to visit each vaccinator more than oncea year, but the Assistant Superintendents have the means of doing so twice a year, and asthey always carry good lymph with them, it is often the means of saving most valuable time. 2ndly.39 16. In justice to the vaccinators I must add that they have great difficulties to con- tend with. The new plan organized by Dr. Blanc has dealt a heavy blow upon the vaccinators. Formerly, although they received smaller pay, and that irregularly, still they got a tattoo and free quarters supplied to them by the Darbár, besides food for them- selves and beast, which, by order of the Darbár, was supplied to them gratis in every gaum. Now, when they go to gaums away from their homes, they have the greatest difficulty in procuring the commonest necessaries of life ; indeed in some gaums the inhabitants will not, or cannot, supply grain or grass, as I know to my cost. In others they are bound by vow not to sell things. In many gaums the people only store enough of these things to supply their own wants, and to part with any of their little hoard means short commons for themselves. Another difficulty the vaccinators have to contend with, is that they have to collect the children for vaccination themselves ; formerly they were collected by a Darbár sepoy. For the above reasons the vaccinators pay as short a visit as possible to each gaum (unless the villagers are charitable), and the consequence is, that the work is not as carefully done as it used to be. False Entries. 17. During the year the two Assistant Superintendents reported 414 false entries, but on a close enquiry I found some of these were not false entries, and I have no doubt, if I could have gonethrough the whole myself, I should have found that more of them were mistakes. How- ever, taking the whole 422 (including those I found), of these 236 were reported before I took over charge of the office, and the remainder 186 after I rejoined. 18. During the whole of my tour of nearly six months I found only 28 false names ; and taking into consideration that I inspected 7,498 registered children, the number is not large. Besides, some of these the vaccinators explained by declaring they were travellers, but as I am unable to prove this I have given the whole number. 19. The cause of the greater number of false entries being, in my opinion, the fining of each vaccinator if he did not return 200 a month, I did not enforce Dr. Blanc's order on re-taking charge, and consequently the disease has died a natural death, as is shown by the following table :40 The Pátils or heads of gaums can seldom read or write, so that the &quot; Patrakás, 'as they call them, are very seldom examined by them. But they are useful to higher func- tionaries when on tour. Very often the Pátil cannot find the &quot; Patrak, &quot; he having hidden it away too safely. Frequently, when it is at last produced, it drops out from under a tile or the end of some one's turband41 The Gondal Assistant Vaccinator Maganlál showed signs of having been ill. His work was indifferent, but the principal faults I had to find with him, were his not vaccinating his outlying gaums, and not vaccinating the Dheds. This is a continual cause of fining against one and all of the vaccinators, and apparently hitherto with very little benefit to these low-caste people. After visiting Gondal I continued on in a southerly direction to Jaitpur. Here Pur- náshankar's work, if any thing, was worse than Maganlál's; but Purnáshankar looked well and was, therefore, sent off to work under pain of immediate dismissal. From Jaitpur I went south-west to Mánikwádá, where, upon the whole, Piánlál's work was good, but the quantity somewhat short. From Mánikwádá I went to Dhoráj í an outlying part of the Gondal Táluká. In the month of November I visited another part of the Gondal Táluká and Sirdár, the' extreme eastern part of the Rájkot Táluká, in charge of Khushál ; here the work was good, but there were a great many unprotected cases, due to the reason that it is some distance from the vaccinator's home. They, none of them, will travel far till they are driven. From. Sirdár I visited the extreme eastern part of Nawánagar, viz., A'dkot, in charge of Tulshí Rájárám ; the work was pretty good upon the whole. Continuing east, I arrived at Petrá Kotrá, and examined the work of Apprentice Vaccinator Bhimjí Dewram. His work was not satisfactory, the proportion of unsuccessful cases being very large. From this district I continued farther east and somewhat southerly to the Bháwa- nagar Táluká, and examined the work of the Vaccinator Tulshí Gigá ; his work was on the whole good. But in one gaum, Amlá, that I visited, only four koss from the vaccinator's home, I found small-pox raging, and there had been several deaths; the vaccinator had not visited the gaum for one and a half years. In the month of December, after seeing Tulshí Gigás work, I went north-east to Wallá, another part of the Bháwanagar Táluká, in charge of Assistant Vaccinator Narottam Premjí. His work was good, though he might have done more, for he had not visited all his out- lying gaums, or vaccinated all the Dheds. From Wallá Táluká I went north and north-west to Botál, Bhádlí and Jasdan, and visited the work of Bhímjí Dewrán ; his work was bad in every way, many unvaccinated and the percentage of success small in comparison to the other stations visited. Besides which the Darbár sent in charges against him for laziness. I, therefore, sent him to Vilá- wal, where there was a vacancy, and sent another man to Botál. The Jasdan man's work (Tulshí Rajárám) was pretty good. I also visited the Sáelá Táluká, and saw Rámshankar's work. His work is the best I have seen throughout the year. At the latter end of the month I visited the two Rajkot Taluka vaccinators' work. Early in January 1 travelled north and visited more of the two last-mentioned vaccinators' work. I was much dis- satisfied with both42 cicatrices were small, and he had entirely neglected to vaccinate Dheds and Bhaugís ; con- sequently a great number of unprotected children were inspected in those castes. From Junágad I went south to Mangarul. Here the state of things was painful in the extreme. Since my visit between three and four years age no one had visited these parts; during my two and a quarter years' absence from Káthiáwád no Superintendent had been near the táluká. The last vaccinator had been transferred to another station because he quarrelled with the Darbár; the man before him had been dismissed, and then reinstated and appointed to another station, by Dr. Blanc. I found that the Darbár and people had lost all faith in vaccination, and no wonder about 2,000 people had died of small-pox, although there had been a resident vaccinator ; but many of the children vaccinated by him showed no marks at all, and two or three hundred that he is stated to have vaccinated, had died of small-pox. I visited one gaum, Shápur, in which every human creature under 20 years of age was down with small-pox ; and though it was only three koss from Mangarul, the vaccinator had never even visited the place. After some difficulty I got the Darbár to agree to all the children in the town of Mangarul being vaccinated, and then and not till then they were to form their opinion of the efficacy of vaccination. While I was encamped at Mangarul an event happened which greatly facilitated this object. The kámdár had two children, one a few years old, the other a few months; the former had been vaccinated, the other not. The new vaccinator Pránlál, whom I had brought with me, had advised the kámdár to have his youngest child vaccinated ; he said he would when the child was a little older. Pranlal told him, he had better have it done at once, else his child would catch small-pox and die like most of the other children in the town. The next week the child sickened, and when I left had confluent small-pox ; the protected child was not attacked. To ensure the chil- dren being vaccinated quickly and well, I placed an umedwár at Pránlál's disposal, and also sent an Assistant Superintendent to see that good lymph was introduced, and that the work was carefully performed. Yesterday I received Pránlál's and the umedwár's return ; they had succeeded in vaccinating 280 children in March, so I hope they will succeed in stamp- ing out the disease. In March I travelled round by Navíbandar, Porbandar and Máhádápur. The march- ing here is most difficult, what with the mouths of large rivers and the sheet rock ; four kos a march is the utmost the carts can get over ; the rock is cut into deep ruts, and most dangerous for horses. One river was so broad I was all day getting my kit over. For the above reasons I suppose the Porbandar and Bhánwad men had not been in the habit of going to these parts, as I found several gaums had never been visited. The Porbandar (Ganárám) man's work, what he had done, was pretty good, but his vesicles were small. He had not vaccinated the low castes, or visited the out-of-the-way villages in his charge. Some of these villages cannot be visited except in boats (which means of conveyance a vaccinator has not at his command) till March, and then you have to wade through one or two miles of water up to the saddle girths. The Bántwá (Haríbháí Narbhairám) man's work was much the same as Porbandar ; very few low caste vaccinated, and his outlying villages not visited. The latter part of March I continued in a westerly direction, and examined the Bhán- wad (Digámbar) man's work, which was very bad. He had vaccinated very few, his per- centage of successful cases was comparatively small, and for two years he had not visited his distant gaums, although only about 20 miles from his home. I found also at one gaum that he had taken money from the parents of children he had vaccinated.
43 The last station I visited was Kbánbáliá, Nawánagar, in charge of Nánálál. His work is good, but, like all others, he had not been 10 kos from his home. Altogether during the time of my tour of a little under six months I travelled 1,828 miles, examined 19 vaccinators' work, and saw 23,736 vaccinated children. Concluding Remarks. 26. In conclusion I beg to state that, whatever remarks I have made, I mean nothing in any way personal. Dr. Blanc performed a right good service in changing the system44 REWA' KA'NTHA' CIRCLE. Superintendent.45 Age. 6 The number of children vaccinated under one year is 5,774, This is smaller than is desirable, but many of the Natives have a prejudice to allow their children to be vaccinated when very young. Re-vaccination. 7. 348 re-vaccinations were performed; all that can be said of this is, that it is holding its ground fairly. Lymph, Vesicles, Cicatrices. 8. The lymph in use is of very fair quality. In November 1872 four tubes ofEnglish lymph were received from the Superintendent General of Vaccination : two of them were given to Dámodar Dayáshankar, the Chotá Udaipur vaccinator, and he vaccinated five children with them, and all the children had good vesicles, and from these he continued his work. The other two tubes were given to Hirálál Vishwanáth, one of the Rájpiplá vaccinators, but they failed. The vesicles which r have seen were on the whole very good, and the cicatrices very fairly marked. Small-pox. 9. Several sporadic cases of small-pox were reported to me during the year, but thedisease did not assume any serious extent, and soon died out. In Bálásinur I was informed that several deaths took place from small-pox, but on inquiry I could not find any reliable proof, as no record was kept of the deaths, and all I could ascertain, from verbal inquiry, was that several children died from it, and these had been vaccinated. From the description I have received of some of the cases of supposed small-pox I conclude they were some other eruption. Inoculation. 10. Inoculation is not practised in any part of the Circle as far as I am aware. Husband's Tubes. 11. These are only used for transmitting lymph to a distance, and the importanceof arm to arm vaccination is impressed fully on the vaccinators, and from the small number of tubes used, there is no doubt it is carefully attended to. Assistant Superintendent. 12. The Assistant Superintendent has worked well during the year. But it must always be borne in mind that he was formerly a vaccinator, and perhaps might be a little too lenient with the vacci- nators. Vaccinators. 13. The vaccinators during the year worked well46 Native States. 15. In the Native States the vaccinators have a good deal to discourage them in the way of want of willing support from the Native Chiefs, and in receiving their pay irregularly, frequently being several months in arrears. The way in which Native Chiefs with large incomes dole out a few Rupees for the purpose of mitigating such a dangerous, loathsome, and disabling disease as small-pox, is truly sad ; yet most of them appreciate the advantages of the pro- tective power of vaccination. While I was at Chotá Udaipur I vaccinated several of the Rájáh's family at his request, and while there I amputated the arm of a sepoy whose hand was shot off by a matchlock ; the remains of the hand had been hacked off by a Native hákim, and both bones with jagged ends were protruding several inches from a ragged wound. The patient was put under the influence chloroform for the operation. About a couple of months afterwards Mr. Propert, the Agent of His Excellency the Governor, told me he saw the man, and that his arm was quite healed. Popularity of Vaccination. 16. I am unable to say that vaccination is popular, but the Bheels submit to it generally with an indifferent air, which seems to say, if it pleases you, it does not do me much harm, and I will al- low it. As a rule Bheels do not seem to care about the disfiguration of their persons. They are always burning and scarifying themselves all over the body for the purpose of curing diseases, frequently &quot; firing &quot; young infants in a truly alarming manner. Hindrances. 17. The Natives believe that the small-pox is a goddess, and that it is improper to interfere with her. They are also decidedly partial to drinking, especially at their various feasts, when they are quite unmanageable, and sometimes dangerous. I was at Jhálod during the Holí, and for several days could scarcely get any children to inspect, as most of the Bheels were drunk, women as well as men. Expenditure. 18. The expenditure for the Local Funds was Rs. 1,484, for the Native States Rs. 2,531-11-0, and for the sanctioned establishment of the Superintendent Rs. 2,997-5-6, total Rs. 7,013-0-6. This latter represents the pay of the Assistant Superintendent, a clerk, 4 peons, and sta- tionery, &c. Aid from the Political Agent. 19. I had frequently, during the year, to request the assistance of the Political Agent Rewá Kánthá, and it was always most willingly and effect- ually rendered. Through this means I was enabled to get a grant of Rs. 3 Bábásháí per annum for each vaccinator for the expense of stationery ; formerly they generally had to pay for it out of their own pockets. Tour. 20. I started on my tour on the 1st November 1872, and as this was my first regulartour I wished to make a complete circuit of my Circle, soas to obtain personal information of each vaccinator andhis district. In this I succeeded to my satisfaction, as I saw all the vaccinators and theirlymph, and method of working, and examined their registers. I inspected 6,799 children,visited 215 villages, and travelled 924 miles. Camp Dohad, 5th May 1873.
47 PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. Local Superintendent.48 Ages. From birth to 15 days. From 16 days to one month. Between 1and 3 months. Between 3 and 6 months. Between 6 and 9 months. Between 9 and 12 months. Between 12 and 15 months. Between 15 and 18 months. Between 18 and 21 months. Between 21 and 24 months. Between 2 and 4 years. Between 4 and 6 years. Between 6 and 9 years. Between 9 and 13 years. Between 13 and 24 years. Between 24 and 44 years. Upwards. Total Deaths. Deaths from Small-pox .... 6 21 69 186 195 415 71 101 15 238 427 176 95 44 99 70 5 2,233 These facts speak unequivocably for themselves ; comment on them would be vain. To proceed49 hundreds were vaccinated from the Dockyard employés, and the crews of the war and troop ships that were then in the harbour. Many of these sources have naturally failed us and hence the decrease. Indeed, had it not been for the Native regiments, and the schools for European children, we should scarcely have had a decent number of re-vaccinations to show in our present returns and report. Nor is there any very great likelihood of our being called upon to perform re-vaccinations, in the members of the general community, for some considerable time to come yet. Nor, indeed, is this to my mind any reason for being concerned, for whatever the experience or opinion of others on the subject, I have a firm conviction that vaccination, properly performed, with genuine lymph, is as sure a pre- vention of small-pox as a natural attack of small-pox itself. During a professional career of 26 years50 April 1872. May 51 The following three tables show the deaths from small-pox arranged according to localities and castes52 Castes. Birth to 15 days. From 16 days to 1 month. Between 1 and 6 months. Between 6 and 12 months. Between 12 and 23 months. Between 2 and 4 years. Between 4 and 6 years. Between 6 and 9 years. Between 9 and 13 years. Between 13 and 24 years. Between 24 and 41 years. Upwards. Total. Not vaccinated. Vaccinated. Budhists and Jains ......... ... ... 7 10 14 21 3 2 ... 1 ... ... 58 18 ... Bráhmins, &c............. ... ... 9 24 5 14 7 2 1 1 1 ... 64 30 2 Liugávats and Bhátyás .... ... ... 4 15 14 11 3 2 1 1 ... ... 51 15 ... Hindús of other Castes...... 3 10 101 219 53 198 39 22 13 36 12 1 707 406 21 Hindú out-castes ............ ... 2 20 33 2 17 8 6 3 1 2 ... 93 66 2 Musalmáns ........ 1 1 38 89 24 130 24 20 9 8 15 1 361 91 5 Pársis ......... ... ... 10 31 28 49 25 13 3 4 ... ... 163 ... ... Jews ......... ... ... 2 3 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 7 ... 1 Native Christians ........ 1 1 1 9 2 19 3 2 3 13 16 1 71 13 ... Europeans ................ ... ... ... 3 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 2 ... 7 ... ... Indo-Europeans............ ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Negro Africans ........ ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 1 ... 6 5 ... 13 2 ... Kolís or Fishermen ....... ... ... 1 13 ... 7 3 ... ... 1 ... ... 25 7 ... Total....... 5 14 194 450 143 466 117 69 33 73 53 3 1,620 648 31 12. It will be seen from the above tables that no part of Bombay escaped from the effects of the outbreaks of small-pox ; but there are some localities, such as Dhobí Taláo Kámáthípurá, Market, Mándví, Fort, Girgaum, Umharkhádí, Bhuleshwar, Khetwádí, Khárá Taláo, Chakhlá, and Dongarí, that suffered most terribly. The Fort and Dhobí Taláo Dis- tricts are of late generally not so badly off in this respect; but, during the past year, the unprecedentedly high mortality amongst the Pársís has brought these places prominently forward. Of the 103 deaths in the Fort District, 68 were among the Parsis alone; and of the 165 of Dhobí Taláo, 48 are among Pársís. 13. It does appear a strange circumstance that, year after year, the same places should show the greatest mortality from small-pox, and this in spite of the existence of a large vaccine establishment presumably using its very best efforts in those very places. To one unacquainted with the circumstances of the place, the question would naturally arise53 Nor is the explanation far to seek. It has been several times expressed in our An- nual Reports that the Vaccine Department has, practically, no influence whatever on the Mahomedan portion of the community, from the poorest mendicant and fakír to the richest merchant and millionaire, wherever residing. Former experience having taught that assault and abuse are the only, but certain, recompense of any interference or offi- ciousness on the part of our establishment, and persuasion in whatever shape useless, no attempt even, at it, is made by our men. It thus happens that the number of Mahomedans vaccinated almost wholly consist of such as are brought to the stations for the operation at their own sweet and free will, and at their own convenience; and improvident and apathetic as they generally are, and having, besides, in their general ignorance, a false sense of ten- derness for their little ones, believing them to be too tender for the opeiation till they are thee or four years old, it very frequently happens that they are surprised by that terrible scourge of humanity which respects neither the rank or position, caste or creed, nor the color or age of any body, and is supremely indifferent to their convenience. A painful in- tance, in corroboration of this statement, was met with last year in connection with the district of Kámáthípurá. 14. That I may be acquainted with the localities where small-pox was prevailing most, or where its ravages were the greatest, so that I may be enabled to visit those places specially and more frequently than otherwise would have been the case, I was in the habit of referring to the mortuary returns as they appear in the daily papers. I found that Kámáthípurá was a locality that had the greatest number of deaths from small-pox. I be- gan to work then twice a week, but no change was produced. Thrice a week and even oftener, and yet without at all lessening the deaths. Do what I would, I always found that I had made no impression upon the disease in that quarter. I knew that some of the Kámáthís and the low-caste people, that live there in such numbers, tried to conceal their children,54 generally suffer, simply because they are rather improvident and given to procrastination and would not have recourse to vaccination in time. It was very painful to witness the amount of superstition and ignorant prejudice among the Pársís during the last year in connection with small-pox. One could easily conceive that the Pársís mind, true to the laws of its own nature, would, during the pro- longed, constant, and intimate contact with the Hindús, appropriate to a certain extent their manners and customs, and even imbibe their superstitions and prejudices; but that the present state of enlightenment and education of the Pársís, at least of Bombay, should have tolerated this for a moment, is what I could not possibly believe : yet to my amaze- ment the fact was there, in all its strangeness, that the Pársís even out-hindued the Hindús themselves in their superstitious regard for small-pox. Whatever influence enlightenment and education may have had upon the male portion of the Pársís community, there can be no denying the fact that their females continue to be as ignorant and superstitious as ever ; and, what is worse, the males invariably succumb to their influence, which is paramount in these cases. The same is the case with the Mahomedans ; with this difference, perhaps, that they have not much enlightenment or education to show, and, as a natural consequence, the males and females are in the same boat. The case of the Kolis or fishermen, though painful in the extreme, is a different one altogether. Whether for weal or for woe they will stick to their dread deity &quot;Deví:&quot; and rather than deprive her of the victim of her choice, and try to thwart her operations, they would see every child of theirs in the grave. Wherever they are, they have to a soul con- sistently persisted in having nothing whatever to do with vaccination. It is true that they are doubly mischievous, They not only set a bad example to their ignorant and equally superstitious neighbours, but actually, like the &quot; dog in the manger,&quot; do not allow others the opportunity of availing themselves of the benefits of vaccination. In the Kolíwádá of the Mándví district, though there were but five deaths among the Kolís, there were no less than 20 deaths in the other residents, of whom 18 were Hindús and 2 Christians. They, however, do not care to know what the result of their reprehensible conduct is either to themselves or to their neighbours. Extent of Operations. 17. Speaking of the extent of the operations of the Vaccine Department generally the Native Town, Fort included, though a very extensive and well-stocked field, is not the one that receives even its relative amount of benefit from vaccination. Our work is complete55 subject, make a questionable use of their position in preventing the children of their ser- vants being taken to the stations to be vaccinated. But the upshot is, that they are either surprised by small-pox, or get their children vaccinated when it too late to be of any use. Máhálakshumí had its quota of deaths from small-pox from among the Pársís even. At Warlí there is a Kolíwádá At Máhim there is a small part of it called Bhandárwádá, lying on the main road, solely occupied by Bhandárís or toddy-drawers. These Bhandá- rís have always tried their best to resist our attempts at vaccinating them or their chil- dren ; and though there was a mortality of only 22 in the whole of Máhim, some 10 deaths of these were among these Bhandárís of this limited spot. In Máhim we have, too, a number of the Konkaní-Málwání Hindús so prone to migrate. In the Seo district we have two Kolíwádás56 Total Population. Successful Primary Opera- tions. Kolábá. Fort. Esplanade. Market. Mándví Chakhlá. Umbarkhádí. Dongarí. Dhobí Taláo. Phanaswádí. Bhuleshwar. Khárá Taláo. Kumbhárwádá. Khetwádí. Girgaum. Chawapátí. Wálkeshwar. Máhálakshumi. Mázagaon. Tádwádi. Kámáthípurá . Bycullá. Parel. Shíwrí. Seo. Máhim. Warlí. Water Division. Outstation. 1871-72...10,338. 1872-73...12,343. Percent.of Population...... 2.58 4.97 1.64 6.70 5.45 5.70 7.73 3.97 5.88 3.22 5.59 3.67 4.28 3.29 3.85 1.17 1.20 0.67 3.25 1.57 7.29 4.35 2.14 0.70 1.79 2.23 1.56 3.56 .. Percent. successful 1871-72... 1.72 3.38 2.36 6.98 4.22 3.60 4.60 7.06 6.32 2.35 2.43 2.38 1.88 7.46 6.72 1.90 2.95 1.16 4.04 0.93 9.58 2.39 4.90 1.45 4.36 2.11 0.39 0.28 0.10 Percent. successful 1872-73.. 1.75 3.42 2.77 6.49 3.06 3.37 5.38 6.48 7.39 2.59 4.63 4.76 2.65 7.76 4.80 0.90 1.51 2.68 2.62 0.64 7.54 2.64 3.84 1.71 2.32 4.24 1.36 0.08 0.62
57 It has been frequently remarked that when small-pox makes its appearance in Bombay as an epidemic, it is seen to prevail in all its parts, in its entire extent, almost simultaneously. Nor is there any wonder that this is so. Insularly placed as Bombay appears to be, in the daily course of events it becomes connected with more parts of the world than any other place in India, inland or on the sea coast. During the last year, of those that died from small-pox alone, some 26 persons brought the disease into Bombay from ten outstations, and introduced it into 13 different localities, comprising almost the entire length and breadth of the island. The same thing must be taking place year after year. Conduct of the Subordinates. 19. The conduct of the subordinates has been good. Byculla, 10th June 1873. 8 VAC
58 KUTCH CIRCLE. One Native Superintendent, and 9 Native States Vaccinators, under Mr. DORÁBJI HORMASJÍ, G.G.M.C. Population 148,402. Total cost, Rs. 2,188-10. Average cost of each successful vacci- nation, Rs. 1-3-5. Years. Total vaccinated. Compared with the preceding year. Successfully vaccinated. Percentage of success excluding those unknown from the total. Increase. Decrease. In Primary Vaccina- tion. In Re-vac- cination. 1871-72 ... 1,706 ...... ...... 1,563 94.4 64.0 1872-73 1,932 226 ...... 1,791 94.3 88.8 1. During the year 1872-73 there were 1,932 vaccine operations performed, of which 1.791 cases were successful, 108 were unsuccessful, and 33 did not come under observation after being vaccinated. Of the cases vaccinated there were 1,036 males and 896 femalesthere were 1,327 Hindús, 599 Musalmáns, and 6 Pársís. 2. I am glad to observe that vaccination is gaining a better footing every year. This year there were performed 226 operations more than those of the last. In order to give an idea of the progress made during the last successive five years I here annex a table: 59 who exercised his influence in inducing the Judejás to appoint their own vaccinators, and thus four vaccinators were added to the number of five who were already maintained by His Highness the Ráo. Although the work performed by the Judejá vaccinators was only to a limited extent, yet their appointment freed the Darbár vaccinators to work exclu- sively in the Darbár towns, and thus more work was done by them than in former years. 3. This year there were nine vaccinators at work. His Highness was pleased to increase their number from four to five. The Chief of Terá and the Judejás of Rohá, Berájá and Mothárá had each one of their own. Vaccination in the Darbár towns was performed as follows : TABLES OF VACCINATION RETURNS. &c., FOR 1872-73. 9( 2 ) A.[NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted ( 4 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Per- sons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS Percentage of successful cases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Musalmán. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cination. In Re-vaccina- tion. 1872-73 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 CIRCLE. Acting( 5 ) SOUTHERN J. RABY, Assistant Surgeon. 1 1 929 1,112 Ka- Collec- 552 83,848 Mudebihál .... 457 472 .. 774 93 .. 62 195 736 631 100 208 939 .. .. .. .. 86.3 .. 929 1 1 763 756 837 105,475 Indí ........ 414 348 .. 655 95 .. 12 101 661 553 87 158 798 .. 1 .. 1 86.4 .. 763 1 1 841 1,117 792 99,798 Sindghí...... 410 431 .. 695 102 .. 44 176 665 758 23 66 847 .. .. .. .. 97.0 .. 841 2 2 1,755 1,417 865 86,311 Bijápur ...... 918 823 .. 1,428 275 .. 38 481 1,260 1,494 120 128 1,742 6 5 3 14 92.5 54.5 877 1 1 11 11 10,217 10,771 5,693 816,037 5,253 4,830 1 8,383 1,163 .. 531 2,004 3,079 8,727 660 244 10,331 63 37 34 134 92.9 63.0 928 .. .. 1 1 812 646 Native States, Southern Maráthá States. 1,207 223,663 Sánglí ........ 437 375 .. 702 110 .. .. 551 261 618 101 105 825 .. .. .. .. 85.9 .. 812 1 1 672 1,086 574 82,201 Miraj, 1st .... 375 297 .. 465 207 .. .. 514 158 669 1 2 672 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 672 1 1 559 396 197 35,601 Do. 2nd .... 372 187 .. 534 25 .. .. 307 252 559 .. .. 559 .. .. .. .. 99.8 .. 559 1 1 462 585 271 39,420 Kurandwád 1st. 223 239 .. 348 81 .. 33 199 263 439 25 7 471 .. .. .. .. 84.6 .. 462 1 1 467 387 177 30,251 Do. 2nd 253 213 .. 397 33 .. 36 79 387 424 24 26 474 1 .. .. 1 84.6 100.0 467 1 1 913 1,539 317 58,921 Mudhol ...... 496 417 .. 837 76 .. .. .. 913 452 432 29 913 .. .. .. .. 51.1 .. 913 1 1 467 1,138 189 38,031 Rámdrug .... 204 200 .. 364 40 .. .. 100 304 343 38 23 404 17 36 10 63 90.0 30.9 467 2 1 1,090 827 Unkn. 102,346 Jamkhandí .. 577 513 .. 932 147 .. 11 431 659 330 221 628 1,179 .. .. .. .. 59.8 .. 545 1 1 515 312 Unkn. Unkn. Sávanúr ...... 260 253 1 352 157 .. 3 46 467 467 53 10 530 2 .. .. 2 89.8 100.0 515 .. .. 10 9 5,957 6,916 2,932 610,434 3,197 2,694 1 4,931 876 .. 83 2,227 3,664 4,301 895 831 6,027 20 36 10 66 82.7 35.7 595 1 .. 1 1 2,070 1,744 Kolhápur States. 360 32,414 Vishálgarh ... 1,059 1,007 .. 1,824 86 .. 156 445 1,621 2,008 40 21 2,069 4 .. .. 4 98.4 100.0 2,070 1 1 1,777 1,224 567 59,330 Ichalkaranjí.. 894 883 .. 1,458 89 .. 230 774 1,003 1,482 65 256 1,863 .. .. .. .. 95.7 .. 1,777 1 1 1,911 1,467 252 47,801 Kágal ......... 984 927 3 1,695 18 .. 195 543 1,368 1,660 38 216 1,914 .. ... ... .. 97.7 .. 1,911 1 1 1,438 1,185 486 128,204 Gadhinglaj .. 780 678 8 1,373 59 .. 18 98 1,360 1,285 134 50 1,469 .. .. .. .. 90.5 .. 1,458 1 1 1,271 863 486 43,439 Báurá........ 586 579 .. 951 145 .. 69 146 1,019 1,106 35 62 1,203 33 6 67 106 96.9 84.6 1,271 1 1 2,235 1,595 540 106,714 Panálá ...... 1,260 1,265 .. 2,278 16 .. 231 540 1,985 2,517 16 8 2,541 9 .. 1 10 99.3 .. 2,535 1 1 2,343 1,660 900 91,148 Buthargarh .. 1,180 1,133 9 2,146 48 .. 110 263 2,050 2,003 154 156 2,313 .. .. .. .. 92.8 .. 2,313 1 1 976 1,268 243 79,722 Shirol .......... 490 486 .. 816 68 .. 92 646 330 808 40 153 1,001 .. .. .. .. 95.2 .. 976 1 1 325 636 180 84,464 Torgal ...... 160 165 .. 294 26 .. 5 94 231 297 21 17 335 .. .. .. .. 93.3 .. 325 1 1 1,132 1,143 598 Ajrá ......... 576 556 8 1,017 27 .. 80 446 686 1,111 44 19 1,174 .. .. .. .. 96.1 .. 1,132 1 1 3,777 3,345 506 129455 Kolhápur Pe- thá & Station. 1,737 1,600 1 2,924 136 .. 276 879 2,458 2,891 194 271 3,356 321 102 17 440 93.7 75.4 3,777 1 .. 11 11 19,545 15,330 5,118 802,691 9,706 9,279 29 16,776 718 .. 1,462 4,874 14,111 17,168 781 1,229 19,178 367 108 85 560 90.0 77.2 1,776 Grand Total of the Sou- thern Circle. 5 4 64 62 70,623 67,627 26,410 4,455,796 35,861 32,588 434 58,608 5,999 5 3,403 15,676 52,773 59,122 5,410 5,284 69,816 818 566 173 1,587 91.6 59.9 1,094 WESTERN CIRCLE. T. CODY, Assistant Surgeon. 1 1 1 2 1,098 1,992 Tháná Collectorate. 288 79,025 Shásti ....... 556 540 248 771 23 4 50 409 687 1,051 13 32 1,096 2 .. .. 2 98.7 100.0 1,098 1 247 .. 14,290 Tháná City .. 134 108 17 195 6 7 17 79 163 206 30 9 245 1 4 .. 5 87.2 20.0 247 1 1 1,286 1,324 216 61,089 Bassein...... 669 613 154 1,101 6 1 20 628 654 1,271 18 1 1,290 .. 4 .. 4 98.6 .. 1,286 1 1 2,246 890 320 74,267 Bhiwandí.... 1,131 1,115 .. 2,041 61 .. 144 300 1,946 1,940 464 36 2,437 .. .. .. .. 80.7 .. 2,246 1 1 1,168 1,672 579 72,556 Kalián ...... 574 589 .. 1,051 31 .. 81 412 751 886 240 72 1,198 4 .. 1 5 78.6 100.0 1,168 1 1 1,076 1,999 636 110,423 Dhanú ...... 557 514 .. 957 .. 114 .. 186 885 969 100 11 1,080 5 .. .. 5 90.6 100.0 1,076 1 1 1,401 2,456 365 77,150 Karjat ...... 693 703 1 1,224 20 .. 151 569 827 1,301 76 31 1,408 5 .. .. 5 94.4 100.0 1,401 1 1 787 309 413 71,974 Máhim ...... 413 370 .. 776 .. .. 7 272 511 738 30 20 788 2 2 .. 4 96.0 50.0 787 1 1 1,333 1,768 345 57,203 Murbád .... 674 657 .. 1,298 29 .. 4 332 999 1,030 98 205 1,333 .. 2 .. 2 91.3 .. 1,333 1 2 1,562 278 96,714 Panwel...... 765 797 .. 1,469 35 .. 58 1,020 542 1,392 52 118 1,562 .. .. .. .. 96.3 .. 1,562 1 548 2,350 .. Panwel Town. 276 269 1 512 24 .. 8 304 241 505 37 17 539 3 .. .. 3 93.1 100.0 548 313 .. 8,690 Uran ......... 175 137 13 277 13 1 8 132 180 239 23 63 325 .. 1 .. 1 91.2 .. 313 1 1 1,972 2,344 849 100,304 Shahpur .... 1,038 934 .. 1,871 35 .. 66 214 1,758 1,860 113 7 1,980 .. .. .. .. 94.2 .. 1,972 1 1 902 350 318 32,420 Wádá........ 439 463 .. 660 13 .. 229 122 780 713 176 23 912 .. .. .. .. 80.2 .. 902 1 1 13 13 15,939 17,454 4,607 847,424 8,094 7,809 434 14,203 296 127 843 4,979 10,924 14,101 1,467 645 16,213 22 13 1 36 90.5 62.8 1,226 1 1 1 1 1,739 1,522 Kolábá Collecto- rate. 192 66,947 Alíbág ...... 915 824 4 1,637 44 2 52 688 1,051 1,700 16 32 1,748 .. .. .. .. 99.0 .. 1,739 1 1 1,709 2,408 339 72,733 Mángáon .... 857 797 .. 1,467 25 .. 53 657 997 1,532 140 56 1,728 27 25 3 55 91.6, 51.9 1,709 1 1 1,138 1,744 455 105,336 Máhád ...... 556 571 .. 1,045 29 .. 162 155 972 1,090 25 12 1,127 8 3 .. 11 97.7 72.7 1,138 1 1 2,232 1,844 236 63,363 Pen .......... 1,190 1,026 .. 2,043 44 .. 129 1,145 1,071 2,130 72 37 2,239 7 9 .. 16 96.7 43.7 2,232 1 1 900 1,991 219 42,044 Rohá ...... 431 447 .. 787 24 .. 67 473 405 814 44 23 881 19 2 1 22 94.8 90.4 900 1 1 5 5 7,718 9,509 1,501 350,423 3,949 3,665 4 6,979 166 2 463 3,118 4,496 7,266 297 160 7,723 61 39 4 104 96.0 61.0 1,543
( 6 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Per- sons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful eases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Músalmán. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. Primary Vaccination. In Re-vaccina- tion. 1872-73 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 WESTERN CIRCLE- Continued. T. COLY, Assistent Surgeon. 1 1 1 2 2,211 3,785 Rutnágiri Collec- torate. 263 118,672 Ratnágirí .... 1,136 1,090 4 1,857 302 .. 63 318 1,908 1,935 207 167 2,202 12 4 2 18 90.3 75.0 2,241 2 2 6,065 6,293 727 176,897 Chiplún...... 2,887 2,699 .. 4,628 277 .. 681 1,002 4,584 5,355 82 235 5,612 257 120 102 479 98.4 68.1 3,031 1 2 3,579 5,122 503 146,735 Dápulí ...... 1,270 1,183 .. 1,975 275 .. 203 436 2,017 2,210 39 232 2,181 628 307 191 1,126 98.2 67.1 3,579 1 1 5,340 2,929 508 118,901 Deogarh .... 2,424 2,406 38 4,570 137 .. 115 865 3,995 4,563 306 158 5,027 269 144 67 480 90.7 65.1 5,340 1 1 2,378 3,919 325 82,119 Gohágarh.... 1,221 1,104 .. 1,935 166 .. 227 220 2,108 2,007 271 174 2,452 29 13 8 50 88.1 69.0 2,378 2 1 7,340 4 ,333 273 121,337 Málwan...... 3,659 3,323 17 6,193 177 .. 295 1,218 5,764 6,767 309 110 7,186 177 177 4 358 95.6 50.0 3,670 2 1 7,232 3,157 785 166,347 Rájápur ...... 3,674 3,375 9 6,205 540 .. 295 759 6,290 6,482 401 310 7,193 83 85 10 184 94,1 49.4 3,616 1 1 3,003 3,379 447 102,616 Sangamesh- war. 1,591 1,412 .. 2,445 175 .. 383 872 2,131 2,959 60 37 3,056 .. .. .. .. 98.0 .. 3,003 1 1 11 11 37,182 32,931 3,931 1,036,624 17,895 16,592 68 30,108 2,049 .. 2,262 5,690 28,797 32,278 1,075 1,386 35,339 1,455 850 390 2,695 95.0 63.1 3,380 .. .. 1 1 l,364 197 Native States. 150 71,996 Janjíeá ...... 679 678 .. 1,191 138 .. 28 129 1,228 1,086 50 211 1,359 1 6 .. 7 94.8 14.2 1,361 1 1 1,081 425 534 37,406 Jawár ........ 559 522 .. 1,037 3 .. 41 137 944 1,065 1 15 1,081 .. .. .. .. 99.9 .. 1,181 1 1 6,528 4,648 900 190,814 Sáwantwádí 2,720 2,772 120 5,256 116 .. .. 1,056 4,126 5,278 344 20 5,642 779 213 11 1,036 99.8 76.2 6,528 .. .. 3 3 8,973 5,270 1,584 300,216 3,958 3,972 120 7,484 257 .. 69 1,332 6,598 7,129 404 219 8,082 780 219 14 1,043 94.8 75.8 2,991 Grand Total of the Western Circle. 3 3 32 32 69,812 65,107 11,623 2,534,687 33,896 32,038 626 58,774 2,768 129 3,637 15,119 50,815 61,074 3,843 2,410 67,357 2318 1151 409 3,878 94.0 66.8 2,181 .. .. 1 1 314 1,151 Pálanpur. Unkn. 9,335 Disá Camp.... 163 137 9 189 82 6 14 204 96 256 20 26 202 9 5 .. 14 92.7 64.2 374 CIRCLE COLY ,M.D. 1 1 1 1 2,186 2,035 Ahmadábád Collectorate. 306 130,610 Daskroí...... 1,183 944 10 1,791 169 .. 217 1,382 745 1,878 226 78 2,182 33 19 7 59 89.2 65.4 2,186 2 2 4,913 5,098 2 116,873 Ahmádábád City. 2.263 2,141 11 3,070 1,077 26 220 2,811 1,593 4,250 119 107 4,176 401 102 15 518 97.2 70.7 2456 2 1 2,458 2,237 650 92,521 Dholká ...... 1241 1,141 .. 1,911 184 .. 287 1,662 720 2,120 127 129 2,382 56 9 11 76 94.3 86.1 1,229 1 490 .. 20,854 Dholká Town. 2 2 2,319 3,248 1,203 124,860 Dhandútká.... l,066 1,046 .. 1,615 339 .. 158 1,380 732 1,830 158 128 2,022 155 26 26 207 92.0 85.5 1,159 2 1 2,931 2,492 655 108,383 Veramgáon 1441 1,352 .. 2,407 192 1 193 2,006 787 2,567 81 185 2,833 78 24 36 138 96.9 70.4 1,465 1 698 .. 19,661 Veramgáon Town. 1 1 1,503 1,290 356 73,229 Sánand...... 711 656 .. 1,189 72 .. 109 829 541 1,281 39 53 1,373 97 9 27 123 97.0 91.5 1,503 1 1 1,577 995 446 196,901 Prántej...... 776 754 .. 1,371 28 .. 131 1,018 512 1,392 116 26 1,356 27 1 6 47 92.6 90.2 1,577 1 1 2,211 712 223 33,329 Gogo ........ 1,146 1,056 .. 1,945 97 .. 160 671 1,531 2,057 67 98 2,222 25 8 6 39 96.8 75.7 2,241 1 1 12 2 20,128 19,325 3861 80,571 9,830 9,090 21 15209 2,093 27 1,475 11,759 7,161 17,387 933 893 19,131 82 201 104 1,217 91.3 81.4 1,677
( 7 ) NORTHERN MANCHARJI' BERAMJI', 1 1 1 1 2,733 2,521 Khedá Collec- torate. 165 98,435 Mahmudabad. 1,392 1,141 2 2,170 177 .. 486 1,819 714 2,320 77 141 2,318 115 18 37 200 96.7 70.5 2,733 1 1 2,398 2,736 216 78,673 Mátar........ 1,199 992 .. 1,875 216 .. 121 1,212 979 1,905 162 124 2,194 116 49 42 207 92.1 70.3 2,398 1 2 2,951 3695 223 136,316 Nariád...... 1,634 1,275 .. 2,267 369 .. 273 1,283 1,621 2,162 81 65 2,909 37 3 2 42 97.1 92.5 2,954 1 982 .. 24,551 Nariád Town. 462 343 .. 687 105 2 8 450 375 752 1 52 805 89 41 44 177 99.8 66.9 982 1 1 1,874 1,849 279 86,742 Kupatbunj .. 1,008 800 .. 1,611 102 .. 95 1,147 661 1,727 27 54 1,808 43 14 9 66 98.4 75.4 1,874 1 1 2,062 1,449 246 85,601 Thásrá ...... 1,119 941 .. 1,634 198 .. 208 1,259 801 2,050 8 2 2,060 2 .. .. 2 99.6 100.0 2,062 1 1 2,691 2,996 237 157,692 A'nand ....... 1,335 1,185 .. 2,140 188 .. 192 1,441 1,079 2,303 85 138 2,526 108 23 40 171 96.4 82.4 1,345 1 1 4,119 3,128 192 144,528 Borsad ....... 2,105 1,864 .. 3,514 156 .. 322 2,024 1,945 3,781 126 83 3,999 67 70 27 164 96.7 48.9 4,149 1 1 9 9 19,810 18,374 1,558 812,538 10,254 8,541 2 15,891 1,494 2 1,406 10,617 8,178 17,603 567 660 18,830 577 231 201 1,029 96.8 69.6 2,201 1 1 1 1 1,439 2,139 Broach Col- lectorate. 298 73,359 Broach ...... 719 701 2 734 531 .. 153 987 433 4,269 28 125 1,422 11 4 4 19 97.8 73.3 1,439 1 1 960 773 .. 36,932 Broach City .. 490 456 2 532 290 127 5 570 386 763 31 163 977 4 .. .. 4 96.0 100.0 960 1 1 2,694 2,767 375 78,365 Jambusar .... 1,457 1,230 .. 2,016 393 .. 278 1,641 1,046 2,487 75 123 2,687 4 .. 3 7 97.0 100.0 2,694 1 1 537 1,566 224 40,260 A'mod ...... 221 223 .. 300 53 .. 91 273 171 389 21 31 444 39 36 18 93 94.1 52.0 1276 739 158 374 38,779 Wágrá ...... 37 329 .. 511 92 .. 97 399 301 623 41 38 702 27 8 4 39 94.8 77.1 1 1 1,542 1,892 406 54,177 Ankleshwar .. 751 733 .. 1,171 263 .. 50 974 510 1,362 70 62 1,491 33 7 18 58 95.1 82.5 1,542 1 1 5 5 7,911 9,295 1,677 321,872 4,009 3,682 4 5,264 1,622 127 674 4,844 2,847 6,893 269 544 7,706 118 55 47 220 96.2 68.2 1,582 1 1 1 1 2,453 1,355 Súrat Col- lectorate. .. 90,000 Súrat City .... 1,071 956 19 1,451 413 78 36 914 1,113 1,749 84 194 2,027 263 67 96 426 95.4. 79.6 2,453 1 1 2,094 1,096 94 28,144 Chorásí ...... 1,040 999 .. 1,612 213 19 195 1,214 795 1,769 150 122 2,041 43 9 3 55 92.1 82.6 2,094 1 1 1,209 1,376 336 70,531 Ulpád........ 579 610 .. 970 91 10 113 585 604 1,147 20 23 1,190 15 1 4 20 98.2 93.7 1,209 1 1 1,578 1,514 175 64,233 Jalálpur .... 818 744 .. 1,316 133 .. 113 882 680 1,326 69 168 1,563 9 1 6 16 95.0 90.0 1,578 1 1 1,478 1,199 225 71,972 Balsád ...... 747 721 .. 1,376 20 5 67 562 906 1,282 39 155 1,176 8 1 1 10 97.0 88.8 1,478 1 1 1,571 852 188 35,411 Màndví...... 823 708 .. 1,434 91 4 2 650 881 1,456 9 67 1,532 28 8 5 41 93.3 63.6 1,571 1 1 1,718 1,538 167 49,103 Chiklí........ 902 786 .. 1,528 139 5 16 1,306 382 1,642 28 18 1,688 24 6 .. 30 98.3 80.0 1,718 1 1 2,152 2,573 221 61,311 Bárdolí ...... 1,035 998 .. 1,907 20 .. 106 821 1,212 1,951 60 32 2,043 90 24 5 119 97.0 78.8 2,152 1 1 1,423 1,588 103 41,604 Párdí ........ 681 741 .. 1,314 37 4 67 739 683 1,290 66 95 1,451 .. .. 1 1 95.1 .. 1,423 1 1 9 9 15,676 13,091 1,509 512,309 7,696 7,263 19 12,908 1,187 125 720 7,703 7,256 13,612 525 874 15,011 480 117 121 718 96.2 80.4 1,741 .. .. 1 1 2,959 3,206 Pálanpur Superintendency. 1,188 136,303 Pálanpur .... 1,324 1,428 1 2,294 369 .. 292 1,245 1,711 2,891 17 48 2,956 3 .. .. 3 99.4 100.0 2,959 .. .. 896 .. 864 49,821 Disá ........ 470 421 .. 854 13 .. 24 458 433 799 59 39 897 4 .. 1 5 93.1 100.0 896 1 1 1,127 695 1,012 29,858 Dhánerá .... 565 562 .. 1,008 23 .. 96 832 295 1,060 16 51 1,127 .. .. .. .. 98.5 .. 1,127 1 1 1,094 .. 1,080 37,771 Kákhrej ..... 587 494 .. 902 104 .. 75 727 324 1,003 10 72 1,085 5 8 .. 13 99.0 38.4 1708 412 997 495 19,701 Deodar ..... 219 193 .. 392 4 .. 16 291 121 355 30 38 423 .. .. .. .. 92.2 .. 202 .. 162 7,338 Teharwádá .. 117 85 .. 171 16 .. 15 114 88 178 2 22 202 .. .. .. .. 98.8 .. 1 1 585 827 382 23,081 Wáw ........ 322 263 .. 475 49 .. 61 290 295 551 6 25 585 .. .. .. .. 98.9 .. 1928 1,343 753 1,989 44,510 Tharád ...... 674 669 .. 1,153 32 .. 158 847 496 1,207 10 26 1,313 .. .. .. .. 99.2 .. 1 1 567 51 472 13,574 Sántalpur .... 323 244 .. 461 32 .. 74 269 298 541 7 19 567 .. .. .. .. 98.7 .. 1752 259 31 78 6,995 Motewáda .. 146 113 .. 232 3 .. 24 155 101 235 13 11 259 .. .. .. .. 94.7 .. 50 739 362 20,096 Warye ...... 28 22 .. 44 1 .. 5 36 14 49 .. 1 50 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 157 .. 157 3,983 Charchat .... 81 76 .. 141 5 .. 11 83 74 152 2 3 157 .. .. .. .. 98.7 .. .. .. .. 636 Jajhám...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 214 124 162 5,659 Bhábhar .... 120 92 .. 192 4 .. 16 130 82 191 4 17 212 2 .. .. 2 97.9 100.0 505 .. 322 10,164 Suígám ...... 257 248 .. 400 11 .. 94 298 207 445 10 50 505 .. .. .. .. 97.8 .. 1 1 2,373 1,569 1,225 113,422 Rádhanpur .. 1,247 1,126 .. 1,986 206 .. 181 711 1,632 1,889 278 206 2,373 .. .. .. .. 87.1 .. 2,373 6 6 12,743 8,992 10,450 522,852 6,684 6,036 1 10,705 872 .. 1,142 6,516 6,204 11,613 464 628 12,741 14 8 1 23 96.1 63.6 2,123 .. .. 1 1 722 1,203 Mahí Kánthá Agency. 4,000 42,300 Wátrak Kánthá 330 346 .. 613 29 .. 34 376 300 345 159 22 696 31 8 7 46 76.4 79.4 1158 1 436 3 30,114 Rhevar ...... 183 225 .. 399 2 .. 7 738 270 233 90 27 410 19 8 1 28 76.5 70.3 1 1 825 .. 38,478 Bávesi ...... 445 380 .. 711 47 .. 67 351 474 713 46 41 830 .. .. .. .. 91.1 .. 1566 741 427 22,876 Katosan...... 401 340 .. 667 24 .. 50 469 272 625 127 48 800 .. .. .. .. 83.1 .. 1 1 1,978 2905 271698 I'dar ........ 1,066 906 .. 1,810 59 .. 103 956 1,016 1,787 87 102 1,976 5 1 87 6 95.3 83.3 1,978 1 1,230 A'mnagar.... 636 593 87 1,113 54 87 62 445 784 1,065 125 44 1,234 1 .. .. 1 89.4 100.0 1,230 1 1 982 1,524 41,590 Sábar Kánthá. 514 468 .. 941 21 .. 20 406 576 921 47 11 982 .. .. .. .. 93.1 .. 982 .. .. 5 5 6,914 6,062 4,000. 447,056 3,575 3,278 .. 6,254 236 .. 313 3,141 3,692 5,952 681 295 6,928 56 17 8 81 89.7 76.7 1,382
( 8 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina tors. Total Number of Per- sons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Musalmán. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Re-vaccina- tion. 1872-73 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 NORTHERN contd. M.B. COLA', M.D. .. .. 1 1 1,355 1,659 Cambay.. 350 117,203 Cambay...... 944 867 .. 1,551 169 3 88 1,195 616 1,797 .. 14 1,811 42 1 1 44 100.0 97.6 1,855 .. .. 1 1 2,189 1,307 Dharmpur 2650 25,000 Dharmpur .. 1,055 1,128 .. 2,067 .. 3 113 591 1,592 1,898 141 165 2,201 6 .. .. 6 93.0 100.0 2,189 .. .. 1 1 1,451 762 Bánsdá .. 22,000 Báusdá...... 745 712 .. 1,448 9 .. .. 96 1,361 1,370 16 71 1,457 .. .. .. .. 98.8 .. 1,457 .. .. 3 3 5,501 3,728 3,000 164,203 2,744 2,707 .. 5,066 178 6 201 1,882 3,569 5,065 157 250 5,472 48 1 1 50 96.9 97.9 1,833 Grand Total of the Nor- thern Circle. 4 4 50 50 88,997 80,018 20,035 3,595,919 44,955 40,714 56 71,576 7,769 293 5,975 46,666 39,003 78,417 3,616 4,081 86,114 2181 655 513 3,352 95.5 76.9 1,779 CIRCLE. Assistant Surgeon. 1 1 1 1 1,148 2,111 Karáchí Collectorate 16,109 87,199 Karáchí...... 599 510 9 35 1,048 2 15 310 799 1,031 69 58 1,158 11 27 1 39 94.4 28.9 1,148 2 2 3,983 2,729 80,000 Karáchí Town. 2,415 1,193 85 1,015 2,253 91 164 2,266 1,342 3,227 233 166 3,626 169 229 22 420 93.3 42.5 1,991 1 1 1,174 1,972 45,489 Dádú........ 630 544 .. 160 993 .. 21 951 223 1,172 .. .. 1,174 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 1,174 1 1 1,042 1,012 39,738 Siliwán...... 575 467 .. 132 900 .. 10 237 805 10 29 1,015 .. .. .. .. 990 .. 1,042 1 2 825 304 14,780 Mánjhándá .. 410 399 .. 114 673 .. 22 287 522 775 7 27 809 .. 16 .. 16 99.4 .. 1586 761 1,695 24,771 Kotri and Ko- histán .............. 408 340 .. 137 589 .. 22 390 358 .. 16 31 752 9 2 2 13 97.8 81.8 1 1 1,279 1,487 26,493 Táttá........ 703 550 .. 89 1,118 .. 46 451 802 .. 14 22 1,263 24 .. 2 26 98.9 100.0 1,279 .. 1 323 1,620 14,270 Mírpur Sákrá. 174 149 .. 12 299 .. 12 111 212 310 6 10 326 .. .. .. .. 98.1 .. 1229 1 1 906 529 15,930 Ghodábárí.... 467 438 .. 65 830 .. 10 177 728 857 9 44 910 .. 1 .. 1 98.9 .. 1 683 884 17,656 Sháhábandar. 330 224 .. 66 458 .. 30 87 467 550 4 .. 554 108 13 8 129 99.3 89.2 683 .. 1 803 1,758 15,981 Játí.......... 396 351 .. 37 513 .. 197 262 485 731 11 9 751 26 14 17 57 98.5 65.0 1672 1 1 869 1,210 19,000 Belá.......... 444 403 .. 57 688 .. 102 330 517 838 5 6 849 12 3 7 22 99.4 80.0 1,092 1,449 25,693 Mírpúr Batorá 561 508 .. 91 859 .. 119 359 710 1,025 10 37 1,072 6 8 9 23 99.0 42.8 1,092 1 1 11 12 14,888 18,760 16,109 427,000 8,112 6,076 94 2,010 11,221 93 770 6,218 7,970 13,462 386 441 14,289 365 313 68 746 97.2 53.8 1,353 1 1 1 1 1,124 484 Collectorate 16,483 56,200 Shikárpur .... 609 515 .. 129 975 .. 20 684 440 1,122 .. 2 1,124 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 1,124 1 1 1,452 1,863 36,000 Do. Town. 787 496 2 660 607 .. 14 814 469 1,203 82 25 1,310 133 32 4 169 93.6 80.6 1,452 1 1 1,537 500 68,249 Rohrí......... 861 670 .. 322 1,084 .. 125 693 838 1,449 40 69 1,558 2 3 1 6 97.3 40.0 1,537 .. .. 785 Saidpur...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1,050 1,551 33,780 Ghotki ...... 560 490 .. 161 810 .. 79 741 309 1,017 8 31 1,056 .. .. .. .. 99.2 .. 1,050 1 1 1,787 2,445 21,214 Mírpur Mátelo 1,106 681 .. 123 1,474 .. 190 328 1,459 1,786 25 1 1,812 .. .. .. .. 98.6 .. 1,787 1 1 1,456 1,111 20,709 Obáurá...... 832 602 .. 102 1,091 .. 241 756 678 1,389 8 45 1,442 21 .. 1 22 99.4 100.0 1,456 1 1 1,730 1,439 46,646 Sakkhar ...... 937 793 .. 487 1,182 .. 61 1,447 283 1,700 52 16 1,768 .. .. .. .. 97.0 .. 1,730 1 1 1,196 729 31,000 Sakkhar Town 625 3S9 12 394 579 .. 29 491 523 728 31 276 1,035 130 26 26 182 95.9 83.3 1,196 .. 1 1,880 262 47,903 Mánsháhrá Abrú ...... 1,048 832 .. 352 1,455 .. 73 1,367 513 1,833 5 47 1,885 .. .. .. .. 99.7 .. 2010 1 130 554 20,000 Sujnwal ..... 72 58 .. 15 111 .. 4 66 61 130 .. .. 130 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. .. 1 1 253 1,836 35,733 Rataderá ..... 150 103 .. 37 191 .. 25 138 95 218 .. .. 253 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 99
( 9 ) SINDH J. WILLIAMS, M.D., 1 1 645 598 Shikárpur 98,770 Ládkháná.... 347 296 .. 43 591 .. 9 278 365 626 12 15 653 2 .. .. 2 98.1 100.0 645 1 1 1,695 2,445 44,223 Kambar .... 914 776 .. 209 1,455 .. 26 927 763 1,689 7 1 1,697 3 .. 2 5 99.6 100.0 1,695 1 1 9 976 23,879 Nasirábád.... 4 5 .. .. 9 .. .. 1 8 9 .. .. 9 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 1647 1,638 982 14,000 Labdaryá ... 876 762 .. 225 1,356 .. 57 851 787 1,579 48 52 1,679 .. .. .. .. 97.0 .. 1 1 1,349 1,667 15,000 Tiger or Thurí. 728 621 .. 120 1,205 .. 24 344 1,005 1,318 .. 31 1,349 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 1877 528 .. 46,462 Mehar ..... 267 261 .. 43 480 .. 5 196 332 498 .. 30 528 .. .. .. .. 100.0 .. 1 1 1,624 1,558 24,255 Kakkar ...... 909 709 .. 212 1,398 .. 8 984 634 1,490 43 113 1,646 .. 1 5 6 97.2 .. 1,624 1 1 15 15 21,083 21,785 16,483 6,84,023 11,632 9,059 14 3,634 16,053 .. 990 11,126 9,565 19,814 361 759 20,934 291 62 39 392 98.2 81.8 1,405 1 1 1 1 2,620 2,280 Haidarábád Collectorate. 1,826 61,009 Haidarábád .. 1,398 1,166 .. 367 2,053 .. 144 771 1,793 2,473 65 53 2,591 29 16 11 58 97.3 64.4 2,620 1 1 1,597 1,826 14 35,272 Haidarábád Town ...... 1,042 502 27 631 879 .. 7 895 649 1,513 22 11 1,546 42 11 .. 53 98.6 79.2 1,597 1 1 1,518 931 989 56,559 Tándá........ 735 667 .. 106 1,226 .. 70 542 860 1,297 29 94 1,420 44 37 35 116 97.8 54.3 1,518 1 1 2,001 1,011 694 47,922 Rágá-ká- Tándá...... 1,060 889 .. 190 1,479 .. 280 711 1,238 1,754 228 175 2,157 38 7 14 59 89.0 84.4 2,001 1 1 1,891 1,556 794 51,593 Baddin ...... 1,063 819 .. 145 1,638 .. 99 382 1,500 1,795 6 81 1,882 8 .. 1 9 99.7 100.0 1,891 1 1 1,892 1,124 676 30,445 Digrí........ 1,012 814 .. 220 1,462 .. 174 1,078 778 1,825 16 30 1,871 31 1 4 36 99.1 96.9 1,892 1 1 1,087 2,457 861 55,833 Alhar-ká- Tándá ....... 583 487 .. 200 771 .. 99 540 530 843 74 187 1,104 7 5 5 17 91.3 41.7 1087 .. 489 197 22,449 Mírpur Khás . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2,156 2,367 645 55,707 Sháhdádpur.. 1,088 864 .. 328 1,468 .. 156 887 1,065 1,942 18 6 1,996 184 18 2 20 97.6 91.1 2,156 1 1 1,959 2,605 444 74,141 Hálá ........ 1,056 300 .. 297 1,513 .. 46 648 1,208 1,736 49 73 1,858 47 15 41 10 97.1 75.8 1,959 1 1 2,237 2,149 976 53,566 Sakkrand .... 1,153 986 .. 250 1,829 .. 60 1,073 1,006 2,034 13 99 2,146 55 14 29 98 99.4 79.7 2,237 1 1 1,797 1,867 457 45,551 Morá ........ 922 814 .. 213 1,435 .. 88 558 1,178 1,546 93 117 1,756 44 3 14 61 94.3 93.6 1,797 1 1 1,535 1,880 485 70,492 Nausháhrá Ferozá .... 825 686 .. 195 1,202 .. 112 839 670 1,423 20 80 1,523 19 2 5 26 98.6 90.5 1,535 1 1 1,838 2,275 277 47,768 Khandiará .. 975 846 .. 186 1,581 .. 54 1,068 753 1,753 24 66 1,743 11 .. 6 17 98.6 100.0 1,838 1 1 13 13 24,128 24,818 9,635 708,307 12,910 10,370 27 3,328 18,536 .. 1,389 9,992 13,288 21,934 687 1,072 23,693 559 129 167 855 96.9 81.2 1,856 .. .. 1 1 1,824 2,291 Frontier Upper Sindh. 2,009 35,000 Jacobábád.... 1,016 727 1 89 1,657 .. 26 831 942 1,672 18 92 1,782 22 22 7 51 98.9 50.0 1,824 1 735 .. 15,000 Kasmar ...... 408 319 .. 37 677 .. 13 289 438 723 3 1 727 8 .. .. 8 99.6 100.0 735 1 661 210 25,000 Thúl ........ 356 303 .. 74 577 .. 8 447 212 640 18 18 676 2 .. .. 2 97.3 100.0 661 .. .. 3 1 3,220 2,501 2,009 75,000 1,810 1,349 1 200 2,911 .. 47 1,567 1,592 3,035 39 111 3,185 32 22 7 61 98.7 59.3 1,610 1 1 1 1 2,251 2,166 Tharwad Párkar. 12,729 36,527 Umarkot..... 1,240 1,011 .. 223 1,330 .. 698 609 1,642 2,179 36 17 2,251 .. .. .. .. 97.5 .. 2,251 1 1 2,587 1,055 27,847 Cháchrá...... 1,352 1,035 .. 577 1,014 .. 796 505 1,882 2,370 30 2 2,402 107 93 .. 200 98.7 53.0 2,587 1 1 921 564 28,259 Nagar Párkar. 488 388 .. 203 312 .. 361 349 527 842 10 27 879 38 3 4 45 98.8 92.5 921 1 1 888 1,231 14,521 Diplá........ 479 374 .. 81 698 .. 164 132 721 828 .. 25 858 17 17 1 35 99.4 50.0 888 1 1 1,468 .. 27,189 Kiprá......... 760 650 .. 28 1,065 .. 317 497 913 1,386 1 11 1,410 41 17 .. 58 99.3 70.0 2377 909 1,101 17,956 Sán char .... 311 377 .. 15 721 .. 152 227 69 863 20 3 888 20 1 .. 21 97.7 93.2 1 1 1,575 1,010 23,039 Mittí........ 874 686 .. 129 829 .. 602 199 1,311 1,509 35 18 1,500 14 1 .. 15 97.9 93.3 1,575 1 1 6 6 10,599 7,127 12,729 175,341 5,706 1,522 .. 1,276 5,879 .. 3,090 2,518 7,707 9,979 164 105 10,248 237 132 5 374 98.4 64.2 1,766 .. .. 1 1 1,941 2,180 Native State. .. 110,000 Khairpur .... 1,252 679 .. 291 1,487 .. 163 677 1,264 1,186 392 447 2,325 .. .. .. .. 79.1 .. 1,941 Grand Total of the Sindh Circle. 4 4 49 48 75,859 77,171 56,965 2,179,671 41,430 32,054 136 10,719 56,087 93 6,449 32,098 41,386 69,710 2,029 2,935 74,674 1434 658 286 2,428 97.2 69.3 1,580 b VAC
( 10 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Per- sons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Poputation of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. R-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot; Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindu. Musalmán. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Re-vaccina- tion. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. CIRCLE Surgeon. 1 1 Northern Division. .. a .. .. Chúrá .... 62 20.000 Chúrá........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 12/12 2619 2,094 Dhráng- drá. 1,050 100000 Dhrángdrá 1,387 1,220 .. 2,427 103 .. 77 980 1,627 3,386 157 91 2,634 11 1 .. 12 93.8 91.6 2,619 .. 6/12 1,030 Ralwad .... 1 12/12 2,381 1,829 Jinjíwádá. 225 22,309 Jinjíwáda .... 1,83 1,098 .. 2,024 185 .. 172 862 1,519 2,357 12 15 2,384 .. .. .. .. 99.4 .. 2,381 1 12/12 3,012 2,094 Native States. 208 40,000 Jasdan ...... 1,546 1,457 .. 2,731 216 .. 56 1,096 1,907 2,870 41 92 3,003 6 3 .. 9 98.5 66.6 3,012 1 12/12 2,108 2,327 238 75,000 Limdí........ 1,103 1,005 .. 1,939 102 .. 67 793 1,315 2,047 39 22 2,108 .. .. .. .. 98.1 .. 2,108 .. 5/12 .. 627 164 35,000 Lakhtar...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1/12 .. 22 99 15,000 Máliá........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4/12 .. 453 130 20,000 Múlí ........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. b .. .. 36 2,000 Pátrí........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 11/12 2,332 1,886 184 33,000 Sáelá........ 1,145 1,090 .. 1,941 66 .. 228 592 1,643 2,165 6 65 2,236 83 4 10 97 99.7 95.4 2,332 .. c .. .. 48 3,000 Sudámdá .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. d .. .. 19 7,500 Vitthalgarh .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 11/12 1,527 1,878 382 50,000 Wákàner .... 732 676 .. 1,089 277 .. 42 682 726 1,248 71 89 1,408 60 54 5 119 94.6 52.6 1,527 1 10/12 2,659 1,534 171 60,000 Wadwán .... 1,438 1,196 .. 2,449 156 .. 29 667 1,967 2,481 128 71 2,680 13 10 2 25 95.0 56.5 2,659 .. e .. .. 36 5,000 Wanod ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 8 16,638 15,774 3,052 487,809 8,634 7,742 .. 14,600 1,105 .. 671 5,672 10,704 15,554 454 445 16,453 173 72 17 262 97,1 70,6 2,376 Western Division. 1 9/12 2,287 1,450 Dharol .. 277 25,000 Dharol ...... 1,149 1,130 .. 1,962 257 .. 60 530 1,749 2,135 121 60 2,316 6 1 1 8 94.6 85.7 2,287 1 5/12 1,296 604 Dráphá .. 80 9,500 Dráphá...... 742 548 .. 1,141 129 .. 20 380 910 1,137 133 20 1,290 3 2 1 6 89.5 60.0 1,296 .. 5/12 .. 576 Gondal.. 1,050 100000 Dhorájí.... 1,145 1,035 1 1,722 393 3 61 1,442 738 1,958 131 125 2,214 26 39 3 68 93.7 40.0 2,248 1 12/12 2,248 2,033 Gondal .... .. 5/12 .. 700 Upletá .... Northern Division.( 11 ) KA'THIA'WA'D E. R. BUTLER, M. D., .. a .. .. Native States. 11 1,500 Gadká .......... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. b .. .. 53 3,500 Gawarídhar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. a' .. .. 40 3,000 Taliá Diwání . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4/12 .. 554 27 6,500 KotráSangání. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13/12 2,993 2,838 Morví.. 598 75,000 Morvi .......... 1,542 1,451 .. 2,687 306 .. .. 1,703 1,290 2,926 15 52 2,993 .. .. .. .. 99.4 .. 2,993 1 4/12 257 472 Tankárá...... 121 133 .. 184 70 .. .. 85 169 236 22 1 259 3 .. .. 3 91.4 100.0 257 1 8/12 1,618 805 Nawánagar. 3,460 200,000 Bhánwad .... 838 766 .. 1,311 259 .. 34 549 1,055 1,494 85 50 1,629 14 .. .. 14 94.6 100.0 1,618 .. c .. .. Jodhpur .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5/12 .. 449 Júdiá........ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 11/12 2,228 1,647 Khambáliá .. 1,222 1,006 .. 2,002 220 .. 6 1,092 1,136 2,143 3 82 2,228 .. .. .. .. 99.8 .. 2,228 .. d .. .. Kondurná.... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 12/12 2,800 2,220 Nawánagar .. 1,542 1,251 .. 2,031 711 1 50 749 2,044 2,436 164 193 2,793 4 3 .. 7 93.6 57.1 2,800 .. a&quot; .. .. Pál. 12 1,500 Pál.......... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 24/12 4,433 4,158 Rájkot. 400 30,000 Rájkot ...... 2,108 2,099 2 3,496 488 6 215 2,463 1,744 3,629 375 320 4,324 141 79 6 226 90.6 64.0 4,433 .. e .. .. Wasáwar. 21 3,360 Wasáwar.... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 9/12 2,797 2,677 Porbandar 661 75,000 Porbandar .. 1,394 1,403 .. 2,456 229 .. 112 1,272 1,525 2,703 82 12 2,797 .. .. .. .. 97.0 .. 2,797 1 1 10 10 6/12 22,957 21,183 6,690 533,860 11,803 10,822 3 18,992 3,062 10 558 10,265 12,360 20,781 1,131 915 22,843 197 124 11 332 94.8 61.3 2,295 Southern Division. .. 1 12/12 1 537 1,991 Bábriá- wád. 25 4,000 Bábriwád .. 764 770 .. 1,402 132 .. .. 644 890 1,337 68 129 1,534 3 .. .. 3 95.4 100.0 2613 1,076 Jáfrábád .... 549 522 .. 962 100 .. 9 322 749 979 33 59 1,071 3 2 .. 5 96.7 60.0 1 12/12 2,502 2,260 Bántwá. 70 30,375 Bántwá...... 1,304 1,201 .. 1,954 521 .. 30 553 1,952 2,475 29 4 2,508 .. .. .. .. 93.8 .. 2,502 1 7/12 790 1,100 Bagúsrá. 70 11,628 Ragúsrá...... 399 344 .. 647 96 .. .. 448 295 656 59 28 743 .. .. .. 47 91.7 100.0 790 Mánikwádá .. .. a .. .. Bilká. 55 10,880 Bilká.......... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 12/12 3,300 2,555 Jaitpur. 233 37,950 Jaitpur...... 1,761 1,529 .. 2,738 391 .. 158 1,394 1,896 3,205 54 35 3,294 10 .. .. 10 98.3 100.0 3,300 .. 3/12 .. 247 Junágarh. 3,240 311,550 Chorwád .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 12/12 2,277 2,184 Junágarh .... 1,210 1,067 .. 1,795 451 .. 31 803 1,474 2,172 28 77 2,277 .. .. .. .. 98.7 .. 2,277 .. 5/12 .. 734 Kutiáná...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 12/12 2,126 1,747 Mangarul.... 1,180 911 .. 1,372 686 .. 33 786 1,305 1,569 459 63 2,091 34 1 .. 35 77.3 97.1 2,126 1 12/12 2,144 2,269 U'ná ........ 1,120 1,014 .. 1,912 174 .. 48 567 1.067 2,131 28 3 2,162 9 1 .. 10 98.7 90.0 2,144 .. b .. .. Pattan ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 6/12 1,202 701 Viráwal...... 646 555 597 132 .. 62 140 1,061 1,090 55 59 1,204 1 .. .. 1 95.1 100.0 1,202 .. 4/12 .. 450 Visáwadar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 1/12 16,957 16,238 8,933 7,913 .. 13,739 2,736 .. 371 5,657 11,189 15,614 813 457 16,884 107 14 .. 111 950 96.3 2,119 Western Division.( 12 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Per- sons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Squars Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, ex- cluding those &quot; unknown&quot; from the Total. Average number of Persons vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Musalmán. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Re-vaccina- tion. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. Eastern Division. KA'THIA'WA'D CIRCLE( 13 ) REWA' S. B. HALIDAY, 1 1 2 2 1,726 2,467 Rewá Kántá States. 1,736 71,813 Lúawádá .... 868 835 .. 1,384 253 .. 66 50 1,199 1,628 48 36 1,712 16 6 1 23 97.1 72.7 863 2 2 3,306 2,363 4,500 102,036 Rájpípla .... 1,635i 1,626 .. 3,040 88 11 122 1,072 2,189 3,173 183 18 3,374 30 10 5 45 94.5 75.0 1,653 2 2 3,692 2,770 1,600 52,121 Báriá .......... 1,885 1,807 .. 3,221 1 8 462 648 3,014l 3,535 69 98 3,702 .. .. .. .. 98.0 .. .. 1 1 728 1,214 400 41,984 Bálásinúr .... 358 360 .. 566 112 .. 40 190 528 625 41 65 731 4 4 3 11 93.8 50.0 728 1 1 510 553 3,000 62,913 Chotá Udai- pur .......... 207 301 .. 162 9 .. 37 49 459 418 65 11 524 1 .. 1 2 87.3 100.0 510 1 1 944 702 900 62,364 Sunth and Ka- dáná ...... 462 482 .. 840 9 .. 95 104 840 914 16 20 950 .. .. .. .. 98.2 .. 944 1 1 932 830 400 46,966 Sankhedá Me- wás........ 473 453 .. 893 22 .. 11 245 681 866 8 60 934 3 .. 4 7 99.0 100.0 932 1 1 10 10 11,833 10,899 12,536 443,497 5,888 5,864 .. 10,406 494 19 833 2,812 8,940 11,189 430 308 11,927 54 20 14 88 96.2 72.9 1,183 Grand Total of theRewá Kántá Circle. 1 1 15 15 18,788 19,481 14,205 684,237 9,337 9,171 .. 16,701 706 20 1,081 5,486 13,022 17,778 553 441 18,772 198 56 28 282 96.9 77.9 1,252 PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. ANANTA' CHANDROBA', Sub-Assistant Surgeon. 1 1 310 224 City of Bombay. 19 16,601 Kolábá ...... 157 101 37 173 13 9 26 154 104 217 28 24 269 30 22 .. 52 88.57 57.6 l958 711 702 32,095 Fort ........ 265 218 37 114 27 294 11 254 229 422 49 36 507 88 99 41 228 89.5 47.0 937 2,009 10,464 Esplanade....____ 236 200 10 127 23 6 270 261 175 342 99 41 482 306 165 30 501 77.5 64.9 1 1 930 838 43,198 Market...... 535 382 30 668 150 62 7 553 364 801 86 65 952 10 2 1 13 90.3 83.3 l828 428 489 35,100 Mándvi...... 227 200 6 336 6 .. 24 223 204 378 27 26 431 .. .. 1 1 93.3 .. 470 406 36,748 Chakhlá.... 282 187 1 184 230 32 22 244 225 416 21 34 471 1 .. .. 1 95.1 100.0 1 1 1,118 763 37,915 Dhobi Talào.. 584 445 138 627 34 183 47 637 392 913 81 73 1,067 42 43 4 89 91.8 49.4 2187 382 267 20,760 Phanas Wádí. 232 145 19 343 7 7 1 222 155 319 46 19 384 3 1 1 5 87.3 75.0 687 287 36,029 Bhuleshwar.. 409 278 2 423 211 25 26 368 319 512 53 66 691 .. .. .. .. 91.5 .. 1 1 739 874 24,817 Girgáum .... 415 311 70 577 19 48 12 417 309 593 80 64 737 8 2 3 13 88.1 80.0 15411 169 239 7,531 Chawapátá.... 78 52 4 103 7 15 2 79 51 112 13 6 131 3 36 .. 39 89.6 7.6 219 383 7,741 Wálkeshwar.. 121 93 23 159 6 6 20 132 82 187 16 16 219 .. 2 3 5 92.1 .. 414 149 4,317 Mahálakshumí 228 152 18 339 3 9 11 191 189 329 26 30 385 18 13 3 34 92.6 58.0 1 1 1,129 938 21,234 Khetwádí.... 677 449 17 883 78 82 66 632 494 958 93 90 1,141 3 .. .. 3 91.0 100.0 2196 680 273 23,638 Khárá Taláo.. 397 278 11 452 135 10 66 368 307 588 52 38 678 4 1 .. 5 92.8 80.0 387 223 27,594 Kumbhár Wá- dá .......... 213 173 9 314 37 .. 26 231 155 327 34 28 389 .. .. 1 1 90.5 .. 1 1 1,076 580 49,873 Umbarkhádí.. 518 307 69 449 257 7 43 406 419 664 106 56 826 46 164 41 251 86.2 21.9 1966 890 850 25,556 Dongarí .... 539 348 7 801 49 2 28 539 348 791 54 51 896 1 1 1 3 93.6 50.0 1 1 421 506 20,973 Mázgaon .... 224 163 96 197 49 31 14 214 173 322 38 36 396 14 13 7 34 89.4 51.8 629 208 210 10,083 Tád Wádí.... 57 45 9 83 3 1 6 58 44 80 20 6 106 33 73 .. 106 80.0 31.1 1 1 1,099 1,948 46,996 Kámáthípurá. 610 474 51 668 163 3 199 620 464 931 87 79 1,097 3 7 5 15 91.4 30.0 1793 694 347 28,032 Bycullá ........ 287 128 73 244 65 10 23 173 242 324 54 40 418 77 166 36 279 85.7 31.6 1 1 593 656 13,773 Parel .......... 347 225 45 470 19 4 34 313 259 475 64 42 581 7 3 11 21 88.1 70.0 839 246 178 4,460 Shiwri ...... 134 112 4 223 12 .. 7 140 106 211 26 10 247 .. .. .. .. 89.7 .. 1 1 314 481 11,572 Sion ........ 186 128 47 116 2 .. 4 142 172 287 24 20 331 .. .. .. .. 92.2 .. 1099 599 268 14,310 Máhim ...... 382 217 111 443 40 1 4 321 278 524 40 38 602 .. .. .. .. 92.9 .. 186 42 10,012 Warlí........ 111 75 26 147 11 .. 2 74 112 169 12 10 191 .. .. .. .. 93.3 .. 1 1 171 294 22,953 WaterDivision 17 .. 2 .. 15 .. .. 1 16 10 6 1 17 8 66 80 154 62.5 10.8 379 208 23 .. Out Stations.. 118 60 59 27 87 1 4 48 130 81 182 35 298 7 23 .. 30 30.7 23.3 Grand Total of the Pre- sidency Circle. 1 1 11 16,415 15,457 19 644,405 8,586 5,946 1031 9,835 1,813 848 1,005 8,015 6,517 12,343 1,517 1,080 14,940 712 902 269 1,883 89.0 44.1 1,492 BARODA'. G. EDWIN EEWARD, Surgeon. 1 1 23 23 29,661 23,491 Native State of Barodá. Unknown. Barodá Districts. 16,314 13,053 .. 26,329 2,405 30 603 10,062 19,305 26,058 2,003 1,306 29,367 238 22 34 294 92.8 91.5 1,289
( 14 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccina- tors. Total Number of Per- sons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which Vaccinations were performed during the year. Square Miles. Population of Area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. Percentage of successful cases, ex- cluding those &quot;Unknown&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vac- cinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULTS. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Musalmán. Pársi. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vaccination. In Re-vaccina- tion. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. KUTCH. DORA BJI HORMASJI, G.G.M.C. 1 1 9 10 1,932 1,706 Native State of Kutch. 6,764 148,402 Bhúj, Mándví, Mundrá, Anjár, &c. 1,027 896 .. 1,318 599 6 .. 383 1,540 1,783 107 33 1,923 8 1 .. 9 94.3 88.8 214 ADEN. R. W. JAMES, M.D., Surgeon Major. .. .. 2 1 684 446 Aden. .. 19,289 City of Aden. 537 147 3 25 110 137 409 225 459 490 194 .. 684 .. .. .. .. 71.6 .. 342 Grand Total.5 27 26 373 370 561,876 526,402 205,252 21,169,152 289,221 257,620 2,469 417,020 91,581 1,595 34,176 198,484 348,357 495,930 28,049 30,244 554,223 8,832 4,361 1,936 15,129 94.6 66.9 1,506 Details of Column 5. Total number of persons vaccinated ........... 561,876 Deduct persons re-vaccinated .......... 15,035 Number of persons primarily vaccinated ...... 546,841 Details of Primary Vaccinations. Total number of operations vaccinated ........... 554,223 Deduct persons re-vaccinated .......... 546,811 Number of operations primarily vaccinated ...... 7,332 Details of Re-vaccinations. Total number of operations (Col. 10 D.) ......... 15,129 Deduct persons vaccinated .......... 15,035 Number of operations in excess persons .... 94
( 15 ) A.( 16 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Superintendence. MONTHS. District in which operations were chiefly canducted in each month. Total Number vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percentage Successful, excluding those "Un- known.&quot; Successful. Unsuccess- ful, includ- ing &quot;Doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. WESTERN CIRCLE. April 1872. Whole Circle 6,291 5,875 382 128 6,385 93.8 May ( 17 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Superintendence. MONTHS. District in which operations were chiefly conducted in each month. Total Number vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percentage Successful, excluding those Un- known. Successful. Unsuccess- ful, includ- ing &quot;Doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. KÁTHIÁWÁD CIRCLE. April 1872. Whole Circle. 7,029 6,560 251 248 7,059 96.3 May ( 18 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Superintendence. MONTHS. District in which operations were chiefly conducted in each month. Total Number vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average percentage Successful, excluding those &quot; Un- known.&quot; Successful. Unsuccess- ful, includ- ing&quot; Doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE.( 19 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Superintendence. MONTHS. District in which operations were chiefly conducted in each month. Total Number vaccinated. RESULTS. TOTAL. Average pertentage Successful, excluding those &quot; Un- known.&quot; Successful. Unsuccess- ful, includ- ing &quot; Doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. ADEN CIRCLE. April 1872. Whole Circle 44 36 8 ... 44 81.8 May ( 20 ) A.( 21 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- cessful Case. A. PAID BY GOVERNMENT( 22 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. A.( 23 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful Case. E.( 24 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number Vaccinated. Precentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful Case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. B.( 25 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful Case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. B.( 26 ) 1 2 3 4 6 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful Case Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. B.( 27 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success excluding those un- Known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful Case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. B.( 28 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- Known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful Case. B.( 29 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated Percentage of Success, excluding those nu- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. C.( 30 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each Suc- cessful case. C.( 31 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of Success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. C.( 32 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding theses un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. C.( 33 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. C.( 34 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. D.( 35 ) 11 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. D.( 36 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case Rs. a. p. Rs a. p. Rs. a. p. D.( 37 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. D.( 38 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. D.( 39 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentnge of success, excluding those un- known from the Total. Cost of each suc- cessful case Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs a. p. D.( 40 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. B.( 41 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage Of Success, excluding those un- known from the total. Cost of each suc- cessful case D.( 42 ) A.B. DISPENSARY VACCINATION.
( 44 ) B.( 45 ) CEN- P. S. TURNBULL, M. D., Surgeon ; Acting( 46 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle of Medical Superinten- dence. Name and Rank of superinten- dent of Dispensary. No. of Native super- intendents of Vac- cination attached to the Dispensary. No. of Vaccinators attached to the Dispensary. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State for the population of which the Dis- pensary is provided. Population of Area included in the last column. Name of Dispensary. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINA- TIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vaccina- tor. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Musalmán. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. unsuccessful, in cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cinations. In Re-vaccina- tions. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. SOUTHERN( 47 ) WESTERN. T. CODY, Assistant Surgeon. ... ... ... ... 105 ... Thá- Bassain .... 9,356 Do. .... 64 41 20 58 4 ... 33 36 69 77 28 ... 105 ... ... ... ... 73.3 ... 105 ... ... ... ... 109 ... Kelví Má- him...... 7,183 Do. .... 60 45 ... 105 ... ... ... 36 69 72 41 ... 113 1 3 ... 4 63.7 25.0 108 ... ... ... ... 10 ... Mátheran Do. .... 7 2 2 6 1 ... ... 1 8 8 1 ... 9 1 ... ... 1 88.8 100.9 10 ... ... ... ... 764 439 77,866 416 336 85 521 98 20 28 256 496 578 145 41 764 3 9 ... 12 79.9 25.0 84 ... ... ... ... 207 272 Kolálá. Alibág .... 5,473 Dispensary .... 114 93 4 182 6 ... 15 96 111 198 9 ... 207 ... ... ... ... 95.6 ... 207 ... ... ... ... 61 77 Pen........ 6,514 Do. .... 27 33 ... 59 1 ... ... 31 29 53 8 2 63 ... 1 ... 1 86.8 ... 61 ... ... ... ... 268 349 11,987 141 126 4 241 7 ... 15 127 140 251 17 2 270 ... 1 ... 1 93.6 ... 134 ... ... ... ... 310 269 Ratnágirí, Dápuli .... 8,972 Dispensary .... 159 151 1 298 10 1 ... 142 168 253 59 6 318 ... ... ... ... 81.0 ... 310 ... ... ... ... 173 335 Vingurlá ... 10,618 Do. .... 84 89 3 152 18 ... ... 80 93 139 16 19 174 ... ... ... ... 89.6 ... 173 ... ... ... ... 636 ... Sáwántwádá 8,017 Do. .... 154 154 40 220 46 2 ... 115 193 281 34 4 319 206 120 2 328 89.2 63.1 636 ... ... ... ... 1,119 604 27,607 397 391 44 670 74 3 ... 317 454 673 109 29 811 206 120 2 328 86.0 63.1 373 Circle Total . ... ... ... ... 2,151 1,392 117,460 954 856 133 1,432 179 23 43 720 1,090 1,502 271 72 1,845 209 130 2 341 84.7 61.6 153 NORTHERN. MANCHERJÍ BERAMJÍ COLÁ, M. D. Máhi Kántá ... ... ... .... 101 202 Ahmadábád. Sádrá ...... 6,749 Agency Dis- pernsary .... 55 37 ... 78 13 1 ... 53 39 55 30 7 92 2 6 1 9 64.7 25.0 101 ... ... ... ... 224 89 Veramgáon.. 19,661 Dispensary ... 109 113 ... 172 50 ... ... 200 22 197 17 8 222 1 1 ... 2 92.0 50.0 224 ... ... ... ... 256 163 Sánand .... 7,229 Do. .... 150 81 ... 223 8 ... ... 186 45 221 6 4 231 20 1 4 25 97.3 95.2 256 ... ... ... ... 209 222 Prántej..... 8,341 Do. .... 111 98 ... 150 59 ... ... 143 66 198 11 ... 209 ... ... ... ... 94.7 ... 209 ... ... ... ... 489 335 Dholká..... 20,854 Do. .... 238 246 ... 349 135 ... ... 393 91 397 32 55 484 5 ... ... 5 92.5 100.0 489 ... ... ... ... ... ... Dhanduká. 9,782 Do. .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 247 184 Dholerá .... 12,468 Do. .... 139 108 ... 221 26 ... ... 143 104 222 9 16 217 ... ... ... ... 96.4 ... 247 ... ... ... ... 197 311 Gogo ...... 9,571 Do. .... 95 102 3 133 61 ... ... 134 63 149 37 12 108 ... ... ... ... 80.1 ... 197 ... ... ... ... 1,723 1,506 94,655 897 785 3 1,326 372 1 ... 1,252 430 1,439 142 102 1,683 28 8 5 41 91.0 77.7 216 ... ... ... ... 484 169 Khedá. Kapathanj 13,952 Dispensary ... 252 224 ... 292 181 ... ... 322 154 416 8 25 479 5 3 ... 8 98.2 62.5 484 ... ... ... ... 91 79 Mahamuda- bád ...... 8,065 Do. ...... 55 35 ... 66 24 ... ... 40 50 70 14 7 91 1 ... ... 1 83.3 100.0 91 ... ... ... ... 193 96 Mahudhá ... 9,384 Do. ....... 103 90 ... 113 32 ... 26 117 76 174 14 5 193 ... ... ... ... 92.5 ... 193 ... ... ... ... 186 112 Dákor ...... 7,740 Do. ....... 103 76 ... 175 4 ... ... 84 95 165 19 6 190 3 6 ... 9 89.6 33.3 186 ... ... ... ... 20 78 Nariád ...... 21,551 Do. ....... 12 8 ... 16 4 ... ... 10 10 10 3 7 20 ... ... ... ... 76.9 ... 20 ... ... ... ... 322 373 Borsad ...... 12,214 Do. ...... 192 130 4 282 35 1 ... 228 94 290 21 11 322 ... ... ... ... 93.2 ... 322 ... ... ... ... 1,296 907 75,896 717 563 4 946 303 1 26 801 479 1,155 69 61 1,295 9 9 ... 18 93.5 50.0 216 ... ... ... ... 471 113 Broach. Jambusar ... 11,634 Dispensary .... 245 226 ... 342 129 ... ... 308 163 459 2 10 471 ... ... ... ... 99.5 ... 471 ... ... ... ... 67 83 Ankleshwar 9,414 Do. .... 41 26 ... 42 25 ... ... 44 23 61 3 3 67 ... ... ... ... 95.3 ... 67 ... ... ... ... 63 62 Hánsot .... 4,152 Do. .... 33 30 ... 35 8 ... ... 33 30 59 ... 4 63 ... ... ... ... 100.0 ... 63 ... ... ... ... 110 94 Eláo ...... 1,915 Do. .... 54 47 ... 77 ... 24 ... 61 40 91 9 4 104 6 ... 5 11 91.0 100.0 110 ... ... ... ... 711 352 87,115 373 329 ... 516 162 24 ... 446 256 679 14 21 705 6 ... 5 11 97.9 100.0 177
( 48 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle of Medical Superintend- ence. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent of Dispensary. No. of Native Super- intendents of Vac- cination attached to the Dispensary. No. of Vaccinators attached to the Dispensary. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency or Native State for the population of which the Dis- pensary is provided. Population of Area included in the last column. Name of Dispensary. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of successful Cases, exclud- ing those &quot; unknown&quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vaccina- tor. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Musalmán. Pársí. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In Primary Vac- cinations. In Re-vaccina- tions. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. NORTHERN( 49 ) SINDH J. WILLIAMS. M. D., Assistant ... ... ... ... 79 ... Haidarábád. Tharnshá ... 6,000 Dispensary .... 59 18 ... 47 30 ... ... 57 20 75 2 ... 77 2 ... ... 2 97.4 100.0 79 ... ... ... ... 55 99 Hálá ...... 4,500 Do. .... 29 26 ... 33 22 ... ... 19 36 55 ... ... 55 ... ... ... ... 100.0 ... 55 ... ... ... ... 106 107 Alhar-ká- Tándá .... 6,000 Do. .... 63 43 1 65 40 ... ... 23 83 79 24 3 106 ... ... ... ... 76.7 ... 106 ... ... ... ... 130 177 Mahammad Khán's Tándá ... 4,500 Do. .... 70 60 ... 68 62 ... ... 71 59 127 3 ... 130 ... ... ... ... 97.7 ... 130 ... ... ... ... 370 383 21,000 221 147 1 213 154 ... ... 170 193 336 29 3 368 2 ... ... 2 92.0 100.0 92 ... ... ... ... ... ... Frontier Upper Sindh. Jacobábád 15,000 Dispensary ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54 80 Thar and Párkár Nagar Pár- kár ......... 1,200 Dispensary ... 30 24 ... 42 12 ... ... 33 21 54 ... ... 54 ... ... ... ... 100.0 ... 54 ... ... ... ... 104 97 Mítí ...... 2,000 Do. .... 64 40 ... 80 11 ... 13 50 54 100 4 ... 104 ... ... ... ... 96.1 ... 104 ... ... ... ... 95 16 Umarkot ... 5,000 Do. .... 60 35 ... 90 5 ... ... 3 92 74 9 12 95 ... ... ... ... 89.1 ... 95 ... ... ... ... 80 ... Kiprá ...... 2,000 Do. .... 44 36 ... 66 14 ... ... 18 62 77 ... 3 80 ... ... ... ... 100.0 ... 80 ... ... ... ... 333 193 10,200 198 135 ... 278 42 ... 13 104 229 305 13 15 303 ... ... ... ... 95.9 ... 83 ... ... ... ... 326 ... Mckrán Coast. Goádar ... 6,000 Dispensary ...... 186 139 2 62 261 ... ... 73 252 253 52 20 325 1 ... ... 1 82.9 100.0 326 Circle Total. ... ... ... ... 2,455 2,099 206,300 1,451 992 7 1,114 1,307 1 14 1,134 1,309 2,186 146 120 2,452 8 3 1 12 93.7 72.7 122 KÁTHIÁWÁD. E. R. BUTLER, M. D., Surgeon. ... ... ... ... 35 56 Káthiáwád Political Agency. British Station of Wadwán. British Station of Mánik- wádá. British Station of Songad or Sonpurí. 500 Wadwán Dis- pensary. 21 14 ... 30 3 1 1 10 25 34 1 ... 35 ... ... ... ... 97.1 ... 35 ... ... ... ... 22 182 1,000 Manikwádá Dis- pensary. 10 12 ... 19 3 ... ... 9 13 18 ... 4 22 ... ... ... ... 100.0 ... 22 ... ... ... ... ... 8 500 Songad or Son- puri Dispen- sary. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... ... 57 246 2,000 31 26 ... 49 6 1 1 19 38 52 1 4 57 ... ... .. ... 98.1 ... 28 g( 50 ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle of Medical Superintend- ence. Name and Rank of Superinten- dent of Dispensary. No. of Native Super- intendents of Vac- cination attached to the Dispensary. No. of Vaccinators attached to the Dispensary. Total Number of Persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agency or Native State for the population of which the Dis- pensary is provided. Population of Area included in the last column. Name of Dispensary. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCI- NATIONS. Percentage of Successful Cases, exclud- ing those &quot; unknown &quot; from the Total. Average Number of Persons vaccinated by each Vacci- nator. A. B. C. D. E. A. B. C. D. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindú. Musulmán. Pársi. Other Caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. Total. In Primary Vac- cinations. In Re-vaccina- tions. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. REWÁ KÁNTHÁ S. B. HALIDAY, Assist- ant Surgeon. ... ... ... ... 422 380 Punch Mahals. Godhrá... 10,641 Dispensary .... 167 189 ... 153 181 ... 22 257 99 333 14 9 356 28 30 8 66 95.9 48.2 422 ... ... ... ... 65 85 Native State. Báriá .... 2,891 Dispensary ...... 37 28 ... 60 3 ... 2 31 34 63 2 ... 65 ... ... ... ... 96.9 ... 65 Circle Total. ... ... ... ... 487 465 13,532 204 217 ... 213 184 ... 24 288 133 396 16 9 421 28 30 8 66 96.1 48.2 243 KUTCH. DORABJÍ HOR- MASJÍ G.G.M.C ... ... ... ... 162 241 Kutch Na- tive State. Bhúj .... 23,742 Dispensary .... 87 69 ... 73 77 6 ... 60 96 149 7 ... 156 5 1 ... 6 95.5 83.3 162 ... ... ... ... 138 495 Mándví... 35,912 Do. .... 65 70 ... 33 102 ... ... 34 101 125 2 8 135 3 ... ... 3 98.4 100.0 138 Circle Total. ... ... ... ... 300 736 59,654 152 139 ... 106 179 6 ... 94 197 274 9 8 291 8 1 ... 9 96.8 88.8 150 Grand Total ... ... ... ... 17,951 14,315 1,187,685 9,093 7,592 600 11,981 3,758 98 248 7,556 9,129 14,652 1,429 857 16,938 702 584 41 1,327 91.1 54.3 183 Details of Column 5. Total number of persons vaccinated ............ 17,951 Deduct persons re-vaccinated ............ 1,266 Number of persons primarily vaccinated ...... 16,685 Details of Primary Vaccinations. Total number of operations (Col. 9 E. ) ......... 16,938 Deduct persons vaccinated ........................... 16,685 Number of operations in excess of persons .... 253 Details of Re-vaccinations. Total number of operations (Col. 10 D.) ......... 1,327 Deduct persons vaccinated ........................... 1,266 Number of operations in excess of persons ...... 61
( 51 ) C.( 52 ) Native Army. Number of Vacci- nators. Total number of persons vaccinated. Strength. Primary Vaccinations. Re-vaccinations. Percentage of successful cases, exclud- ing those unknown from the Total. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Result. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1872-73. 1871-73. 1872-73. 1871-72. Europeans. Natives. Total. Males. Females. Christians. Hindus. Musalmáns. Parsis. Other Castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Uknown. Total. In Primary Vaccination. In Re-vaccnation. Regiments........ .. .. 4,490 4,599 865 43,501 44,366 1,377 1,210 60 1,890 559 .. 78 1,576 1,011 2,370 320 16 2,706 755 1,115 41 1,911 88.1 40.3 Camp Followers. 3 3 2,523 2,722 1,947 46,050 47,997 1,315 1,080 153 1,610 546 35 51 1,779 616 2,257 137 75 2,469 73 78 2 153 94.2 48.3 Total.... 3 3 7,013 7,321 2,812 89,551 92,363 2,692 2,290 213 3,500 1,105 35 129 3,355 1,627 4,627 457 91 5,175 828 1,193 43 2,064 91.0 40.9 * Regmental Lines or Bazar and Cantonment Bazar. Details of Column 2. Total number of persons vaccinated .... 7,013 Deduct persons re-vaccinated .......... 2,031 Number of persons primarily vaccinated 4,982 Details of Primary Vaccinations. Total number of operations (Col. 8) ........ 5,175 Deduct persons vaccinated ............ 4,982 Number of operations in excess of persons 193 Details of Re-vaccinations. Total number of operations (Col. 10) ........ 2,064 Deduct persons vaccinated ............ 2,031 Number of operations in excess of persons 33
( 53 ) RETURN of Small-pox in Native Army for 1872-73. Remained. Admitted. Total. Recovered. Died. Remaining. Total. Previously vacci- nated. Regiment ...................... Males.................. 13 69 82 69 1 12 82 64 Females .......... 2 33 35 23 2 10 35 27 Children ............ 5 95 100 72 2 26 100 82 Regimental Lines or Bazárs .................. Males.............. 2 8 10 6 1 3 10 5 Females ........ 2 8 10 8 1 1 10 8 Children ...... 6 50 56 42 1 13 56 23 Total............ 30 263 293 220 8 65 293 209
( 54 ) STATEMENT No. VII. SUMMARY of the Diaries of Superintendents of Vaccination and their Assistants for the Year 1872-73. Name of Number of Encampments. Number of Travelling Days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Villages visited. Number of vaccinated Children inspected. Total Number of Children vaccinated during the year 1872-73. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Collectorate. Táluká. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Trimbak Anant. Púná. Hawelí .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 19 29 10 46 56 123 326 449 7 56 63 379 1,898 2,277 4,906 Máwal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24 24 .. 33 33 .. 254 254 .. 70 70 .. 1,556 1,556 1,932 Khed .. .. .. .. .. .. 22 22 .. 35 35 .. 420 420 .. 64 64 .. 923 923 1,884 Juner .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 9 .. 14 14 .. 159 159 .. 33 33 .. 331 331 912 Purandhar .. .. .. .. 3 18 21 11 25 36 121 231 352 19 36 55 938 1,994 2,932 2,049 Sirúr .. .. .. .. .. 1 17 18 3 28 31 32 253 285 2 33 35 93 523 616 1,035 Indápur .. .. .. .. .. .. 23 23 .. 35 35 .. 373 373 .. 55 55 .. 1,113 1,113 940 Bhimthadí .. .. .. .. .. 33 33 .. 47 47 .. 514 514 .. 84 84 .. 1,803 1,803 1,428 1 1 14 165 179 24 263 287 276 2,530 2,806 28 431 459 1,410 10,141 11,551 15,086 Assistant Surgeon. Dharma Bápují. Ahmadnagar. Nagar .. .. .. .. .. 3 14 17 13 31 44 117 239 356 20 60 80 631 765 1,396 3,482 Ráhuri .. .. .. .. .. 2 12 14 10 44 54 89 300 389 21 32 53 707 1,628 2,335 988 Párner .. .. .. .. 1 11 12 3 23 26 31 206 237 8 42 50 285 724 1,009 959 Srigundí .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 .. 17 17 .. 116 116 .. 26 26 .. 442 442 1,405 Karjat .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 .. 19 19 .. 149 149 .. 23 23 .. 534 534 1,643 Newásá .. .. .. .. .. 6 6 .. 19 19 .. 165 165 .. 25 25 .. 483 483 1,854 Ánkolá .. .. .. .. .. 6 6 .. 16 16 .. 187 187 .. 23 23 .. 642 642 1,542 Jámkhed .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 6 .. 15 15 .. 105 105 .. 19 19 .. 497 497 1,975 Kopargáon .. .. .. 2 20 22 4 47 51 41 299 340 6 64 70 308 1,026 1,334 913 Sangamner .. .. .. .. 13 13 .. 28 28 .. 284 284 .. 58 58 .. 625 625 1,210 Siogáon .. .. .. .. .. 3 3 .. 15 15 .. 116 116 .. 26 26 .. 419 419 1,103 1 1 8 100 108 30 274 304 278 2,222 2,500 55 393 448 1,931 7,785 9,716 17,074
( 55 ) CENTRAL. P. S. TURNBULL, M.D., Surgeon ; Acting( 56 ) Name of Number of Encampments. Number of Travelling Days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Villages visited. Number of vaccinated Children inspected. Total Number of Children vaccinated during the year 1872-73. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Collectorate. Táluká. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendant. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. CENTRAL( 57 ) SOUTHERN. J. RABY, Assistant Surgeon : Acting( 58 ) Name of Number of Encampments. Number of Travelling Days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Villages visited. Number of vaccinated Children inspected. Total Number of Children vaccinated during the year 1872-73. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Collectorate. Táluká. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Máhádeo Vináyak. Tháná. Sáshtí .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 13 15 2 32 34 108 261 369 1 19 20 19 451 470 1,345 Bassein .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 10 .. 13 13 .. 161 161 .. 15 15 .. 385 385 1,286 Bhiwandí .. .. .. .. .. .. 16 16 .. 23 23 .. 107 107 .. 35 35 .. 669 669 2,246 Kalíán .. .. .. .. .. 2 29 31 6 36 42 78 296 374 14 47 61 390 829 1,219 1,168 Dhánú .. .. .. .. .. 23 23 .. 26 26 .. 652 652 .. 35 35 .. 665 665 1,076 Kurjat .. .. .. .. 4 18 22 6 22 28 71 236 307 15 49 64 318 466 784 1,401 Máhim .. .. .. .. .. 35 35 .. 48 48 .. 258 258 .. 34 34 .. 385 385 787 Murbád .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 3 4 7 11 39 91 130 7 11 18 128 4 132 1,333 Panwel .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 2 2 .. 69 69 .. 1 1 .. 30 30 2,423 Sháhpur .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 .. 7 7 .. 18 18 .. 4 4 .. 45 45 1,972 Wádá .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 .. 21 21 .. 226 226 .. 35 35 .. 348 348 902 Native State. Jawár .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,081 1 1 9 159 168 18 237 255 296 2,375 2,671 37 285 322 855 4,277 5,132 17,020 WESTERN. T. CODY, Assistant Surgeon. Bálájí Ráyájí. Kolábá. Alíbág .. .. .. .. .. 4 30 34 8 53 61 83 328 411 24 103 127 291 741 1,032 1,739 Mángáon .. .. .. .. 3 44 47 5 74 79 51 330 381 14 122 136 176 1,521 1,697 1,709 Máhád .. .. .. .. .. 2 12 14 7 23 30 76 116 192 15 54 69 196 939 1,135 1,138 Pen .. .. .. .. .. 2 40 42 3 67 70 30 443 473 17 121 138 175 1,315 1,490 2,232 Rohá .. .. .. .. .. 2 32 34 4 40 44 31 239 270 11 84 95 55 720 775 900 Native State. Janjírá .. .. .. .. 1 6 7 1 7 8 40 25 65 1 6 7 4 194 198 1,364 1 1 14 164 178 28 264 292 311 1,481 1,792 82 490 572 897 5,430 6,327 9,082 Ratnágiri .. .. .. .. .. 6 18 24 13 36 49 121 219 340 11 3 14 280 168 448 2,244 Chiplûn .. .. .. .. .. 6 5 11 10 29 39 92 229 321 17 21 38 1,140 608 1,748 6,065 Dápulí .. .. .. .. .. 2 14 16 3 46 49 32 472 504 4 47 51 114 1,127 1,241 3,573
( 59) Bálájí Krishnájí. Ratnágirí. Deogarh .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 20 22 2 29 31 60 240 300 1 36 37 20 1,639 1,659 5,340 Gohágarh .. .. .. .. .. 2 17 19 4 21 25 26 235 261 8 9 17 261 598 859 2,378 Málwan .. .. .. .. .. 6 27 33 8 43 51 162 494 656 11 49 60 902 2,610 3,512 7,340 Rájápur .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 30 40 13 48 61 131 525 656 11 48 59 646 1,920 2,566 7,233 Sangameshwar .. .. .. .. 7 7 14 10 18 28 109 129 238 7 18 25 411 634 1,045 3,003 Native State. Sáwantwádí .. .. .. .. 3 7 10 3 6 9 60 105 165 4 7 11 226 382 608 6,528 44 145 189 66 276 342 703 2,648 3,441 74 238 312 4,000 9,686 13,686 43,710 1 3 3 67 468 535 112 777 889 1,400 6,504 7,904 193 1,013 1,206 5,752 19,393 25,145 69,812 Sardármiyá Nánámiyá. Ahmadábád. Daskroí .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 11 12 1 42 43 144 565 709 .. 48 48 .. 1,365 1,365 7,099 Dholká .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 .. 20 20 .. 327 327 .. 42 42 .. 927 927 2,458 Dhandúká .. .. .. .. .. .. 15 15 .. 39 39 .. 448 448 .. 46 46 .. 1,790 1,790 2,319 Voramgáon .. .. .. .. .. 3 1 4 14 7 21 183 123 306 30 16 46 853 183 1,036 2,931 Sánand .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 .. 23 23 .. 363 363 .. 47 47 .. 877 877 1,503 Prántej .. .. .. .. .. 4 7 11 7 21 28 70 237 307 22 28 50 549 509 1,058 1,577 Gogo .. .. .. .. .. .. 19 19 .. 32 32 .. 408 408 .. 62 62 .. 2,098 2,098 2,241 8 66 74 22 184 206 397 2,471 2,868 52 289 341 1,402 7,749 9,151 20,128 NORTHERN. MANCHARJÍ BERÁMJÍ COLÁ, M.D. Parbhudás Hírjí. Khedá. Mahmudábád .. .. .. .. .. 7 7 .. 35 35 .. 285 285 .. 59 59 .. 1,561 1,561 2,733 átar .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 7 .. 41 41 .. 327 327 .. 56 56 .. 1,513 1,513 2,398 Nariád .. .. .. .. .. 7 7 .. 37 37 .. 237 237 .. 45 45 .. 1,958 1,958 3,933 Kapatbanj .. .. .. .. .. 2 5 7 4 29 33 40 328 368 10 52 62 437 868 1,305 1,874 Thásrá .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 3 .. 28 28 .. 230 230 .. 39 39 .. 1,051 1,051 2,062 Ánand .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 11 .. 43 43 .. 317 317 .. 53 53 .. 1,912 1,912 2,691 Borsád .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 .. 31 31 .. 204 204 .. 37 37 .. 2,094 2,094 4,119 Native State. Cambay .. .. .. .. .. 6 6 .. 12 12 .. 83 82 .. 22 22 .. 684 684 1,855 2 50 52 4 256 260 40 2,010 2,050 10 363 373 437 11,641 12,078 21,665 Parbhurárn Pránshankar. Broach. Broach .. .. .. .. .. 1 22 23 .. 63 63 .. 675 675 1 55 56 60 1,501 1,561 2,399 Jambusar .. .. .. .. .. .. 31 31 .. 67 67 .. 627 627 .. .. 73 .. 1,986 1,986 2,694 Arnod .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 .. 8 8 .. 49 19 .. 14 14 .. 365 365 537 Wásrá .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 11 .. 23 23 .. 277 277 .. 27 27 .. 428 428 739 Ankleshwar .. .. .. .. .. 2 20 22 6 64 70 53 508 561 13 55 68 518 992 1,510 1,542 3 89 92 6 227 233 53 2,136 2,189 14 224 238 578 5,272 5,850 7,911 Jethálál Punjáji. Súrat. Chorásí .. .. .. .. .. 1 8 9 5 23 30 47 333 380 4 31 35 148 799 947 4,547 Ulpád .. .. .. .. .. 2 3 5 9 20 29 81 243 324 15 72 87 420 1,040 1,460 1,209 Jalálpur .. .. .. .. .. 3 5 8 9 17 26 81 151 232 20 20 40 705 280 985 1,578 Balsád .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 .. 35 35 .. 318 318 .. 45 45 .. 978 978 1,478 Mándví .. .. .. .. .. 3 11 14 12 27 39 117 242 359 32 39 71 955 814 1,769 1,571 Chicklí .. .. .. .. .. 1 6 7 4 13 17 43 131 174 10 14 24 181 333 514 1,718
( 60 ) Name of Number of Encampments. Number of Travelling Days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Villages visited. Number of vaccinated Children inspected. Total Number of Children vaccinated during the year 1872-73. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Collectorate. Táluká. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assitant Superintendent. Total. NORTHERN( 61 ) Lachman. Karachí. Karáchí ... ... ... ... ... 23 7 30 46 20 66 255 187 442 50 9 59 990 113 1,103 5,131 Dádu ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 24 ... 32 32 ... 199 199 ... 71 71 ... 839 839 1,174 Sihwán ... ... ... ... ... 1 39 40 2 57 59 60 441 501 ... 77 77 ... 665 665 1,042 Mánjhándá ... ... ... ... ... 1 13 14 1 19 20 55 128 183 ... 44 44 ... 943 943 825 Kotrí and Kohistan ... ... ... ... 24 4 28 48 11 59 433 64 497 42 12 54 1,306 155 1,461 761 Tantá ... ... ... ... 10 70 80 31 98 129 270 805 1,075 61 91 152 795 896 1,691 1,279 Mírpur Sácra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 323 Ghodábari ... ... ... ... ... 11 11 ... 17 17 ... 115 115 ... 39 39 ... 361 361 906 Sháhábandar ... ... ... ... ... 5 5 ... 9 9 ... 71 71 ... 8 8 ... 205 205 633 Játí ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 803 Belá ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 11 ... 10 10 ... 89 89 ... 50 50 ... 485 485 869 Mírpur Batorá ... ... ... ... 2 16 18 2 19 21 29 238 267 10 44 54 693 418 1,111 1,092 1 1 61 200 261 130 292 422 1,102 2,337 3,439 163 445 608 3,784 5,080 8,864 14,888 SINDH. J. WILLIAMS, M.D., Assistant Surgeon. Hásá Mal. Shikárpur. Shikárpur ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... 8 28 ... 28 58 ... 58 134 ... 134 563 ... 563 2,576 Rohri ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... 30 30 ... 80 80 ... 36 36 ... 414 414 1,537 Saidpur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ghotki ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,050 Mírpur Mátelo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,787 Obáurá ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,456 Sakkhar ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... 13 28 ... 28 160 ... 160 30 ... 30 1,490 ... 1,490 2,926 Náushahrá Abrú ... ... ... ... ... 2 6 8 5 21 26 31 131 162 5 46 51 362 571 933 1,880 Sujáwal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 130 Ratáderá ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 ... 7 7 ... 13 13 ... 4 4 ... 39 39 253 Ládkháná ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 9 9 ... 43 43 ... 27 27 ... 269 269 645 Kambar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,695 Nasirábád ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Labdaryá ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... 7 7 ... 40 40 ... 23 23 ... 292 292 1,638 Tiger or Thuri ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... 8 8 ... 55 55 ... 23 23 ... 175 175 1,349 Mehar ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 ... 2 55 ... 55 ... ... ... ... ... ... 528 Kakkar ... ... ... ... ... 1 5 6 1 6 7 65 29 94 ... 22 22 ... 157 157 1,624 1 1 25 31 56 64 88 152 369 391 760 169 181 350 2,415 1,917 4,332 21,083 Ású Mal. Haidarábád. Haidarábád ... ... ... ... 11 18 29 15 67 82 137 618 755 41 111 152 632 1,718 2,350 4,217 Tándá ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 6 4 8 12 49 125 174 4 53 57 429 265 694 1,518 Bága-ká-Tándá ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... 8 8 ... 92 92 ... 40 40 ... 436 436 2,001 Baddin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,891 Digrí ... ... ... ... ... 2 6 8 3 14 17 40 163 203 2 21 23 135 439 574 1,892 Alhar-ká Tándá ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 6 4 7 11 103 78 181 17 26 43 876 412 1,288 1,087 Mírpur Khás ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 4 5 5 10 74 74 148 23 ... 23 416 ... 416 ... Sháhdádpur ... ... ... ... ... 16 16 ... 21 21 ... 274 274 ... 65 65 ... 947 947 2,156 Hálá ... ... ... ... ... 1 11 12 3 18 21 33 190 223 10 57 67 221 887 1,108 1,959 Sákkrand ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 6 ... 11 11 ... 178 178 ... 35 35 ... 275 275 2,237 Morá ... ... ... ... ... 7 7 ... 20 20 ... 180 180 ... 48 48 ... 474 474 1,797 Naushahrá Ferozá ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... 15 15 ... 124 124 ... 49 49 ... 638 638 1,535 Khandiárá ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... 15 15 ... 147 147 ... 51 51 ... 616 616 1,838 1 1 23 81 104 34 209 243 436 2,243 2,679 97 556 653 2,709 7,107 9,816 24,128 ... Upper Sindh Frontier Jacobábád ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,824 Kasmar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 735 Thùl ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 661 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,220
( 62 ) Name of Number of Encampments. Number of Travelling Days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Villages visited. Number of vaccinated Children inspected. Total Number of Children vaccinated during the year 1872-73. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Collectorate. Táluká. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. SINDH( 63 ) KÁTHÁWÁD. E. R. BUTLHR, M.D. Surgeon. Ranchoddás Western Division. Gondal .. .. .. .. 6 16 22 13 36 49 196 319 515 23 28 51 1,913 850 2,763 2,248 Upletá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Gadká .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Gaurídhar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Talíá Diwání .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Kotrá Sangání .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Morví .. .. .. .. .. 7 7 .. 15 15 .. 142 142 .. 22 22 .. 603 603 2,993 Tankárá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 257 Bhánwad .. .. .. .. .. 4 1 5 6 5 11 76 94 170 14 9 23 537 190 727 1,618 Jodhpur .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Júdiá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Khambáliá .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 7 7 .. 40 40 .. 8 8 .. 266 266 2,228 Kondurná .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Nawánagar .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 3 8 12 6 18 151 44 195 25 7 32 1,324 113 1,937 2,800 Pál .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 2 .. 2 18 .. 18 4 .. 4 136 .. 136 .. Rájkot .. .. .. .. .. 7 7 14 16 15 31 194 390 584 27 59 86 1,795 888 2,683 4,433 Wasáwar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Porbandar .. .. .. .. .. 4 23 27 10 32 42 97 333 430 19 30 49 1,876 1,908 3,784 2,797 1 2 35 59 94 72 117 189 894 1,390 2,284 148 169 317 10,376 4,995 15,371 22,957 Kánojí Jayarám. Southern Division. Dídan .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Jáfrábád .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 4 4 .. 70 70 .. 11 11 .. 450 450 2,613 Bántwá .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 1 4 5 24 72 96 3 12 15 302 662 964 2,505 Bagusrá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mánikwádá .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 4 4 7 11 69 110 179 13 13 26 652 517 1,169 790 Bilká .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Jaitpur .. .. .. .. .. 3 8 11 9 19 28 104 75 179 13 13 26 444 531 975 3,300 Chorwád .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Junágarh .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 10 15 7 22 172 32 204 42 12 54 5,853 238 6,091 2,377 Kutiáná .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mangarul .. .. .. .. .. 5 3 8 8 .. 15 84 116 200 14 7 21 508 78 586 2,126 Uáná .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 3 3 .. 81 81 .. 22 22 .. 530 530 2,144 Pattan .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Viráwal .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 4 4 .. 49 49 .. 2 2 .. 58 58 1,202 Visáwadar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18 26 44 37 55 92 453 605 1,058 85 92 177 7,759 3,064 10,823 16,957 Eastern Division. Bháwanagar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 4 .. 16 16 .. 7 7 .. 179 179 2,005 Botád .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 3 4 6 10 42 30 72 10 2 12 827 335 1,162 2,551 Kundalá .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 .. 4 4 .. 36 36 .. 8 8 .. 440 440 2,523 Líliá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mowá .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 .. 10 10 .. 160 160 .. 40 40 .. 1,232 1,232 2,610 Noganwadar .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Umrálá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Shehor .. .. .. .. .. 3 5 8 10 15 25 104 103 207 19 11 30 1,300 559 1,859 2,130 Taiájá .. .. .. .. .. .. 18 18 .. 28 28 .. 263 263 .. 55 55 .. 1,056 1,056 2,399 Láthí .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Dánthá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Uánd Surveyá .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Pálítáná .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 11 .. 15 15 .. 119 119 .. 24 24 .. 623 623 2,443 Wallá .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 12 14 5 24 29 49 237 286 13 12 25 1,624 2,600 4,224 2,355 1 2 6 58 64 19 106 125 195 964 1,159 42 159 201 3,751 7,024 10,775 19,016 1 2 4 75 219 294 148 383 531 1,828 4,052 5,880 309 524 833 23,736 17,234 40,970 75,568
( 64 ) Name of Number of Encampments. Number of Travelling Days. Number of Miles travelled. Number of Villages visited. Number of vaccinated Children inspected. Total Number of Children vaccinated during the year 1872-73. Circle. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Collectorate. Taluká. Superinendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. Superintendent. Assistant Superintendent. Total. REWÁ KÁNTHÁ. S. B. HALIDAY, Assistant Surgeon. Jethálál Ganpatrám. Panch Maháls. Godhrá ... ... ... ... ... 2 8 10 12 25 37 121 129 250 16 39 55 595 503 1,098 1,505 Dohad ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 5 ... 20 20 12 123 135 1 36 37 105 738 843 1,706 Kalol ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 4 1 17 18 7 135 142 1 43 44 112 755 867 1,474 Jhálod ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 11 ... 11 54 ... 54 14 ... 14 647 ... 647 1,492 Halol ... ... ... ... ... 1 8 9 3 19 22 23 149 172 4 78 82 82 821 903 773 7 23 30 27 81 108 217 536 753 36 196 232 1,541 2,817 4,358 6,950 Native States. Lúnwádá ... ... ... ... ... 2 10 12 9 52 61 45 354 399 26 184 210 649 2,596 3,245 1,726 Rájpíplá ... ... ... ... ... 9 12 21 40 45 85 267 311 578 65 58 123 2,568 1,634 4,202 3,306 Bárá ... ... ... ... ... 5 12 17 10 33 43 128 336 464 32 119 151 669 1,813 2,482 3,692 Bálásinúr ... ... ... ... 1 4 5 6 29 35 22 150 172 6 70 76 264 838 1,102 728 Chotá Udaipur ... ... ... ... 3 4 7 9 9 18 75 87 162 9 15 24 123 168 291 510 Sunth and Kadáná ... ... ... ... ... 2 6 8 7 19 26 54 151 205 19 58 77 516 611 1,127 944 Sankhedá Mewás ... ... ... ... 2 5 7 13 18 31 113 131 244 22 32 54 469 581 1,050 932 1 1 24 53 77 94 205 299 704 1,520 2,224 179 536 715 5,253 8,241 13,499 11,838 1 1 1 31 76 107 121 286 407 921 2,056 2,977 215 732 947 6,799 11,058 17,857 18,788 7 25 27 505 3,189 3,694 1,062 5,957 7,019 11,661 53,342 65,003 2,139 9,083 11,222 78,359 197,371 275,730 513,184* * Excluding the Presidency, Barodá and Kutch Circles, the Superintendents of which are not peregrinating officers.
Administration Report ( Vaccination). GENERAL DEPARTMENT. No. 3998. Bombay Castle, 25th November 1873. Letter from the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, No. 3091, dated the 4th October 18732 5. The number of infants vaccinated under one year of age was 1,98,484 being the largest number as yet attained to. With the aid of the Birth-registers which are kept in each village, the infants passed over by the Vaccinators should be very few in future. 6. Of persons in civil life primarily vaccinated 2,98,314 were males and 2,65,212 females : Christians numbered 3,069, Hin- doos 4,29,001, Musalmans 95,339, Parsees 1,693, while 34,424 are classed as Miscellaneous. Total 5,63,526, or 2.81 per cent. of the whole estimated population. There were also 16,301 re-vaccina- tions. 7. The percentage of success in primary vaccinations was 94.6 and in re-vaccinations 66.9. 8. Notwithstanding the increased strength of the Depart- ment which enabled a Vaccinator to be appointed to each Talooka, the number of operations has fallen off in Sind as well as in Rewa Kanta and Kutch. This is to be regretted. Government especi- ally notice with displeasure the bad accounts of the Southern Circle. Not only is the percentage of the population operated on far behind the rest, but the average number of operations perfor- med by the Vaccinators is the lowest. The percentage of success ascertained by the Superintendent is also nearly 20 per cent. behind any other Circle. The removal of the two incompetent Assistant Superintendents (who ought never apparently to have been ap- pointed) will, it is hoped, somewhat mend matters; but if it be really the case that nearly one-half of the Vaccinators themselves are indolent, an example will have to be made of some of them. 9. The results of the year's operations seem best in the Northern, Central, and Kattywar Circles, under the Superinten- dents Messrs. Robb, Colah, and Butler. Mr. Cody seems also to have done good service. 10. The greatly increased average of work done by Municipal Vaccinators which was brought to notice in last year's report has been well maintained in 1872-73 ; the average being 1,129 opera- tions per man. This is much below the general average of the Department, but considering the difficulties the Vaccinators have to contend with in large towns where the field of operations is also limited, it may be considered good. 11. The attention of the Collector of Poona should be drawn to the remarks contained in paragraph 27 of the report. It would be well if he could succeed in obtaining an increase to
3 the pay of the new Vaccinator who has been appointed to do work in Narayangaon and Otoor. 12. Government view with much pleasure the progress vac- cination is making in Native States. The prompt assistance given by the Chiefs of Jamkhandi, Sanglee, and Miraj is greatly to their credit. The attention of the Karbhari of Bhore should be drawn to the advisability of appointing another Vaccinator to that State. The suggestions of Dr. Turnbull for the re-organization of the Vaccination Department in Kutch should also be communicated to the Political Agent. It is probable that His Highness the Rao would readily entertain Dr. Tumbull's sensible proposals if they were laid before him. 13. Dr. Turnbull reports that for want of skill, coupled with want of energy and deficient tact, the vaccination that goes on at Dispensaries is very unsatisfactory. Government were cer- tainly not prepared to learn that many Sub-Assistant Surgeons and Hospital Assistants are unable to vaccinate, and they cannot imagine how, with such ignorance, they can have passed into the service. The Surgeon-General should be requested to make ar- rangements so that all the students at the Grant Medical College may learn vaccination in future. At the same time His Excel- lency in Council is not altogether prepared to endorse all Dr. Turnbull's conclusions as to Dispensary Vaccination. The officers in charge of these institutions have more important duties to perform than vaccination, which is merely an incidental adjunct to their appointments. They are moreover placed in large towns where, as Dr. Turnbull himself admits, the population is usually more obstructive than in rural districts, and not having undivided time, are unable to go seeking for children as the regular Vacci- nators can. In future where there is a Municipal Vaccinator he should be responsible for the vaccination of the town. Where there is none, the officer in charge of a Dispensary should be looked to, but the Superintendent General must try to have a special peon allowed him for the purpose, or he cannot be expected to work satisfactorily. 14. The Deputy Surgeons-General should take care to notice in their reports the progress made in vaccination at each Dispen- sary, and any cases of incompetence should be specially reported. 15. Government have already expressed their views on the subject of animal vaccination. It is a subject to which the most careful attention should be paid.
4 16. It was to be expected that a few isolated cases of in- oculation would be discovered. There is no fear, however, of its spreading, and Government do not think that it is an offence that should be heavily punished. It is to be remembered that after all those who practise it are only a little behind the age. 17. Dr. Turnbull has given statistics of deaths from small- pox only for the town and island of Bombay. These amounted to 1,637. The figures for the rest of the Presidency should have been obtained from the Sanitary Commissioner. It appears from that officer's report that in the calendar year 1872, including Bom- bay, the deaths from this disease were 26,699 in number, being 17,296 more than in 1871. This is much to be regretted, but shows what a number of valuable lives may in future be saved by vaccination. 18. The Revenue and Political officers gave, as was to be expected, all the aid in their power to the Vaccinators. An in- stance to the contrary is quoted by Mr. Robb, but the ill success of the Vaccinator seems from Mr. Robb's own account to have been more due to the weakness of the man himself than to any derelic- tion on the part of the officials. 19. Government quite concur with Dr. Turnbull that no hard and fast line can be drawn to regulate the number of villages to be gone through by a Vaccinator in a year, but it is certainly advisable that as many villages should be visited as possible. 20. The Assistant Superintendents seem on the whole to have been a success, and to judge from the present report their creation has been justified by the results. The improved correct- ness of the returns, which Government are glad to hear of, is no doubt to be attributed in some measure to them. 21. The different Superintendents have, to judge from their reports and Dr. Turnbull's commendations, generally exhibited praiseworthy energy, which has been shared in by their subordi- nates. Government must, however, repeat their opinion that offi- cers who have so much district work as Superintendents of Vacci- nation ought certainly to know the vernacular. Attention was called to this in the review of the last year's report, but apparently with no effect. The Surgeon-General should be asked his opinion as to the advisability of making the passing of an examination by the Superintendents compulsory, since, without such knowledge,
5 they cannot examine the vaccination returns for themselves or speak directly to the people. 22. In conclusion, Government are glad to record their sense of the zeal and intelligence exhibited by Dr. Turnbull while he has been in charge of the Department. F. S. CHAPMAN, Chief Secretary to Government. To The Surgeon-General, Indian Medical Department, The Commissioner in Sind. The Revenue Commissioner, N. D., The Revenue Commissioner, S. D., All Collectors, including Sind, and the Assistant Collector in charge Panch Mahals, The Military Department of the Secretariat, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, J. M. Campbell, Esq., Compiler, Administration Report for 1872-73 (with a copy of the report).
