REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE PRESIDENCY AND PROVINCES OF MADRAS, FOR THE YEAR 1877-78. PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY. MADRAS: PRINTED BY R. HILL, AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1878.
REPORT ON VACCINATION THROUGHOUT THE PRESIDENCY AND PROVINCES OF MADRAS, FOR THE YEAR 1877-78. PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY. MADRAS: PRINTED BY R. HILL, AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1878.
OFFICE OF SANITARY COMMISSIONER, MADRAS, 18th September 1878. No. 53. From SURGEON-MAJOR W. R. CORNISH, F.R.C.S., Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, To C. G. MASTER, ESQ., Acting Chief Secretary to Government. SIR, I HAVE the honor to submit, herewith, for the information of His Grace the Governor in Council, the Report on Vaccination for the official year 1877-78. 2. I much regret the delay in the submission of this document. It reached me originally on the 13th June, but in accordance with the instructions of Govern- ment in G.O., No. 1,116, of 26th June 1878,I was obliged to return it to Dr. Laing for the inclusion of the vaccination statistics of several Municipalities, which were then missing. Dr. Laing being absent on inspection duty in the Northern Division some further delay occurred in the correction and re-submission of the report, which reached me at Ootacamund on the 1st instant. Arrangements have been made for the more prompt collection of Municipal returns, and I trust that in future there will be no loss of time in the submission of these papers. 3. Dr. Shortt, late Inspector of Vaccination, retired on the 15th February 1878, and was succeeded by Surgeon J. A. Laing. The report is based on Dr. Shortt's notes, he having been in charge of the office for ten and a half months of the year. For the short period of the year Dr. Laing was in office, he at my request undertook the revision and correction of the rules for the guidance of Deputy Inspectors and Vaccinators, and the revised code has subsequently been published. 4. The regular staff of Deputy Inspectors and Vaccinators was as follows :4 REPORT ON VACCINATION. 6. Great as the increase in vaccine operations was, it would have been still more satisfactory if the local authorities in Bellary, Kurnool, Nellore, and South Arcot had taken full advantage of the assemblage of the people on famine relief to extend vaccination. The best results of all were obtained in the town of Madras, where no fewer than 116,335 persons were vaccinated by the regular staff and the temporary establishment entertained for house-to-house visitation. The numbers vaccinated in Chingleput, Coimbatore, Salem, North Arcot, Cuddapah, and Madura were very much above the average. 7. Dr. Shortt, the Inspector of Vaccination, at my request devoted much personal attention to the extension of vaccination in the town and relief camps of Madras, and to the organization of a temporary establishment to assist in the house- to-house visitation sanctioned under G.O., No. 174, of 13th February 1877. In the course of the year besides this work he inspected the vaccine arrangements in North Arcot, Cuddapah, Coimbatore, Chingleput, and Malabar. 8. The lymph employed was on the whole of good quality, as I had abundant means of observing from constant inspection of famine camps ; but in some of the children who had been subjected to long privation the vesicles did not appear healthy, and in a few cases the arms ulcerated. This result, commented on by Dr. Shortt in his inspection of the North Coimbatore Circle, was, I believe, due more to the low health of the children than to defects in vaccination. Recent inspection of the work in Bhavani and Erode in healthy and well-nourished children, shows the lymph to be unexceptionable, and the work satisfactory in every respect. 9. The number of children under one year of age vaccinated was 68,110. These results in regard to the actual births in the several districts are unsatis- factory. It is very difficult, however, to persuade the people that vaccination should be done during the infantile period of life, and the intelligent counsel and aid of district officers is much needed to impress upon the people that the proper age for vaccination is that previous to teething. More support is given to vaccinators than formerly by village and district officials, but there is still much room for improve- ment in some of the districts. 10. Small-pox was unusually prevalent and fatal in 1877, but in the greater part of the Presidency it had declined very much before the end of the year. In the early months of 1878 it continued to be very prevalent and fatal in Godavari, Tanjore, South Arcot and Salem. In regard to the prevalence of this disease, the experience of the various famine camps showed that it could be absolutely controlled by effective vaccination. Measures essential to the safety of the people in famine centres, however, cannot be applied to scattered populations of rural districts, without legal powers compelling the people to have their children vaccinated within the early months of life. 11. The present report, prepared before the issue of G.O., No. 1,116 of 26th June 1878, includes the vaccinations performed in a few military cantonments beyond the Presidency limits. The reasons for the inclusion of such operations in those of the general report were, I imagine, because the Vaccinators are paid by the Madras Government, and their work principally confined to the floating populations of camp-followers, who are subjects of, and mainly belong to, the Presidency. The numbers are separately given, but if Government desire it the returns of these cantonments can be excluded in future reports. 12. In regard to the operations performed by Medical Subordinates and private Vaccinators, the instructions of Government have been attended to in excluding them from the calculations showing the average cost of each operation. In the year under review Medical Subordinates (chiefly those of jails) vaccinated 28,584 cases, or an increase of 12,831 on the previous year. 13. Only one Civil Dispensary in this Presidency makes any return of vaccin- ation, i.e., the institution at Cuddalore, where 584 operations were performed. In my opinion the Medical Officers of the numerous dispensaries established and paid for out of Local Funds, ought to exert themselves in the extension of vaccina- tion. As a rule the smaller dispensaries have but few or no in-patients, and the officers in charge, according to my experience, have abundance of time and oppor-
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 5 tunities of vaccinating. By utilising the services of their medical servants, the Local Fund Boards might get more vaccine work done, and the Taluk Vaccinators might devote their energies mainly to outlying villages and hamlets, which are now to a great extent neglected. 14. In regard to the results of the vaccination work the tables, prepared according to the new forms of the Government of India, show a total of 787,146 persons vaccinated, of which number 776,705 were primary vaccinations and 11,025 re-vaccinations. Of the former 648,097 or 82.28 per cent. were returned as &quot; successful,&quot; and of the re-vaccination cases 7,210 or 65.39 per cent. succeeded. The proportion of success would have been higher in primary vaccinations, only that during the famine crisis many persons subjected to the operation were lost sight of, and such persons could not be entered as those successfully operated on. 15. The following abstract shows the agency by which the vaccine operations were carried out:6 REPORT ON VACCINATION. 20. I fear the great increase in numbers vaccinated in 1877-78 does not show any greater willingness on the part of the civil population to submit to vaccination, and that the results of the famine year are not likely to be obtained in any future period under a system of voluntary vaccination. 21. Since the close of the official year Government has sanctioned my propo- sition for the Inspector of Vaccination taking a share in the general sanitary inspec- tion of the Presidency, by which arrangement, during the present year, a much wider area of country will be brought under review. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, W. R. CORNISH, F.R.C.S., Sanitary Commissioner for Madras.
ANNUAL REPORT OF VACCINATION FOR 1877-78. I HAVE the honor, in submitting the Annual Report of Vaccination of the Madras Presidency for the year 1877-78, to state that during the year under review one Second-class Deputy Inspector was added to the establishment for employ in the South Arcot District and posted to the Virudachalam Circle, as the district was divided into two circles. The advisability of employing a separate Deputy Inspector in the Tellicherry Circle of the Malabar District was suggested to the President, Local Fund Board, during Dr. Shortt's tour of inspection in November last in that district, as the district is large and divided into two circles, and the greater part sickly. 2. There was one resignation among the staff of Deputy Inspectors, viz., that of the Deputy Inspector of Chittur Circle. 3. In the beginning of 1877 the appointments of Deputy Inspectors to the Tinnevelly District were resuscitated by the appointment of two Second-class Deputy Inspectors. In the middle of the year, at the request of the President, Local Fund Board, a First-class Deputy Inspector was substituted to the Tinnevelly Circle in lieu of a Second-class Deputy Inspector, in accordance with the new Vaccination Rules. In the Dindigul Circle of the Madura District, at the request of the Presi- dent, a Second-class Deputy Inspector was substituted in lieu of the First-class Deputy Inspector. The Second-class Deputy Inspectors of the South Canara District, Chicacole Circle of the Ganjam District, and the Southern Circle of the Coimbatore District were promoted to the first-class grade during the year at the request of the Local Fund Boards of these districts, and the appointments of First- class Deputy Inspector to Jeypore Hill Tracts was also resuscitated by this office. The temporary Vaccinators in connection with the recently created Health Depart- ment in the town of Madras continued at work till the end of August 1877, and the work was then carried out by the town vaccine staff. The Vaccinators had to undergo much difficulties in hunting for and procuring lymph subjects to furnish arm vaccine lymph to meet the numerous demands that had arisen in connection with the work, and a large number of operations were carried out in the several relief-camps and poor-houses in the suburbs of the town owing to the large number of the suffering poor who congregated at these centres from the great distress caused by the famine. But at the Perambore Relief Camp the relief officers showed little or no interest in vaccination nor in urging the camp inmates to undergo the operation ; consequently very little was done in this particular camp. The total of operations performed in the town of Madras is 116,335, showing a vast increase of 64,840 cases when compared with that of the previous year, and the town work stands first in the Presidency, but this is owing to the accidental circumstance caused by the famine. A First-class Vaccinator was specially employed in the Red Hills Famine Relief Camp from April to 1st November 1877, when his services were dispensed with as they were no longer required. He shows a total of 4,827 operations having been performed in the camp from April to October 1877. This Vaccinator was paid out of the famine funds the whole time he was so employed. 4. The establishment during the year under notice consisted of 38 Deputy Inspectors (of whom 31 are of the first and 7 only of the second-class), 162 First- class Vaccinators, 281 Second-class Vaccinators, and 92 Probationers. The increase
8 REPORT ON VACCINATION. in the number of Vaccinators is due to the employment of additional men by several of the Local Fund Boards under the new Vaccination Rules. Of five Vaccinators four were prosecuted by the several Local Fund Boards, and have been convicted of falsifying returns during the year. Two of the four were prosecuted in the Trichi- nopoly District and convicted and punished, one with fine and the other with simple imprisonment; the third was prosecuted in the Cuddapah Circle, viz., a Second- class Vaccinator, who was convicted and punished with a fine of Rupees 50 for a similar crime; and the fourth, a First-class Vaccinator, was punished in the Penu- konda Circle with a fine of Rupees 5 for rendering false accounts, and subsequently suspended for six months by the President, Local Fund Boards; the fifth (a Second- class Vaccinator) belonged to the Madras Collectorate, falsified his returns and deserted: the neceessary steps have been taken to prosecute him, and the Presidency Magistrate has issued a warrant for his apprehension. One First-class Vaccinatrix was dismissed from the service for unsatisfactory work. 5. The casualties, &c., &c., among the staff of Vaccinators as reported by the Deputy Inspectors comprise 30 transfers, 26 resignations, 33 dismissals, 9 desertions, and 7 deaths. Of the transfers 8 occurred in Vizagapatam, 6 in South Arcot, 3 in Coimbatore District, 2 in each of the Madras Collectorate, Tanjore, Madura, Bellary, Nellore, and 1 in each of the following: Trichinopoly, North Arcot, and Salem. Of the resignations there were 6 in Coimbatore, 4 in Cuddapah, 3 in Nellore, 2 in each of the Madras Collectorate, North Arcot, Vizagapatam, and one in each of the following districts : South Arcot, Trichinopoly, Madura, Salem, Kurnool, Kistna, and Jeypore Hill Tracts. Of the dismissals 12 occurred in Salem, 5 in Coimbatore, 3 in Vizagapatam, 2 in each of South Arcot, Trichinopoly, and one in each of the following : Madras Collectorate, Tanjore, Tinnevelly, North Arcot, Cuddapah, Bellary, Jeypore Hill Tracts, Ganjam, and Hill Tracts of Ganjam. Of the desertions there were 6 in Coimbatore, and one in each of the Madras Collectorate, Cuddapah, and Vizagapatam. Of the deaths 2 occurred in Jeypore Hill Tracts, 2 in Cuddapah, and one in each of the following districts : Malabar, Bellary, and Kistna. The Deputy Inspectors as a body worked well during the year, and gave satisfaction in the performance of their duties. Only Rupees 20 have been exacted from them as fines for inattention to orders and gross remissness in their work, and Rupees 14-12-0 were recovered by this office from the Vaccinators for neglect of duty and misconduct. RS. A. P. Recovered as fines from Deputy Inspectors and Vaccinators. 121 3 9 REPORT ON VACCINATION. 9 Department. Total of Operations. Increase. Decrease. Net Increase. Vaccine Districts and Vaccine Depôt ... 685,890 278,401 ... ... Military Cantonments ... ... ... 6,790 1,550 ... ... Private Vaccinators ... ... ... 471 ... 2,577 ... Medical Subordinates ... ... ... 28,584 12,831 ... ... Municipalities ... ... ... ... 59,288 18,116 ... ... Zemindaris ... ... ... ... ... 6,113 2,266 ... ... Civil Dispensaries ... ... ... ... 584 497 ... ... Railway Apothecaries ... ... ... 10 ... 47 ... Total ... 787,730 313,661 2,624 311,037 The total work shows a large increase of 304,538 operations when compared with that of the previous year, with an average of 83.20 per cent. of success. Of the total of operations the largest number has been performed in the collectorate of Madras, 116,335, next comes Coimbatore with 69,043, North Arcot with 60,508, Madura with 59,114, and Salem 52,487. The smallest number was operated on in the Hill Tracts of Jeypore, viz., 3,654 cases. Dr. Shortt visited during the year the districts of North Arcot, Cuddapah, Madhanapalle, Salem, Coimbatore, Chingleput, and Malabar, and, owing to the great prevalence of small-pox followed by famine, his presence was absolutely necessary in Madras for arranging a systematic plan of work in the town of Madras and the several relief-camps and poor-houses, &c., to arrest the spread of small-pox, which had become virulent. Dr. Shortt states that the department responded nobly to the sudden and emergent calls made on it for the services of Vaccinators as well as for large supplies of vaccine lymph, and ultimately succeeded in controlling the disease and in arresting its virulency and progress in Madras. The Vaccinators of the Madras Collectorate are to be placed under the direct control of the President, Municipal Commission, Madras, from the commencement of the official year 1878-79. Small-pox was prevalent chiefly in Madras, Chingleput, North Arcot, South Arcot, Trichinopoly, Cuddapah, Kurnool, Salem, Coimbatore, Nellore, Bellary, Malabar, South Canara, Kistna, and Godavari Districts, and Temporary Vaccinators had to be employed in the following: Chingleput, Trichinopoly, Vellore Circle, Oosoor Circle, Malabar, South Canara, Nellore, and Ongole Circles. The total number of children successfully vaccinated under one year of age has been 68,110 during the year. The largest number of operations of this class was performed in the town of Madras, viz., 7,274, and the smallest in the Malabar District, being 48. The average percentage of success of the primary and re-vaccinations, includ- ing the unknown results, has been 83.20 on the whole, showing a falling off of 11.13 when compared with that of the preceding year. The decrease in the percentage of success is attributed to the large number of coolies operated on among the famine relief-camps, works, poor-houses, &c., in the several districts and in the Presidency town; their results were not fully ascertained after vaccination, as the inmates of the camps, &c., were moved out from place to place frequently. The proportion of successful cases varies as usual in the different districts, ranging from 98.23 in the Vizgapatam Range to 81.76 in the Cuddapah Circle ; but in the following the proportion of success was over 95 per cent.: Tanjore, Dindigul, Salem, South Caimbatore Circle, Vizianagram Range, and Hill Tracts of Ganjam. The cost of each successful operation for the whole Presidency was 3 Annas and 9 Pies, showing a decrease of 1 Anna and 2 Pies below that of the previous year. In the Hill Tracts of Ganjam the cost was highest, viz., Rupees 1-0-1, in Jeypore Hill Tracts Rupees 0-12-7, and the lowest was in South Coimbatore Circle, 1 Anna and 6 Pies. 3
10 REPORT ON VACCINATION. ABSTRACTS OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS' REPORTS. BELLARY DISTRICT. This district comprises three circles, with a Deputy Inspector presiding over in one circle and an Assistant Deputy Inspector in each of the other two circles. BELLARY CIRCLE. In this circle 6,728 operations are reported by the Deputy Inspector with 5,178 successful, 681 unsuccessful, and 869 unknown results, showing a decrease of 1,060 cases below that of the previous year. This decrease is due, the Deputy Inspector says, to the great prevalence of famine, which was attended with much sickness, and many of the vaccinating staff suffered from repeated attacks of fever, which rendered them unfit to perform their work. There were two transfers, one vacancy, and one dismissal among the Vaccinators. Obstruction to the spread of vaccination still exists in the circle, and the people in the taluks of Kudligi, Harpanahalli, Hudgalli, and Raidroog do not appreciate the benefits likely to result from vaccination. The want of material assistance by the Revenue officials to the department is a great drawback to vaccination in the circle, and the Deputy Inspector requests that Tahsildars, Revenue Inspectors, and Village officials, &c., be strictly ordered to render their legal aid to the Vaccinators in promoting vaccination. Small-pox was not reported to have prevailed in a severe form. The Deputy Inspector suggests for the wide spread of vaccination that the operation should be enforced on the people who are unprotected, and a small fine be levied should they refuse to undergo the operation when called upon. The number of children vaccinated under one year of age was 2,595, comprising 1,252 males and 1,343 females. First-class Vaccinator Syed Hussain, No. 90, has obtained the largest number of infants, viz., 596. No batta was spent to mothers for furnish- ing lymph. Eight vaccination certificates have been granted to candidates; of these 6 had marks of vaccination and 2 of small-pox. A few of the Vaccinators were reprimanded and punished with fines for remissness in their duties. The majority of the Vaccinators are clamorous for better prospects and the extra allowance allowed in G.O., dated 2nd September 1876, No. 1,591. The Deputy Inspector complains that no travelling allowance or the services of a peon are allowed him, whilst such indulgences are conceded to Deputy Inspectors in some other districts. The lymph in use was good, and the cost of each successful case was Annas 8. PENUKONDA CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector reports 2,450 operations with a percentage of 81.67 of success, and the results in 277 cases were unknown. On comparison with the work performed during the preceding year, there is a decrease of 1,780 operations. The vaccine staff remained for the most part of the year incomplete. One Vaccinator was on sick leave for three months, another under medical treatment for two months, and he was then granted three months' sick leave, and a third was prosecuted before the Deputy Magistrate of Penukonda Division and punished with a fine of Rupees 5 for having submitted false returns of work. Thereupon the Local Fund Board suspended the Vaccinator for six months, and his place was not filled up for some months. A few of the Vaccinators were repeatedly attacked with fever, which was prevalent in the circle. These various causes account for the decrease in the number vaccinated during the year as compared with that of the
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 11 previous year. The number of infants vaccinated under one year of age was 762. The Deputy Inspector suggests that compulsory measures be adopted for spreading vaccination in the Ceded Districts. In the absence of any such law much might be done by the Tahsildars and other native officials by subjecting their own children freely to the operation and thus set an example to others. Enlightened people not only object to the extraction of lymph from the arms of their own children, but also often prevent lymph being taken from the children of their servants and friends. Small-pox broke out in the circle, and immediate arrangements were made to check its further spread by vaccinating the unprotected. The Deputy Inspector complains that no travelling batta is conceded to him, and the lack of a peon is much felt in transacting his work. The conduct of the staff has been uniformly good, and the average cost of each case vaccinated is Annas 9 and Pies 5. Thirteen vaccination certificates have been granted to candidates during the year. GOOTY CIRCLE. The Assistant Deputy Inspector reports 5,854 operations during the year with 5,173 successful, 404 unsuccessful, and 277 unknown results. The total shows an increase of 1,980 cases when compared with the number vaccinated during the preceding year. This increase is due, the Deputy Inspector thinks, to cholera and small-pox having been less prevalent in the district than in the previous year. The staff of Vaccinators was not complete during the year as some were on leave. There was one death among the staff. Objection to the spread of vaccination existed in some parts of the circle, and many people were reluctant to undergo the vaccine operation during the time the famine lasted. The Deputy Inspector suggests that vaccination be made compulsory till the people appreciate the benefits of vaccination. Much difficulty exists in procuring arm lymph for transfer, and the Deputy Inspector suggests that the people be allowed a small amount of money to enable the Vaccinators to extract lymph from the arms of children. No. batta to mothers was paid during the year. The cost of each successful case was Annas 6 and Pies 4. CHINGLEPUT DISTRICT. The Deputy Inspector reports 22,789 operations during the year under notice with a percentage of 94.47 of success, and the results in 3,479 cases were not known. The total, comprising the work of the permanent and temporary staff, shows an increase of 7,527 cases, exclusive of the work performed by the temporary Vaccina- tors, when compared with the number of cases vaccinated during the preceding year. The increase is attributed to the relief-camps which were opened in the district on account of famine, and the coolies in these camps were compelled to be vaccinated. The largest amount of work, viz., 3,317, was performed by Second-class Vaccinator Coopoosawmy, No. 633, with 2,092 successful results. Small-pox was prevalent in the district and four temporary Vaccinators were entertained to check the progress of the epidemic. The Deputy Inspector suggests that if the Tahsildars and heads of villages be directed to interest themselves in spreading vaccination, that a considerable amount of work can thus easily be performed with the assistance of the Revenue officials. The number of children vaccinated under one year of age was 1,238; of this number 256 were operated on by Second-class Vaccinator Visvanathum, No. 721, with 225 successful results. 37 vaccination certificates were granted to candidates who appeared for examination. The Deputy Inspector states that Second-class Vaccinators of Chingleput Circle have been granted famine batta during the year, while the Vaccinators of the Saidapet Circle have been refused, although they have worked very hard. He complains of the insufficiency of the staff of Vaccinators to meet the wants of the district and the absence of any induce- ment to the unpaid volunteers to work satisfactorily. The conduct of the staff has
12 REPORT ON VACCINATION. been reported satisfactory and the working lymph in use good. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 2 and Pies 10. On the 18th September 1877 Dr. Shortt visited Saidapet Famine Camp and found much fault with the Vaccinators for carelessness, and directed two of them to be recommended for fine to the President, Local Fund Board. He also visited the Pallavaram Famine Camp on the 20th and Chingleput on the 25th, where he inspected several subjects with good vaccine vesicles at the feeding-place. On the 27th he visited the famine relief camp at Tiruvallur and left for Salem. COIMBATORE DISTRICT. This district has been divided into two ranges with a First-class Deputy Inspector to each. NORTH COIMBATORE RANGE. The Deputy Inspector reports 29,033 operations during the year with a success of 96.65 per cent. The total work performed in the two ranges shows an increase of 24,610 cases when compared with that of the preceding year, notwithstanding that a great deal of sickness prevailed in the range and many people left it on account of the famine. The increase is accounted for, viz., first, by the employment of 19 Probationary Vaccinators on Rupees 7 each per mensem; second, result system in the district. On reviewing the comparative work done by the staff of Vaccinators, Temporary Vaccinator B. Cumroodeen stands first, who shows a total of 3,200 cases with a percentage of 98.75 of success. The Deputy Inspector states that obstructions to the spread of vaccination arising from prejudice, &c., are gradually diminishing, but great difficulties have been experienced by the Vaccinators by the withdrawal of peons by Tahsildars. Batta to the extent of Rupees 13-4-0 was spent on account of mothers for furnishing arm lymph. Small-pox was prevalent throughout the district and the mortality from the disease has been 1,358 against 361 during the past year, but steps were taken to put down the spread of the disease whenever it appeared. The number of children vaccinated under one year of age is 3,971. Small-pox after vaccination in a few cases occurred, but the disease was very mild. Forty vaccination certificates were granted to candidates appearing for examinations. The character of the staff of Vaccinators was generally good and the lymph in use effective. The cost of each successful case has been 1 Anna and 8 Pies. Dr. Shortt was at Erode on the 1st November 1877, where he met the Deputy Inspector, and in the evening visited the famine relief camps and saw the Tahsildar, the Passed Hospital Apprentice in charge of the camp. He inspected a large number of subjects and condemned the whole work as being most disgraceful to the depart- ment, as the subjects were most carelessly operated on with badly stored lymph, and each having but one or two insertions, and these were in a state of ulceration. There were also 12 cases of small-pox in the camp hospital. He visited the camp again on the 2nd; neither the Deputy Inspector nor the Vaccinator were present, but after waiting for some time in the camp hospital he met the Deputy Inspector on his way back to the town, and went to relief works and orphanage, where he saw several subjects vaccinated only three or four days ago, in which nothing was to be seen at the insertions. The whole work was most unsatisfactory. On the 3rd he left for Bhavani and visited the famine relief camp, where also the work was in the same unsatisfactory state as was seen at Erode. Saw three cases in the town and inspected the equipments of the Vaccinators. On the 5th he went over to the famine camp and found no working lymph. There were 4 cases of small-pox and 26 of measles in the camp hospital. He left the Deputy Inspector to carry on vaccina- tion with the two lymph subjects subsequently brought by the Vaccinator and returned to the town. Visited the camp again in the afternoon, and the Vaccinator who went for a subject did not return. On the 6th he left for Audyoor and visited the relief- camp, where the Vaccinator, quite a youth, showed him one subject with large
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 13 This is an unfavorable report, but it is only fair to the Deputy Inspector to state, that having recently inspected vaccination work in villages of the Coimba- tore, Erode and Bhavani Taluks, I have formed a more favorable opinion of the work and superintendence than Dr. Shortt has done.W.R.C. maturating pustules said to have been vaccinated four days ago, and no other work was to be seen there; evidently the Vaccinator has been idling for the past two months. On calling on the Deputy Inspector for explanation, he said that this man was taken as a probationer to work on the Burgoor Hills, where fever was reported to have prevailed. Returned to Bhavani and inspected three subjects from the camp with good vesicles. Saw two probationers and found one of them quite unfit for the work. The Vaccinator from the Audyoor Relief Camp who was directed to follow Dr. Shortt into Bhavani was said to have deserted. Dr. Shortt left for Erode on the 8th and arrived at Coimbatore late in the evening. Visited next day the small-pox and famine hospitals with Dr. Morton, the officer in medical charge of the camps, and vaccinated a small gang of 20 members encamped next the small-pox hospital. Inspected the equipments of three Vaccinators and found them correct. Saw also the President of the Local Fund Board and the Zillah Surgeon. On the 11th he inspected the children's nursery with the Collector and suggested the whole unprotected to be vaccinated, and accordingly sent the Deputy Inspector and Vaccinators, and in the course of two days 241 cases were reported to have been vaccinated by them. On the whole the work of the Deputy Inspector of this range was very unsatisfactory, which he attributes to his carelessness and want of attention. SOUTH COIMBATORE RANGE. The Deputy Inspector reports 37,105 operations in this range during the year under notice, with a success of 97.26 per cent. As the district was divided into two vaccine ranges from the beginning of 1877, no comparison can be drawn of the work done during the year with that of the preceding year. Among the staff Probationary Vaccinator Shaick Omer stands first in respect to the quantity of work done, and he has operated on 3,390 cases. This was owing to the opportunities he had in vaccinating the coolies in the various famine relief-camps established in this range. Small-pox was prevalent during the year, and six temporary Probationary Vaccinators were employed to check the disease. These proba- tioners did not find the result system to be attractive, and at last they resigned their appointments after a month. The Deputy Inspector acknowledges the assistance given by the Revenue officials as well as the services of a peon in aiding the Vaccinators in their work. No batta was spent to mothers for furnish- ing arm lymph as the Vaccinators used the lymph from the cases vaccinated in the relief camps and works. The number of subjects vaccinated under one year of age was 5,198 with 4,912 successful results. 18 vaccination certificates were granted to candidates appearing for examinations. The conduct of the staff, exclusive of probationers, has been good and the lymph in use excellent. The cost of each successful case has been 1 Anna and 6 Pies. On the 16th November 1877 the Deputy Inspector of this range reported himself to Dr. Shortt at Coimbatore, when he was suffering from a bilious complaint. On the 17th he inspected his records, &c., and left for Calicut. CUDDAPAH DISTRICT. In this district there are two circles, each being presided over by a First-class Deputy Inspector. CUDDAPAH CIRCLE. The total number vaccinated during the year under notice is 12,692 with a percentage of 81.76 of success, and the results in 1,041 cases are not known. On comparison with the work shown in the preceding year there is an increase of 9,459 operations partly owing to the greater opportunities the Vaccinators had of 4
14 REPORT ON VACCINATION. operating on coolies working in the various famine relief camps and partly to the kind aid rendered by the District Collectors, Divisional Officers, and Tahsildars, who all took a warm interest in promoting vaccination among the famine relief laborers. Great obstruction exists in regard to infantile vaccination, as the parents imagine that young children will have their health ruined by vaccination. The conduct of the Vaccinators was on the whole satisfactory. The largest number, viz., 1,734, was obtained by First-class Vaccinator P. Sashachellum. The mortality from small-pox was 973. Small-pox broke out in almost all parts of the circle, and immediate steps were taken to arrest the disease. Fever also showed itself, commit- ting great havoc during the year, and deaths from it were countless, and this greatly interfered with the progress of vaccination. The salary of Second-class Vaccinators is complained of very much by the Deputy Inspector, as it hardly suffices to meet the expenses incurred by the Vaccinators, and he suggests that the new rules providing batta and extra allowance to Vaccinators be brought into operation. Among the staff there were 4 resignations, 1 dismissal, and 1 desertion. One of these was convicted and punished for submitting false returns. No batta was paid to mothers for furnishing lymph during the year, as no provision was made for this purpose ; consequently the mothers were reluctant to allow lymph being taken from their children's arms. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 5 and Pies 3. MADHANAPALLE CIRCLE. In this circle the Deputy Inspector reports that 7,618 were vaccinated with a success of 88.01 per cent., showing a considerable increase of 4,677 cases over that of the past year. The increase in the number of operations is partly due to compulsory vaccination in getting the inmates of the famine relief camps vaccin- ated, and partly to the employment of extra hands, viz., three Second-class and four Probationary Vaccinators. During the year the staff was not complete; there were two deaths from cholera and fever, and one was on the sick list for three months. The people in some parts of the circle are averse to being vaccinated owing to ignorance. They believe that if they submit to the operation they will incur the displeasure of their goddess, who, it is supposed, would bring some calamity on their family. Although the Vaccinators convinced many of the people of the advantages of vaccination, yet they would not allow lymph to be taken from the subjects vaccinated. 353 subjects were vaccinated under one year of age, comprising 164 males and 189 females. The Deputy Inspector acknowledges the material assistance given by the Sub-Collector and Vice-President in encouraging vaccina- tion on all his visits to the famine camps. The cost of each successful operation was 6 Annas and 1 Pie. On the 15th July 1877 Dr. Shortt arrived at Madhanapalle, where the Deputy Inspector of the circle met him, when he was engaged in transacting office work. Saw the medical officer and visited the relief-camp on the 16th, and inspected a large number of old cases and the working lymph of the eighth day. Conversed with Lieutenant Money, the officer in charge of the camp. Inspected the records of the Deputy Inspector and the equipments of two Vaccinators, and was much pleased with all he saw there, and left for Punganur the same night. GANJAM DISTRICT. This district comprises two circles with a First-class Deputy Inspector to each, and in addition there are the hill tracts, in which a First-class Deputy Inspector and a staff of Vaccinators are at work. CHETTERPORE CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector reports 8,301 operations with a percentage of 88.7 of success. The total shows an increase of 3,754 cases as compared with the
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 15 number operated on during the preceding year. There would have been a still greater increase in the amount of work had it not been for the famine, which partly tended to interfere with vaccination. The co-operation of the Revenue and Village officials is absolutely necessary in promoting vaccination in the district. The largest amount of work, 781, was performed by First-class Vaccinator Balarama- sami. Small-pox made its appearance in Russelkonda, Berhampore, and Ganjam, and immediate steps were taken to depute Vaccinators to the infected localities, and thus checked the further spread of the disease. Of the total, 56 were vaccinated under one year of age, comprising 27 males and 29 females. No batta was paid to mothers for furnishing lymph. Much difficulty is felt in procuring lymph from the subjects operated on, as the parents refused to allow of lymph being taken, as they say that the health of their children would be injured if such were done. The working lymph in use was good and effective. Four vaccination certificates were granted to candidates appearing for Government examinations. The conduct of the staff with the exception of a few has been good. The average cost of each successful case has been Annas 7 and Pies 10. CHICACOLE CIRCLE. During the year 3,992 operations are reported in this circle with a success of 85.1 per cent. The total shows a small increase of 529 cases when compared with the work done during the former year. There would have been still greater increase in the vaccine operations had it not been for cholera, which prevailed in the circle throughout the year. The Oriyah Vaccinators have done their work well as usual, but owing to their ignorance of English they lose all chance of promotion. No ill-effects resulting from vaccination have been noticed. 163 infants under one year of age were vaccinated, comprising 70 males and 93 females. No batta was granted to mothers during the year for furnishing lymph. The average cost of each successful case has been Annas 10 and Pies 6. HILL TRACTS, GANJAM DISTRICT. The Deputy Inspector attached to these hill tracts reports 2,126 operations during the year under report with a success of 94.82 per cent., thus showing a decrease of 2,529 cases when compared with the total number vaccinated during the previous year. The Deputy Inspector states that this decrease was owing to the total refusal of the Maliahs to submit themselves to the operation on account of the famine. Many of the Maliahs are greatly opposed to vaccination, and it is only when small-pox breaks out that they will submit to the operation. The people who readily submit to vaccination are Sowras, Khonds, Panhoes, and Oriahs. Much difficulty is experienced in procuring supplies of lymph from vaccinated subjects, as the parents object greatly to lymph being taken from their children's arms, as they are under the impression that it will do harm and injure the health of their children. The Deputy Inspector states that the assistance of the local authorities is absolutely necessary in extending vaccination widely among the Maliahs, and he acknowledges with thanks the material help rendered by Mr. W. H. Bartley, the Magistrate of Udayagiri Taluk, in promoting vaccination in his taluk, where the number vaccinated was larger than in any other taluk. The conduct of the staff has been reported good and satisfactory. 177 subjects were vaccinated under one year of age during the year, comprising 85 males and 92 females. Small-pox was not reported to be prevalent during the year, and the working lymph in use was good. 40 capillary tubes charged with fresh vaccine lymph have been sent to medical and other officers. The want of a peon to do the menial work attached to his office is greatly felt. The average cost of each successful case has been Rs. 1-0-1.
16 REPORT ON VACCINATION. GODAVARI DISTRICT. There are two circles in this district with a First-class Deputy Inspector to each circle. COCANADA CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector reports 12,661 operations during the year under review. Of these 11,309 were successful, 861 unsuccessful, and 491 unknown. On comparison with the work of the preceding year there is an increase of 4,375 cases, accounted for chiefly by the prevalence of small-pox in the circle, and to the greater exertions of the staff with the hope of attaining the extra allowance for each successful case above the maximum number given in the revised vaccina- tion rules. Second-class Vaccinator K. V. Sooba Row, No. 967, performed the largest number of operations, viz., 1,953. The Deputy Inspector states that the obstructions to the spread of vaccination which were complained of during the previous years are now gradually diminishing, and that the people are being convinced of the benefits of vaccination by the severe outbreak of small-pox. Small-pox appeared in its most virulent form, and the mortality from it was great owing to the people not having been vaccinated. In February last small-pox was prevalent in the town of Rajahmundry and the mortality from it was great. With the permission of the President and the Zillah Surgeon, the Municipal Vaccinator was aided by the Taluk Vaccinators in checking the disease in its progress, and 1,500 cases were then vaccinated. The Deputy Inspector suggests that compul- sory vaccination be introduced into this Presidency as in Bengal and Bombay. 20 cases of small-pox after successful vaccination were seen, but in none of these cases was it fatal. There were no changes among the staff. The conduct of the Vaccinators has been on the whole satisfactory. The average cost of each success- ful case has been Annas 6 and Pies 10. The Deputy Inspector states that the Local Fund Board have sanctioned a travelling batta of 8 Annas per diem for himself, 3 Annas for both the First and Second-class Vaccinators, and 4 Annas for the Probationary Vaccinators in consideration of their scanty pay. ELLORE CIRCLE. In this circle 5,840 operations are reported by the Deputy Inspector during the year under notice. Of the total 5,001 were successful, 571 unsuccessful, and 268 unknown. An increase of 1,759 cases is shown this year when compared with the work performed during the previous year. Cholera, small-pox, and other diseases were prevalent in the circle throughout the year. The vaccine lymph in use was reported good and effective. The Deputy Inspector states that more work might be done if the Revenue and Native officials interested themselves in the work of vaccination. Batta to the amount of Rupees 50-11-6 was spent on account of mothers for furnishing vaccine lymph from the arms of their children. During the year 45 Vaccination certificates were granted to candidates for Government employ. The conduct of the staff with a few exceptions has been good. 343 infants under one year of age were vaccinated during the year. The average cost of each successful operation has been Annas 6 and Pies 6. KISTNA DISTRICT. There are two circles in this district with a First-class Deputy Inspector presiding over each.
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 17 MASULIPATAM CIRCLE. In this circle the Deputy Inspector reports 13,958 cases during the year with a percentage of 86.76 of success. On comparison with the work of the previous year there is a large increase of 8,827 operations, attributable chiefly to the great prevalence of small-pox throughout the circle and to the employment of 2 Proba- tioners and 2 additional Vaccinators, as the present staff was found insufficient to meet the various applications received from Tahsildars and Deputy Tahsildars. The largest number, viz., 2,301, was performed by temporary Second-class Vaccinator M. Kistna Row, among the whole staff. Batta to the amount of Rupees 53-9-0 was spent during the year to mothers for furnishing vaccine lymph. The conduct of the staff has been reported good with one or two exceptions. The cost of each successful operation has been Annas 4 and Pies 2. Among the Vaccinators there was one death from cholera and one resignation. GUNTOOR CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector of this circle reports that 10,239 cases were vaccinated during the year with a success of 93 per cent. The total shows an increase of 7,251 over that of the previous year, which is accounted for by the entertainment of six additional Vaccinators during the year. In some parts of the circle the people readily come forward for vaccination, but in other parts the people are very much opposed to it. Small-pox prevailed in several places in the circle during the whole year. The conduct of the Vaccinators has been reported good, and the lymph in use effective. Much difficulty is experienced by Vaccinators in procuring arm lymph from the subjects vaccinated. The Deputy Inspector states that a great deal of work might be done if the village authorities would interest themselves in convincing the people of the advantages of vaccination. Rupees 1-2-0 was spent in batta to mothers of vaccinated children. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 3 and Pies 5. KURNOOL DISTRICT. The total number vaccinated in this district is 4,347 with a success of 86 per cent., showing an increase of 1,985 cases when compared with the work performed during the past year. This increase is mainly due to vaccination having been carried on among the coolies in the gangs of the various relief-works through the assistance of the Deputy Collector of Koilkunta Taluk. A larger increase would have been shown this year had the Revenue officers of other taluks afforded greater assistance to the Vaccinators. Obstructions of various kinds still exist in this district to the effectual spread of vaccination. The Deputy Inspector suggests that all Village Kurnums, Taliaries, Cuttoobadies, and other classes of servants be required to produce vaccination certificates like other applicants seeking admission into the Government service; in addition to this that no school-boy should be admitted into any of the Government or aided schools unless he had been previously vaccinated. Small-pox was prevalent throughout the year. It broke out specially in the relief gangs and spread steadily. Immediate steps were taken by deputing the Vaccinators to the infected localities to vaccinate all the unprotected. The total number vaccinated under one year of age has been 517, consisting of 266 males and 251 females. Batta to the amount of Rupees 23-14-9 was given to mothers for furnishing lymph. The conduct of the Vaccinators, with the exception of a few, has been good. One First-class Vaccinator deserted the district without permission and sent in his resignation. The average cost of each successful operation has been Annas 12 and Pies 5. 5
18 REPORT ON VACCINATION. MADRAS COLLECTORATE. The Deputy Inspector reports 116,335 operations during the year under review with a success of 91.09 per cent., and the results in 59,855 cases were not ascertained. On comparison with the work of the preceding year the total shows a marked increase of 64,840 cases. The increase is attributed to the greater number of Vaccinators and to the work carried on in the different camps which were established in the town and suburbs for the famine coolies. A large amount of work -was performed among the inmates of the various relief-camps, works, and poor-houses with the assistance of the camp superintendents. No obstructions to the spread of vaccination were met with during the year, as the people came forward of their own accord to get their children and their families vaccinated owing to the severe outbreak of small-pox. Small-pox was prevalent in the town, and on the receipt of mortuary reports Vaccinators were deputed at once to the infected parts to arrest the disease in its progress by vaccinating all the unprotected in the vicinity. The amount of batta to vaccinated subjects was reduced from 6 to 3 Pies, and that of mothers from 8 to 4 Annas at the end of September last, owing to want of funds. The Deputy Inspector states that the batta is now too small to induce the people to be vaccinated, and suggests that it be raised to 6 Pies. He suggests that compulsory vaccination be introduced in the town of Madras as in other Presi- dencies. The conduct of the Vaccinators has been in general good and the nature of the working lymph in use effective. 7,335 subjects under one year of age were vaccinated, comprising 4,155 males and 3,180 females. Of these 5,090 were successful, 328 unsuccessful, and 1,917 unknown. 534 vaccination certificates were granted to candidates appearing for examinations. Rupees 3,631-7-0 were spent in batta to vaccinated children and mothers for supplying arm lymph. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 2 and Pies 3. MADURA DISTRICT. In this district there are two circles, one being presided over by a First-class Deputy Inspector and the other by a Second-class Deputy Inspector. MADURA CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector reports 32,704 cases during the year under review, with a success of 90.76 per cent. The total shows an increase of 9,797 operations on comparison with the work of the previous year, and the Deputy Inspector attributes this increase to the employment of additional Vaccinators among his staff, viz., 3 First-class and 9 Second-class Vaccinators during the year, and to the exertions of the staff in vaccinating in the various famine relief-camps. Vaccination conti- nued still backward in some parts of the circle owing to sickness and frivolous excuses advanced by the people. The inhabitants of Eliyankudi, Arupakotai, Tiruchulai, Devikotai, Karakudi, Kondanore and Mana-Madurai, &c., entirely refuse vaccination, and it is hard, the Deputy Inspector says, to convince the people of the benefits resulting from vaccination, and thus the Vaccinators have great difficulties in keeping up arm-to-arm vaccination as the parents will not allow the lymph being extracted from the arms of their children. The Deputy Inspector therefore suggests that vaccination be made compulsory. The quality of the vaccine lymph has been excellent throughout the year. Small-pox prevailed to some extent in parts of the circle, and immediate steps were taken to arrest the disease. In some parts of the zemindaries the inoculators settle themselves and necessary measures are being taken to have the men punished. The number of subjects vaccinated under one year of age is 4,976. The conduct of the Vaccinators has been generally good. 26 vaccination certificates have been granted to candi- dates for Government employ. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 3 and Pies 6.
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 19 DINDIGUL CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector might be told not to write &quot; rubbish &quot; in an official report. The &quot; ancestors &quot; of the people knew nothing about vaccination, and could have made no prohibitions in regard to practices then unknown.W.R.C. In this circle the Deputy Inspector reports 26,297 operations with a percentage of 96.98 of success, and the results in 481 cases were unknown. On comparison with the work of the previous year there is an increase of 10,244 cases, attributable chiefly to the exertions of the vaccinating staff in carrying vaccination in the several famine relief-camps. Most of the ignorant and super- stitious Hindus, Lubbays, Cappliers and Thottyers, &c., of most of the villages of this circle still hold the impression that the operation of vaccination is against the laws of their respec- tive religions, and that it is utterly prohibited by their ancestors, consequently there are great difficulties experienced in vaccinating. The Deputy Inspector suggests that the village officers be required to keep the Vaccinators in their work as a part of their duty, because, in many instances, when the co-operation of the heads of villages is sought for by Vaccinators, it is not given. The Deputy Inspector also complains of the low salaries of the Vaccinators and requests that the new vaccination rules be brought into operation. A peon is greatly wanted to do the menial work of the office. The conduct of the staff is good and the lymph in use effective. The cost of each successful case is Annas 2 and Pies 2. MALABAR DISTRICT. The small proportion of infantile vaccination in this district is bad, and efforts should be made to improve it.W.R.C. The inspection of the work is the chief duty of the Deputy.W.R.C. In this district the Deputy Inspector reports 12,546 operations with a percentage of 95.72 of success, and the results in 829 cases were not known. On comparison with the total vaccinated during the preceding year there is an increase of 2,275 operations, attributable to the greater exertions of the staff of Vaccinators with the object of attaining the extra allowance sanctioned in G.O., No. 1,591, dated 2nd September 1876. 48 infants under one year of age were vaccinated with 100 per cent. of success. Second-class Vacci- nator E. Krishna Numbiar has obtained the largest number of operations, viz., 1,709. Among the Vaccinators there occur- red a death from cholera. The Deputy Inspector states that a portion of his staff in the North Malabar Circle has been placed under the orders of the Revenue officials as regards the entire management of their work, and he has no control over these men beyond that of inspecting their work. He therefore requests that he be entrusted with the thorough supervision of the work of his subordinates in all respects. The average cost of each successful case has been Annas 4. Dr. Shortt arrived at Calicut on the evening of the 19th November 1877 and was met by the Deputy Inspector of Vaccination of this district. Saw the Zillah Surgeon and inspected a subject brought by the senior Municipal Vaccinator. Visited the Collector of the district on the subject of vaccination, and suggested the advisability of employing a separate Deputy Inspector for the Tellicherry Circle, as the district is large and greater parts sickly. Inspected the working lymph with the Taluk Vaccinator and the records of the Deputy Inspector and the equipments of the Vaccinators that were present, and found them all in good order. On the 24th he left the place for Nagalore. NELLORE DISTRICT. Two First-class Deputy Inspectors are working in this district, one to each of the circles into which the district is divided.
20 REPORT ON VACCINATION. NELLORE CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector of this circle reports 31,280 operations with a percent- age of 94.06 of success, and the results in 1,113 cases were unknown. The total shows a marked increase of 14,905 cases when compared with the number vaccinated during the preceding year. Most of the inmates of the famine relief-camps and works established in the circle, owing to the famine, were vaccinated. The Relief Officers of these camps rendered very material aid to the Vaccinators in extending vaccination freely among the coolies on the works. 6 temporary Vaccinators were employed during the year and 4 of these were confirmed ultimately as probationers. These various causes contributed to the increase shown above. First-class Vaccinator Vadamalay, No. 166, has vaccinated the highest number, viz., 4,468 cases. Obstructions of the kind reported last year are still in existence, and the people believe small-pox to be their goddess, and that the practice of vaccination is wrong. The Deputy Inspector suggests that vaccination be rendered compulsory in this Presidency as in England. Small-pox broke out throughout the district and the mortality was great, especially among the famine-stricken people. Every means were taken to arrest the disease. The Deputy Inspector states that village officials, such as Munsifs, Headmen and Kurnums, &c., be compelled to get themselves vacci- nated to set an example to their villagers, who look to them for advice and orders. 967 subjects under one year of age were vaccinated, comprising 464 males and 503 females. Infantile vaccination is backward in the district, as the parents refuse to have their children operated on on the plea of tender age. 60 vaccination certificates were granted to candidates appearing for examination ; 41 of these had marks of vaccination and 19 of small-pox. The conduct of the staff has been good and the working lymph in use effective. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 1 and Pies 7. The Deputy Inspector states that the Local Fund Board have sanctioned the services of a peon and travelling batta of 12 Annas per diem for himself, 4 Annas for the First-class, 2 Annas for the Second-class, and 1 Anna for Probationary Vaccinators for every day actually travelled. ONGOLE CIRCLE. During the year under review 12,312 cases have been vaccinated in this circle. Of these 11,369 were successful, 358 unsuccessful, and 585 unknown. The total shows an increase of 3,477 operations when compared with the work of the past year, and the Deputy Inspector states that this increase is mainly due to the exertions of the staff and the employment of 8 extra hands as probationers during the year. Small-pox of a virulent type was prevalent in all parts of the circle and energetic measures were adopted to arrest the disease. The inhabitants of the circle are quite ignorant of the benefits accruing from vaccination, and frivolous excuses are constantly advanced by them when a Vaccinator appears for the purpose of vaccinating children. The Deputy Inspector suggests that vaccination be made compulsory. 6 temporary Vaccinators were employed by the Local Fund Board, and they give a total of 1,430 operations with a percentage of 92.37 of success, and the results in 110 cases were unknown. The conduct of the staff has been reported good with the exception of temporary First-class Vaccinator R. Venkatasawmy, who was degraded by the President, Local Fund Board, for neglect of duty. Vaccine lymph is reported good, and the number of infants vaccinated under one year of age is 621. No cases of small-pox after successful vaccination have occurred during the year. NORTH ARCOT DISTRICT. This district comprises two circles with a First-class Deputy Inspector to each.
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 21 CHITTUR CIRCLE. In this circle 27,790 operations are reported by the Deputy Inspector with a success of 94. per cent., and the results in 1,274 cases were unknown. On compari- son with the work of the preceding year a marked increase of 17,128 cases is shown this year, which the Deputy Inspector attributes partly to the greater exertions of the staff and partly to the large number of coolies having been operated on in the famine relief-camps and works. Of the total vaccinated 30 were re-vaccinations, of which 27 were successful. 1,656 infants under one year of age have been vaccinated during the year, consisting of 829 males and 827 females. No obstructions to the spread of vaccination were met with, and the prejudices of the people against vaccination are gradually wearing out and the beneficial results from vaccination are fully appreciated except when small-pox breaks out. The Deputy Inspector complains that Vaccinators are being taken away from their legitimate work to treat cholera patients. Small-pox prevailed in this circle to some extent, especially in the taluks of Punganur and Tirutani and among the famine relief coolies, but the disease was soon arrested and great help was given by the Revenue officials. The mortality from small-pox was 1,942 during the year. The cost of each successful case was Annas 2 and Pies 5. On the 4th July 1877 Dr. Shortt left Madras for Arcot, where he met the Deputy Inspector of Vaccination of this circle on the next day. In the evening visited the relief-camp and inspected many old and new cases which were good, but did not see any working lymph. The next day he started for Wallajapet and inspected the Municipal vaccination, and reprimanded the Vaccinatrix for having had no working lymph, and returned to Madras on the 7th. Left again on the 9th to Gudiyatam and entered into the town with the Deputy Inspector, and inspected one sixth-day and four fifth-day cases vaccinated with stored lymph, and found the vesicles of all of them in a state of maturation, except one vesicle in one of the subjects and a large number of old cases irregularly inserted. Arrived at Palmanair on the 10th and inspected several old cases which where not satisfactory. The Vaccinator had no working lymph to show, and worked only one day in the week instead of six. Visited the relief-camp on the 11th morning and vaccinated 11 subjects with tube lymph and returned to Palmanair, and proceeded to Punganur the same evening, where the Vaccinator produced 3 subjects with scarcely any vesicles in them. Visited the relief-camp there on the 13th and inspected some seventh-day and some old cases which were good. Visited again the relief-camp on the 14th and vaccinated 30 subjects, with the assistance of the superintendent, with arm lymph from a subject selected in the camp. Found the Zemindari Vaccinator sick, suffering from fever and an abscess on one of his legs. Left for Madhanapalle with instructions to the Deputy Inspector to vaccinate as many as he could in the adjoining villages where small-pox was prevailing. On the night of the 16th returned to Punganur, where the Deputy Inspector again met Dr. Shortt and reported that 12 cases were operated on at Chowdapully. On the 17th visited again the famine relief-camp and inspected some good eighth-day cases and vaccinated 9 cases before he returned to the palace. Left for Palmanair where, on the 18th, he saw a few old cases of the Taluk Vaccinator. On the 19th visited the relief-camp and reprimanded the Vaccinator for not producing a single case he operated on the 11th, and left for Chittur the same night, where one Vaccinator with two probationers presented themselves, and the Deputy Inspector showed a good seventh-day case in the town. Dr. Shortt inspected the equipments of the Vaccinators, and left the same evening for Vellore and returned to Madras. Left again for Arcot on the 22nd, and visited the famine relief-camp with the Deputy Inspector, and saw a number of excellent cases with good working lymph. Saw a woman here, who had just been admitted into the relief-camp with an infant attacked with small-pox, whilst the mother herself having good marks of vaccina- tion on her arms was free from the disease ; this he pointed out to Major Liardett, the officer in charge of the camp, and left for Arni with instructions to the Deputy Inspector to meet him again on his return from Vellore Circle. Arrived at Arcot on the 1st August 1877, but did not find the Deputy Inspector as directed. Sent for the Vaccinators and visited the famine relief-camp, and inspected a large number of good cases, and saw also the Hospital Assistant. Inspected the equip- ments of two Vaccinators and a good eighth-day subject brought by one of the 6
22 REPORT ON VACCINATION. Vellore Circle Vaccinators, and returned to Madras the same evening to get through some office work. Dr. Shortt was again at Arcot on the 15th December 1877, where he inspected the children's nursery and found the work good, and returned to Madras on the 17th. Proceeded again to Arcot on the 21st, and examined 6 cases in the famine camp and found them good. VELLORE CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector reports 27,832 operations in this circle with a percentage of 94.34 of success, showing a large increase of 20,876 cases over that of the previous year. This increase is attributable partly to the greater exertions of the vaccinating staff and partly to the ready assistance rendered by the Famine Relief Officers, and also to the payment of batta to children vaccinated. Obstructions of various kinds still prevail in parts of the circle where people are not fully acquainted with the benefits resulting from vaccination, and the Deputy Inspector suggests. that the operations should be rendered compulsory. Small-pox made its appearance during the year, but the mortality from the disease was not great. Rupees 139-11-6 were spent on relief-works at Vellore, and 5,045 cases were vaccinated by money payments. In the several relief-camps 10,020 cases were operated on at a cost of Rupees 70. The Deputy Inspector acknowledges with thanks the material assistance given by the Collector Mr. Whiteside, Mr. W. P. Austin, the Sub-Collector, and the several Relief Officers. The number of infants vaccinated under one year of age was 1,422, comprising 703 males and 719 females. Rupees 4-4-0 were spent as batta to mothers of vaccinated children for furnishing arm lymph. 12 vaccination certificates were granted to candidates for Government employ. The average cost of each successful case is Anna 1 and Pies 7. Among the Vaccinators there were one transfer, two resignations, and one dismissal. The President, Local Fund Board, has sanctioned some additional Vaccinators to work in the several relief-camps at the suggestion of the Vice- President. These Vaccinators show a total of 3,837 operations ; among these 1,827 cases were vaccinated by payment of batta to children amounting to Rupees 41-13-5. The conduct of the staff of Vaccinators has been generally good. On the 25th July Dr. Shortt arrived at Arni with the Deputy Inspector. The Jaghiredar's Vaccinator reported sick, and he did not attend till the evening of the 26th, when he reported himself with no lymph whatever on the plea of sickness. Arrived at Polur on the next morning, where the Deputy Inspector produced two Vaccinators with several good eighth-day subjects and some old cases. Inspected the equipments of the Vaccinators, and left for Wandiwash, where, on the 28th, saw two good eighth and ninth-day subjects. Returned to Arni again on the 29th, and the Jaghiredar's Vaccinator produced then a good seventh-day case. Inspected the cases brought by one Second-class Vaccinator of Arcot Taluk and another of Wandiwash and their equipments, and left for Vellore during the night. On the 30th proceeded to the relief-camp at Vellore, and inspected a large number of good eighth-day cases and of old cases. Saw Major Liardett and Mr. Austin, the Sub-Collector, on the subject of vaccination. Inspected on the way to Vellore several excellent eighth- day cases of the Municipal Vaccinators in the trench at Vellore. On the 31st visited the Central Jail with the Civil Surgeon, and inspected during the day one subject brought by the Municipal Vaccinatrix, the equipments of 3 Vaccinators, and left for Arcot the same evening. SALEM DISTRICT. In this district there are two circles, one being presided over by a First-class Deputy Inspector and the other a Second-class Deputy Inspector.
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 23 SALEM CIRCLE. This is all nonsense. Measles is not a very fatal disease, and the mortality from it in this country is insignificant compared with that from small-pox.W.R.C. During the year under notice 34,863 operations were performed in this circle with 33,603 successful and 987 unknown results, showing a marked increase of 24,315 cases over that of the preceding year. The Deputy Inspector ascribes this increase chiefly to vaccination having been carried on most energetically during the famine in the several relief-camps and works. No obstruction to the spread of vaccination was met with during the year. During the famine to a certain extent the people began to come forward of their own will to get themselves vaccinated with the hope of obtaining a meal, or its value, &c., for the day. The Deputy Inspector suggests that vaccination be rendered compulsory for all classes of people on the payment of batta to the poorer classes, to act as an inducement to accept vaccination, and this would be the best means for promoting vaccination to a great extent in the circle. The mortality from small-pox was about 7,000 during the year, showing a high death-rate, and the Deputy Inspector accounts for this by saying that most of these cases were due to measles and chicken-pox followed by dysentery, &c. &quot; Ummay &quot; is the generic term in Tamil for all eruptive fevers, and small-pox is the only heading opened in the death registers for eruptive fevers ; consequently the death-rate of the disease small-pox is highly exaggerated. Vaccinators were deputed to the infected localities to arrest the disease in its progress. 632 children under one year of age have been vaccinated, comprising 341 males and 291 females. The conduct of the staff, with the exception of a few, has been reported satisfactory. The cost of each successful case has been Anna 1 and Pies 9½. On the 10th August 1877 Dr. Shortt left Madras for Salem, and on his way thither the Deputy Inspector of this circle met him at Vaniambadi with the Taluk Vaccinator, and he inspected a large number of good subjects and the equipments of the Vaccinatrix. At Tirupatur the Vaccinator who was directed to meet Dr. Shortt was absent, and the Vaccinator at Morappur met him with a good eighth- day subject. He inspected his equipments and went on to Mallapuram, where the Vaccinator appeared without a subject, but he inspected his equipments and went to Salem. On the 13th arranged to vaccinate some gentlemen's children at Yercaud, and returned to Salem on the 14th. Visited the famine relief-camp with the Deputy Inspector, and reprimanded the Vaccinator for his carelessness, which was pointed out to the Deputy Inspector also, and met the Collector Mr. Longley. On the 16th Dr. Shortt proceeded to Sankaridroog and visited the famine relief-camp, where vaccination was not kept up regularly. The Vaccinator was directed by the Tahsildar to attend immediately on some cholera patients in a village. Saw the Hospital Assistant and instructed the Deputy Inspector what to do for the few cases of small-pox in the camp hospital, and returned to Sankaridroog and thence to Salem, where he saw the Zillah Surgeon. Of the 3 Municipal Vaccinators he inspected the equipments of one, the second was reported sick, and the third was on cholera duty. Met the Collector on the 21st, and on the 22nd Dr. Shortt again visited the famine relief-camp and found the same carelessness in the work. The Vaccinator had defective vision, whom he ordered to be taken before the Zillah Surgeon to ascertain his fitness for further service. Met Mr. Puckle of the Board of Revenue and Major Baynes at the relief-camp. On the 23rd he visited the conjee-house and inspected the work and equipments of the 2 Vaccinators. Went into the town on the 24th, and inspected the work of the Municipal Vaccinators excellently done. Visited also the poor-house, small-pox hospital and dispensary. Examined the records of the Deputy Inspector and Municipal Vaccinatrix, who was still on sick report, and went up to Yercaud to ascertain the results of the children previously vaccinated. Returned to Salem on the 27th and left for Tirupatur on the 28th, where he saw three subjects. Visited the Tirupatur Famine Camp, where the Vaccinator was absent for a long time as his services were taken for a compounder in lieu of his legitimate work. Dr. Shortt returned to Tirupatur and got a supply of vaccine lymph, and visited the camp again the next morning and vaccinated 13 cases. Directed the Vaccinator to vaccinate first and then attend to other works that may be required of him. Visited the Civil Dispensary, where the Medical Officer met him, and went on to Kistnagiri in the evening
24 REPORT ON VACCINATION. of the 30th. On the 28th September 1877 he again met the Deputy Inspector at Morappur and accompanied him into Salem, and after some office work Dr. Shortt proceeded up to Yercaud. On the 8th January 1878 he was again at Salem, where he met the Deputy Inspector and enquired about the large mortality from small-pox. OOSOOR CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector of this circle reports 17,809 operations during the year with a success of 89 per cent., showing an increase of 8,479 cases when compared with the total vaccinated during the preceding year. The increase alluded to is chiefly due to the staff having been increased, and to the assistance given by the Vice-President, Local Fund Board. The people of this circle, except a few, greatly objected to vaccination owing to famine and cholera. The Deputy Inspector complains of the inadequacy of the staff of Vaccinators to meet the wants of the circle. There were two dismissals, one resignation, and one transfer among the staff. The Deputy Inspector suggests that the new rules providing extra allowance to Vaccinators should be brought into operation as an encouragement to the scantily paid Vaccinators to work more steadily, and he fancies that considerable increase would be effected in the vaccine operation if the-above suggestion be adopted. The Deputy Inspector acknowledges the interest evinced by the Vice-President, Local Fund Board, in promoting vaccination in his circle. The average cost of each successful case is Annas 2 and Pies 8. 944 infants under one year of age were vaccinated, comprising 497 males and 447 females. No batta to mothers for furnishing lymph was spent during the year in consequence of there being no provision made for the purpose. The &quot; Price Vaccinators &quot; have been amalga- mated with the Local Fund staff when the revised rules were brought into operation from the beginning of the current year. Small-pox prevailed to a great extent in the circle, and immediate steps were taken to arrest the disease. Dr. Shortt was at Kistnagiri on the 31st August 1877, and went to the famine relief-camp, where vaccination was kept up in a careless manner. There were 40 cases of small-pox in the camp, who were all crowded together in a small hut that could scarcely accommodate 6 patients, which he pointed out to the Native superintendent in charge of the camp. Reprimanded the Vaccinators and deputed two Vaccinators in the camp till the whole of the inmates were vaccinated, and a third one to vaccinate all the friends, relatives, and attendants of the small-pox patients. Arranged with the superintendent of the camp for the vaccination of the new- comers. Saw the Sub-Collector, Mr. Wilkinson, at Kistnagiri on the subject of vaccination in the circle. Vaccinated 152 subjects in the camp with the Deputy Inspector and 3 Vaccinators, and left Kistnagiri and thence for Oosoor. On the 2nd September he visited the Oosoor Famine Camp, where vaccination was not well kept up. There were 11 cases of small-pox in the camp hospital. Inspected a number of subjects and the working lymph and found them good. Directed the Deputy Inspector to vaccinate the inmates of the whole camp and leave a Vaccinator to vaccinate the new-comers as they come daily. Saw the Apothecary in medical charge of the camp, and Dr. Wells, the Honorary Surgeon. Inspected the equip- ments of 3 Vaccinators and the records of the Deputy Inspector, and left for Bangalore. SOUTH ARCOT DISTRICT. This district has been divided into two circles with a First-class Deputy Inspector presiding over one circle and a Second-class Deputy Inspector over the other. CUDDALORE CIRCLE. The total number vaccinated in this circle during the year was 11,284 with a success of 89.9 per cent., and the results in 775 cases were unknown. Of the
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 25 total 6,047 were males and 5,237 females. This year shows a decrease of 516 operations when compared with the work of the preceding year, and the Deputy Inspector accounts for this first, by the prevalence of famine, and second, to the prevalence of fever, dysentery, &c. First-class Vaccinator Aroonachellum Moodelly, No. 128, has obtained the largest number of cases, viz., 2,433, among the whole staff, and he stands also first in respect to infantile vaccination. The Deputy Inspector states that the above named Vaccinator has been recommended for extra allowance for each successful operation in excess of 1,200 in the year, as provided in the revised rules, to act as an inducement to other Vaccinators to compete for the reward. Objections regarding the practice of vaccination are gradually dying out in many of the larger towns, and there the people freely come forward of their own will to get their children vaccinated ; but in the remote corners of this circle some people are quite ignorant of the results of vaccination, and they believe small-pox to be one of their deities. When the treatises on vaccination are explained to them, they look to the village authorities to set them an example, but they do not ; and the Deputy Inspector suggests that vaccination be made compulsory for Village Munsifs, Monegars, Kurnums and their families, and that the Revenue authorities should be requested to take a greater interest in the work of vaccination by takeeds to their village subordinates. Small-pox prevailed to a great extent in the circle, and the havoc committed by it was greater than in the previous year. Among the staff there were one dismissal, one resignation, and three transfers. The Deputy Inspector acknowledges with thanks the material assistance given by F. R. H. Sharpe, Esq., the Acting President of the district, in promoting vaccination. The conduct of the staff, with one or two exceptions, has been good. The Deputy Inspector complains that no travelling allowance is granted to him, whilst it is allowed to some Deputy Inspectors in other districts. The value of each successful case has been Annas 4 and Pies 7. VIRUDACHALAM CIRCLE. During the year under review the district of South Arcot was divided into two vaccine circles, and the Deputy Inspector to this circle was appointed in May 1877. He reports 5,264 operations with a percentage of 84.9 of success. This circle comprises three taluks with an area of 15,568 square miles and an estimated population of 598,684. The staff consists of 1 Second-class Deputy Inspector, 3 First-class and 3 Second-class Vaccinators, 2 Probationers and a peon. Second- class Vaccinator S. Narainasawmy has performed the largest number of cases, viz., 1,263, among the whole staff. The usual obstructions to the spread of vaccina- tion still exist in some parts of the circle from religious superstition, the people believing that there is a small-pox goddess presiding over them. The extraction of lymph for transfer from the cases vaccinated is objected to by the people, and the only means the Deputy Inspector suggests to overcome this obstacle, as well as to promote vaccination in the circle, is to make it compulsory. Small-pox was preva- lent slightly during the year, and every precaution was taken to check the disease. No irregularities in the progress of vaccination nor any ill-effects resulting from the operation were noticed. The conduct of the staff has been good and the work- ing lymph effective. The Deputy Inspector complains that no travelling batta or other allowances are conceded to himself and his staff as provided in the Revised Vaccination Rules, dated 2nd September 1876, No. 1,591. The value of each successful case has been Annas 5. SOUTH CANARA DISTRICT. In this district the Deputy Inspector reports 42,140 operations during the year under review with a percentage of 90.24 of success, comprising 24,014 males and 18,126 females. The total shows a decrease of 1,913 cases when compared with the work performed during the preceding year. This decrease, the Deputy Inspector states, is attributable to small-pox not having been so prevalent as in the 7
26 REPORT ON VACCINATION. previous year, consequently the demand for vaccination was not so great. The staff was also incomplete for some time as a few Vaccinators were on leave during the year. The 10 temporary Vaccinators who were employed by the Local Fund Board during 1876-77 continued at work for three months, viz., April, May and June 1877, when their services were dispensed with as small-pox gradually subsided. They show a total of 9,767 operations of the number given above with a percentage of 88.58 of success. Second-class Vaccinator Bastian Gore, No. 987, obtained 4,334 operations, being the largest number among the whole staff. The Deputy Inspector states that people of this district rush to the Vaccinators for vaccination only when small-pox makes its appearance, and during its continuance large numbers are vaccinated ; but when the disease abates they are reluctant to get themselves vaccinated and plead some excuse or other to avoid the operation. He therefore suggests that compulsory vaccination be introduced. The offer of rewards to the Vaccinators in excess of 1,200 cases performed in any year is allowed in this district, and the Vaccinators are trying their best to obtain the extra allowance. Small-pox of a virulent type continued for three months, viz., April, May and June during the year, and every means were taken to put a stop to the further spread of the disease. 659 subjects under one year of age were successfully vaccinated during the year. The conduct of the staff, with the exception of a few, has been good. Two Vaccinators were detected having received remuneration from the people vaccinated, and with the sanction of the President, Local Fund Board, they were prosecuted before the Magistrate under Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to pay a fine of 51 Rupees each. The vaccine lymph in use is excellent. The average cost of each successful case has been Anna 1 and Pies 8. TANJORE DISTRICT. There are two First-class Deputy Inspectors at work in this district, one to each of the circles into which the district has been divided. TANJORE CIRCLE. Fifteen thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine operations are reported in this circle during the year under notice with a success of 96.93 per cent., thus showing an increase of 6,078 cases when compared with that of the past year. Had not most of the Vaccinators been employed in treating cholera patients the increase would have been greater than that now shown. Owing to the prevalence of cholera and famine objections to the spread of vaccination were raised by the people in some parts of the circle. Small-pox was prevalent during the year in the famine relief-camps, and Vaccinators were immediately deputed to vaccinate all the unprotected, and through the assistance rendered by the Medical authorities the disease gradually subsided. The Deputy Inspector suggests that compulsory vacci- nation be introduced in this Presidency as in Bombay. Infants vaccinated under one year of age amount to 1,575, consisting of 777 males and 798 females. The largest number, 368, was vaccinated by Second-class Vaccinator T. Jaganadum Pillay, No. 154, who has stood first among the whole staff in this respect for the past three years. Great difficulties existed in maintaining supplies of arm lymph owing to the prevalence of cholera and famine: some of the famine-stricken people left their houses after being vaccinated in search of their daily bread, and the Vaccinators in consequence lost their working lymph and had recourse to preserved lymph. Inoculation is practised in this circle, and the Sub-Magistrate of Arandangy arrested an inoculator through the assistance of the Police authorities, and sentenced him to ten months' imprisonment. Batta to the amount of Rupees 52-3-0 was given to mothers for furnishing vaccine lymph. During the year the Local Fund Board have sanctioned the appointment of two additional First-class Vaccinators, one for each taluk, and extra allowance of 2 Annas per successful case above 100 in accordance with the Revised Vaccination Rules. The Deputy Inspector complains that no
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 27 travelling batta is given to himself or his Vaccinators, and such indulgences are granted in some other districts. The average cost of each successful case has been Annas 3 and Pies 7. NEGAPATAM CIRCLE. The Deputy Inspector reports 10,919 operations during the year with a success of 91.07 per cent. On comparison with the work of the previous year there is an increase of 2,019 cases this year attributable to the staff being complete, there having been no casualty or vacancy among the Vaccinators. Objections to the spread of vaccination do not exist in most parts of the circle, but there are in some parts a few ignorant people who have strong prejudices against vaccination. The prejudices, the Deputy Inspector hopes, will soon vanish by the frequent visits and exertions of the Vaccinators. The Local Fund Board have sanctioned an extra allow- ance of 2 Annas per successful operation in excess of 100 in any month to Vaccinators as an encouragement in their work. One small-pox inoculator, Gopal Naick, was punished with two weeks' rigorous imprisonment, and another in the Tiruturaipundi Taluk is being sought for by the Police. Small-pox prevailed in the early part of the year in the circle in a very virulent form, and steps were at once taken to arrest the disease. The Deputy Inspector suggests that vaccination be rendered compulsory, and that small-pox cases should be isolated from the unvaccinated people. 698 infants under one year of age have been vaccinated during the year, comprising 354 males and 344 females, and the highest number, 181, has been obtained by First-class Vacci- nator Balakistnen, No. 783. The lymph in use has been good, and Rupees 15-5-10 were paid to mothers as batta for supplying vaccine lymph. The conduct of the Vaccinators has been reported satisfactory, and the cost of each successful case has been Annas 4 and Pies 8. TINNEVELLY DISTRICT. This district comprises two circles, one being presided over by a First class Deputy Inspector and the other by a Second-class Deputy Inspector, TINNEVELLY CIRCLE, The Deputy Inspector of this circle reports 16,275 operations during the year under notice with a success of 91.27 per cent. The total shows an increase of 5,700 cases over that of the preceding year. First-class Vaccinator Govindasamy Pillay, No. 703, was found to have been imprisoned for two years for theft of jewels, &c., in 1871, and the President, Local Fund Board of the district, dismissed the Vaccinator on Deputy Inspector informing him of the above circumstance. One Theroomalay Chetty of Sengumapooram of the Virudupati Division was prosecuted before the Second-class Magistrate of the Satur Taluk with the permission of the President, and was fined the sum of Rupees 15, or in default to undergo one month's imprisonment, for having obstructed a Vaccinator in carrying out his work. The Deputy Inspector states that he has been specially engaged with two Vaccinators in conducting vaccine operation in a thickly populated village called Ervadi of the Nanguneri Taluk, and nearly 200 cases have been vaccinated by payment of batta of Rupees 11-2-3 as an inducement. The Deputy Inspector complains that no travelling batta or the services of a peon have been granted to him. No ill-effects resulting from vaccination have been noticed ; but in a few instances ulceration occurred owing to the application of irritating remedies. Batta paid to mothers for furnishing lymph during the year was Rupees 36-2-6. The conduct of the staff, with a few exceptions, has been reported satisfactory. The working lymph in use was excellent, and the cost of each successful case is Annas 3 and Pies 8.
28 REPORT ON VACCINATION. SHERMADAVI CIRCLE. The total number vaccinated during the year was 6,578 with a percentage of 84.41 of success. On comparison with the work performed during the preceding year there is an increase of 1,641 cases, accounted for by the greater exertions of the vaccinating staff and the material assistance afforded by the Revenue officials under the Collector J. B. Pennington, Esq. Vaccination continues still backward in the circle, and the usual frivolous objections of a bad day, sickness, absence of relatives or parents, &c., are put forth. In some parts the people are so stubborn that no coaxing or persuasion can induce them to undergo the operation. Many difficulties exist in maintaining arm lymph for transfer, as the people in general refuse to allow the lymph being extracted from the arms of their children, as they think that it will enfeeble their children. In a village called Ervadi thickly popu- lated by Lubbays, the Vaccinators have to contend against great difficulties in getting the people vaccinated and in extracting lymph from those operated on. They say that the operation of vaccination is against the doctrines of their religion, and they would rather prefer the visitation of small-pox. A First-class Mahomedan Vaccinator was specially deputed to persuade these people as much as possible to accept vaccination, and 197 cases have since been operated on. Five vaccination certificates have been granted to candidates for Government employ, and 80 to village officials who were newly appointed : of the latter 14 were vaccinated at the time the certificates were granted to them. Small-pox broke out in the southern part of the Nanguneri Taluk, and two Vaccinators were immediately sent out to arrest the further spread of the disease. 703 children under one year of age were vaccinated with a percentage of 88.19 of success, comprising 378 males and 325 females. The quality of lymph has been good throughout the year. Rupees 16-6-6 were spent in batta to mothers for furnishing lymph. The conduct of the staff was reported satisfactory, and the cost of each successful case was Annas 5 and Pies 2. TRICHINOPOLY DISTRICT. The Deputy Inspector reports 15,615 operations during the year under review with a success of 95.90 per cent., and the results in 2,327 cases were unknown. Of the total there were 7,961 males and 7,654 females. On comparison with the work of the preceding year there is a marked decrease of 4,481 cases which the Deputy Inspector attributes to the following causes : 1st, the abolition of the result system which was in force during the previous year ; 2nd, the introduction of the new vaccination rules in the district, and the maximum number of cases to be performed by the staff being put down at 50 per cent. for First-class Vaccinator and 30 for Second-class ; 3rd, the prevalence of famine ; and 4th, the incompletion of the staff (until the end of the latter part of the year) occasioned by dismissals, leave of absence, and in training of new-comers to the vacant posts. Two Vaccinators were punished by the Magistrate, one with a fine of 50 Rupees and the other simple imprisonment for two months, for false entries of vaccination results. Each famine camp was visited by Vaccinators, and good work was performed by the assistance of the Relief Officers under orders from the Collector. There were two dismissals, one resignation, and one transfer among the staff. 1,503 infants under one year of age were vaccinated; of these 1,295 were successful, 66 unsuccessful, and 142 unknown. The largest number of operations, viz., 1,762, was obtained by Second- class Vaccinator Mooroogasem, who stands first among the whole staff. The conduct of the Vaccinators, with one or two exceptions, has been good. Small-pox broke out throughout the district, and 3 temporary Vaccinators were entertained as the present staff was found insufficient. The Deputy Inspector states that all the taluk officials have rendered material assistance in promoting vaccination in the district, and the names of such officials have been brought to the notice of the Collector with a view of being published in the District Gazette in recognition of their services. The working lymph in use was found effective and good. 87 vaccination certificates were granted to candidates proceeding for examination and for securing employment as Village Munsifs and Kurnums, &c. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 4 and Pies 8.
REPORT ON VACCINATION. 29 VIZAGAPATAM DISTRICT. This district has been divided into two ranges with one First-class Deputy Inspector at work in one range, and a Second-class Deputy Inspector in the other. Besides these there are the Hill Tracts of Jeypore, in which another First-class Deputy Inspector and a staff of Vaccinators are working. VIZAGAPATAM RANGE. In this range 9,116 operations were reported during the year with a percentage of 98.23 of success, and the results in 21 cases were unknown. The total comprises 4,644 males and 4,472 females. On comparison with the work of the past year there is a decrease of 2,335 cases, which is accounted for 1st, by the unfavor- able state of the season ; 2ndly, the prevalence of cholera ; 3rdly, the employment of Vaccinators to treat cholera patients under orders of the President, Local Fund Board. Since the receipt of G.O., dated 25th May 1877, No. 1,573, all the Vaccina- tors employed in this duty have been relieved and ordered off to their legitimate work of vaccination. Inoculation has to some extent been put a stop to in this range as the President, Local Fund Boards, has issued instructions to the Taluk and Divisional Magistrates to prosecute any persons practising inoculation. The Deputy Inspector states that as Government has ruled that all seeking Government employ must produce certificates of vaccination, the village authorities are now alive to the benefits of vaccination, and set an example to their people by having their children vaccinated. Small-pox prevailed more or less throughout the range during the year, and every means were taken to check the further spread of the disease. 8 cases of small-pox after vaccination occurred, but the disease was in a mild form in these cases. Obstructions of various kinds still exist against vaccina- tion among the people. First-class Vaccinator G. Veerannah has obtained the largest number of operations, viz., 1,275. The conduct of the staff, with a few exceptions, has been good, and the lymph in use effective. 139 infants under one year of age were vaccinated. Only 6 Annas were paid as batta to mothers for furnishing lymph. The cost of each successful case has been Annas 7 and Pie 1. VIZIANAGRAM RANGE. The Deputy Inspector reports that 12,989 operations were performed during the year, comprising 6,625 males and 6,364 females, with an average per cent. of 98.94 of success. The total shows a decrease of 2,253 cases below that of the previous year, and the Deputy Inspector attributes this decrease to the prevalence of cholera and other diseases in the range. There are still great obstructions to the spread of vaccination in this range. Cholera prevailed throughout the taluks and committed great havoc, and it materially interfered with the progress of vaccination. A few Vaccinators were deputed to distribute cholera pills for a few months during the year. Small-pox appeared in all the taluks in a very severe form, and immediate steps were taken to arrest the disease. The Deputy Inspector suggests that vaccination be made compulsory and the practice of inoculation be strictly prohibited. 752 infants under one year of age were operated on, comprising 374 males and 378 females. Of these 737 were successful, 13 unsuccessful, and 2 unknown. The vaccine lymph in use was good and effective. The conduct of the Vaccinators, with a few exceptions, has been good. The Deputy Inspector states that the Acting President, Mr. Goodrich, gave great help in promoting vaccination in the district. The average cost of each successful case has been Annas 5 and Pies 3. 8
30 REPORT ON VACCINATION. JEYPORE HILL TRACTS. The Deputy Inspector reports 3,654 operations with a percentage of 82.45 of success, and the results in 307 cases were unknown. The total shows an increase of 279 operations when compared with the work of the past year. Prejudices against the practice of vaccination among the hill tribes called Khonds and Sowras still prevail owing to ignorance. Nothing can convince these people of the advantages of vaccination, and the Vaccinators have great difficulties to contend against, for, when they make their appearance in the villages, the people go into the jungles and hide themselves, leaving the old and dying to answer the questions of Vaccinators. Should the Vaccinators come across the people by chance great opposition is met with, and the people will not allow their children to be vaccinated. Small-pox inoculation is practised in these parts among the Odea and hill tribes, and the Deputy Inspector states that if the practice be prohi- bited by law or otherwise that the number of vaccination cases would soon be increased. Small-pox was prevalent during the latter part of the year in the district, but the mortality from it was not great. The quality of the working lymph was good throughout the year. The conduct of the staff has been satisfac- tory. No batta was paid to mothers for furnishing lymph. 274 infants were vaccinated during the year ; of these 222 were successful, 23 unsuccessful, and 29 unknown. The cost of each successful case has been Rupees 1-1-7. MILITARY CANTONMENTS. BANGALORE. Two Vaccinators (one a First-class and the other a Second-class) are stationed in this cantonment, and they show a total of 1,399 operations done during the year with a percentage of 94.22 of success, and the results in 25 cases were unknown. On comparison with the work of the preceding year the total shows a decrease of 267 cases, for which no explanation is given. The female Second-class Vaccinator gives a total of 574 cases ; of these 528 were successful, 29 unsuccessful, and 17 unknown. She appears to work to the satisfaction of the Garrison Surgeon. 550 infants under one year of age were vaccinated during the year. The caste and sex of those vaccinated are as follows :REPORT ON VACCINATION. 31 Males. Females. Europeans and East Indians ... ... ... ... 30 22 Hindus ... ... ... ... 1,390 1,293 Mahomedans ... ... ... ... 375 485 Total ... 1,795 1,800 KAMPTEE. One Second-class Vaccinator worked during the year in this cantonment. He reports a total of 1,796 operations with a percentage of 87.73 of success, showing an increase of 1,208 cases over the work of the previous year, and the results in 2 cases were unknown. Of the total there were 988 males and 808 females. 776 infants under one year of age were successfully vaccinated. The caste and sex of these are as follow :32 REPORT ON VACCINATION. CIVIL DISPENSARIES. Two Vaccinators (one in the Old and the other in the New Town) of Cuddalore worked throughout the year under the immediate supervision of the Medical Officers in charge of these institutions. They show a total of 584 operations with a percentage of 77.4 of success, and the results in 120 cases were unsuccessful. 55 infants under one year of age were successfully operated on during the year. The particulars of their work are given below :REPORT ON VACCINATION. 33 MEDICAL SUBORDINATES. The Medical Subordinates performed 28,584 operations during the year under notice with a success of 68 per cent., comprising 23,230 males and 5,354 females. The total shows an increase of 12,831 cases when compared with the work of the previous year. The general monthly returns for January, February and March 1878 from the Mysore and Ceded Districts have not been received at this office, and if the work for these months be included, the increase would have been greater than that shown above. First-class Hospital Assistant Maduranayagum, No. 156, operated on 2,277 cases, being the largest number ; of these 1,950 were successful. Next to him stands Second-class Hospital Assistant T. Sabapathy, No. 691. He reports 2,009 operations. The Medical Subordinates who obtained over 100 operations each during the year are given in the accompanying statement. Rank and Name. General Num- ber. Stations. Number Vacci- nated. Successful. Ratio Percent- age of Success. First-class Hospl. Asst. Maduranayagum ... 156 Central Jail, Salem ... 2,277 1,950 85.63 Second-class do. T. Sabapathy ... 691 District Jail, Madura. 2,009 971 49.32 Third-class do. Bishoon Nauth ... ... Central Jail, Salem ... 1,590 1,357 85.34 Second-class do. P. Doorgiah ... ... 666 Jail, Cuddapah ... 1,583 1,061 67.02 First-class do. A. Coopoosawmy ... 595 Do. Chingleput ... 1,559 10 .06 Third-class do. P. Peroomaul Naidu. 954 District Jail, Palam- cottah. 1,404 1,295 92.23 Second-class do. Appavoo Pillay ... 863 Central Jail, Salem ... 998 817 81.86 Third-class do. A. T. Veeraragavaloo. 923 District Jail, Calicut . 869 597 68.69 Assistant Apothecary D. F. O'Keefe ... ... H. M.'s Penitentiary, Madaras . 833 217 26.05 Second-class Hospl. Asst. P. Appavoo ... 845 Do. do. ... 744 251 33.73 Third-class do. C. Francis ... ... ... Central Jail, Salem ... 560 445 79.46 Do. do. E. A. Simon ... ... 1,014 40th Regiment N.I. 534 417 78.08 Second-class do. T. Maduranayagam ... 736 District Jail, Tanjore. 483 337 69.77 Third-class do. C. T. Sigamoney Pillai. 992 4th (P.W.O.) L.C., Bellary. 483 11 2.28 First-class do. Shaik Madar ... 639 Jail, Chittur ... 476 409 85.92 Assistant Apothecary W. H. Cooper ... ... 26th Regt., Trichur. 466 385 82.61 First-Class Hospl. Asst. Parthasarthy Moodaly. 672 Temporary Jail, Trichinopoly. 408 377 92.40 Do. do. A. Paul ... ... 635 District Jail, Telli- cherry. 390 289 74.10 Third-class do.Mittenlaul ... ... ... 35th Regiment N.I., Kamptee. 335 80 23.87 Do. do. Shaik Abdool Khader. ... 40th Regiment ... 301 236 78.40 First-class do. Chetter Singh ... 224 Chittur Town ... 291 254 87.28 Second-class do. R. Peter ... ... 708 District Jail, Manga- lore. 239 173 72.38 Do. do. T. Veerabudren ... 800 District Jail, Kurnool. 238 183 76.89 Do. do. C. Cundasawmy ... ... 2nd Regt., Kamptee. 230 196 85.21 First-class do. A. Narrainsawmy ... 500 Sub-Collector's Dept., Salem. 219 138 63.01 Second-class do. A. Gooriah ... ... 650 Police Hospital, Rajah- mundry 203 175 86.20 Do. do. M. Lutchminen Moodelly. ... Sub-Jail Relief Camp, Dindigul. 188 153 81.38 First-class do. Balasoondrum ... 645 Berhampore 153 70 45.75 Third-class do. A. Maria Dossen ... ... ...... 148 119 80.40 Do. do. Abdool Majeed ... ... 31st Regt., Rapur ... 132 110 83.33 First-class Apothecary W. McKenzie ... ... Cantonment Hospital. 132 85 64.39 Third-class Hospl. Asst. S. Coopoosawmy ... 955 29th Regiment ... 130 126 96.92 Do. do. V. Soobaroyen ... 909 1st M.L.C. ... 129 120 93.02 Do. do. Chengulvaroya Moodelly. 1,145 Famine Camp; Tri- chinopoly. 129 94 72.86 Do. do. Shaik Deliwar Ally ... ... 9th Regt., Cannanore. 126 117 72.85 9
34 REPORT ON VACCINATION. Rank and Name. General Num- ber. Stations. Number Vacci- nated. Successful. Ratio Percent- age of Success. First-class Hospl. Asst. Narrainsawmy ... 369 Central and District Jail, Coimbatore. 125 79 63.2 Third-class do. P. Mootoosawmy ... 1,025 Temporary Jail, Pal- ghat. 122 115 94.26 Do. do. S. T. Narrainsawmy... 996 Sub-Jail Town, Bali- goda. 119 81 68.06 Do. do. P. Runganaikooloo ... 928 Jail, Russelkonda ... 118 95 80.50 Do. do. T. Ganapathy Pillay. 977 Collector's Department, Vallum. 114 84 73.68 Do. do. Purum Lall ... ... 22nd Regt., Kamptee. 113 99 87.61 Do. do. M. D. Arokianaden ... 977 25th Regiment ... 113 86 76.10 Do. do. J. Paravathulu ... ... Russelkonda ... 109 73 66.97 Do. do. S. Anthony ... ... 978 38th Regiment N. I., Trichinopoly. 106 62 84.76 First-class do. M. R. Rajahgopaul ... 390 Chingleput Town ... 105 89 58.49 Third-class do. Daman Khan ... ... Central Jail, Trichino- poly. 105 79 75.23 Second-class do. T. Narrainsawmy Naidu. 733 Civil Dispensary, Kadiri. 100 95 95 (Signed) JAS. ANDERSON LAING, Surgeon, Inspector of Vaccination and Depy. Sanitary Commissioner, Madras Presidency. OFFICE OF INSPECTOR OF VACCINATION, &c., MADRAS PRESIDENCY, MADRAS, 10th June 1878.
APPENDICES.
36 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. AAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 37 8 Tanjore Circle ... ... Permanent ... ... 969,738 436 18 8,443 7,356 15,799 877 15,799 1,492 ... 13,336 ... ... 96.93 ... 15 8,463 8 991 1 9 Negapatam Circle. Permanent ... ... 819,981 540 12 5,990 4,929 10,919 909 10,510 649 ... 9,038 409 258 92.16 63.08 12 7,814 9 987 1 10 Madura Circle ... Permanent ... ... 1,246,798 255 33 16,767 15,902 32,669 989 32,635 4,443 14,008 11,171 34 17 90.76 50 ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... Private Vaccinators. ... ... 1 20 15 35 35 35 21 ... 14 ... ... 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 1,246,798 255 34 16,787 15,917 32,704 962 32,670 4,464 14,008 11,185 34 17 90.77 50 24 22,301 18 385 .22 11 Dindigul Circle ... Permanent ... ... 954,965 270 18 13,072 13,225 26,297 1,460 26,263 4,763 10,296 10,413 34 20 96.98 58.82 ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... Hospital Assistant as Vaccinator at Pul- ney Hills. ... ... ... 54 59 113 113 113 43 ... 29 ... ... 63.71 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 954,965 270 18 13,126 13,284 26,410 1,579 26,376 4,806 10,296 10,442 34 20 96.84 58.82 26 8,888 9 1,517 1 12 Tinnevelly Circle- Permanent ... ... 1,181,111 330 17 8,624 7,651 16,275 957 16,269 1,736 8,002 5,114 6 2 91.27 33.33 13 11,466 9 1,852 2 13 Shermadavi Circle. Permanent ... ... 463,294 372 8 3,567 3,011 6,578 822 6,558 620 ... 4,921 20 15 84.41 75 12 4,752 10 628 1 14 Cuddapah Circle ... Permanent ... ... 784,750 169 21 7,306 5,386 12,692 604 12,692 416 4,307 5,655 ... ... 81.76 ... 13 22,041 28 541 .7 15 Madhanapalle Circle. Permanent ... ... 550,169 160 15 4,319 3,299 7,618 692 7,547 289 1,802 3,519 71 46 88.01 66.28 10 2,529 5 464 .84 16 Kurnool District ... Permanent ... ... 926,766 120 12 2,599 1,748 4,347 362 4,336 461 ... 3,236 11 11 86 100 4 2,736 3 937 1 17 Bellary Circle ... Permanent ... ... 395,172 86 13 3,429 3,299 6,728 517 6,699 2,154 ... 3,007 29 17 89.52 80 13 9,187 23 369 .93 18 Penukonda Circle. Permanent ... ... 376,715 130 3 1,316 1,134 2,450 612 2,424 663 ... 1,329 26 9 81.67 .09 5 2,927 8 373 .99 19 Gooty Circle ... Permanent ... ... 609,982 163 6 3,028 2,854 5,882 980 5,854 2,399 ... 2,774 28 24 87.9 85.7 8 4,006 6 751 1 20 Salem Circle ... Permanent ... ... 1,363,087 285 17 16,904 17,959 34,863 2,050 34,770 623 9,039 23,858 93 83 96.40 89.24 24 9,976 7 2,319 1 21 Oosoor Circle ... Permanent ... ... 553,896 196 15 7,859 8,156 16,015 1,187 15,830 862 ... 13,466 185 148 89 80 ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... Temporary ... ... ... ... 2 876 733 1,609 804 1,609 29 ... 1,382 ... ... 87 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 553,896 196 17 8,735 8,889 17,624 1,036 17,439 891 ... 14,848 185 148 90.25 80 28 7,219 11 658 1 22 Nilgiri Circle. Permanent ... ... 36,461 36 2 1,642 1,263 2,905 1,452 2,788 254 ... 2,301 117 79 87.95 76.36 72 ... ... 14 .38 23 North Coimbatore Circle. Permanent ... ... 795,610 234 13 12,304 11,176 23,480 1,806 23,406 3,326 ... 17,980 74 62 96.52 92.54 ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... Temporary ... ... ... ... 2 2,754 2,799 5,553 2,776 5,500 328 ... 4,766 53 42 97.19 87.05 ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 795,610 234 15 15,058 13,975 29,033 1,946 28,906 3,654 ... 22,746 127 104 91.33 81.81 36 ... ... ... ... 10
38 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. AAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 39 29 Masulipatam Circle Permanent ... ... 738,047 202 11 3,799 3,192 6,991 1,081 6,830 713 ... 6,117 161 113 89.20 17.18 ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... Temporary ... ... ... ... 7 3,676 3,291 6,967 995 6,409 569 ... 5,840 558 433 86.05 77.59 ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 738,047 202 18 7,475 6,483 13,958 775 13,239 1,282 ... 11,957 719 546 94.84 75.93 19 7,589 5 720 .97 30 Guntoor Circle ... Permanent ... ... 660,106 159 7 5,779 5,250 11,029 1,576 10,996 921 ... 9,291 33 27 93 82 15 714 1 31 Cocanada Circle ... Permanent ... ... 834,948 193 16 6,694 4,802 11,496 1,305 11,496 590 ... 9,718 ... ... 89.67 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... Zemindari, Pittapur. ... ... 2 701 464 1,165 582 1,165 23 ... 998 ... ... 87 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 834,948 193 18 7,395 5,266 12,661 703 12,661 613 ... 10,716 ... ... 89.47 ... 14 5,517 7 718 .86 32 Ellore Circle ... Permanent ... ... 694,927 216 7 2,997 2,843 5,840 834 5,840 323 ... 4,678 ... ... 85.06 ... 7 4,015 6 1,034 1 33 Vizagapatam Circle Permanent ... ... 836,828 739 24 4,644 4,472 9,116 381 9,083 712 3,563 4,648 33 32 98.23 96.96 11 16,569 19 804 .45 34 Vizianagram Circle Permanent ... 937,967 1,076 18 6,625 6,364 12,989 590 12,944 737 ... 12,070 45 44 98.94 97.77 12 8,860 10 35 Jeypore Hill Tracts Permanent ... 314,498 37 6 1,040 647 1,687 281 1,687 104 994 293 ... ... 82.45 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... Zemindari ... ... ... ... 8 1,198 769 1,967 163 1,967 118 1,167 337 ... ... 82.46 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total.... 314,498 37 14 2,238 1,416 3,654 261 3,654 222 2,161 630 ... ... 82.45 ... 10 2,223 7 ... ... 36 Chetterpore Circle Permanent ... ... 784,856 221 18 4,874 3,427 8,301 461 8,301 48 ... 7,319 ... ... 91.25 ... 9 5,353 4 1,263 1 37 Chicacole Circle ... Permanent ... ... 566,863 476 10 2,107 1,885 3,992 399 3,992 163 ... 3,829 ... ... 85.1 ... 7 ... ... 130 .22 38 Ganjam Hill Tracts Permanent ... ... 131,112 ... 6 1,144 982 2,126 355 2,126 172 ... 1,844 ... ... 97.53 ... 15 3,210 24 ... ... Total of the Circles and Districts. ... ... 605 367,836 324,638 692,474 1,145 683,578 53,608 88,960 428,358 8,896 5,677 83.52 63.81 ... ... ... ... ... MILITARY CANTONMENTS. 1 Bangalore ... Salem District ... 81,810 ... 2 773 626 1,399 699 1,335 529 ... 712 64 39 94.22 68.42 15 1,022 12 ... ... 2 Secunderabad ... ...... 52,448 ... 2 1,795 1,800 3,595 1,797 3,595 2,630 ... 776 ... ... 91.41 ... 64 2,016 38 ... ... 3 Kamptee ... ... ...... 47,244 ... 2 988 808 1,796 898 1,796 776 ... 798 ... ... 87.73 ... 33 903 19 ... ... Total ... 181,512 ... 6 3,556 3,234 6,790 1,132 6,726 3,935 ... 2,286 64 39 92.49 60.93 3 ... ... ... ... RAILWAY APOTHECARIES. 1 Madras Railway Lines. ...... ... ... ... 8 2 10 ... 10 1 ... 6 ... ... 70 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... ... 8 2 10 ... 10 1 ... 6 ... ... 70 ... ... ... ... ... ...
40 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. AAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 41 11 Nellore ... ... Nellore District ... 29,922 ... 1 1,245 1,107 2,352 2,352 1,854 66 ... 1,763 498 406 98.65 81.52 74 1,024 30 16 .50 12 Conjeveram ... Chingleput District ... 37,327 ... 1 735 597 1,332 1,332 1,332 151 558 544 ... ... 94.06 ... 33 4,177 112 75 2 13 Cuddalore ... South Arcot District. 40,290 ... 1 682 532 1,214 1,214 1,214 21 511 558 ... ... 89.7 ... 26 174 4 32 .70 14 Chilambaram ... Do. ... 15,519 ... 1 290 268 558 558 558 20 ... 461 ... ... 86.02 ... 30 114 7 9 .57 15 Trichinopoly ... Trichinopoly District. 76,530 ... 4 1,275 1,110 2,385 596 1,896 648 ... 887 489 424 80 86 25 2,817 36 81 1 16 Srirangam ... Do. ... 18,655 ... 1 223 248 471 471 471 79 ... 277 ... ... 95.69 ... 19 563 30 15 .80 17 Tanjore ... Tanjore District ... 52,175 ... 2 733 422 1,155 577 1,155 154 ... 925 ... ... 94.48 ... 20 1,176 22 52 .99 18 Combaconam ... Do. ... 44,444 ... 1 520 502 1,022 1,022 1,022 220 ... 571 ... ... 89.88 ... 15 1,114 21 62 1 19 Mayavaram ... Do. ... 21,165 ... 1 165 197 362 362 362 116 ... 216 ... ... 91.71 ... 6 664 14 21 .98 20 Negapatam ... Do. ... 48,525 ... 5 461 438 899 179 889 170 ... 615 10 2 88.30 20 17 623 14 38 .78 21 Mannargudi ... Do. ... 17,703 ... 1 301 251 552 552 552 49 ... 471 ... ... 87.56 ... 24 454 21 23 1 22 Madura ... ... Madura District ... 51,987 ... 3 1,854 1,157 3,011 1,003 2,868 948 851 779 143 135 85.61 94.40 52 2,504 47 107 2 23 Dindignl ... ... Do. ... 12,865 ... 1 3,378 3,824 7,202 7,202 7,202 281 1,887 4,684 ... ... 95.14 ... 532 1,335 103 11 .85 24 Tinnevelly ... Tinnevelly District ... 21,044 ... 2 262 270 532 266 482 66 201 215 50 ... 91.72 ... 22 490 23 45 2 25 Palamcottah ... Do. ... 17,945 ... 2 194 244 438 219 324 53 125 107 114 87 87.96 76.31 21 389 22 36 2 26 Tuticorin ... Do. ... 10,565 ... 1 481 499 980 980 976 90 ... 765 4 4 76 100 70 777 73 31 3 27 Kurnool ... ... Kurnool District ... 25,579 ... 1 148 115 263 263 183 40 86 16 80 22 76 26 6 312 12 29 1 28 Cuddapah ... Cuddapah District ... 16,275 ... 1 540 296 836 836 836 63 ... 455 ... ... 88.85 ... 32 230 14 7 .43 29 Bellary ... ... Bellary District ... 51,766 ... 3 897 1,032 1,929 643 1,904 777 ... 740 25 ... 78.38 ... 51 1,115 22 61 1 30 Adoni ... ... Do. ... 22,723 ... 1 743 486 1,229 1,229 1,229 635 ... 413 ... ... 85.3 ... 46 1,002 43 45 2 31 Gooty ... ... Do. ... 6,730 No Vaccinator was employed in this Municipality. 32 Anantapur ... ... Do. ... 4,918 ... 1 185 170 355 355 355 190 ... 156 ... ... 97.4 ... 70 69 14 1 .20 33 Vellore ... ... North Arcot District. 38,022 ... 2 3,990 4,202 8,192 4,096 8,189 649 2,283 5,259 3 2 99.98 66.66 215 886 24 42 1 34 Wallajapet ... Do. ... 12,103 ... 1 293 309 602 602 602 23 361 128 ... ... 85 ... 42 133 11 29 2 35 Salem ... ... Salem District ... 50,012 ... 3 1,017 927 1,944 972 1,928 436 ... 1,223 16 9 86.04 56.25 33 1,337 27 103 2 36 Coimbatore ... Coimbatore District.. 35,310 ... 1 805 785 1,590 1,590 1,528 638 ... 698 62 62 87.43 100 39 1,362 38 31 .87 37 Erode ... ... Do. ... 10,201 ... 1 189 167 356 356 356 11 ... 251 ... ... 86.75 ... 25 170 16 15 1 38 Karur ... ... Do. ... 9,378 ... 1 198 154 352 352 352 3 ... 311 ... ... 95.44 ... 33 ... ... 1 .10 39 Mettapolliem ... Nilgiri District ... 4,144 No Vaccinator was employed in this Municipality. 40 Ootacamund ... Do. ... 9,982 ... 1 562 483 1,045 1,045 973 189 678 ... 72 32 89.10 44.4 90 726 72 6 .60 41 Coonoor ... Do. ... 3,058 ... 1 511 325 836 836 711 137 292 239 125 95 93.95 76 24 489 15 1 .32 42 Mangalore ... South Canara District 29,712 ... 2 1,367 893 2,260 1,130 2,096 230 ... 1,691 164 84 85 51.2 67 2,731 91 54 2 43 Tellicherry... Malabar District ... 20,504 ... 1 558 150 708 708 691 3 66 486 17 2 78 11 27 896 43 81 4 44 Calicut ... ... Do. ... 47,962 ... 2 984 309 1,293 646 1,293 26 265 826 ... ... 86.3 ... 23 1,546 32 156 3 45 Palghat ... ... Do. ... 30,752 ... 1 506 269 775 775 775 3 373 236 ... ... 79 ... 20 1,315 42 45 1 46 Cochin ... ... Do. ... 13,840 ... 1 400 255 655 655 655 62 217 165 ... ... 67.78 ... 32 853 61 113 8 47 Cannanore ... Do. ... 31,358 ... 1 831 495 1,326 1,326 1,326 116 527 437 ... ... 84.76 ... 29 7,392 23 66 2 Total ... 1,604,188 ... 64 32,154 27,134 59,288 926 57,223 7,825 9,585 33,731 2,065 1,494 89.37 72.34 33 33,000 20 2,421 1.5 Grand Total ... 31,597,872* *226.2 675 426,784 360,362 787,146 ... 776,121 68,055 98,545 481,133 11,025 7,210 82.28 65.39 21 346,398 11 37,746 1.19 N.B.42 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. AAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 43 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the Year 1877-78. diture. Paid from Total. Number of all successful Vaccination and Re-vacci- nation. Average Cost of each successful Case. Total Cost. Imperial Funds. Provincial Funds. Local Funds. Municipali- ties. Native States, Zemindars or Private Funds. 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 18,501 7 0 ... 18,501 7 0 ... ... ... 18,501 7 0 ... ... 7,175 2 5 ... ... ... 7,175 2 5 ... 7,175 2 5 51,595 0 2 3 2,946 8 9 ... ... 2,946 8 9 ... ... 2,946 8 9 13,588 0 3 5 279 13 3 ... ... 279 13 3 ... ... 279 13 3 4,462 0 1 0 105 0 0 ... 105 0 0 ... ... ... 105 0 0 4,502 0 0 4 3,331 6 0 ... 105 0 0 3,226 6 0 ... ... 3,331 6 0 22,552 0 2 4 4,009 14 1 ... ... 4,009 14 1 ... ... 4,009 14 1 26,105 0 2 6 2,776 14 11 321 3 4 ... 2,455 11 7 ... ... 2,776 14 11 26,265 0 1 9 121 6 8 121 6 8 ... ... ... ... 121 6 8 3,368 0 0 7 120 0 0 ... ... ... ... 120 0 0 120 0 0 1,033 0 1 9 3,018 5 7 442 10 0 ... 2,455 11 7 ... 120 0 0 3,018 5 7 30,666 0 1 7 3,029 10 0 ... ... 3,029 10 0 ... ... 3,029 10 0 10,150 0 4 9 1,453 15 4 ... ... 1,453 15 4 ... ... 1,453 5 4 4,486 0 5 0 3,603 10 10 ... ... 3,603 10 10 ... ... 3,603 10 10 12,204 0 4 9 91 10 8 ... ... 91 10 8 ... ... 91 10 8 517 0 2 10 3,695 5 6 ... ... 3,695 5 6 ... ... 3,695 5 6 12,721 0 4 7 3,339 0 0 ... ... 3,339 0 0 ... ... 3,339 0 0 14,828 0 3 7 2,888 5 7 ... ... 2,888 5 7 ... ... 2,888 5 7 9,945 0 4 8 6,490 10 4 ... ... 6,490 10 4 ... ... 6,490 10 4 29,639 0 3 6 3,832 11 1 ... ... 3,832 11 1 ... ... 3,832 11 1 25,492 0 2 5 55 0 0 ... ... 55 0 0 ... ... 55 0 0 72 0 12 1 3,887 11 1 ... ... 3,887 11 1 ... ... 3,887 11 1 25,564 0 2 5 3,412 8 1 ... ... 3,412 8 1 ... ... 3,412 8 1 14,854 0 3 8 1,796 3 6 ... ... 1,796 3 6 ... ... 1,796 3 6 5,556 0 5 2 3,429 6 11 ... ... 3,429 6 11 ... ... 3,429 6 11 10,378 0 5 3 2,404 2 3 ... ... 2,404 2 3 ... ... 2,404 2 3 5,656 0 6 1 2,890 5 9 840 0 0 ... 2,050 5 9 ... ... 2,890 5 9 3,708 0 12 5 2,600 3 2 ... ... 2,600 3 2 ... ... 2,600 3 2 5,178 0 8 0 1,173 10 9 ... ... 1,173 10 9 ... ... 1,173 10 9 2,001 0 9 5 2,069 5 3 ... 572 11 11 1,496 9 4 ... ... 2,069 5 3 5,197 0 6 4 3,628 14 9 ... ... 3,623 14 9 ... ... 3,623 14 9 33,603 0 1 9
44 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. AAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 45 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the Year 1877-7846 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. AAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 47 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the Year 1877-7848 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. AAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 49 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the Year 1877-7850 APPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. BAPPENDIX TO REPORT ON VACCINATION. 51 COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV. showing the Number of Persons Primarily Vaccinated and the Number of those Persons who were Successfully Vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned Official Years. Establishment. Persons Primarily Vaccinated. Total Number. Number success- fully vacci- nated. Total Number. Number success- fully vacci- nated. Total Number. Number success- fully vacci- nated. Total Number. Number success- fully vacci- nated. Total Number. Number success- fully vacci- nated. Total Number. Number success- fully vacci- nated. Total Number. Number success- fully vacci- nated. Years ended 31st March 1871-72. 1872.73. 1873-74. 1874-75. 1875-76. 1876-77. 1877-78. Local Funds ... ... ... ... 190,229 174,047 232,530 213,918 285,298 263,856 359,929 315,652 327,293 272,738 410,497 350,763 676,998 564,976 Military Cantonments ... ... 4,463 4,065 3,765 3,461 4,270 3,823 4,389 3,231 5,323 4,810 4,997 4,514 6,726 6,221 Municipalities ... ... ... ... 28,298 24,123 42,219 36,539 42,646 37,998 33,606 28,874 28,832 25,077 40,441 35,392 57,223 51,141 Native States ... ... ... ... 33,722 31,354 31,528 29,491 4,424 3,797 5,391 4,638 4,245 3,637 3,847 3,255 6,109 5,479 Private Vaccinators ... ... ... 1,104 1,075 3,228 3,092 5,192 5,008 6,062 5,838 5,934 5,508 3,048 2,795 471 471 Railway Apothecaries ... ... 23 13 12 10 4 4 10 9 ... ... 57 49 10 7 Medical Subordinates ... ... ... 18,399 12,063 22,447 14,900 20,890 14,477 17,251 12,200 11,032 7,067 15,753 9,553 28,584 19,438 Dispensaries ... ... ... ... 584 532 751 728 675 635 2,029 1,606 408 297 87 77 584 364 Total ... 276,822 247,272 336,480 302,139 363,399 329,598 428,667 372,048 383,067 319,129 478,727 406,398 776,705 648,097 N.B.( 53 ) GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. PUBLIC DEPARTMENT. Read letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, dated 18th September 1878, No. 53, submitting the Report on Vaccination for the year 1877-78. ORDER THEREON, 17th October 1878, No. 1526. Towards the close of the year to which the above report relates Dr. Shortt, the Inspector of Vaccination, retired from the public service and was succeeded by Surgeon J. H. Laing. The Government have already in their Order, dated 26th June 1878, No. 1116, expressed their appreciation of Dr. Shortt's devoted services in furtherance of vaccine knowledge among the people of this Presidency. 2. Dr. Laing, his successor, has had the sphere of his duties enlarged by being appointed Deputy Sanitary Commissioner as well as Inspector of Vaccination. This arrangement was suggested to Government by the Sanitary Commissioner, and they trust that it may eventuate in the more efficient working of the department and the progress of sanitation in the Presidency generally. 3. In their review on the report for 1876-77 the Government drew attention to the absence of returns from certain Municipalities, to confusion arising from want of accuracy in the definition of the limits of some sub-divisions, and to other matters connected with the completeness and accuracy of the returns theretofore adopted. The Government are glad to note considerable improvement in these administrative and statistical details, and have every confidence that, under Dr. Cornish's able supervision and guidance, the defects noticed in these respects will be entirely removed and the department will be as deserving of credit for accuracy in these respects as it has been for energy and progress in securing the more important ends in view. 4. The regular vaccine staff consisted, all told, of 573 employés, of whom 92 were probationers, but including Local Fund and Municipal vaccinators there were 713 officers and subordinates. Extra hands were also employed temporarily in several districts in connection with outbreaks of small-pox and in famine centres. 5. The large increase in the number of operations was remarked on last year, but in the year under review, in consequence of the prevalence of the disease and the control which was exercised by Government officials over vast numbers of people assembled on famine works or in famine camps, the number nearly doubled itself, being 787,730 against 483,192 in the preceding year, being a gross increase of 304,538 operations. Of these 776,705 were primary against 478,727 in 1876-77. In 1871-72 the number was 276,822 only. Making every allowance for the facilities which the exceptional circumstances of the year afforded, the Government cannot but regard these figures as indicative of very satisfactory progress, and that amongst many sections of the people repugnance to the operation is fast losing its strength. The returns of the current year will probably show a very marked decrease, but the subjection of so large a proportion of the population to the process must tend to raise their apprecia- tion of the efficacy of the prophylactic. The Government regret to observe that in many districts full benefit was not taken by the officers concerned of the power they possessed of vaccinating numbers of people who had become properly amenable to the operation. 14
( 54 ) 6. The organization of special establishments for vaccine work in the Presidency town and elsewhere appears to have been very effective and to reflect much credit on Dr. Shortt and his immediate subordinates. 7. The lymph used seems to have been generally of excellent quality. Its partial failure in some instances is reported to have been in large measure due to the low condition of many of the famine-stricken subjects. 8. The proportion of infantile vaccinations to births is still very low. Rapid progress in this respect is hardly to be expected though the district and subordinate revenue officers may help to disseminate knowledge on this important subject, and induce the people to submit to the operation by their counsel and example. 9. Before deciding upon the point referred to in paragraph 11, the Government desire to have before them the opinion of the Surgeon-General; but, unless there are other reasons for the retention of these figures in the returns besides that mentioned by the Sanitary Commissioner, they should be excluded. 10. The Government fully agree with the Sanitary Commissioner that officers in charge of dispensaries should be required to regard vaccine work as part of their hospital duties. 12. They further approve the Sanitary Commissioner's suggestion that the Presidency town should appear in the returns under Municipalities. 13. The total expenditure on vaccination was Rupees 1,50,330, nearly five-sixths of which was by Local Fund Boards and Municipalities, the charge to Provincial being only Rupees 24,434. The cost per head shows a satisfactory reduction, viz., three annas and nine pies against four annas and ten pies in the preceding year. The results of the vaccine operations in Kurnool still continue quite out of proportion to the outlay. The President, after consulting the Local Fund Board, will submit a special report on present state of affairs and the best means for improving the vaccine administration. (True Extract.) (Signed) H. B. GRIGG, Acting Under Secy. to Govt.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1887-88. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 14 annas.] 1888.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1887-88. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1888.
MADRAS, 18th August 1888. No. 778. From SURGEON D. F. DYMOTT, M.B., Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER FOR MADRAS. SIR, I HAVE the honor to submit statistical returns and brief notes on vaccination in the Madras Presidency for the official year 1887-88. Statements I, II, and III for the first three months of 1887 are also given in the appendix, as the last annual report was for the calendar year 1886. 2. I took charge of the office from Surgeon-Major O'Hara on the 18th June 1887. From the 1st April to 18th June my predecessor visited for vaccine and sanitary inspections the districts of Salem, Coimbatore and Nílgiris, and the towns of Tirupatúr, Coonoor, Ootacamund, and Coimbatore. During the rest of the year I inspected the districts of Ganjam, Vizagapatam, Godávari, Kistna, South Canara, Malabar, Kurnool, and Cuddapah and the towns of Ganjam, Berhampore, Parlákimedi, Chicacole, Vizianagrum, Bimlipatam, Vizaga- patam, Anákapalle, Cocanada, Rajahmundry, Ellore, Bezváda, Masulipatam, Pálghat, Cochin, Mangalore, Cannanore, Tellicherry, Calicut, Kurnool, Nandyál, and Cuddapah. 3. The following statement shows the strength of establishment employed during the years 1886 and 1887-88:4 VACCINATION REPORT. Districts. 1886. 1887-88. Deputy Inspec- tors, First Class. Deputy Inspec- tors, Second Class. Vaccinators. Deputy Inspec- tors, First Class. Deputy Inspec- tors, Second Class. Vaccinators. First Class. Second Class. Proba- tioners. First Class. Second Class. Proba- tioners. Government. Ganjam Hill Tracts ... ... 1 ... ... 6 ... 1 ... ... 6 ... Jeypore do. ... ... 1 ... ... 6 ... 1 ... ... 6 ... Gudem Hills ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... Bhadráchalam Hill Tracts ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... Total ... 2 ... 4 12 ... 2 ... 4 12 Native States (Zemindary). Vellore (Arni) ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... Jeypore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 ... ... ... ... 9 ... Total ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... ... ... 10 ... Madras Town ... ... ... 1 ... 8 15 8 1 *4 8 8 8 Municipalities ... ... ... ... ... 39 37 3 ... ... 43 50 12 Total ... 1 ... 47 52 11 1 4 51 58 20 Cantonments' ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... 2 2 2 Grand Total ... 33 17 244 394 113 33 21 249 424 129 4. The following table contrasts the work performed during 1886 with that of 1887-88:VACCINATION REPORT. 5 6. The following table shows the number of operations according to age :6 VACCINATION REPORT. The increase of total cost, Rs. 6,009-11-6, is due to the increased number of cases vaccinated. The diminution in the average cost of each successful case, especially as regards Government establishments, is due to the vaccinators having done better work than in 1886. 9. In the following table is compared the total work, amount of success, and average cost of each case in Local Fund districts :VACCINATION REPORT. 7 Districts. Population. 1886. 1887-88. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to population. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to population. Males. Females. Males. Females Males. Females Males. Females Males. Females Males. Females. Males. Females. Anantapur ... ... ... ... ... 303,026 291,956 7,293 6,513 52.8 47.2 2.4 2.2 7,960 7,135 52.7 47.2 2.6 2.4 Bellary ... ... ... ... ... 335,567 325,339 11,672 10,851 51.8 48.2 3.4 3.3 11,152 10,550 51.3 48.6 3.3 3.2 Chingleput ... ... ... ...... 474,520 469,586 16,234 13,901 53.0 46.1 3.4 2.9 17,915 14,567 55.4 44.8 3.7 3.1 Coimbatore ... ... ... ... ... 779,006 820,648 23,127 21,844 51.4 48.6 2.9 2.6 27,452 25,923 51.4 48.5 3.5 3.1 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... 560,394 541,662 7,883 5,962 55.3 44.7 1.8 1.1 7,448 6,362 53.9 46.0 1.3 1.1 Ganjam ... ... ... ... ... 850,604 859,046 14,357 12,240 54.0 46.0 1.6 1.4 14,530 12,109 54.5 45.4 2.0 1.7 Godávari ... ... ... ... 849,908 863,101 8,958 7,158 55.6 44.4 1.0 0.8 13,970 11,684 54.4 45.5 1.6 1.3 Kistna ... ... ... ... ... 753,987 739,791 7,845 5,895 57.1 42.9 1.0 0.7 7,582 5,726 56.9 43.0 1.0 0.7 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... 349,717 339,259 5,528 4,237 56.6 43.4 1.5 1.2 8,439 6,061 58.2 41.8 2.4 1.7 Madura ... ... ... ... ... 988,443 1,092,248 23,912 21,306 52.9 47.1 2.4 1.9 24,759 22,091 52.8 47.1 2.5 2.0 Malabar ... ... ... ... ... 1,092,233 1,110,884 31,302 13,309 70.2 29.8 2.8 1.1 31,271 13,441 69.9 30.0 2.8 1.2 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... 597,353 586,178 12,242 11,250 52.1 47.9 2.0 1.9 14,164 13,321 51.5 48.4 2.3 2.2 Nílgiris ... ... ... ... ... 41,950 31,971 1,066 694 60.6 39.4 2.5 2.1 1,253 757 62.6 37.6 3.0 2.3 North Arcot ... ... ... ... ... 884,882 885,054 15,522 13,997 52.6 47.4 1.7 1.5 18,912 16,872 52.9 47.1 2.1 1.9 Salem ... ... ... ... ... 753,899 795,029 23,073 22,195 50.9 49.1 3.0 2.7 24,570 23,968 50.6 49.3 3.2 3.0 South Arcot ... ... ... ... ... 875,054 896,302 14,656 11,663 55.7 44.3 1.6 1.3 14,078 11,236 55.6 44.3 1.6 1.2 South Canara ... ... ... ... ... 455,697 471,718 16,140 13,062 55.3 44.7 3.5 2.7 20,427 16,538 55.2 44.7 4.4 3.5 Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... 930,826 998,406 23,117 21,312 52.0 48.0 2.4 2.1 17,556 16,238 51.9 48.0 1.8 1.6 Tinnevelly ... ... ... ... ... 797,821 844,460 25,440 20,500 55.4 44.6 3.1 2.4 27,810 22,539 55.2 44.7 3.4 2.6 Trichinopoly ... ... ... ... ... 535,854 574,957 11,162 10,496 51.5 48.5 2.0 1.8 10,759 10,076 51.6 48.3 2.0 1.7 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... 1,217,939 1,192,411 21,474 18,862 53.2 46.8 1.7 1.5 19,491 17,103 53.2 46.7 1.8 1.6 Total ... 14,428,680 14,710,006 321,503 267,247 51.6 45.4 2.2 1.8 341,498 284,297 54.5 45.6 2.3 1.9 11.During the year 1887-88 vaccination was made compulsory in the follow- ing towns:8 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vacci- nation. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vacci- nations. Percentage of success. Births registered. Number of infants under 1 year who died. Number of infants under 1 year who remained unprotected. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under 1 year. Over 1 and under 6 years. Above 6 years. Primary vaccina- tion. Re-vaccination. Under 1 year. Over 1 and under 6 years. Above 6 years. Males. Females. Total. RS. A. P. Ádóni (c) ... 1886 ... 22,441 405 384 789 785 465 296 13 4 3 59.2 37.7 1.6 777 98.6 75.0 773 93 215 0 4 1 1887-88. 494 481 975 973 395 556 10 2 2 40.5 57.1 10.2 963 98.7 100.0 748 80 273 0 3 2 Anantapur(c) ... 1886 ... 4,907 114 122 236 219 130 74 4 17 14 59.3 33.7 1.8 222 94.9 82.3 240 31 79 0 11 10 1887-88. 194 129 323 322 198 39 61 1 1 61.4 12.1 18.9 299 92.5 100.0 206 34 41 0 9 1 Anakápalle ... 1886 ... 13,341 300 76 376 232 43 109 66 144 83 18.5 46.9 28.4 301 93.9 57.6 442 22 377 0 8 1 1887-88. 290 108 398 241 57 133 32 157 106 23.6 55.1 13.2 328 92.1 67.5 436 38 341 0 6 11 Bellary ... 1886 ... 53,460 1,126 643 1,769 1,725 834 755 ... 44 44 48.3 43.7 ... 1,633 92.1 100.0 1,775 290 651 0 3 0 1887-88. 1,061 661 1,722 1,684 790 406 365 38 33 46.9 24.1 21.6 1,594 92.6 86.8 1,843 528 525 0 3 5 Berhampore ... 1886 ... 23,599 214 155 369 352 23 186 91 17 12 6.5 52.8 25.8 312 85.2 70.5 894 151 720 0 5 0 1887-88. 245 114 359 359 37 117 158 ... ... 10.3 32.3 44.0 312 86.9 ... 718 136 545 0 5 3 Bimlipatam ... 1886 ... 8,582 246 227 473 398 112 226 42 75 75 28.1 56.7 10.5 455 95.4 100.0 324 39 173 0 6 2 1887-88. 229 197 426 379 108 186 63 47 47 28.4 49.0 16.6 404 94.2 100.0 244 31 105 0 6 11 Calicut ... ... 1886 ... 57,085 1,863 669 2,532 2,532 66 551 1,448 ... ... 2.6 21.7 57.1 2,065 81.5 ... 1,980 305 1,609 0 3 10 1887-88. 2,271 659 2,930 2,930 277 908 1,274 ... ... 9.4 30.9 43.4 2,459 83.9 ... 2,364 264 1,823 0 3 1 Cannanore ... 1886 ... 26,386 854 622 1,476 1,476 281 840 303 ... ... 19.0 56.9 20.5 1,424 96.4 ... 1,214 233 700 0 3 8 1887-88. 915 639 1,554 1,554 375 789 326 ... ... 24.1 50.7 20.9 1,490 95.8 ... 867 109 383 0 3 2 Chicacole ... 1886 ... 18,302 424 361 785 785 250 343 118 ... ... 31.8 43.6 15.0 711 90.5 ... 447 75 122 0 4 2 1887-88. 437 314 751 737 159 409 102 14 2 21.5 55.4 13.8 672 90.9 14.2 483 81 243 0 4 3 Chidambaram (c) 1886 ... 19,837 506 320 826 826 239 384 157 ... ... 28.9 46.4 19.0 780 94.4 ... 450 90 121 0 3 11 1887-88. 436 346 782 782 175 486 96 ... ... 22.3 62.1 12.2 757 96.8 ... 497 87 235 0 4 1 Cochin ... ... 1886 ... 15,698 748 332 1,080 1,064 206 388 367 16 2 19.3 36.4 34.5 963 90.3 12.5 634 105 323 0 3 3 1887-88. 810 306 1,116 1,109 171 449 374 7 2 15.4 40.4 33.7 996 89.6 28.5 680 104 405 0 3 0 Cocanada ... 1886 ... 30,441 296 271 567 504 167 254 24 63 7 33.1 50.3 4.7 452 88.2 11.1 950 178 605 0 6 11 1887-88. 648 498 1,146 1,017 325 540 23 129 1 31.9 53.0 2.2 889 87.3 0.7 897 100 472 0 3 5 Coimbatore ... 1886 ... 38,967 581 510 1,091 1,091 250 711 95 ... ... 22.9 65.1 8.7 1,056 96.7 ... 1,673 401 1,022 0 4 1 1887-88. 534 435 969 969 425 437 72 ... ... 43.8 45.0 7.4 934 96.3 ... 1,619 342 852 0 4 3 Conjeeveram ... 1886 ... 37,275 1,104 821 1,925 1,722 520 728 226 203 51 30.1 42.2 13.1 1,525 85.5 25.1 1,620 393 767 0 4 5 1887-88. 555 412 967 953 292 435 187 14 7 30.6 45.6 19.6 921 95.8 50.0 1,774 407 1,075 0 4 6 Coonoor ... 1886 ... 4,778 43 20 63 63 9 13 7 ... ... 14.3 20.6 11.1 29 46.0 ... 52 12 31 6 6 1 1887-88. 85 72 157 141 23 63 20 16 ... 16.3 44.6 13.4 108 71.6 43.7 69 17 29 1 11 4 Cuddalore ... 1886 ... 43,545 571 400 971 971 139 575 221 ... ... 14.3 59.2 22.7 935 96.2 ... 1,179 74 966 0 4 11 1887-88. 669 547 1,216 1,216 185 675 232 ... ... 15.2 55.5 19.0 1,092 89.8 ... 990 111 694 0 4 3 Cuddapah (c) ... 1886 ... 18,982 163 125 288 288 43 174 34 ... ... 14.9 60.4 11.8 251 87.1 ... 458 68 347 1 4 6 1887-88. 335 235 570 565 88 301 111 5 4 15.5 53.2 19.6 504 88.4 80.0 415 90 237 0 7 0 Dindigul ... 1886 ... 14,182 526 252 778 644 81 387 143 134 100 12.5 60.0 22.2 711 94.8 74.6 669 100 488 0 4 11 1887-88. 395 235 630 501 103 339 11 129 101 20.5 67.6 2.1 554 90.4 78.3 691 114 474 0 5 8 Ellore (c) ... 1886 ... 25,092 244 111 355 355 15 175 145 ... ... 4.2 49.3 40.8 335 94.3 ... 718 91 612 0 6 6 1887-88. 452 433 885 879 79 619 146 6 4 8.8 70.4 16.6 848 96.0 66.6 697 180 438 0 6 1
VACCINATION REPORT. 9 Erode (c) ... 1886 ... 9,864 281 217 498 498 166 316 ... ... ... 33.3 63.4 ... 482 96.7 ... 277 40 71 0 6 2 1887-88. 291 202 493 493 271 184 27 ... ... 54.9 37.3 5.4 482 97.7 ... 472 63 138 0 6 5 Gudiyátam ... 1886 ... 16,690 186 189 375 375 78 265 8 ... ... 20.8 70.7 2.1 351 93.6 ... 388 75 235 0 2 10 1887-88. 151 132 283 282 66 186 9 1 1 23.4 65.9 3.1 262 92.5 100.0 534 119 349 0 6 8 Guntúr ... 1886 ... 19,646 236 134 370 333 36 77 56 37 11 10.8 23.1 16.8 180 50.7 29.7 533 82 415 1 9 0 1887-88. 111 70 181 178 17 69 23 3 2 9.5 38.7 12.3 111 61.2 66.6 450 44 389 2 4 11 Kumbakónam ... 1886 ... 50,098 856 654 1,510 1,510 340 803 297 ... ... 22.5 53.1 19.6 1,440 95.3 ... 1,551 444 767 0 6 7 1887-88. 659 738 1,397 1,397 479 650 204 ... ... 34.2 46.5 14.6 1,333 95.4 ... 1,405 354 572 0 7 0 Karúr ... 1886 ... 9,205 244 198 442 442 255 120 45 ... ... 57.7 27.1 10.2 420 95.0 ... 456 34 167 0 5 0 1887-88. 239 185 424 424 240 118 42 ... ... 56.6 27.8 9.9 400 94.3 ... 426 50 136 0 5 1 Karnool ... 1886 ... 20,329 348 186 534 519 107 247 84 15 15 20.6 47.6 16.1 453 84.3 100.0 738 134 497 0 4 11 1887-88. 355 294 649 601 127 359 51 48 48 21.1 59.7 8.4 585 89.3 100.0 716 115 474 0 4 3 Madras ... 1886 ... 405,848 12,941 10,149 23,090 20,935 12,830 6,220 1,273 2,155 1,644 61.3 29.7 6.0 21,967 97.0 76.2 15,976 5,122 ... 0 8 8 1887-88. 11,050 8,987 20,037 18,523 13,407 3,460 1,080 1,514 1,223 72.3 18.6 5.8 19,170 96.8 80.7 17,161 5,417 ... 0 10 3 Madura ... 1886 ... 76,847 1,757 1,187 2,944 2,944 1,536 949 342 ... ... 52.2 32.2 11.6 2,827 96.0 ... 2,988 464 988 0 2 3 1887-88. 1,726 1,358 3,084 3,084 1,724 1,142 137 ... ... 55.9 37.0 4.4 3,003 97.3 ... 3,055 431 900 0 2 6 Mannárgudi ... 1886 ... 19,409 260 163 423 423 95 223 66 ... ... 22.4 52.7 15.6 384 90.7 ... 629 114 420 0 8 4 1887-88. 241 208 449 449 33 328 68 ... ... 7.3 73.0 15.1 429 95.5 ... 587 102 452 0 10 0 Mangalore ... 1886 .. 32,099 1,080 966 2,046 2,046 485 1,110 391 ... ... 23.7 54.2 19.1 1,986 97.0 ... 1,022 165 372 0 2 0 1887-88. 2,140 2,022 4,162 3,872 976 1,892 863 290 252 25.2 48.8 22.2 3,983 96.3 86.8 1,535 339 220 0 1 3 Masulipatam ... 1886 ... 35,056 764 303 1,067 1,068 52 560 363 19 12 4.9 53.4 34.6 987 93.0 63.1 917 65 800 0 3 6 1887-88. 726 348 1,074 1,055 78 587 301 19 11 7.3 55.6 28.5 977 91.5 58.0 983 39 866 0 3 7 Máyavaram(c)... 1886 ... 23,044 435 362 797 783 194 442 99 14 10 24.8 56.4 12.6 745 93.8 71.4 676 166 316 0 4 9 1887-88. 376 329 705 701 201 407 58 4 4 28.6 58.0 8.2 670 95.0 100.0 789 212 376 0 5 9 Negapatam (c)... 1886 ... 53,776 1,029 823 1,852 1,785 299 938 253 67 31 16.7 52.5 14.2 1,521 83.4 46.2 957 235 423 0 5 8 1887-88. 1,073 1,088 2,161 2,139 604 1,189 203 22 6 28.2 55.5 9.4 2,002 93.3 27.3 1,407 342 461 0 4 6 Nellore (c) ... 1886 ... 27,505 386 232 618 530 67 275 125 88 25 12.6 51.9 23.5 492 88.0 28.4 726 94 565 0 6 8 1887-88. 457 364 821 777 91 453 189 44 34 11.7 58.3 24.3 767 94.3 77.2 865 96 678 0 3 11 Ongole ... 1886 ... 9,200 278 192 470 470 64 294 84 ... ... 13.6 62.6 17.8 442 94.0 ... 431 66 301 0 4 4 1887-88. 191 177 368 368 39 185 44 ... ... 10.5 50.2 11.9 268 72.8 ... 335 33 263 0 8 5 Ootacamund (c) 1886 ... 12,335 349 274 623 591 158 255 142 32 22 26.7 43.1 24.0 577 93.9 68.7 338 78 102 0 7 4 1887-88. 259 247 506 490 59 332 43 16 16 12.0 67.7 8.7 450 88.5 100.0 445 74 312 0 10 9 Palamcottah (c) 1886 ... 17,964 483 330 813 769 142 342 261 44 29 18.4 44.4 33.9 774 96.8 65.9 582 112 328 0 4 7 1887-88 560 365 925 840 261 344 193 85 65 31.0 40.9 22.9 863 95.0 76.4 585 141 183 0 3 7 Pálghat ... 1886 ... 36,339 1,067 690 1,757 1,757 33 509 1,119 ... ... 1.8 28.9 63.7 1,661 94.5 ... 1,170 213 924 0 2 10 1887-88. 1,122 867 1,989 1,983 52 824 940 6 5 2.6 41.5 47.4 1,821 91.5 83.3 1,262 191 1,019 0 3 2 Parlákimedi ... 1886 ... 15,365 108 121 229 229 77 90 20 ... ... 33.6 39.3 8.7 187 81.6 ... 351 24 250 0 6 7 1887-88. 409 292 701 696 143 333 137 5 ... 20.5 47.8 19.6 613 88.0 ... 322 6 173 0 3 2 Periyacolum ... 1886 ... 16,446 98 63 161 146 62 80 2 15 10 42.4 54.8 1.3 154 98.6 66.6 469 65 342 0 4 11 1887-... 199 170 369 359 157 189 8 10 8 43.7 52.6 2.2 362 98.3 80.0 638 130 351 0 6 1 Palni ... ... 1886 ... 13,315 360 309 669 657 181 433 29 12 12 27.5 65.9 4.4 655 97.8 100.0 273 37 35 0 1 9 1887-88. 312 273 585 551 167 335 35 34 30 30.3 60.7 6.3 567 97.4 88.2 372 133 72 0 3 4 Rajahmundry (c) 1886 ... 24,555 765 460 1,225 1,225 86 673 375 ... ... 7.0 54.9 30.6 1,134 92.5 ... 688 70 532 0 5 7 1887-88. 918 686 1,604 1,604 377 935 236 ... ... 23.5 58.2 14.7 1,548 96.5 ... 645 85 183 0 5 8 Salem ... 1886 ... 59,631 830 787 1,617 1,617 466 958 78 ... ... 28.8 59.2 4.8 1,502 92.8 ... 1,957 370 1,121 0 3 9 1887-88. 1,040 917 1,957 1,957 573 1,180 66 ... ... 24.1 60.2 3.3 1,819 92.9 ... 1,864 403 888 0 3 3 Srírangam ... 1886 ... 19,773 346 256 602 602 34 448 98 ... ... 5.6 74.4 16.2 580 96.3 ... 696 131 631 0 5 0 1887-88. 138 91 229 229 23 135 57 ... ... 10.0 58.9 24.8 215 93.8 ... 682 136 523 0 9 4 Tanjore ... 1886 ... 54,745 922 592 1,514 1,310 221 678 269 204 154 16.8 51.7 20.5 1,322 89.1 75.4 1,690 290 1,179 0 4 9 1887-88. 856 393 1,249 1,167 194 504 386 82 51 16.6 43.1 33.0 1,135 92.8 62.2 1,552 305 1,053 0 5 8 Tellicherry ... 1886 ... 24,581 1,281 721 2,002 1,932 227 857 592 70 70 11.7 44.3 30.6 1,746 86.7 100.0 733 77 429 0 4 8 1887-88. 1,261 930 2,191 2,009 277 972 480 182 182 13.2 48.3 23.8 1,911 86.0 100.0 724 95 352 0 3 10 (c) is placed opposite those towns in which vaccination is compulsory. 3
10 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vacci- nation. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vac- cinations. Percentage of success. Births registered. Number of infants under 1 year who died. Number of infants under 1 year who remained unprotected. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under 1 year. Over 1 and under 6 years. Above 6 years. Primary vaccina- tion. Re-vaccination. Under 1 year. Over 1 and under 6 years. Above 6 years. Males. Females Total. RS. A. P. Tinnevelly (c) .. 1886 ... 23,221 348 174 522 522 84 274 150 ... ... 16.1 52.4 28.7 508 97.3 ... 743 148 511 0 5 9 1887-88. 486 284 770 770 235 405 119 ... ... 30.5 52.5 15.4 759 98.5 ... 496 92 169 0 4 4 Trichinopoly ... 1886 ... 84,449 2,277 1,424 3,701 3,512 896 1,807 622 189 165 25.5 51.4 17.7 3,490 94.6 87.3 1,934 469 569 0 4 3 1887-88. 1,872 1,246 3,118 3,004 804 1,633 442 114 88 26.7 54.3 11.0 2,967 95.8 77.2 1,754 440 510 0 3 10 Tripatore ... 1886 ... 14,278 176 165 341 341 66 204 44 ... ... 19.3 59.8 12.9 314 92.0 ... 44 13 ... 0 4 8 1887-88. 179 136 315 305 56 180 61 10 10 18.3 18.3 20.0 307 92.3 100.0 249 58 135 0 6 5 Tripaty ... 1886 ... 13,232 150 115 265 265 68 175 17 ... ... 25.0 66.0 6.4 260 98.1 ... 130 9 53 0 4 2 1887-88. 61 52 113 110 48 46 8 3 3 43.0 41.8 7.2 105 92.7 100.0 228 1 179 1 0 10 Tuticorin ... 1886... 16,281 365 161 526 517 85 230 124 9 8 16.4 41.5 23.9 447 84.9 88.8 606 127 394 0 7 1 1887-88. 417 226 643 599 126 256 102 44 40 21.0 42.7 17.0 524 80.8 90.9 656 147 383 0 5 11 Vaniembady ... 1886 ... 15,933 143 107 250 250 64 155 19 ... ... 25.6 62.0 7.6 238 95.2 ... 57 10 ... 0 4 8 1887-88. 161 121 282 282 115 153 9 ... ... 40.7 54.2 3.1 277 98.2 ... 140 28 ... 0 7 3 Vellore ... 1886 ... 37,491 609 598 1,207 1,202 477 579 105 5 2 39.6 48.1 8.7 1,163 96.5 40.0 1,203 143 583 0 5 0 1887-88. 746 647 1,393 1,361 586 609 124 32 17 43.0 44.7 9.1 1,336 96.9 53.1 1,115 162 367 0 4 8 Vizagapatam ... 1886 ... 30,291 790 479 1,269 1,137 287 470 357 132 54 25.3 41.3 31.3 1,168 97.9 40.9 884 136 461 0 4 0 1887-88. 989 500 1,489 884 247 366 237 605 423 27.8 41.4 26.8 1,273 96.1 69.9 723 129 347 0 3 7 Vizianagrum ... 1886 ... 22,577 434 288 722 605 146 280 169 117 91 24.1 46.2 27.9 686 98.3 77.7 800 127 527 0 5 2 1887-88. 374 311 685 598 154 275 155 87 78 25.7 45.9 25.9 662 97.3 89.6 775 99 522 0 5 8 Wálajápet ... 1886 ... 10,387 132 80 212 206 76 79 35 6 1 36.9 38.3 16.9 191 92.2 16.6 388 82 230 0 10 2 1887-88. 160 98 258 258 89 118 32 ... ... 34.9 45.7 12.4 239 92.6 ... 393 68 236 0 8 3 Total ... 1886 ... 1,848,705 43,442 30,570 74,012 70,065 24,413 29,584 11,617 3,947 2,757 34.8 42.2 16.5 68,371 93.6 69.8 60,493 12,782 25,326 0 5 11 1887-88. 43,360 32,175 75,535 71,710 17,358 29,220 20,827 3,825 2,914 24.2 40.7 29.0 70,319 93.9 76.1 62,578 13,332 31,888 0 5 11 (c) is placed opposite those towns in which vaccination is compulsory.
VACCINATION REPORT. 11 13. The following table shows particulars of the work done by Government Vaccinators during the years 1886 and 1887-88:12 VACCINATION REPORT. Districts. No. of dispensaries. Number vaccinated. Number vaccinated successfully. Percentage of success. Average number vac- cinated at each dis- pensary. Success of primary vaccination. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccina- tion. Total. Primary vaccination. Re-vacina- tion. Total. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccina- tion. Total. Under 1 year. Above 1 and under 6 years. Above 6 years. Godávari ... 1886 ... 17 576 5 591 382 3 385 66.3 20.0 65.1 35 29 236 117 1887-88. 18 450 5 455 304 3 307 67.5 60.0 67.4 25 22 197 85 Kistna ... 1886 ... 18 302 12 314 226 7 233 74.8 58.3 74.8 17 10 171 45 1887-88. 18 321 5 326 240 3 243 74.7 60.0 74.5 18 11 177 52 Kurnool ... 1886 ... 10 469 ... 469 316 ... 316 67.3 ... 67.3 47 65 194 57 1887-88. 12 447 9 456 322 3 325 72.0 33.3 71.2 38 59 203 60 Madras Town... 1886 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1887-88. 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madura ... 1886 ... 31 1,444 51 1,495 1,254 29 1,283 86.8 56.8 85.8 48 325 779 150 1887-88. 31 995 26 1,021 845 14 859 85.9 51.5 84.1 33 224 540 81 Malabar ... 1886 ... 13 413 34 447 301 10 311 72.8 29.4 69.5 34 32 186 83 1887-88. 15 377 ... 377 303 ... 303 80.4 ... 80.4 25 21 167 115 Nellore ... 1886 ... 15 1,097 17 1,114 877 14 891 79.9 82.3 79.9 74 99 564 214 1887-88. 18 1,440 23 1,463 1,304 20 1,324 90.5 86.8 90.4 81 133 855 316 Nílgiris ... 1886 ... 5 35 ... 35 28 ... 28 80.0 ... 80.0 7 10 13 5 1887-88. 5 52 5 57 35 1 36 67.3 20.0 63.1 11 15 18 2 North Arcot ... 1886 ... 14 659 5 664 606 3 609 91.9 60.0 91.7 47 114 386 106 1887-88. 15 371 2 373 329 1 330 88.7 50.0 88.4 25 61 220 48 Salem ... ... 1886 ... 12 604 10 614 514 9 523 85.0 90.0 85.1 51 85 394 35 1887-88. 15 935 31 966 781 8 789 83.5 25.8 81.6 63 161 500 120 South Arcot ... 1886 ... 12 454 11 465 400 9 409 88.1 81.8 87.9 39 44 272 84 1887-88. 13 689 15 704 565 4 569 82.0 26.6 80.8 53 69 397 99 South Canara... 1886 ... 8 298 36 334 254 16 270 85.2 44.4 80.8 42 15 99 140 1887-88. 13 596 40 636 446 22 468 74.8 55.0 73.5 49 44 189 213 Tanjore ... 1886 ... 37 2,470 47 2,517 2,117 27 2,144 85.7 57.4 85.1 68 262 1,467 388 1887-88. 37 1,742 35 1,777 1,482 18 1,500 85.1 51.4 84.4 48 151 1,010 321 Tinnevelly ... 1886 ... 22 1,170 29 1,199 956 18 974 81.7 62.0 81.2 55 90 604 262 1887-88. 22 880 12 892 780 9 789 88.6 75.0 88.4 41 75 434 271 Trichinopoly ... 1886 ... 8 262 1 263 258 1 259 98.4 100.0 98.4 33 44 158 56 1887-88. 11 341 8 349 322 ... 322 94.4 ... 94.4 32 28 220 74 Vizagapatam ... 1886 ... 15 1,000 65 1,065 917 40 957 91.7 61.5 89.8 71 161 537 219 1887-88. 15 742 81 823 688 56 744 92.7 69.1 90.4 55 120 451 117 Total ... 1886 ... 312 16,790 453 17,243 13,954 227 14,181 83.1 50.1 82.2 55 2,682 8,768 2,504 1887-88. 334 13,736 438 14,174 11,506 214 11,720 83.7 48.9 82.6 42 1,961 7,195 2,350 16. The following table shows the vaccinations performed in the canton- ments in 1887-88 compared with the work done in 1886 :VACCINATION REPORT. 13 Circles. Number of inspecting officers. Number of villages visited. Total number of persons vaccinated. Number of days spent on inspection duty. Number of cases verified. Proportion per cent. of inspec- tion to total number vaccinated. First- class Deputy Inspec- tors. Second- class Deputy Inspec- tors. First- class Deputy Inspec- tors. Second- class Deputy Inspec- tors. First- class Deputy Inspec- tors. Second- class Deputy Inspec- tors. First- class Deputy Inspec- tors. Second- class Deputy Inspec- tors. Gooty ... ... ... ... 1 ... 400 5,901 246 ... 3,683 ... 62.4 Penukonda ... ... 1 ... 549 ... 8,917 286 4,820 ... 54.0 ... Bellary ... ... ... 1 ... 296 ... 13,880 208 6,119 ... 441 ... Harpanahalli ... ... ... 1 ... 323 7,593 164 ... 3,561 ... 46.8 Chingleput ... ... 1 ... 326 ... 23,005 118 6,430 ... 27.9 ... Saidápet ... ... 1 ... 227 ... 6,051 121 4,135 ... 68.3 ... North Coimbatore ... 1 ... 679 ... 26,345 243 14,796 ... 561 ... South Coimbatore ... 1 ... 563 ... 29,664 219 11,992 ... 40.4 ... Cuddapah ... ... 1 ... 282 ... 3,906 16 1,936 ... 49.5 ... Madanapalle ... ... 1 ... 232 ... 4,605 173 1,947 ... 42.2 ... Sidhout ... ... ... ... 1 ... 174 4,344 213 ... 2,305 ... 53.0 Chatrapur ... ... 1 ... 516 ... 13,879 231 9,095 ... 65.5 ... Chicacole ... ... 1 ... 283 ... 12,597 168 6,144 ... 48.7 ... Ganjam Hill Tracts ... 1 ... 229 ... 6,110 103 3,477 ... 56.9 ... Ellore ... ... ... 1 ... 340 ... 7,788 221 3,585 ... 460 ... Pittapore ... ... ... 1 ... 428 7,751 302 ... 5,987 ... 77.2 Rajahmundry ... ... 1 ... 338 ... 9,163 155 5,388 ... 58.8 ... Guntúr ... ... ... 1 ... 305 ... 4,391 226 3,131 ... 71.3 ... Masulipatam ... ... 1 ... 295 ... 6,723 193 2,878 ... 42.8 ... Vinukonda ... ... ... 1 ... 397 2,661 247 ... 2,088 ... 78.4 Cumbum ... ... 1 ... 182 ... 4,170 129 ... 2,106 ... 50.5 Kurnool ... ... ... 1 ... 486 ... 10,364 233 7,008 ... 67.6 ... Dindigul ... ... 1 ... 172 ... 15,947 194 8,229 ... 51.6 ... Madura ... ... ... ... 1 ... 405 10,725 260 ... 5,564 ... 51.8 Permagudi ... ... 1 ... 257 ... 19,814 148 4,336 ... 21.9 ... North Malabar ... ... ... 1 ... 84 18,103 65 ... 7,578 ... 41.8 South Malabar ... ... 1 ... 242 ... 28,312 245 10,229 ... 361 ... Kávali ... ... ... ... 1 ... 372 9,540 292 ... 6,090 ... 63.8 Nellore ... ... ... 1 ... 457 ... 8,584 214 5,672 ... 66.1 ... Ongole ... ... ... ... 1 ... 362 9,016 206 ... 7,019 ... 77.8 Chittoor ... ... ... 1 ... 610 ... 15,041 216 7,068 ... 46.9 ... Kárvetnagar ... ... ... 1 ... 375 10,531 215 ... 5,334 ... 50.6 Vellore ... ... ... 1 ... 255 ... 10,485 150 5,150 ... 49.1 ... Krishnagiri ... ... ... 1 ... 527 14,333 249 ... 6,934 ... 48.3 Namakal ... ... ... 1 ... 291 19,778 135 ... 7,354 ... 37.2 Salem ... ... ... 1 ... 282 ... 16,826 131 5,569 ... 33.1 ... Cuddalore ... ... 1 ... 421 ... 15,559 215 7,103 ... 45.1 ... Vriddháchalam ... ... 1 ... 376 9,119 213 ... 5,800 ... 63.6 No. I, South Canara ... 1 ... 255 ... 21,391 175 7,054 ... 32.9 ... No. II, South Canara ... ... 1 ... 179 10,622 174 ... 4,629 ... 43.6 Negapatam ... ... 1 ... 621 ... 15,051 254 10,520 ... 69.9 ... Tanjore ... ... ... 1 ... 548 ... 22,474 209 9,226 ... 410 ... Sátur ... ... ... ... 1 ... 327 13,647 206 ... 6,864 ... 50.3 Shermádevi ... ... ... 1 ... 365 17,781 241 ... 10,282 ... 57.7 Tinnevelly ... ... 1 ... 535 ... 18,411 262 8,078 ... 43.8 ... Trichinopoly ... ... 1 ... 453 ... 21,136 198 14,856 ... 70.2 ... Jeypore Hill Tracts ... 1 ... 239 5,744 198 1,662 ... 28.9 ... Vizagapatam ... ... 1 ... 594 ... 17,050 251 15,600 ... 91.4 ... Vizianagrum ... ... ... 1 ... 287 19,904 270 ... 10,967 ... 55.0 Total ... 32 17 12,069 5,672 634,732 9,801 213,233 104,145 48.0 54.4 18. Animal Vaccination.14 VACCINATION REPORT. 19. During the year two First-class Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination were reduced to second-class grade for unsatisfactory work and three Second-class Deputies promoted to first class, two in lieu of the two degraded, and one to fill a vacancy caused by death which occurred on the 15th January 1887. One Second- class Deputy Inspector, Y. Poonoosawmy Pillay, of the Gooty Range, was dismissed the service on conviction before a court of law for cheating and falsifying his diaries. Two vaccinators were promoted to Second-class Deputy Inspectors. Fines to the extent of Rs. 30 were inflicted on Deputy Inspectors for unsatisfactory work. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, DONALD F. DYMOTT, Surgeon, M.B., Inspector of Vaccination and Dy. Sanitary Commissioner, Madras, MADRAS, 1888.
APPENDIX. VACCINATION RETURNS.
VACCINATION RETURNS. 17 A18 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 19 23 Madura. Dindigul circle ... ... ... 664,478 211 14 8,450 7,502 15,952 1,139 15,695 6,347 7,962 15,254 257 195 97.1 75.8 23.2 ... ... ... ... 24 Madura do. ... ... ... 498,398 314 10 5,633 5,109 10,742 1,074 10,738 3,134 6,201 10,531 4 4 98.0 100.0 21.1 ... ... ... ... 25 Permagudy do. ... ... ... 885,014 241 18 10,676 9,480 20,156 1,119 19,766 4,738 11,757 19,175 390 313 97.0 80.2 22.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,047,890 244 42 24,759 22,091 46,850 1,115 46,199 14,219 25,920 44,960 651 512 97.3 78.6 22.2 53,491 26.1 875 0.4 26 Malabar. North Malabar circle ... ... ... 736,592 279 12 10,910 5,360 16,270 1,356 16,198 218 5,225 15,462 72 60 95.4 83.3 21.0 ... ... ... ... 27 South do. do. ... ... 1,468,354 474 20 20,361 8,081 28,442 1,422 28,442 395 6,538 26,395 ... ... 92.8 ... 11.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,204,946 384 32 31,271 13,441 44,712 1,397 44,640 613 11,763 41,857 72 60 93.7 83.3 14.4 37,717 17.1 4,435 2.0 28 Nellore. Kávali circle ... ... ... 373,748 132 9 4,786 4,413 9,199 1,149 9,112 573 5,674 8,826 87 75 96.8 86.2 23.8 ... ... ... ... 29 Nellore do. ... ... ... 397,873 137 11 4,687 4,295 8,982 816 8,857 580 5,771 8,419 125 45 95.0 36.0 21.5 ... ... ... ... 30 Ongole do. ... ... ... 411,910 138 9 4,691 4,613 9,304 1,033 9,300 679 6,012 8,648 4 3 93.0 75.0 21.0 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,183,531 136 29 14,164 13,321 27,485 949 27,269 1,832 17,457 25,893 216 123 94.9 56.9 21.9 24,645 20.8 973 0.8 31 Nilgiri. Nilgiri circle ... ... ... 73,921 79 3 1,253 757 2,010 670 1,970 81 812 1,644 40 33 83.4 82.5 22.6 1,661 22.4 22 0.3 Total of district ... 73,921 79 3 1,253 757 2,010 670 1,970 81 812 1,644 40 33 83.4 82.5 22.6 1,661 22.4 22 0.3 North Arcot. Chittoor circle ... ... ... 657,795 232 15 7,843 7,047 14,890 926 14,890 4,290 8,903 14,749 ... ... 99.0 ... 22.4 ... ... ... ... 32 Karvetnagar circle ... ... 473,771 206 9 5,810 5,130 10,940 1,215 10,929 2,024 6,763 10,754 11 10 98.3 90.9 22.7 ... ... ... ... 33 Vellore do. ... ... 608,448 308 11 5,259 4,695 9,954 905 9,936 995 6,956 9,497 18 16 95.5 88.8 16.9 ... ... ... ... 34 Zemindary vaccinators ... 1 478 344 822 822 822 91 569 792 ... ... 96.3 ... Total of district ... 1,740,014 244 36 19,390 17,216 36,606 1,017 36,577 7,400 23,191 35,792 29 26 97.8 89.6 20.5 27,435 15.6 2,305 1.3 35 Salem. Krishnagiri circle ... ... 392,465 150 15 6,740 6,446 13,186 879 13,128 5,048 7,095 12,924 58 43 98.4 72.4 33.0 ... ... ... ... 36 Salem do. ... ... 512,829 179 16 8,384 8,381 16,765 1,048 16,692 3,653 10,514 15,981 73 52 95.7 71.2 31.2 ... ... ... ... 37 Namakal do. ... ... 604,459 285 17 9,446 9,141 18,587 1,093 18,580 2,229 13,372 18,051 7 6 97.1 85.7 29.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,509,753 202 48 24,570 23,968 48,538 1,011 48,400 10,930 30,981 46,956 138 101 97.0 73.2 31.1 32,102 21.2 1,186 0.7 38 South Arcot. Cuddalore circle ... ... 1,122,846 340 15 8,599 7,014 15,613 1,040 15,613 1,961 9,492 14,745 ... ... 94.4 ... 13.1 ... ... ... ... 39 Vriddháchalam circle ... 628,510 401 12 5,479 4,222 9,701 808 9,682 1,060 6,293 9,271 19 19 95.5 100.0 14.7 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,751,356 360 27 14,078 11,236 25,314 937 25,295 3,021 15,785 24,016 19 19 94.9 100.0 13.7 24,196 13.8 2,808 1.6 40 South Canara. No. I. South Canara circle ... 573,167 300 15 12,150 9,960 22,110 1,651 21,097 1,171 8,641 19,820 1,013 748 93.9 73.8 35.8 ... ... ... ... 41 No. II. do. do. ... 354,248 178 10 8,277 6,578 14,855 1,485 14,807 798 4,119 13,802 48 36 93.2 75.0 39.0 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 927,415 238 25 20,427 16,538 36,965 1,478 35,904 1,969 12,760 33,622 1,061 784 93.6 73.8 37.1 33,581 36.2 528 0.5 42 Tanjore. Negapatam circle ... ... 881,387 601 13 7,098 6,420 13,518 1,040 13,497 2,124 8,632 12,705 21 15 94.1 71.4 14.4 ... ... ... ... 43 Tanjore do. ... ... 1,047,924 484 24 10,458 9,818 20,276 844 19,824 4,216 10,840 18,414 452 309 92.8 66.1 17.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,929,311 531 37 17,556 16,238 33,794 913 33,321 6,340 9,472 31,119 473 324 93.3 68.5 16.2 41,642 21.5 1,261 0.6
20 APPEXD1X. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 21 1 Municipalities. Adóni ... ... ... ... 22,441 7,480 1 494 481 975 975 973 395 556 961 2 2 98.7 100.0 42.8 861 38.3 50 2.2 2 Anantapur ... ... ... 4,907 545 1 194 129 323 323 322 108 39 298 1 1 92.5 100.0 60.0 265 54.0 6 1.2 3 Anakápalle ... ... ... 13,341 1,112 1 290 108 398 398 241 57 133 222 157 106 92.1 67.5 24.5 745 55.7 36 2.7 4 Bellary ... ... ... 53,460 2,056 2 1,061 661 1,722 861 1,684 790 406 1,561 38 33 92.6 86.8 29.8 1,679 31.4 76 1.2 5 Berhampore ... ... ... 23,599 4,720 1 245 114 359 359 359 37 117 312 ... ... 86.9 ... 13.2 493 20.9 4 0.1 6 Bimlipatam ... ... ... 8,582 2,145 1 229 197 426 426 379 108 186 357 47 47 94.2 100.0 47.0 444 51.7 2 0.2 7 Calicut ... ... ... ... 57,085 4,391 3 2,271 659 2,930 976 2,930 277 908 2,459 ... ... 83.9 ... 43.0 2,638 46.2 215 3.7 8 Cannanore ... ... ... 26,386 6,596 2 915 639 1,554 777 1,554 375 789 1,490 ... ... 95.8 ... 56.4 1,531 58.0 .34 1.2 9 Chicacole ... ... ... 18,302 5,446 1 437 314 751 751 737 159 409 670 14 2 90.9 14.2 36.7 626 34.2 7 0.3 10 Chidambaram ... ... ... 19,837 9,918 1 436 346 782 782 782 175 486 757 ... ... 96.8 ... 38.1 803 40.4 31 1.0 11 Cochin ... ... ... ... 15,698 15,698 1 810 306 1,116 1,116 1,109 171 449 994 7 2 89.6 28.5 63.4 844 50.5 192 12.2 12 Cocanada ... ... ... 30,441 5,771 1 648 498 1,146 1,146 1,017 325 540 888 129 1 87.3 0.7 29.2 892 29.3 79 2.5 13 Coimbatore ... ... ... 38,967 12,989 2 534 435 969 484 969 425 437 934 ... ... 96.3 ... 23.9 1,169 29.9 138 3.5 14 Conjeeveram ... ... ... 37,275 4,142 1 555 412 967 967 953 292 435 914 14 7 95.8 50.0 24.7 1,307 35.0 37 0.9 15 Coonoor ... ... ... ... 4,778 531 1 85 72 157 157 141 23 63 101 16 7 71.6 43.7 22.6 354 74.8 2 0.4 16 Caddalore ... ... ... 43,545 3,629 2 669 547 1,216 608 1,216 185 675 1,092 ... ... 89.8 ... 25.0 1,038 23.8 14 0.3 17 Cuddapah ... ... ... 18,982 999 1 335 235 570 570 565 88 301 500 5 4 88.4 80.0 26.5 321 16.9 15 0.8 18 Dindigul ... ... ... 14,182 7,091 1 395 235 630 630 501 103 339 453 129 101 90.4 78.3 39.0 1,908 134.5 22 1.5 19 Ellore ... ... ... ... 25,092 2,788 2 452 433 885 885 879 79 619 844 6 4 96.0 66.6 33.7 459 18.2 71 2.8 20 Erode ... ... ... ... 9,864 897 1 291 202 493 493 493 271 184 482 ... ... 97.7 ... 48.8 593 60.1 12 1.2 21 Gudiyátam ... ... ... 16,690 ... 1 151 132 283 283 282 66 186 261 1 1 92.5 100.0 15.6 ... ... ... ... 22 Guntúr ... ... ... ... 19,646 1,691 1 111 70 181 181 178 17 69 109 3 2 61.2 66.6 5.6 399 20.2 27 1.3 23 Karúr ... ... ... ... 9,205 2,301 1 239 185 424 424 424 240 118 400 ... ... 94.3 ... 43.4 436 47.3 4 0.4 24 Kumbakónam ... ... ... 50,098 16,699 2 659 738 1,397 698 1,397 479 650 1,333 ... ... 95.4 ... 26.6 1,629 32.5 40 0.7 25 Kurnool ... ... ... 20,329 4,066 2 355 294 649 324 601 127 359 537 48 48 89.3 100.0 28.7 587 28.9 21 1.0 26 Madras ... ... ... 405,848 15,031 24 11,050 8,987 20,037 835 18,523 13,407 3,460 17,947 1,514 1,223 96.8 80.7 47.2 34,015 83.8 1,281 3.1 27 Madura ... ... ... 76,847 18,452 3 1,726 1,358 3,084 1,028 3,084 1,724 1,142 3,003 ... ... 97.3 ... 39.0 2,841 36.9 100 1.3 28 Mannárgudi ... ... ... 19,409 4,852 1 241 208 449 449 449 33 328 429 ... ... 95.5 ... 22.1 544 28.0 17 0.8 29 Mangalore ... ... ... 32,099 3,567 2 2,140 2,022 4,162 2,081 3,872 976 1,892 3,731 290 252 96.3 86.8 124.0 2,235 69.6 24 0.7 30 Masulipatam ... ... ... 35,056 8,764 1 726 348 1,074 1,074 1,055 78 587 966 19 11 91.5 58.0 27.2 1,009 28.7 26 0.7 31 Máyavaram ... ... ... 23,044 7,681 1 376 329 705 705 701 201 407 666 4 4 95.0 100.0 29.0 960 41.6 33 1.4 32 Negapatam ... ... ... 53,776 7,693 2 1,073 1,088 2,161 1,080 2,139 604 1,189 1,996 22 6 93.3 27.3 37.2 1,448 26.9 81 1.5 33 Nellore ... ... ... ... 27,505 1,100 1 457 364 821 821 777 91 453 733 44 34 94.3 77.2 27.8 688 25.0 31 1.1 34 Ongole ... ... ... 9,200 2,300 1 191 177 368 368 368 39 185 268 ... ... 72.8 ... 29.1 326 35.4 16 1.7 35 Ootacamund ... ... ... 12,335 1,121 1 259 247 506 506 490 59 332 434 16 16 88.5 100.0 36.4 610 49.4 9 0.7 36 Palamcottah ... ... ... 17,964 17,964 1 560 365 925 925 840 261 844 798 85 65 95.0 76.4 48.0 674 37.5 24 1.3 37 Pálghat ... ... ... 36,339 4,037 2 1,122 867 1,989 995 1,983 52 824 1,816 6 5 91.5 83.3 50.1 1,483 40.8 73 2.0 38 Parlákimedi ... ... ... 15,365 ... 1 409 292 701 701 696 143 333 613 5 ... 88.0 ... 39.8 ... ... ... ... 39 Periyakulam ... ... ... 16,446 ... 1 199 170 369 369 359 157 189 354 10 8 98.3 80.0 22.0 ... ... ... ... 40 Pálni ... ... ... ... 13,315 ... 1 312 273 585 585 551 167 335 537 34 30 97.4 88.2 50.0 ... ... ... ... 41 Rajahmundry ... ... ... 24,555 2,046 2 918 686 1,604 802 1,604 377 935 1,548 ... ... 96.5 ... 63.0 1,046 42.1 63 2.5 42 Salem ... ... ... ... 59,631 16,889 4 1,040 917 1,957 489 1,957 573 1,180 1,819 ... ... 92.9 ... 30.5 1,389 23.2 84 1.4 43 Srírangam ... ... ... ... 19,773 2,825 1 138 91 229 229 229 23 135 215 ... ... 93.8 ... 10.8 435 22.0 29 1.4 44 Tanjore ... ... ... 54,745 6,843 3 856 393 1,249 416 1,167 194 504 1,084 82 51 92.8 62.2 20.7 1,871 34.0 67 1.2 45 Tellicherry ... ... ... 24,581 6,602 3 1,261 930 2,191 730 2,009 277 972 1,729 182 182 86.0 100.0 77.7 1,997 81.2 46 1.8 46 Tinnevelly ... ... ... 23,221 23,221 1 486 284 770 770 770 235 405 759 ... ... 98.5 ... 32.6 807 34.7 32 1.3 47 Trichinopoly ... ... ... 84,449 8,445 6 1,872 1,246 3,118 519 3,004 804 1,633 2,879 114 88 95.8 77.2 35.1 3,157 37.3 144 1.7 48 Tirupatúr ... ... ... 14,278 ... 1 179 136 315 315 305 56 180 297 10 10 92.3 100.0 21.5 ... ... ... ... 49 Tirupati ... ... ... 13,232 ... 1 61 52 113 113 110 48 46 102 3 3 92.7 100.0 7.9 ... ... ... ... 50 Tuticorin ... ... ... 16,281 5,427 1 417 226 643 643 599 126 256 484 44 40 80.8 90.9 32.1 489 30.0 20 1.2 51 Vaniyambádi ... ... ... 15,933 ... 1 161 121 282 282 282 115 153 277 ... ... 98.2 ... 17.3 ... ... ... ... 52 Vellore ... ... ... ... 37,491 9,373 2 746 647 1,393 697 1,361 586 609 1,319 32 17 96.9 53.1 35.6 1,248 33.2 26 0.7 53 Vizagapatam ... ... ... 30,291 10,097 1 989 500 1,489 1,489 884 247 366 850 605 423 96.1 69.9 32.0 1,543 50.9 79 2.6 54 Vizianagrum ... ... ... 22,577 4,515 1 374 811 685 685 598 154 275 584 87 78 97.3 89.6 29.3 894 39.5 21 0.9 55 Wálajápet ... ... ... 10,387 10,387 1 160 98 258 258 258 89 118 239 ... ... 92.6 ... 23.0 217 20.8 21 1.0 Total of municipalities ... 1,848,705 4,872 106 43,360 32,175 75,535 712 71,710 17,358 29,220 67,405 3,825 2,914 93.9 76.1 38.0 83,947 45.4 3,482 1.8 Grand Total ... 30,868,504 225 780 399,401 324,905 724,306 22 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 23 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the official year 1887-88. Paid from Total. Number of all successful vaccinations and revacci- nations. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 1,694 3 5 ... ... 1,694 3 5 ... ... 1,694 3 5 5,357 0 5 0 2,076 8 6 ... ... 2,076 8 6 ... ... 2,076 8 6 8,911 0 3 8 3,770 11 11 ... ... 3,770 11 11 ... ... 3,770 11 11 14,268 0 4 2 4,103 10 6 ... ... 4,103 10 6 ... ... 4,103 10 6 13,808 0 4 9 2,330 2 3 ... ... 2,330 2 3 ... ... 2,330 2 3 7,448 0 5 0 6,433 12 9 ... ... 6,433 12 9 ... ... 6,433 12 9 21,256 0 4 10 3,576 12 10 ... ... 3,576 12 10 ... ... 3,576 12 10 16,039 0 3 6 2,776 0 5 ... ... 2,776 0 5 ... ... 2,776 0 5 10,942 0 4 1 6,352 13 3 ... ... 6,352 13 3 ... ... 6,352 13 3 26,981 0 3 9 4,581 8 3 ... ... 4,581 8 3 ... ... 4,581 8 3 23,907 0 3 1 4,197 3 2 ... ... 4,197 3 2 ... ... 4,197 3 2 28,217 0 2 4 8,778 11 5 ... ... 8,778 11 5 ... ... 8,778 11 5 52,124 0 2 8 2,950 10 11 ... ... 2,950 10 11 ... ... 2,950 10 11 4,066 0 11 7 2,999 15 6 ... ... 2,999 15 6 ... ... 2,999 15 6 4,032 0 11 10 2,353 1 6 ... ... 2,353 1 6 ... ... 2,353 1 6 4,671 0 8 1 8,303 11 11 ... ... 8,303 11 11 ... ... 8,303 11 11 12,769 0 10 4 3,963 8 5 ... 15 8 7 3,947 15 10 ... ... 3,963 8 5 14,242 0 4 5 2,406 1 8 ... ... 2,406 1 8 ... ... 2,406 1 8 12,110 0 3 2 2,012 4 7 ... 2,012 4 7 ... ... ... 2,012 4 7 5,895 0 5 6 8,381 14 8 ... 2,027 13 2 6,354 1 6 ... ... 8,381 14 8 32,247 0 4 10 3,127 1 9 ... ... 3,127 1 9 ... ... 3,127 1 9 8,389 0 5 11 2,499 2 3 ... ... 2,499 2 3 ... ... 2,499 2 3 7,762 0 5 2 3,119 14 8 ... ... 3,119 14 8 ... ... 3,119 14 8 8,376 0 5 11 633 12 10 ... 633 12 10 ... ... ... 633 12 10 593 1 1 1 9,379 15 6 ... 633 12 10 8,746 2 8 ... ... 9,379 15 6 25,120 0 5 11 2,771 11 6 ... 24 14 0 2,746 13 6 ... ... 2,771 11 6 3,238 0 13 8 3,512 7 3 ... ... 3,512 7 3 ... ... 3,512 7 3 6,064 0 9 3 1,820 3 5 ... ... 1,820 3 5 ... ... 1,820 3 5 2,133 0 13 7 8,104 6 2 ... 24 14 0 8,079 8 2 ... ... 8,104 6 2 11,435 0 11 4 2,163 15 0 ... ... 2,163 15 0 ... ... 2,163 15 0 3,661 0 9 1 3,319 13 10 ... ... 3,319 13 10 ... ... 3,319 13 10 9,619 0 5 2 5,483 12 10 ... ... 5,483 12 10 ... ... 5,483 12 10 13,280 0 6 7 ... ... 13,761 15 0 ... ... ... 13,761 15 0 ... ... 13,761 15 0 ... 13,761 15 0 ... ... ... 13,761 15 0 ... ... 3,074 8 8 ... ... 3,074 8 8 ... ... 3,074 8 8 15,449 0 3 2 2,101 1 3 ... ... 2,101 1 3 ... ... 2,101 1 3 10,535 0 3 2 3,742 13 7 ... ... 3,742 13 7 ... ... 3,742 13 7 19,488 0 3 1 8,918 7 6 ... ... 8,918 7 6 ... ... 8,918 7 6 45,472 0 3 1 2,812 7 6 ... ... 2,812 7 6 ... ... 2,812 7 6 15,522 0 2 10 4,033 5 2 ... ... 4,033 5 2 ... ... 4,033 5 2 26,395 0 2 5 6,845 12 8 ... ... 6,845 12 8 ... ... 6,845 12 8 41,917 0 2 7
24 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 25 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1887-8826 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 27 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1887-8828 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 29 B30 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 31 B32 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 33 B34 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 35 COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned years. Establishment. Persons primarily vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887-88. Government vaccinators * ... ... 10,194 9,663 9,136 8,741 16,887 16,319 12,386 12,033 9,970 9,701 8,511 8,204 9,741 9,479 Local fund do. ... ... 470,605 435,696 526,329 493,415 591,352 553,890 617,475 580,624 608,729 579,261 584,711 557,732 618,588 590,853 Cantonment do. ... ... 5,213 4,941 3,446 3,207 3,734 3,461 3,434 3,159 2,462 2,295 2,850 2,677 3,375 3,293 Native States do. ... ... 3,635 3,286 3,838 3,652 4,751 4,436 4,506 4,291 4,082 3,915 4,429 4,216 4,042 3,885 Municipalities ... ... ... ... 80,286 70,980 83,533 75,950 91,665 84,452 97,765 88,281 92,946 87,968 70,065 65,614 71,710 67,405 Private vaccinators ... ... ... 137 117 45 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... ... ... 9,890 8,193 10,154 8,371 12,579 10,185 21,561 17,201 22,834 18,793 16,790 13,954 13,736 11,506 Medical Subordinates ... ... ... 9,646 5,742 10,049 7,015 9,633 6,271 8,936 5,280 7,549 4,594 6,720 3,677 3,033 1,630 Army European ... ... ... 1,916 1,382 1,987 1,357 1,940 1,158 2,840 1,737 691 597 875 694 ... ... Native ... ... ... 4,372 3,093 4,414 3,374 4,121 3,212 4,415 3,655 2,784 2,288 2,297 1,987 ... ... Total ... 595,894 543,093 652,931 605,125 736,662 683,384 773,118 716,261 752,047 709,412 697,248 658,755 724,225 688,051 * Work done by vaccinators employed in the Hill Tracts of Ganjam, Jeypore, Gudem and Bhadráchalam.
36 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 37 12 Ganjam. Chatrapur circle ... 906,219 456 20 2,106 1,564 3,670 183 3,667 218 2,657 3,645 3 2 99.4 66.6 4.0 ... ... ... ... 13 Chicacole do. ... 539,816 469 11 1,827 1,693 3,520 318 3,520 273 2,405 3,485 ... ... 99.0 ... 6.4 ... ... ... ... 14 Ganjam H. T. ... ... 246,303 47 6 688 661 1,349 224 1,349 67 470 1,294 ... ... 95.9 ... 5.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,692,338 202 37 4,621 3,918 8,539 291 8,536 558 5,532 8,424 3 2 98.6 66.6 4.3 ... ... ... ... 15 Godávari. Ellore circle ... ... 580,485 230 17 1,169 895 2,064 121 2,064 146 1,082 1,977 ... ... 95.7 ... 3.4 ... ... ... ... 16 Pithápuram circle ... 329,653 264 10 1,096 916 2,012 201 2,010 167 1,214 1,940 2 ... 96.5 ... 5.8 ... ... ... ... 17 Rajahmundry do. ... 790,387 290 16 1,288 1,123 2,411 151 2,404 296 1,141 2,150 7 7 89.4 100.0 2.8 ... ... ... ... Government vaccinators (Bhadráchalam) ... 2 93 55 148 74 148 33 91 119 ... ... 80.4 ... Total of district ... 1,700,525 296 45 3,646 2,989 6,635 147 6,626 642 3,528 6,186 9 7 93.3 77.7 3.6 ... ... ... ... 18 Kistna. Guntúr circle ... ... 562,803 223 12 795 600 1,395 116 1,395 95 660 1,239 ... ... 88.8 ... 2.2 ... ... ... ... 19 Masulipatam circle ... 609,408 174 18 1,064 722 1,786 99 1,752 103 854 1,452 34 11 82.8 32.3 2.4 ... ... ... ... 20 Vinukonda do. ... 321,567 132 8 389 342 731 91 731 75 461 687 ... ... 93.9 ... 2.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,493,778 176 38 2,248 1,664 3,912 103 3,878 273 1,975 3,378 34 11 87.1 32.3 2.2 ... ... ... ... 21 Kurnool. Cumbum circle ... ... 323,837 79 8 477 418 895 111 895 99 488 812 ... ... 90.7 ... 2.5 ... ... ... ... 22 Kurnool do. ... ... 334,385 97 13 1,412 853 2,265 174 2,166 567 1,043 1,944 99 98 89.7 98.9 6.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 658,222 89 21 1,889 1,271 3,160 150 3,061 666 1,531 2,756 99 98 90.0 98.9 4.3 ... ... ... ... 23 Madura. Dindigul circle ... ... 664,478 211 14 2,135 1,939 4,074 291 4,039 1,603 2,112 3,924 35 30 97.1 85.7 5.9 ... ... ... ... 24 Madura do. ... ... 498,398 314 10 1,362 1,304 2,666 266 2,659 742 1,562 2,533 7 3 95.2 42.8 5.0 ... ... ... ... 25 Permagudi do. ... ... 885,014 241 18 2,727 2,441 5,168 287 5,033 1,114 2,885 4,813 135 90 95.6 66.6 5.5 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,047,890 244 42 6,224 5,684 11,908 283 11,731 3,459 6,559 11,270 177 123 96.0 69.4 5.5 ... ... ... ... 26 Malabar. North Malabar circle ... 736,592 279 12 3,417 2,246 5,663 472 5,652 135 1,924 5,509 11 10 97.4 90.9 7.4 ... ... ... ... 27 South do. do. ... 1,468,354 474 20 5,040 1,792 6,832 341 6,832 94 1,510 6,334 ... ... 92.7 ... 4.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,204,946 384 32 8,457 4,038 12,495 390 12,484 239 3,434 11,843 11 10 94.8 90.9 5.3 ... ... ... ... 28 Nellore. Kávali circle ... ... 373,748 132 9 1,289 1,300 2,589 287 2,531 164 1,618 2,448 58 38 96.7 65.5 6.6 ... ... ... ... 29 Nellore do. ... ... 397,873 137 11 1,098 1,023 2,121 193 2,116 157 1,416 1,978 5 2 93.4 40.0 4.9 ... ... ... ... 30 Ongole do. ... ... 411,910 138 9 1,068 1,037 2,105 234 2,096 209 1,384 1,973 9 8 94.1 88.8 4.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,183,531 136 29 3,455 3,360 6,815 235 6,743 530 4,418 6,399 72 48 94.8 66.6 5.4 ... ... ... ... 31 Níl- giri. Nílgiri district ... ... 73,921 79 3 276 162 438 146 408 26 149 339 30 25 83.0 83.3 4.9 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 73,921 79 3 276 162 438 146 408 26 149 339 30 25 83.0 83.3 4.9 ... ... ... ... 32 North Arcot. Chittoor circle ... ... 657,795 232 15 1,878 1,769 3,647 242 3,646 1,024 2,239 3,592 1 1 98.5 100.0 5.4 ... ... ... ... 33 Kárvetnaggar circle ... 473,771 206 9 1,184 984 2,168 240 2,165 412 1,302 2,134 3 2 98.5 66.6 4.5 ... ... ... ... 34 Vellore circle ... ... 608,448 308 11 1,287 1,190 2,477 225 2,473 328 1,663 2,362 4 4 95.5 100.0 4.2 ... ... ... ... Zemindary vaccinators ... 1 130 110 240 240 240 14 167 226 ... ... 94.1 ... Total of district ... 1,740,014 244 36 4,479 4,053 8,532 237 8,524 1,778 5,371 8,314 8 7 97.5 87.5 4.7 ... ... ... ... 10
38 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 39 47 Trichino- poly. Trichinopoly circle ... 1,110,811 313 19 2,825 2,661 5,486 288 5,483 900 3,500 5,335 3 1 97.3 33.3 4.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district... 1,110,811 313 19 2,825 2,661 5,486 288 5,483 900 3,500 5,335 3 1 97.3 33.3 4.8 ... ... ... ... 48 Vizagapatam. Jeypore hill tracts ... 694,673 50 6 379 265 644 107 644 17 315 633 ... ... 98.2 ... 1.9 ... ... ... ... Zemindary vaccinators ... 8 442 259 701 87 701 6 212 698 ... ... 99.5 ... ... ... ... ... Total of hill tracts ... 694,673 50 14 821 524 1,345 96 1,345 23 527 1,331 ... ... 98.9 ... 1.9 ... ... ... ... 49 Vizagapatam circle ... 803,291 456 16 2,140 1,851 3,991 249 3,900 379 2,420 3,777 91 66 96.8 72.5 5.0 ... ... ... ... Government vaccinators (Gudem Hills) ... ... 2 111 92 203 101 203 5 107 203 ... ... 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... 50 Vizianagrum circle ... 912,386 539 16 2,018 1,879 3,897 237 3,871 410 2,428 3,785 26 23 97.7 88.4 4.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,410,350 245 48 5,090 4,346 9,436 196 9,319 794 4,955 9,096 117 89 97.6 76.0 3.8 ... ... ... ... Grand Total of district ... 28,967,614 245 656 90,874 76,219 167,093 255 165,082 28,806 91,156 157,484 2,011 787 95.3 39.1 5.4 ... ... ... ... 1 Cantonment. Bangalore cantonment ... 79,487 ... 2 233 165 398 199 358 283 59 342 40 30 95.5 75.0 4.6 ... ... ... ... 2 Secunderabad do. ... 52,000 ... 4 937 641 1,578 394 1,542 665 259 924 36 30 92.1 83.3 18.3 ... ... ... ... Total of Cantonment... 131,487 ... 6 1,170 806 1,976 329 1,900 948 318 1,266 76 60 66.5 78.9 9.6 ... ... ... ... Medical subordinates ... ... ... ... 1,113 102 1,215 ... 905 24 54 550 310 134 60.7 43.2 ... ... ... ... ... Total of Medical subordi- nates ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,113 102 1,215 ... 905 24 54 550 310 134 60.7 43.2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Municipalities. Adóni ... ... ... 22,441 7,480 1 105 100 205 205 205 85 109 202 ... ... 98.5 ... 9.0 ... ... ... ... 2 Anantapur ... ... 4,907 545 1 26 22 48 48 47 18 16 38 1 ... 80.8 ... 7.7 ... ... ... ... 3 Anakápalle ... ... ... 13,341 1,112 1 46 25 71 71 52 20 23 51 19 15 98.0 78.9 4.9 ... ... ... ... 4 Bellary ... ... ... 53,460 2,056 2 376 298 674 337 674 403 192 642 ... ... 95.2 ... 12.0 ... ... ... ... 5 Berhampore ... ... ... 23,599 4,720 1 3 7 10 10 10 1 ... 1 ... ... 10.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Bimlipatam ... ... 8,582 2,145 1 40 40 80 80 73 23 37 72 7 7 98.6 100.0 9.2 ... ... ... ... 7 Calicut ... ... ... 57,085 4,391 3 542 136 678 226 678 22 116 503 ... ... 74.1 ... 8.8 ... ... ... ... 8 Cannanore ... ... 26,386 6,596 2 249 201 450 225 450 115 185 420 ... ... 93.3 ... 15.9 ... ... ... ... 9 Chicacole ... ... ... 18,302 5,446 1 122 76 198 198 198 55 86 183 ... ... 92.4 ... 9.9 ... ... ... ... 10 Chidambaram ... ... 19,837 9,918 1 112 84 196 196 196 50 129 191 ... ... 97.4 ... 9.6 ... ... ... ... 11 Cochin ... ... ... 15,698 15,698 1 185 86 271 271 270 50 113 247 1 ... 91.4 ... 15.7 ... ... ... ... 12 Cocanada ... ... ... 30,441 5,771 1 130 121 251 251 219 53 132 195 32 3 89.0 9.4 6.5 ... ... ... ... 13 Coimbatore ... ... 38,967 12,989 2 166 129 295 147 295 133 133 279 ... ... 94.5 ... 7.1 ... ... ... ... 14 Conjeeveram ... ... 37,275 4,142 1 216 173 389 389 386 133 177 371 3 3 96.1 100.0 10.0 ... ... ... ... 15 Coonoor ... ... ... 4,778 531 1 37 28 65 65 52 9 40 59 13 7 90.7 53.9 13.8 ... ... ... ... 16 Cuddalore ... ... ... 43,545 3,629 1 115 98 213 213 213 32 145 200 ... ... 93.8 ... 4.5 ... ... ... ... 17 Cuddapah ... ... ... 18,982 999 1 55 43 98 98 98 14 51 78 ... ... 79.5 ... 4.1 ... ... ... ... 18 Dindigul ... ... ... 14,182 7,091 1 86 57 143 143 101 17 72 94 42 40 93.0 95.2 9.4 ... ... ... ... 19 Ellore ... ... ... 25,092 2,788 1 107 74 181 181 181 2 123 168 ... ... 92.8 ... 6.6 ... ... ... ... 20 Erode ... ... ... 9,864 897 1 70 56 126 126 126 40 70 120 ... ... 95.2 ... 12.1 ... ... ... ... 21 Gudiyátam ... ... 16,690 ... 1 53 41 94 94 92 15 60 81 2 2 88.0 100.0 4.9 ... ... ... ... 22 Guntúr ... ... ... 19,646 1,691 1 37 14 51 51 50 ... 12 20 1 ... 40.0 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ...
40 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 41 50 Tuticorin ... ... ... 16,281 5,427 1 91 31 122 122 122 25 50 101 ... 1 82.7 ... 6.2 ... ... ... ... 51 Vániyambádi ... ... 15,933 ... 1 39 38 77 77 77 31 39 75 ... ... 97.4 ... 4.7 ... ... ... ... 52 Vellore ... ... ... 37,491 9,373 2 167 133 300 150 300 90 164 294 ... ... 98.0 ... 7.8 ... ... ... ... 53 Vizagapatam ... ... 30,291 10,097 1 162 133 295 295 238 67 128 234 57 34 98.3 59.6 8.8 ... ... ... ... 54 Vizianagrum ... ... 22,577 4,515 1 95 67 162 162 155 42 58 153 7 7 98.7 100.0 7.0 ... ... ... ... 55 Wálajápet ... ... ... 10,387 10,387 1 29 20 49 49 49 20 21 45 ... ... 91.8 ... 4.3 ... ... ... ... Total of Municipalties ... 1,848,705 4,872 101 10,261 7,751 18,012 178 17,360 6,558 7,117 16,183 652 463 93.2 71.0 9.0 ... ... ... ... Grand Total ... 30,868,504 225 763 103,418 84,878 188,296 246 185,247 36,336 98,645 175,483 3,049 1,444 94.7 47.3 5.7 ... ... ... ... 11
42 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 43 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the first three months of 1887. Paid from Total. Number of all successful vaccinations and revacci- nations. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 410 5 1 ... ... 410 5 1 ... ... 410 5 1 1,433 0 4 7 520 5 0 ... ... 520 5 0 ... ... 520 5 0 2,080 0 4 0 930 10 1 ... ... 930 10 1 ... ... 930 10 1 3,513 0 4 2 1,048 14 7 ... ... 1,048 14 7 ... ... 1,048 14 7 3,581 0 4 8 469 12 11 ... ... 469 12 11 ... ... 469 12 11 2,021 0 3 8 1,518 11 6 ... ... 1,518 11 6 ... ... 1,518 11 6 5,602 0 4 6 774 5 1 ... ... 774 5 1 ... ... 774 5 1 4,718 0 2 7 639 5 11 ... ... 639 5 11 ... ... 639 5 11 3,069 0 3 4 1,413 11 0 ... ... 1,413 11 0 ... ... 1,413 11 0 7,787 0 2 10 866 6 9 ... ... 866 6 9 ... ... 866 6 9 6,725 0 2 1 996 11 9 ... ... 996 11 9 ... ... 996 11 9 6,225 0 2 6 1,863 2 6 ... ... 1,863 2 6 ... ... 1,863 2 6 12,950 0 2 3 603 3 6 ... ... 603 3 6 ... ... 603 3 6 1,073 0 8 11 626 12 5 ... ... 626 12 5 ... ... 626 12 5 1,453 0 6 11 443 0 5 ... ... 443 0 5 ... ... 443 0 5 852 0 8 4 1,673 0 4 ... ... 1,673 0 4 ... ... 1,673 0 4 3,378 0 7 10 1,037 15 3 ... 36 5 3 1,001 10 0 ... ... 1,037 15 3 3,647 0 4 7 641 12 10 ... ... 641 12 10 ... ... 641 12 10 3,485 0 2 7 559 9 0 ... 559 9 0 ... ... ... 559 9 0 1,294 0 6 10 2,239 5 1 ... 595 14 3 1,643 6 10 ... ... 2,239 5 1 8,426 0 4 3 728 12 1 ... ... 728 12 1 ... ... 728 12 1 1,977 0 5 10 568 8 9 ... ... 568 8 9 ... ... 568 8 9 1,940 0 4 8 898 11 11 ... ... 898 11 11 ... ... 898 11 11 2,157 0 6 8 126 2 0 ... 126 2 0 ... ... ... 126 2 0 119 1 0 11 2,322 2 9 ... 126 2 0 2,196 0 9 ... ... 2,322 2 9 6,193 0 5 11 575 10 1 ... ... 575 10 1 ... ... 575 10 1 1,239 0 7 5 922 4 6 ... ... 922 4 6 ... ... 922 4 6 1,463 0 10 1 413 15 9 ... ... 413 15 9 ... ... 413 15 9 687 0 9 7 1,911 14 4 ... ... 1,911 14 4 ... ... 1,911 14 4 3,389 0 9 0 357 7 11 ... ... 357 7 11 ... ... 357 7 11 812 0 7 0 788 6 3 ... ... 788 6 3 ... ... 788 6 3 2,042 0 6 2 1,145 14 2 ... ... 1,145 14 2 ... ... 1,145 14 2 2,854 0 6 5 768 11 10 ... ... 768 11 10 ... ... 768 11 10 3,954 0 3 1 553 13 11 ... ... 553 13 11 ... ... 553 13 11 2,536 0 3 6 859 0 8 ... ... 859 0 8 ... ... 859 0 8 4,903 0 2 10 2,181 10 5 ... ... 2,181 10 5 ... ... 2,181 10 5 11,393 0 3 0 580 6 6 ... ... 580 6 6 ... ... 580 6 6 5,519 0 1 7 1,015 14 11 ... ... 1,015 14 11 ... ... 1,015 14 11 6,334 0 2 6 1,596 5 5 ... ... 1,596 5 5 ... ... 1,596 5 5 11,853 0 2 1 2,158 1 10 ... 2,158 1 10 ... ... ... 2,158 1 10 ... ... 2,158 1 10 ... 2,158 1 10 ... ... ... 2,158 1 10 ... ...
44 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 45 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the first three months of 188746 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 47 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the first three months of 188748 APPENDIX. B( 49 ) GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. PUBLIC DEPARTMENT. READ( 50 ) These bad results have been already commented on in reviewing the adminis- tration reports of the individual Municipalities, and the matter will be further dealt with in the Local and Municipal Department in the general review of Municipal operations throughout the Presidency. 4. The number of operations performed by medical officers in and out of dispensaries shows a lamentable decrease, and the work of these officers has also been very unsatisfactory in regard to the percentage of successful cases. Of the operations performed inside dispensaries, only 82.6 were successful, while of those by medical officers outside, no less than 51.7 per cent. were failures. The special attention of the Surgeon-General is drawn to these figures. He will instruct District Surgeons to see that their subordinates perform more operations and do their work in a less perfunc- tory manner. Attention should also be given to the quality of the lymph supplied, which has, no doubt, much to do with the poor results obtained. It must be clearly understood that the existence of a separate vaccine staff does not in any way relieve medical officers of the duty of assisting the spread of vaccination by every means in their power. 5. The Government regret to notice that the number of cases inspected by 1st class Deputy Inspectors was on the whole only 48 per cent. of the number of opera- tions in their ranges. The inspection work was particularly bad in the Chingleput, Permagudi, South Malabar, Námakal, Salem, South Canara I, and Jeypore ranges. The attention of the Sanitary Commissioner is drawn to the remarks made on this point in paragraph 11, G.O., 11th January 1888, No. 26, and he is requested to report how far he has punished Deputy Inspectors who failed to verify 50 per cent. of the operations in their ranges. 6. Animal vaccination was carried on in the districts of Bellary, Cuddapah, Kurnool, Godávari, Vizagapatam, Salem, South Arcot, and Tanjore. 13,587 operations were performed in this manner, but the percentage of successful cases was only 86.4. The average cost per successful case was, however, only 2 annas 4 pies against 4 annas 1 pie for operations generally. 7. The Government cannot characterize the work of the year as satisfactory, though on some points it shows improvement over the results of 1886. If the officials, and members of the various Boards and Councils concerned, took a personal interest in the matter, much more could be done even with the existing staff, and His Excellency the Governor in Council looks to those whose influence is of value in the cause of vaccination to use it to the utmost. (True Extract.) J. F. PRICE, Chief Secretary.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1888-89. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS 1889. [PRICE, 9 annas.]
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1888-89. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS 1889.
MADRAS, 2nd August 1889. No. 617. From SURGEON-MAJOR C. J. MCNALLY, M.D., Acting Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER FOR MADRAS. SIR, I HAVE the honor to submit statistical returns and brief notes on Vaccination in the Madras Presidency for the official year 1888-89. 2. Surgeon D. F. Dymott, who was in charge of the office throughout the year, visited the districts of Tanjore, Madura, Tinnevelly, Trichinopoly, Salem, Chingleput, South Arcot and North Arcot, and inspected the towns of Tanjore, Máyavaram, Kumbakónam, Mannárgudi, Madura, Periyakulam, Palni, Dindigul, Tuticorin, Tinne- velly, Palamcottah, Trichinopoly, Srírangam, Salem, Conjeeveram, Cuddalore, Chi- dambaram, Vellore, Wálajápet, Gudiyátam and Tirupati. 3. The strength of the vaccine establishment consisted of 33 first and 23 second- class Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination, and 242 first and 427 second-class vaccinators and 128 probationers, showing an increase of 2 second-class Deputy Inspectors, 1 first and 8 second-class vaccinators and 8 probationers. 4. In the following table the work performed during 1888-89 is contrasted with that of the preceding year :4 VACCINATION REPORT. Establishments. Total number of persons vaccinated in 1888-89. Total successful of primary vaccinations in 1888-89. Ages successfully vaccinated in 1888-89. Total successful of re-vaccina- tions in 1888-89. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. 8 9 10 11 12 13 Government .. .. .. .. 17,104 16,210 1,241 6,079 8,890 18 Local Fund .. .. .. .. 676,293 643,761 125,572 371,283 146,906 4,944 Native States .. .. .. 2,270 2,160 163 1,460 537 .. Municipalities .. .. .. 85,572 77,180 32,564 32,846 11,770 3,199 Cantonment .. .. .. 4,972 3,912 2,404 1,508 .. 444 Civil dispensaries .. .. .. 18,827 15,603 2,686 9,634 3,283 275 Medical subordinates .. .. 4,379 1,517 45 247 1,225 518 Total .. 809,417 760,343 164,675 423,057 172,611 9,398 7. Of the total number vaccinated (primary and re-vaccinations) 809,417, or 95.0 per cent. proved successful, against 94.3 per cent. in 1887-88. The cost of each successful case was As. 3-11 against As. 4-1 in 1887-88. Primary vaccinations yielded a percentage of 95.4 success against 95.0 in the previous year and re-vaccina- tions 71.9 against 59.9. 8. Of the total primary successful vaccinations, 164,675 were among children under one year of age, 423,057 between one and under six years, and 172,611 above six years, against 148,895, 392,652 and 146,504, respectively, in 1887-88. 9. In the following table is shown the average number of operations performed by each man during the year contrasted with 1887-88 in the different establishments, and the statement subjoined shows the expenditure incurred by each and the average cost of each successful case :VACCINATION REPORT. 5 *The large number (4,162) vaccinated in 1887-88 in Mangalore was due to the preva- lence of small-pox in the town. cholera and absence of small-pox in North Arcot and South Canara and heavy rains and prevalence of cholera in Tinnevelly are the reasons assigned by the Deputy Inspectors for short work. The work done by municipal vaccinators, though greater than that of the preceding year, yet in some of the towns was far from satisfactory, notably so in Tirupati, Cocanada, Manga- lore,* Calicut, Rajahmundry, Tellicherry, and Vizianagrum, where the decrease in the number of operations, as compared with 1887-88, ranged between 65 per cent. in the first and 27 per cent. in the last- mentioned town. In four others, Cuddalore, Ongole, Parlákimedi and Ellore, the decrease was over 12 per cent. 11. The following table shows the comparative proportion of males and females vaccinated during 1888-89 by purely Local Fund agents contrasted with the previous year:6 VACCINATION REPORT. Districts. Population. 1887-88. 1888-89. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to popula- tion. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to popula- tion. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Anantapur .. .. .. .. .. 303,026 291,956 7,960 7,135 52.7 47.2 2.6 2.4 8,253 7,077 53.8 46.1 2.7 2.4 Bellary .. .. .. .. .. 335,567 325,339 11,152 10,550 51.3 48.6 3.3 3.2 11,521 10,932 51.3 48.7 3.4 3.3 Chingleput .. .. .. .. .. 474,520 469,586 17,915 14,567 55.4 44.8 3.7 3.1 20,155 18,548 52.0 47.9 4.2 3.9 Coimbatore .. .. .. .. .. 779,006 820,648 27,452 25,923 51.4 48.5 3.5 3.1 28,256 27,478 50.7 49.3 3.6 3.3 Cuddapah .. .. .. .. .. 560,394 541,662 7,448 6,362 53.9 46.0 1.3 1.1 12,158 10,565 53.5 46.5 2.2 1.9 Ganjam .. .. .. .. .. 850,604 859,046 14,530 12,109 54.5 45.4 2.0 1.7 18,352 14,978 55.0 44.1 2.1 1.7 Godávari .. .. .. .. .. 849,908 863,101 13,970 11,684 54.4 45.5 1.6 1.3 18,407 15,488 54.3 45.6 2.2 1.7 Kistna .. .. .. .. .. 753,987 739,791 7,582 5,726 56.9 43.0 1.0 0.7 8,043 6,179 56.5 43.4 1.6 0.8 Kurnool .. .. .. .. .. 349,717 339,259 8,439 6,061 58.2 41.8 2.4 1.7 12,612 9,229 57.7 42.2 3.6 2.7 Madura .. .. .. .. .. 988,443 1,092,248 24,759 22,091 52.8 47.1 2.5 2.0 26,122 23,494 52.6 47.3 2.6 2.1 Malabar .. .. .. .. .. 1,092,233 1,110,884 31,271 13,441 69.9 30.0 2.8 1.2 27,218 11,911 69.5 30.4 2.5 1.1 Nellore .. .. .. .. .. 597,353 586,178 14,164 13,321 51.5 48.4 2.3 2.2 12,554 11,790 51.5 48.4 2.1 2.0 Nílgiris .. .. .. .. .. 41,950 31,971 1,253 757 62.6 37.6 3.0 2.3 1,194 617 65.9 34.0 2.8 1.9 North Arcot .. .. .. .. .. 884,882 885,054 18,912 16,872 52.9 47.1 2.1 1.9 16,648 14,398 53.6 46.3 1.8 1.6 Salem .. .. .. .. .. .. 753,899 795,029 24,570 23,968 50.6 49.3 3.2 3.0 27,362 26,404 50.9 49.1 3.6 3.3 South Arcot .. .. .. .. .. 875,054 896,302 14,078 11,236 55.6 44.3 1.6 1.2 16,711 13,413 55.4 44.5 1.9 1.5 South Canara .. .. .. .. 455,697 471,718 20,427 16,538 55.2 44.7 4.4 3.5 19,949 16,730 54.3 45.6 4.3 3.5 Tanjore .. .. .. .. .. 930,826 998,406 17,556 16,238 51.9 48.0 1.8 1.6 23,343 20,789 52.8 47.1 2.5 2.1 Tinnevelly.. .. .. .. .. 797,821 844,460 27,810 22,539 55.2 44.7 3.4 2.6 27,020 21,942 55.1 44.8 3.4 2.6 Trichinopoly .. .. .. .. 535,854 574,957 10,759 10,076 51.6 48.3 2.0 1.7 12,993 11,993 52.0 47.9 2.4 2.1 Vizagapatam .. .. .. .. 1,217,939 1,192,411 19,491 17,103 53.2 46.7 1.8 1.6 18,038 15,429 53.9 46.1 1.4 1.3 Total .. 14,428,680 14,710,006 341,498 284,297 54.5 45.6 2.3 1.9 366,909 809,384 54.3 45.7 2.6 2.1
VACCINATION REPORT. 7 12. The following statements show the work done by Government Native States and Cantonment vaccinators compared with 1887-88 :8 VACCINATION REPORT. 13. The work done in dispensaries is given in the following table compared with 1887-88:VACCINATION REPORT. 9 were inspected by both first and second class Deputy Inspectors collectively. Sepa- rately they did 55.8 and 63.0 per cent. respectively. In some circles the work was not up to mark and notice will be taken of such deputies whose work fell below 50 per cent. The poor result in Chingleput is attributed to the Deputy Inspector having been engaged solely in conducting animal vaccination for eight months in the year without any inspection work:10 VACCINATION REPORT. 15. In the statements appended detailed particulars of the work done during the year are given. 16. Animal vaccination was conducted in ten districts (sixteen circles) and the results are shown in the following table. The total number thus vaccinated amounted to 42,445, of which 39,816 or 94 per cent. proved successful. Circle. Number of months animal vaccination was carried on. Number of calves inoculated. Total vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total cost. Average cost of each successful case. RS. A. P. RS. A P. Bellary .. 7 months .. .. 239 4,630 4,532 85 13 97.8 546 15 1 0 1 9 Harpanahalli .. 4 do. .. .. .. 57 998 983 6 9 98.5 107 10 6 0 1 9 Chingleput .. 8 do. .. .. .. 85 7,121 6,489 424 203 91.1 293 10 1 0 0 9 Saidápet .. 4 do. .. .. .. 56 3,520 3,203 158 159 90.9 147 7 5 0 0 9 Cumbum .. Whole year .. .. 70 4,447 4,259 149 39 95.8 362 7 0 0 1 4 Kurnool .. 9 months and 10 days .. 51 6,459 6,193 266 .. 95.8 284 14 11 0 0 9 Madura .. 4 do. .. .. 20 1,083 1,059 13 11 97.8 80 3 0 0 0 2 South Malabar .. 4 do. .. .. 25 96 92 4 .. 95.8 154 13 10 1 10 11 Nellore .. 3 do. and 11 days .. 22 846 835 10 1 98.6 100 0 0 0 1 11 Krishnagiri .. 2 do. and 23 do. .. 12 406 405 1 .. 99.7 42 3 4 0 1 8 Salem .. Whole year .. .. 62 2,147 1,812 177 158 84.3 193 6 7 0 1 8 Cuddalore .. 5 months .. .. 56 1,647 1,568 51 28 95.2 201 5 3 0 2 1 Vriddháchalam.. 2 do. .. .. 11 175 175 .. .. 100.0 73 12 7 0 6 9 Negapatam .. 6 do. .. .. 33 854 829 17 8 97.1 81 15 4 0 1 7 Tanjore .. Whole year .. .. 74 3,685 3,281 179 225 89.0 229 3 1 0 1 1 Vizagapatam .. Do. .. .. 66 4,331 4,101 182 48 94.6 447 9 11 0 1 9 Total .. 939 42,445 39,816 1,722 907 94.0 3,347 9 11 0 1 4 17. During the year vaccination was made compulsory in the towns of Masuli- patam, Srírangam, Dindigul, Guntúr and Coimbatore, raising the number to which the compulsory provisions of the Act are in force to 21. 18. Two first-class Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination were reduced to second class for general misconduct and unsatisfactory work, and two second-class Deputies promoted instead to first-class grade. Two vaccinators were promoted to second- class Deputy Inspectors (new appointments). Fines to the extent of Rs. 58 were inflicted on Deputy Inspectors for remissness in their duties. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, C. J. McNALLY, Surgeon-Major, M.D., Acting Inspector of Vaccination and Dy. Sanitary Commissioner, Madras. No. 1200. Forwarded to Government. 2. The progress of vaccination during the year under report may certainly be said to be satisfactory seeing that both the quantity and quality of the work turned out show an improvement. (Signed) J. A. LAING, Surgeon-Major, M.D., Sanitary Commissioner for Madras. OOTACAMUND, 5th August 1889.
APPENDIX. 4
VACCINATION RETURNS. 13 A14 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 15 24 Madura. Dindigul circle... ... ... 664,478 211 13 8,992 8,355 17,347 1,334 16,994 7,395 8,193 16,449 353 254 96.7 71.9 25.1 ... ... ... ... 25 Madura do. ... ... ... 498,398 314 10 6,294 5,449 11,743 1,174 11,741 3,622 6,909 11,478 2 1 97.7 50.0 23.0 ... ... ... ... 26 Permagudy do. ... ... ... 885,014 241 18 10,836 9,690 20,526 1,140 20,210 4,535 12,018 19,397 316 215 95.9 68.0 22.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,047,890 244 41 26,122 23,494 49,616 1,210 48,945 15,552 27,120 47,324 671 470 96.6 70.0 23.3 51,178 25.4 1,082 0.5 27 Malabar. North Malabar circle ... ... 736,592 279 12 9,486 4,828 14,314 1,192 14,235 285 4,876 13,453 79 59 94.0 74.6 18.3 ... ... ... ... 28 South do. do. ... ... 1,468,354 474 21 17,732 7,083 24,815 1,181 24,808 341 5,392 22,590 7 5 91.05 71.4 15.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,204,946 384 33 27,218 11,911 39,129 1,186 39,043 626 10,268 36,043 86 64 92.3 74.4 11.8 39,953 18.1 4,628 2.1 29 Nellore. Kávali circle ... ... ... 373,748 132 9 3,615 3,367 6,982 776 6,979 552 4,314 6,624 3 3 94.9 100.0 17.7 ... ... ... ... 30 Nellore do. ... ... ... 397,873 137 12 5,603 5,250 10,853 904 10,831 537 7,282 10,449 22 10 96.4 45.4 26.2 ... ... ... ... 31 Ongole do. ... ... ... 411,910 138 9 3,336 3,173 6,509 723 6,509 380 4,469 6,055 ... ... 92.9 ... 14.7 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,183,531 136 30 12,554 11,790 24,344 811 24,319 1,469 16,065 23,128 25 13 95.1 52.0 19.5 26,390 22.3 1,108 0.9 32 Nílgiri. Nilgiri circle ... ... ... 73,921 79 3 1,194 617 1,811 603 1,745 47 646 1,512 66 57 86.6 86.3 21.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 73,921 79 3 1,194 617 1,811 603 1,745 47 646 1,512 66 57 86.6 86.3 21.2 1,739 23.5 32 0.4 33 North Arcot. Chittoor circle ... ... ... 657,795 232 15 6,964 6,197 13,161 877 13,158 4,241 7,391 12,957 3 3 98.4 100.0 19.7 ... ... ... ... 34 Karvetnagar circle ... ... 473,771 206 9 4,171 3,656 7,827 869 7,823 1,433 4,830 7,654 4 4 97.8 100.0 16.2 ... ... ... ... 35 Vellore do. ... ... 608,448 308 11 5,513 4,545 10,058 914 10,031 969 732 9,452 27 23 94.2 85.1 16.8 ... ... ... ... Zemindary vaccinators ... 1 418 410 828 828 828 43 569 785 ... ... 94.8 ... Total of district ... 1,740,014 244 36 17,066 14,808 31,874 885 31,840 6,686 13,522 30,848 34 30 96.9 88.2 17.7 39,253 22.5 2,489 1.4 36 Salem. Krishnagiri circle ... ... 392,465 150 15 8,166 8,080 16,246 955 16,172 7,317 7,625 15,850 74 74 97.9 100.0 40.6 ... ... ... ... 37 Salem do. ... ... 512,829 179 16 9,261 8,778 18,039 1,127 17,932 3,908 11,323 17,294 107 56 96.4 52.3 33.8 ... ... ... ... 38 Namakal do. ... ... 604,459 285 16 9,935 9,546 19,481 1,218 19,451 2,584 13,516 18,874 30 28 97.1 93.3 31.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,509,753 202 47 27,362 26,404 53,766 1,144 53,555 13,809 32,464 52,018 211 158 97.1 74.9 34.5 36,741 24.3 1,221 0.8 39 South Arcot. Cuddalore circle ... ... 1,122,846 340 17 10,625 8,819 19,444 1,143 19,444 2,085 12,240 18,409 ... ... 94.6 ... 16.4 ... ... ... ... 40 Vriddháchalam circle ... ... 628,510 401 12 6,086 4,594 10,680 890 10,671 1,461 6,699 10,119 9 9 94.7 100.0 16.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,751,356 360 29 16,711 13,413 30,124 1,039 30,115 3,546 18,939 28,528 9 9 94.7 100.0 16.3 24,137 13.8 2,653 1.5 41 South Canara. No. I. South Canara circle ... 573,167 300 14 11,410 9,965 21,375 1,526 20,575 1,066 8,286 19,621 800 600 95.3 75.0 35.3 ... ... ... ... 42 No. II. do. do. ... 354,248 178 10 8,539 6,765 15,304 1,530 15,244 887 4,511 14,626 60 33 95.9 55.0 41.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district... 927,415 238 24 19,949 16,730 36,679 1,528 35,819 1,953 12,797 34,247 860 633 95.6 73.6 37.6 34,689 37.4 538 0.6 43 Tanjore. Negapatam circle ... ... 881,387 601 13 9,141 7,783 16,924 1,301 16,914 2,684 10,743 16,147 10 5 95.4 50.0 18.3 ... ... ... ... 44 Tanjore do. ... ... 1,047,924 484 24 14,202 13,006 27,208 1,134 27,083 6,168 15,110 25,296 125 77 93.4 61.6 24.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,929,311 531 37 23,343 20,789 44,132 1,192 43,997 8,852 25,853 41,443 135 82 94.2 60.0 21.5 40,955 21.2 1,297 0.7 5
16 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 17 2 Municipalities. Anantapur ... ... ... 4,907 545 1 230 144 374 374 329 206 83 315 45 26 95.7 57.7 69.5 227 46.2 1 0.2 3 Anakápalle ... ... ... 13,341 1,112 1 289 131 420 420 274 51 183 273 146 107 99.6 73.2 28.5 710 53.2 36 2.7 4 Bellary... ... ... ... 53,460 2,056 2 1,287 929 2,216 1,108 2,126 1,188 445 1,993 90 71 93.7 78.8 38.6 1,589 29.7 47 0.8 5 Berhampore ... ... ... 23,599 4,720 1 512 408 920 920 920 103 504 816 ... ... 88.7 ... 34.5 475 20.1 6 0.3 6 Bezwada ... ... ... 9,336 ... 1 237 158 395 395 360 41 178 330 35 28 91.6 80.0 38.3 ... ... ... ... 7 Bimlipatam ... ... ... 8,582 2,145 1 230 238 468 468 418 108 218 398 50 47 95.2 94.0 51.8 447 52.0 1 0.1 8 Calicut ... ... ... ... 57,085 4,391 3 1,263 419 1,682 560 1,682 86 495 1,404 ... ... 83.4 ... 24.5 3,393 59.4 233 4.1 9 Cannanore ... ... ... 26,386 6,596 2 871 762 1,633 816 1,633 412 832 1,485 ... ... 90.9 ... 56.2 1,371 51.9 24 0.9 10 Chicacole ... ... ... 18,302 5,446 1 394 310 704 704 704 145 346 632 ... ... 89.7 ... 34.5 652 35.6 7 0.3 11 Chidambaram ... ... ... 19,837 9,918 1 472 474 946 946 944 240 616 897 2 2 95.0 100.0 45.3 778 39.2 30 1.5 12 Cochin ... ... ... ... 15,698 15,698 1 829 203 1,032 1,032 1,025 79 301 946 7 5 92.2 71.4 60.5 910 57.9 198 12.6 13 Cocanada ... ... ... 30,441 5,771 1 259 187 446 446 437 27 233 313 9 1 71.6 11.1 10.3 919 30.1 79 2.6 14 Coimbatore ... ... ... 38,967 12,989 2 625 501 1,126 563 1,126 495 536 1,097 ... ... 97.4 ... 28.1 1,027 26.3 103 2.7 15 Conjeeveram ... ... ... 37,275 4,142 2 928 795 1,723 861 1,670 528 799 1,556 53 38 93.1 71.7 42.7 1,350 36.2 42 1.1 16 Coonoor ... ... ... 4,778 531 1 205 174 379 379 357 56 182 331 22 11 92.7 50.0 71.6 198 41.4 3 0.6 17 Cuddalore ... ... ... 43,545 3,629 2 608 413 1,021 510 1,021 144 527 874 ... ... 85.6 ... 20.1 978 22.4 18 0.4 18 Cuddapah ... ... ... 18,982 999 1 419 346 765 765 706 225 341 660 59 45 93.5 76.3 37.1 346 18.2 14 0.7 19 Dindigul ... ... ... 14,182 7,091 1 622 604 1,226 1,226 1,105 419 563 1,008 121 74 91.2 61.1 76.3 1,304 919 17 1.2 20 Ellore ... ... ... ... 25,092 2,788 1 383 392 775 775 775 144 512 745 ... ... 96.1 ... 29.7 567 22.6 71 2.8 21 Erode ... ... ... ... 9,864 897 1 354 311 665 665 665 400 193 659 ... ... 99.1 ... 66.1 574 58.2 14 1.4 22 Gudiyátam ... ... ... 16,690 ... 1 202 157 359 359 358 148 176 350 1 1 97.7 100.0 21.1 ... ... 9 0.6 23 Guntúr... ... ... ... 19,646 1,691 1 289 227 516 516 495 51 255 341 21 10 68.8 47.6 17.8 328 16.6 27 1.3 24 Karúr ... ... ... ... 9,205 2,301 1 213 207 420 420 420 226 132 403 ... ... 95.9 ... 43.7 424 46.0 4 0.4 25 Kumbakónam ... ... ... 50,098 16,699 2 810 538 1,348 674 1,344 323 693 1,271 4 ... 94.2 ... 25.3 1,415 28.2 42 0.8 26 Kurnool ... ... ... 20,329 4,066 2 1,557 1,039 2,596 1,298 2,061 953 788 1,897 535 485 92.0 90.4 11.7 620 30.5 21 1.0 27 Madras ... ... ... ... 405,848 15,031 24 12,867 10,706 23,573 982 22,114 15,312 4,689 21,554 1,459 1,187 97.4 81.3 56.1 32,821 80.9 1,212 2.9 28 Madura ... ... ... ... 76,847 18,452 3 1,732 1,276 3,008 1,003 3,004 1,689 1,131 2,943 4 1 97.9 25.0 38.3 3,045 39.6 133 1.7 29 Mannárgudi ... ... ... 19,409 4,852 1 304 241 545 545 542 69 346 516 3 1 94.9 33.3 25.1 545 28.0 17 0.8 30 Mangalore ... ... ... 32,099 3,567 1 1,238 978 2,216 2,216 1,918 563 1,022 1,871 298 225 97.4 75.5 65.3 2,600 80.9 52 1.6 31 Masulipatam ... ... ... 35,056 8,764 1 772 406 1,178 1,178 1,175 77 662 1,087 3 3 92.2 100.0 31.1 1,044 29.8 26 0.7 32 Máyavaram ... ... ... 23,044 7,681 1 489 394 883 883 869 375 393 868 14 11 99.8 78.5 38.1 878 38.1 36 1.5 33 Negapatam ... ... ... 53,776 7,693 2 1,114 1,047 2,161 1,080 2,141 897 934 2,003 20 10 93.5 50.0 37.4 1,592 27.7 103 1.9 34 Nellore ... ... ... ... 27,505 1,100 6 1,516 1,455 2,971 495 2,960 722 1,805 2,844 11 9 96.0 81.8 103.7 726 26.3 38 1.3 35 Ongole ... ... ... ... 9,200 2,300 1 168 150 318 318 318 48 202 297 ... ... 93.3 ... 32.3 329 35.7 17 1.8 36 Ootacamund ... ... ... 12,335 1,121 1 342 248 590 590 559 129 288 491 31 26 87.8 83.9 41.1 557 45.1 22 1.7 37 Palamcottah ... ... ... 17,964 17,964 1 495 412 907 907 868 328 356 852 39 14 98.1 35.8 48.2 697 38.9 23 1.3 38 Pálghat ... ... ... 36,339 4,037 2 1,221 993 2,214 1,107 2,195 33 863 1,996 19 13 90.9 68.4 55.2 1,561 42.9 65 1.8 39 Parlákimedi ... ... ... 15,365 ... 1 366 239 605 605 583 131 218 541 22 19 92.8 86.3 36.4 ... ... 3 0.2 40 Periyakulam ... ... ... 16,446 ... 1 199 176 375 375 350 169 161 343 25 20 98.0 80.0 22.1 ... ... 27 1.6 41 Pálni ... ... ... ... 13,315 ... 1 365 292 657 657 632 210 384 614 25 23 97.1 92.0 47.8 ... ... 8 0.6 42 Rajahmundry... ... ... 24,555 2,046 2 585 465 1,050 525 1,050 200 640 1,043 ... ... 99.3 ... 42.4 1,203 48.9 63 2.5 43 Salem ... ... ... ... 59,631 16,889 4 1,120 885 2,005 501 2,001 724 1,038 1,870 4 2 93.4 50.0 31.4 1,537 25.8 67 1.1 44 Srírangam ... ... ... 19,773 2,825 1 436 401 837 837 837 67 577 800 ... ... 95.6 ... 40.4 353 17.8 30 1.5 45 Tanjore ... ... ... ... 54,745 6,843 3 1,078 572 1,650 550 1,558 189 775 1,493 92 60 95.8 65.2 28.4 1,709 31.2 60 1.1 46 Tellicherry ... ... ... 24,581 6,602 3 861 613 1,474 491 1,354 222 581 1,072 120 120 79.2 100.0 48.5 1,960 79.7 57 2.3 47 Tinnevelly ... ... ... 23,221 23,221 1 488 304 792 792 792 269 389 767 ... ... 96.8 ... 330 712 30.6 34 1.4 48 Trichinopoly ... ... ... 84,449 8,445 6 2,984 2,026 5,010 835 4,902 1,278 2,654 4,722 108 88 96.3 81.6 56.9 3,160 37.4 63 0.7 49 Tirupatúr ... ... ... 14,278 ... 1 235 169 404 404 402 107 229 385 2 2 95.7 100.0 27.1 ... ... 10 0.7 50 Tirupati ... ... ... 13,232 ... 1 22 17 39 39 37 10 13 28 2 2 75.7 100.0 2.3 ... ... 4 0.3 51 Tuticorin ... ... ... 16,281 5,427 1 504 319 823 823 814 238 261 684 9 2 84.0 22.2 42.1 510 31.3 23 1.4 52 Vaniyambádi ... ... ... 15,933 ... 1 212 179 391 391 391 184 188 380 ... ... 97.2 ... 238 ... ... 3 0.2 53 Vellore ... ... ... ... 40,958 9,373 2 821 723 1,544 772 1,524 680 693 1,469 20 5 96.3 25.0 35.9 1,271 31.0 54 1.3 54 Vizagapatam ... ... ... 30,291 10,097 1 925 561 1,486 1,486 1,070 347 408 1,063 416 350 99.3 84.1 46.6 1,231 40.6 67 2.2 55 Vizianagrum ... ... ... 22,577 4,515 1 329 170 499 499 452 74 209 434 47 46 96.0 97.8 21.2 830 36.7 20 0.9 56 Wálajápet ... ... ... 10,387 10,387 1 188 145 333 333 327 96 168 316 6 5 96.6 83.3 30.9 227 21.8 20 1.9 Total of municipalities ... 1,861,508 4,872 111 48,526 37,046 85,572 771 81,566 32,564 32,846 77,180 4,006 3,199 94.6 79.8 43.1 83,722 44.9 3,441 1.8 Grand Total ... 30,868,504 225 797 432,064 358,526 790,590 18 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 19 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the official year 1888-89. Paid from Total. Number of all successful vaccinations and revacci- nations. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 1,842 9 10 ... ... 1,842 9 10 ... ... 1,842 9 10 5,793 0 5 1 2,032 11 11 ... ... 2,032 11 11 ... ... 2,032 11 11 8,592 0 3 9 3,875 5 9 ... ... 3,875 5 9 ... ... 3,875 5 9 14,385 0 4 4 4,200 2 3 ... ... 4,200 2 3 ... ... 4,200 2 3 15,137 0 4 5 2,284 3 6 ... ... 2,284 3 6 ... ... 2,284 3 6 6,800 0 5 4 6,484 5 9 ... ... 6,484 5 9 ... ... 6,484 5 9 21,937 0 4 9 3,899 11 5 ... ... 3,899 11 5 ... ... 3,899 11 5 23,264 0 2 8 2,892 4 5 ... ... 2,892 4 5 ... ... 2,892 4 5 13,031 0 3 6 6,791 15 10 ... ... 6,791 15 10 ... ... 6,791 15 10 36,295 0 3 0 3,507 0 8 ... ... 3,507 0 8 ... ... 3,507 0 8 20,365 0 2 10 3,112 6 3 ... ... 3,112 6 3 ... ... 3,112 6 3 21,087 0 2 4 2,231 3 10 ... ... 2,231 3 10 ... ... 2,231 3 10 13,379 0 2 8 8,850 10 9 ... ... 8,850 10 9 ... ... 8,850 10 9 54,831 0 2 7 3,471 3 2 ... ... 3,471 3 2 ... ... 3,471 3 2 6,586 0 8 5 3,406 10 7 ... ... 3,406 10 7 ... ... 3,406 10 7 8,114 0 6 9 2,556 14 6 ... ... 2,556 14 6 ... ... 2,556 14 6 6,936 0 5 11 9,434 12 3 ... ... 9,434 12 3 ... ... 9,434 12 3 15,050 0 10 0 3,909 0 6 ... ... 3,909 0 6 ... ... 3,909 0 6 19,483 0 3 2 2,768 14 0 ... ... 2,768 14 0 ... ... 2,768 14 0 13,390 0 3 4 2,132 8 3 ... 2,132 8 3 ... ... ... 2,132 8 3 8,861 0 3 10 8,810 6 9 ... 2,132 8 3 6,677 14 6 ... ... 8,810 6 9 41,734 0 3 5 3,221 10 2 ... ... 3,221 10 2 ... ... 3,221 10 2 9,408 0 5 7 2,951 15 4 ... 338 8 0 2,613 7 4 ... ... 2,951 15 4 10,865 0 4 4 3,580 9 10 ... ... 3,580 9 10 ... ... 3,580 9 10 12,841 0 4 5 646 8 6 ... 646 8 6 ... ... ... 646 8 6 874 0 11 10 10,400 11 10 ... 985 0 6 9,415 11 4 ... ... 10,400 11 10 33,988 0 4 11 2,877 14 10 ... ... 2,877 14 10 ... ... 2,877 14 10 4,070 0 11 4 3,880 14 7 ... 50 2 0 3,830 12 7 ... ... 3,880 14 7 6,456 0 9 7 1,813 11 4 ... 33 1 0 1,780 10 4 ... ... 1,813 11 4 2,513 0 11 6 8,572 8 9 ... 83 3 0 8,489 5 9 ... ... 8,572 8 9 13,039 0 10 6 2,590 12 5 ... ... 2,590 12 5 ... ... 2,590 12 5 9,044 0 4 8 3,326 11 3 ... ... 3,326 11 3 ... ... 3,326 11 3 10,764 0 5 0 5,917 7 8 ... ... 5,917 7 8 ... ... 5,917 7 8 19,808 0 4 9 12,116 15 0 ... 12,116 15 0 ... ... ... 12,116 15 0 ... ... 12,116 15 0 ... 12,116 15 0 ... ... ... 12,116 15 0 ... ... 3,207 13 3 ... ... 3,207 13 3 ... ... 3,207 13 3 16,703 0 3 1 2,270 11 9 ... ... 2,270 11 9 ... ... 2,270 11 9 11,479 0 3 2 3,762 8 11 ... ... 3,762 8 11 ... ... 3,762 8 11 19,612 0 3 1 9,241 1 11 ... ... 9,241 1 11 ... ... 9,241 1 11 47,794 0 3 1 2,607 11 9 ... ... 2,607 11 9 ... ... 2,607 1 9 13,512 0 3 1 4,065 6 4 ... ... 4,065 6 4 ... ... 4,065 6 4 22,595 0 2 10 6,673 2 1 ... ... 6,673 2 1 ... ... 6,673 2 1 36,107 0 2 11 6
20 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 21 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1888-8922 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 23 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1888-8924 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 25 B26 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 27 B28 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 29 B30 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 31 B32 APPENDIX. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned years. Establishment. Persons primarily vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887-88. 1888-89. Government vaccinators * ... 10,194 9,663 9,136 8,741 16,887 16,319 12,386 12,033 9,970 9,701 8,511 8,204 9,741 9,479 17,092 16,210 Local fund do. ... 470,605 435,696 526,329 493,415 591,352 553,890 617,475 580,624 608,729 579,261 584,711 557,732 618,588 590,853 670,318 643,761 Cantonment do. ... 5,213 4,941 3,446 3,207 3,734 3,461 3,434 3,159 2,462 2,295 2,850 2,677 3,375 3,293 4,316 3,912 Native States do. ... 3,635 3,286 3,838 3,652 4,751 4,436 4,506 4,291 4,082 3,915 4,429 4,216 4,042 3,885 2,270 2,160 Municipalities ... ... ... 80,286 70,980 83,533 75,950 91,665 84,452 97,765 88,281 92,946 87,968 70,065 65,614 71,710 67,405 81,566 77,180 Private vaccinators ... ... 137 117 45 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... ... 9,890 8,193 10,154 8,371 12,579 10,185 21,561 17,201 22,834 18,793 16,790 13,954 13,736 11,506 18,283 15,603 Medical Subordinates ... ... 9,646 5,742 10,049 7,015 9,633 6,271 8,936 5,280 7,549 4,594 6,720 3,677 3,033 1,630 2,517 1,517 Army European ... ... 1,916 1,382 1,987 1,357 1,940 1,158 2,840 1,737 691 597 875 694 ... ... ... ... Native ... ... 4,372 3,093 4,414 3,374 4,121 3,212 4,415 3,655 2,784 2,288 2,297 1,987 ... ... ... ... Total ... 595,894 543,093 652,931 605,125 736,662 683,384 773,118 716,261 752,047 709,412 697,248 658,755 724,225 688,051 796,362 760,343 * Work done by vaccinators employed in the Hill Tracts of Ganjam, Jeypore, Gunapur, Gudem and Bhadráchalam.
( 33 ) GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. PUBLIC DEPARTMENT. READ( 34 ) The average outturn per vaccinator employed was 986 operations or 82 per mensem, against 922 or 77 per mensem in 1887-88. The highest average (1,042 cases) is shown by the Local Fund vaccinators and the lowest (567) by those working in zemindaries. 4. It should be explained how the number of vaccinators employed in zemin- daries comes to have fallen from 10 to 4, and whether these officers are employed and paid by the zemindars. If not, it is not understood why the work done in Jeypore should be shown partly under this head and partly under &quot; Agency Tracts.&quot; Ongole. Vellore. Anantapur. Coonoor. Rajahmundry. Ootacamimd. Palamoottah. Chidambaram. Ellore. Erode. Negapatam. Masulipatam. Tinnevelly. Srírangam. Cuddapah. Dindigul. Nellore. Guntúr. Mayavaram. Coimbatore. Adóni. 5. The work performed in individual Municipalities and Local Fund districts is being noticed in the Local and Muni- cipal Department when reviewing the administration report of these bodies and will be further dealt with in the general Local Fund and Municipal reviews for 1888-89. It will be sufficient to observe here that vaccination was compulsory in the 21 Municipalities noted in the mar- gin, in the last six of which it was in- troduced during the year under review. The Inspector of Vaccination should have entered Erode in paragraph 17 of his report, vaccination having been made compulsory there with effect from 1st April 1888 under G.O., dated 18th February 1888, No. 171 M. The total number of operations performed in these towns amounted to 45.1 per 1,000 of their aggregate population. 6. In 1887-88 animal vaccination was practised in the districts of Bellary, Kur- nool, Vizagapatam, Salem, South Arcot, Tanjore, Cuddapah and Godávari. In the last two of these it was abandoned in the year under review, but it was introduced in Chingleput, Nellore, Madura and Malabar. In all 42,445 operations were performed with animal lymph, of which 39,816 were successful, against 13,587 (with 11,938 successful cases) in 1887-88. The large increase in the number of operations and in the percentage which proved successful (94 against 86) is a matter for congratulation. The desirability of superseding human by animal vaccine has recently been impressed in the Local and Municipal Departments on all Local Boards and Municipalities. The average cost of each successful operation performed by this method is reported to have been As. 1-4, against As. 3-11 for vaccine operations generally, but it seems likely that a proportionate share of the cost of establishments has not been debited to animal vaccination in making out the above average. This should be done in future, the pay of a vaccinator who operates with both kinds of lymph (human and animal) being distributed according to the number of operations performed with each. 7. The attention of the Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commis- sioner is called to the omission to comply with the requirements of G.O., Public Department, No. 396, dated 22nd February 1886. This should not be allowed to recur. (True Extract.) J. F. PRICE, Chief Secretary.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1889-90. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS. PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1890.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1889-90. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS. PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1890.
OFFICE OF SANITARY COMMISSIONER, FORT ST. GEORGE, 18th July 1890. No. 2619a. From SURGEON-MAJOR W. G. KING, D.P.H., &C., Acting Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Madras, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER FOR MADRAS. SIR, I HAVE the honor to forward, herewith, a report for the past official year on the working of the Vaccination Department. You will remember that in my letter, No. 2161, dated 20th June 1890, acknowledged by Government in G.O., No. 1574 L, dated 23rd June 1890, Mis., I fully explained the cause of probable late submission of this report. 2. In addition to remarks made in this report, I have thought it desirable, in the interest of the department, to make certain suggestions as to the effecting of a complete reorganization, and, with reference to the prevention of the present appalling death-rate from small-pox, to advise that compulsory vaccination should be introduced in all parts of the Presidency, except the Hill Tracts. I have thought it better, although these subjects are directly connected with the administration of the department, that they should be presented to you in a form more convenient for being dealt with by Government than if submitted as an integral part of the usual report. I therefore forward, for favor of communication to Government, a supplement to the annual report, in which they are discussed. 3. With reference to the prolixity of the report, I would remind you that under G.O., No. 1455, dated 12th July 1886, it is required that triennially the condition of the Vaccination Department should be fully detailed. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, W. G. KING, Surgeon-Major, M.B., C.M., D.P.H., &C., Acting Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Madras. MEMO. No. Forwarded to Government, Local and Municipal Department. W. G. KING, Surgeon-Major, M.B., C.M., D.P.H., &C., Acting Sanitary Commissioner for Madras. OFFICE OF SANITARY COMMISSIONER, FORT ST. GEORGE, 1890.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY DURING 1889-90. STAFF OF THE VACCINATION DEPARTMENT. 1. During the year no important changes were made in the constitution of the vaccination staff. In Local Fund Circles, 32 Deputy Inspectors of the first class, drawing Rs. 60 and Rs. 70, and 20 of the second class, on Rs. 40 per mensem, formed the inspecting staff; whilst vaccinators of the first and second class, draw- ing Rs. 18 and Rs. 10 respectively, carried out the executive work. In Munici- palities, 106 vaccinators were employed on salaries varying from Rs. 10 to Rs. 18, according to class. Government employed 6 vaccinators in Cantonments, and 22 in the Hill Tracts of Ganjam and Vizagapatam and Gadavire. 2. The areas under the charge of each subordinate employed by District Boards are shown in Table XII attached. It will be seen that they differ within consider- able limits, although there is a certain amount of tendency to uniformity. The question of area, of course, is not a simple one; as often apparently disproportion- ately large tracts under one man's charge may be chiefly of uninhabited mountain ranges, &c., whilst those entrusted to another, of actually smaller area, may include well inhabited villages but small distances apart. No conclusion need, therefore, be arrived at solely by a consultation of this table ; but I have thought the infor- mation conveyed may be useful to local authorities, with reference to questions that must from time to time be referred to them. Thus, during the year, in consideration of the very large areas under the two Deputy Inspectors attached to the Malabar district, it was found necessary to appoint a third man. 3. Two females were employed by District Boards as vaccinators on Rs. 18 and Rs. 10 per mensem, and five by Municipalities on Rs. 10 each, except the woman at Cocanada, who receives Rs. 18. It is most desirable that the employment of female vaccinators be extended; indeed, where vaccination is compulsory, I think this provision should invariably be made. Possibly, as the cases where the services of a female vaccinator would be essential are limited, it would be feasible for Muni- cipalities to unite in paying female vaccinators who could serve in each Municipality for a certain limited time. QUANTITY OF WORK EFFECTED BY THE VARIOUS BRANCHES OF THE DEPARTMENT. * If the work of the special staff of Kurnool district be included, the total would be 893,330. 4. During the past official year 875,748* persons were vaccinated; in 831,499 cases the results are reported to have been successful. This is the greatest number hitherto recorded, and exhibits an increase of 61,758 successful cases when compared with the outturn of the last official year. This highly satisfactory result may be ascribed to the more general use of animal vaccine lymph, and the consequent partial cessation of difficulty in procuring supplies of the virus, as well as to the special urging of attention to the question of vaccination conveyed in reviews by Government of District Board and Muni- cipal Administration Reports, and, I may safely add, to the energy of my pre- decessors in office, Surgeon Dymott and the late Surgeon-Major McNally. Table II attached shows that increased activity has not been limited to any special branch of the department, but has been general, if the, in any case, small work falling to Cantonment vaccinators be excepted. 5. The total live-births recorded in the Madras Presidency during the year were 864,115, whilst there were 176,468 successful vaccinations of children below one year of age, representing a vaccination rate within the first year of life of 20.4 per cent. 2
6 VACCINATION REPORT. 6. LOCAL FUND CIRCLES.VACCINATION REPORT. 7 vaccinators for cholera duty pursued by certain District Boards. These men can by no manner of reasoning be regarded as possessed of either the medical or sanitary knowledge requisite for such employment, and hence both in the interests of the Vaccination Department and of the adoption of correct sanitary measures with respect to cholera, their utilization for this purpose should be definitely forbidden. 11. MUNICIPALITIES.8 VACCINATION REPORT. supplement to this report with reference to the re-organization of the department, that rates of pay much above the average, should be allowed to men working in these tracts. QUALITY OF WORK EFFECTED BY THE VARIOUS BRANCHES OF THE DEPARTMENT. 16. Nothing short of the laborious checking of the work of vaccinators as pur- sued during actual inspection, can testify accurately as to the value of the vacci- nation performed: so-called vaccination marks may be made which are of little or no value. Statements as to quality of work are forwarded to Government after special inspections of Municipalities and districts by the Sanitary Commissioner and his Deputy; but the percentage of successful operations to total performed is also a guide of some value as to the quality of lymph used and skill exhibited, when applied to statistics furnished with this report. This is shown in Table IX attached. As the number of Deputy Inspectors employed is not sufficient to verify the total cases per annum by vaccinators, a large percentage of cases have to be regarded as &quot; successful&quot; on the report of the operators. The average of success for Local Fund Circles, as reported by vaccinators, by all methods of vaccination, amounts to 95.7 per cent., whereas the average result after inspection by Deputy Inspectors amounts to 91.4 per cent. (including work of Municipal Vaccinators reported on by Deputy Inspectors), showing a difference of 4.3 per cent. between the two statements. It will be observed the result of inspections by the Deputy Inspectors does not show uniformly a smaller percentage than that stated by vaccinators, as might naturally be expected; but it is possible the expla- nation in these cases may be that the greater number of cases verified by these Deputy Inspectors, may have been in divisions where more skilful performance of the operation was effected than in others in the same range. In only one case do the rates exactly correspond. This average rate represents a degree of success by all modes of employment of lymph, namely, with lymph taken from arm to arm, stored in tubes, or between glasses and in bottles, and by the softening of scabs. It will be seen, as, indeed, should be the case, that in the majority of operations with human lymph the arm-to-arm method has been employed. According to a standard authorityVACCINATION REPORT. 9 District Board Vaccinators. When it is possible to transmit animal lymph without deterioration, undoubtedly the superior skill of Medical Subordinates will be evident in their showing satisfactory ratios of success; under the present conditions, such results cannot be well looked for. EXPENDITURE ON VACCINATION DURING 1889-90. 18. The total expenditure of the department was Rs. 1,85,194-9-7, of which Government contributed Rs. 7,122-11-7 on account of Government establish- ments and Cantonments, Municipalities Rs. 26,036-5-1, Local Fund Circles Rs. 1,51,455-11-5, and Native States Rs. 579-13-6. Although the total expenditure for the year is Rs. 4,238-6-4 in excess of last official year 1888-89, and Rs. 9,408-3-11 in excess of that of 1887-88, the cost of each successful vaccination has been reduced from Annas 3-11 in 1888-89 to Annas 3-8 in 1889-90. ANIMAL VACCINATION. 19. This method was first introduced practically into this Presidency by Dr. Laing, now Sanitary Commissioner, in 1879. Since this period it has been adopted in district after district, till, at the present time, there are only six districts in which it is not practised. The methods employed vary; in some districts inoculated calves are sent out with the Deputy Inspectors throughout the year, and thus a fresh generation of lymph is placed at disposal of each vaccinator at the time of inspection of his division ; in others, a calf is retained in a vaccinator's division for a certain number of months in the year, and is then passed on to others in the district. * This number is in addi- tion to the total performed by the ordinary staff of the district. 20. In Kurnool, a staff10 VACCINATION REPORT. including pay of staff, as required in para. 6 of G.O., No. 827, dated 19th October 1889, Public; but in certain districts the Deputy Inspectors only vacci- nate, and it would consequently give no result of value to compare their work on Rs. 60 a month, carried on in addition to their ordinary duties, with that of vacci- nators on Rs. 10 and Rs. 15 per month, whose work is confined solely to vaccination. In such instances, the Deputy Inspector's pay has not been taken into account; but an equivalent has been found from the number of days' residence in the vaccinator's division in which the duty has been performed, as doubtless the operation in the majority of cases is carried out in reality by the vaccinator, under the Deputy In- spector's supervision. With one or two exceptions, it will be seen that the cost of each successful case by this method is very considerably below that by humanized lymph; thus a further reason is afforded, if any were required in addition to already recognized advantages, why animal vaccination should be adopted without delay throughout the Presidency. In arriving at the minimum probable cost of vaccination by animal lymph per case, some proportion of contingencies due to upkeep of the ordinary establishment ought in fairness to be debited, whereas in the returns received only expenditure on contingencies specially required for animal vaccination, are shown against it. The returns having been received exceedingly late, as formerly reported, it has been impossible to ask further information before proceeding to compile. In future, special forms and records will be arranged, by means of which it is hoped the desired information will be gained. With the staff organized, as in Kurnool, under better pay than elsewhere and performing animal vaccination only, the probable cost per case isVACCINATION REPORT. 11 when calves could not be obtained, and pointed to the feasibility of regenerating lymph that had been subjected to prolonged transmission from calf to calf. 24. Surgeon-Major Lancaster brought to notice that if an animal were required to take the place of the calf, it would be advisable to use the goat. He apparently made no experiments upon this subject himself, whilst all recorded evidence goes to show that this animal, if susceptible to vaccination at all, is very feebly so. I accordingly inocculated a goat; the resulting vesicles were exceedingly small, and the use of the lymph upon the human being was followed by no result. A Monsieur Hervieux, however, contends, for reasons that need not here be detailed, that the goat should be preferred to the bovine species. An account of his experiments has not yet been published, and I consider that these results may be safely awaited before any action be taken in this matter. In the meantime, having regard to Hindu modes of thought, it is well that the truth12 VACCINATION REPORT. tion, are not sufficiently active to destroy specific germs possessed of a higher grade of vitality. Partial success followed; but, as might be anticipated, prolonged contact with these substances, in the end, impaired activity. Ultimately, however, I devised an exceedingly simple mode, which I think will do all that is required. By this method, the vaccine product has been retained in an efficient condition without the aid of any extraneous mechanism, or, after first preparation, the use of any material, for forty days; whilst hawked about the town, for use during the hottest part of the last season's hot weather. The same material has also stood well the test of transport by rail and road for long distances. Certain details, as to its application to the ordinary exigencies of district work, however, remain to be worked out, and I shall then forward a complete report to Government. In the meantime, I am justified in stating that experiments have secured satisfactory results as to the main point at issue, and that a very large proportion of expen- diture that would have been otherwise inevitable in carrying out animal vaccination throughout the Presidency may be saved. THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE ADULT POPULATION IS PROTECTED BY VACCINATION. 26. On inquiry, I elicited from Medical Officers of Jails information as to the condition of the populations under their charge as to vaccination and previous affection by small-pox. The total average gained by observation of a population of 4,310 prisoners, showed that 204.8 per mille were vaccinated, 205.1 were un- protected on admission, and that 593.04 bore marks of previous attacks of small- pox, and 2.5 had both vaccination and small-pox marks. This affords a rough idea of the state of protection of the adult population of the lower classes. RE-VACCINATION. 27. There is a field for much improvement throughout the Presidency as regards re-vaccination; in no district did the rate amount to 1 per mille with the exception of Kurnool, which showed 6.4 per mille. European statistics clearly demonstrate that re-vaccination, after the age of ten, or at least the age of puberty, is essential for the protection of adult life, and it is shown that this further vacci- nation so confirms the influence of the primary vaccination that most authorities are agreed that a subsequent re-vaccination is not required. At present, a large proportion of the adult population are doubtless in a condition of protection from having suffered from small-pox; but as time advances, and the influence of vaccination upon the younger members of the population increases, the adults will, in the absence of re-vaccination, suffer more from small-pox than the youngVACCINATION REPORT. 13 CONDUCT OF THE STAFF, &C. 29. During the year one Deputy Inspector was prosecuted, convicted and dis- missed for receiving illegal gratification and falsifying his returns; another was suspended for repeated negligence of duty and afterwards permitted to resign. Fines to the extent of Rs. 58 were inflicted on Deputy Inspectors for remissness in their duties. 30. The service registers of the Deputy Inspectors were all verified. W. G. KING, Surgeon-Major, M.B., C.M., D.P.H., &C., Acting Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Madras. MADRAS, 18th July 1890. NOTE.14 VACCINATION REPORT. I. Table showing the Work done by the different establishments. Establishments. Total number of persons vaccinated in 1887-88. Total successful of primary vaccinations in 1887-88. Ages successfully vaccinated in 1887-88. Total successful of re-vaccina- tions in 1887-88. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Government ... ... ... 9,816 9,479 686 4,078 4,715 74 Local Funds ... ... ... 625,795 590,853 126,492 349,271 115,090 4,259 Native States ... ... ... 4,042 3,885 178 1,920 1,787 ... Municipalities ... ... ... 75,535 67,405 17,358 29,220 20,827 2,914 Cantonment ... ... ... 3,937 3,293 2,182 849 262 204 Civil dispensaries ... ... 14,174 11,506 1,961 7,195 2,350 214 Medical subordinates ... ... 5,181 1,630 38 119 1,473 876 Total ... 738,480 688,051 148,895 392,652 146,504 8,541 VACCINATION REPORT. 15 II. Table showing the Average Number of Operations performed per Vaccinator during the year contrasted with 1887-88 and 1888-89 in the different establishments. Establishments. Number of Vaccinators. Average number of operations per man. Increase or decrease per man. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1888-89. 1889-90. Increase Decrease. Increase. Decrease. Local Fund Vaccinators ... 642 649 653 974 1,042 1,100 68 ... 58 ... Government do. ... 16 27 22 613 633 1,288 20 ... 655 ... Native States do. ... 10 4 6 404 567 877 163 ... 310 ... Municipal do. ... 82 87 82 676 713 745 37 ... 32 ... Madras Town do. ... 24 24 24 835 982 1,021 147 ... 39 ... Cantonment do. ... 6 6 6 656 828 617 172 ... ... 211 Total ... 780 797 793 922 986 1,061 64 ... 75 ... III. Table showing the Cost of Vaccination during the year 1889-90 compared with two previous years. Establishments. Total expenditure. Average cost of each successful case. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. Government establishment 5,246 12 4 6,278 6 11 6,183 2 7 0 8 9 0 6 2 0 3 8 Local Fund do. ... 1,42,381 9 4 1,46,433 1 3 1,51,455 11 5 0 3 9 0 3 8 0 3 6 Municipal do. ... 26,185 11 0 26,970 8 11 26,036 5 1 0 5 11 0 5 5 0 5 3 Native States do. ... 1,035 0 0 334 0 2 579 13 6 0 4 3 0 2 11 0 1 9 Cantonments do. ... 937 5 0 940 2 0 939 9 0 0 4 3 0 3 6 0 4 3 Total ... 1,75,786 5 8 1,80,956 3 3 1,85,194 9 7 0 4 1 0 3 11 0 3 8 5
16 VACCINATION REPORT. IV. Table showing the Proportion of Males to Females vaccinated during 1889-90 by purely Local Fund Agents contrasted with two previous years. Districts. Population. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to population. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to population. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to population. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Anantapur ... ... 303,026 291,956 7,960 7,135 52.7 47.2 2.6 2.4 8,253 7,077 53.8 46.1 2.7 2.4 8,685 7,027 55.3 44.7 2.8 2.4 Bellary ... ... 335,567 325,339 11,152 10,550 51.3 48.6 3.3 3.2 11,521 10,932 51.3 48.7 3.4 3.3 11,508 10,604 52.04 47.9 3.4 3.2 Chingleput ... ... 474,520 469,586 17,915 14,567 55.4 44.8 3.7 3.1 20,155 18,548 52.0 47.9 4.2 3.9 23,933 22,717 51.3 48.7 5.04 4.8 Coimbatore ... ... 779,006 820,648 27,452 25,923 51.4 48.5 3.5 3.1 28,256 27,478 50.7 49.3 3.6 3.3 26,165 25,319 50.8 49.2 3.4 3.08 Cuddapah ... ... 560,394 541,662 7,448 6,362 53.9 46.0 1.3 1.1 12,158 10,565 53.5 46.5 2.2 1.9 12,833 11,162 53.5 47.3 2.3 2.06 Ganjam ... ... 850,604 859,046 14,530 12,109 54.5 45.4 2.0 1.7 18,352 14,978 55.0 44.1 2.1 1.7 12,693 10,469 54.8 45.2 1.4 1.2 Godávari ... ... 849,908 863,101 13,970 11,684 54.4 45.5 1.6 1.3 18,407 15,488 54.3 45.6 2.2 1.7 17,695 14,872 54.3 45.6 2.1 1.7 Kistna ... ... 753,987 739,791 7,582 5,726 56.9 43.0 1.0 0.7 8,043 6,179 56.5 43.4 1.6 0.8 10,377 8,619 54.6 45.4 1.3 1.1 Kurnool ... ... 349,717 339,259 8,439 6,061 58.2 41.8 2.4 1.7 12,612 9,229 57.7 42.2 3.6 2.7 16,482 9,385 63.7 36.3 4.7 2.7 Madura ... ... 988,443 1,092,248 24,759 22,091 52.8 47.1 2.5 2.0 26,122 23,494 52.6 47.3 2.6 2.1 28,787 26,110 52.4 47.5 2.8 2.4 Malabar ... ... 1,092,233 1,110,884 31,271 13,441 69.9 30.0 2.8 1.2 27,218 11,911 69.5 30.4 2.5 1.1 28,798 12,420 69.8 30.08 2.6 1.1 Nellore ... ... 597,353 586,178 14,164 13,321 51.5 48.4 2.3 2.2 12,554 11,790 51.5 48.4 2.1 2.0 15,068 14,096 51.6 48.3 2.5 2.4 Nílgiris ... ... 41,950 31,971 1,253 757 62.6 37.6 3.0 2.3 1,194 617 65.9 34.0 2.8 1.9 1,189 753 61.2 38.8 2.8 2.3 North Arcot ... ... 884,882 885,054 18,912 16,872 52.9 47.1 2.1 1.9 16,648 14,398 53.6 46.3 1.8 1.6 19,011 16,758 53.1 46.8 2.1 1.9 Salem ... ... 753,899 795,029 24,570 23,968 50.6 49.3 3.2 3.0 27,362 26,404 50.9 49.1 3.6 3.3 29,274 27,876 51.2 48.8 3.8 3.5 South Arcot ... ... 875,054 896,302 14,078 11,236 55.6 44.3 1.6 1.2 16,711 13,413 55.4 44.5 1.9 1.5 17,990 14,740 54.9 45.03 2.1 1.6 South Canara ... 455,697 471,718 20,427 16,538 55.2 44.7 4.4 3.5 19,949 16,730 54.3 45.6 4.3 3.5 14,234 11,587 55.1 44.8 3.1 2.4 Tanjore ... ... 930,826 998,406 17,556 16,238 51.9 48.0 1.8 1.6 23,343 20,789 52.8 47.1 2.5 2.1 23,977 21,090 53.2 46.8 2.5 2.1 Tinnevelly ... ... 797,821 844,460 27,810 22,539 55.2 44.7 3.4 2.6 27,020 21,942 55.1 44.8 3.4 2.6 30,709 24,060 56.07 43.9 3.8 2.8 Trichinopoly ... ... 535,854 574,957 10,759 10,076 51.6 48.3 2.0 1.7 12,993 11,993 52.0 47.9 2.4 2.1 19,546 18,626 51.2 48.8 3.6 3.2 Vizagapatam ... 1,217,939 1,192,411 19,491 17,103 53.2 46.7 1.8 1.6 18,038 15,429 53.9 46.1 1.4 1.3 21,736 19,607 52.5 47.4 1.8 1.6 Total ... 14,428,680 14,710,006 341,498 284,297 54.5 45.6 2.3 1.9 366,909 309,384 54.3 45.7 2.5 2.1 390,690 327,897 54.3 45.6 2.7 2.2
VACCINATION REPORT. 17 V. Table showing the Work done by Government Vaccinators during 1889-90 compared with two previous years. Hill Tracts. Number of vaccinators. Number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Revacci- nation. Percentage of success. Cost of each successful case. Average number of operations per man. Total. Successful. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Total. Successful. Primary vaccination. Revaccina- tion. RS. A. P. Ganjam... 1887-88 ... 6 3,159 2,907 6,066 5,992 466 2,242 3,114 74 73 97.1 94.6 0 5 6 1,011 1888-89 ... 7 4,852 4,442 9,294 9,282 740 2,623 5,489 12 9 95.3 75.0 0 3 10 1,328 1889-90 ... 7 9,681 8,762 18,443 18,403 1,173 3,418 13,177 40 37 96.3 92.5 0 1 9 2,634 Gunupur. 1887-88 ... 6 1,397 1,001 2,398 2,398 128 1,134 1,091 ... ... 98.1 ... 0 12 5 399 1888-89 ... 4 584 485 1,069 1,069 125 478 411 ... ... 94.8 ... 1 7 3 267 1889-90 ... 4 1,024 892 1,916 1,911 176 887 711 5 ... 92.8 ... 0 15 3 476 Jeypore... 1887-88 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1888-89 ... 12 2,648 2,413 5,061 5,061 106 2,122 2,574 ... ... 94.8 ... 0 4 3 422 1889-90 ... 5 2,792 2,685 5,477 5,477 642 2,460 2,245 ... ... 97.6 ... 0 4 10 1,095 Gudem ... 1887-88 ... 2 341 379 720 720 17 308 387 ... ... 98.8 ... 1 0 10 360 1888-89 ... 2 395 292 687 687 57 339 281 ... ... 98.5 ... 1 1 5 343 1889-90 ... 2 412 322 734 734 55 319 360 ... ... 100.0 ... 0 14 1 367 Bhadrá- chalam. 1887-88 ... 2 333 299 632 631 75 394 123 1 1 93.8 100.0 1 1 1 316 1888-89 ... 2 506 487 993 984 213 517 135 9 9 87.9 100.0 0 11 10 496 1889-90 ... 3 511 480 991 957 187 458 212 34 33 89.5 97.1 ... 330 Pedda- puram. 1887-88 Was included in Pittapur Circle. 1888-89 1889-90 ... 1 594 181 775 775 2 105 640 ... ... 96.4 ... 0 6 5 775 Total ... 1887-88 ... 16 5,230 4,586 9,816 9,741 686 4,078 4,715 75 74 97.3 98.6 0 8 10 613 1888-89 ... 27 8,985 8,119 17,104 17,092 1,241 6,079 8,890 21 18 94.8 85.7 0 6 2 633 1889-90 ... 22 15,014 13,322 28,336 28,257 2,235 7,647 17,345 79 70 96.3 88.6 18 VACCINATION REPORT. VI. Table showing the Work done by Native States during 1889-90 compared with two previous years. Native States (Zemindaries). Number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Revac- cination. Percentage of success. Cost of each successful case. Average number of operations per man. Total. Successful. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Total. Successful. Primary vaccination. Revaccination. RS. A. P. Jeypore ... 1887-88... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1888-89... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1889-90... 1,485 1,408 2,893 2,893 238 1,084 1,496 ... ... 97.4 ... 0 2 2 964 Gunupur... 1887-88... 1,866 1,354 3,220 3,220 87 1,351 1,655 ... ... 96.0 ... 0 8 4 357 1888-89... 756 686 1,442 1,442 120 891 364 ... ... 95.4 ... 0 3 5 481 1889-90... 1,306 1,066 2,367 2,361 368 1,391 492 6 6 95.3 100.0 0 1 11 790 Total ... 1887-88... 1,866 1,354 3,220 3,220 87 1,351 1,655 ... ... 96.0 ... 0 8 4 357 1888-89... 756 686 1,442 1,442 120 891 364 ... ... 95.4 ... 0 3 5 481 1889-90... 2,791 2,474 5,260 5,254 606 2,475 1,988 6 6 96.4 100.0 0 1 9 877 VII. Table showing the Work done by Cantonment Vaccinators during 1889-90 compared with two previous years. Cantonments. Number of vaccinators. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Revac- cination. Percentage of success. Cost of each successful case. Average number of operations per man. Total. Successful. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Total Successful. Primary vaccination. Revaccination. RS. A. P. Bangalore. 1887-88... 2 644 521 1,165 1,119 815 228 14 46 42 94.4 91.3 0 5 3 582 1888-89... 2 865 854 1,719 1,271 876 318 ... 448 305 93.9 68.0 0 3 11 859 1889-90... 2 585 491 1,076 938 683 199 ... 138 102 94.03 73.9 0 5 4 538 Secunder- abad. 1887-88... 4 1,553 1,219 2,772 2,256 1,367 621 248 516 162 99.1 31.3 0 3 10 693 1888-89... 4 1,613 1,640 3,253 3,045 1,528 1,190 ... 208 139 89.2 66.8 0 3 2 812 1889-90... 4 1,559 1,067 2,626 2,403 1,376 1,027 ... 223 122 100.0 54.7 0 3 8 656 Total ... 1887-88... 6 2,197 1,740 3,937 3,375 2,182 849 262 562 204 97.5 36.3 0 4 3 656 1888-89... 6 2,478 2,494 4,972 4,316 2,404 1,508 ... 656 444 90.6 67.7 0 3 6 828 1889-90... 6 2,144 1,558 3,702 3,341 2,059 1,226 ... 361 224 98.3 62.02 0 4 3 617
VACCINATION REPORT. 19 VIII. Table showing the Work done in Dispensaries during 1889-90 compared with two previous years. Districts. Number of dispensaries. Number vaccinated. Number vaccinated successfully. Percentage of success. Average number vaccinated at each dispensary. Success of primary vaccination. Primary vaccination. Revaccination. Total. Primary vaccination. Revaccination. Total. Primary vaccination. Revaccination. Total. Under one year. Above one and under six years. Above six years. Anantapur. 1887-88 ... 8 292 1 293 278 1 279 95.2 100.0 95.2 37 80 154 44 1888-89 ... 8 460 2 462 439 2 441 95.4 100.0 95.4 58 117 268 54 1889-90 ... 8 559 24 583 523 12 545 93.5 50.0 93.5 73 253 243 27 Bellary ... 1887-88 ... 15 679 ... 679 644 ... 674 94.9 ... 94.9 45 376 244 24 1888-89 ... 16 723 ... 723 676 ... 676 93.4 ... 93.4 45 387 273 16 1889-90 ... 17 706 5 711 667 4 671 94.4 80.0 94.3 42 442 196 29 Chingleput. 1887-88 ... 14 1,130 96 1,226 859 24 893 76.9 25.0 78.5 87 114 624 131 1888-89 ... 13 2,512 167 2,679 2,096 53 2,149 83.4 31.7 80.2 206 314 1,534 248 1889-90 ... 14 3,584 115 3,699 3,237 52 3,289 90.3 45.2 88.8 264 820 1,964 453 Coimbatore. 1887-88 ... 14 598 15 613 510 8 518 85.2 53.3 84.5 44 106 350 54 1888-89 ... 15 733 13 746 598 6 604 81.5 46.1 80.9 49 213 375 10 1889-90 ... 16 1,000 5 1,005 933 5 938 93.3 100.0 93.3 63 259 526 148 Cuddapah... 1887-88 ... 11 279 22 301 174 17 191 62.3 77.2 63.4 27 58 83 33 1888-89 ... 12 328 5 333 186 5 191 56.7 100.0 57.3 28 20 103 63 1889-90 ... 11 877 26 903 747 4 751 85.2 15.4 83.2 82 121 449 177 Ganjam ... 1887-88 ... 10 380 7 387 285 2 287 75.0 28.5 74.1 39 33 162 90 1888-89 ... 12 1,340 19 1,359 1,156 15 1,171 86.2 78.9 86.1 113 189 589 378 1889-90... 14 355 3 358 297 3 300 83.6 100.0 83.8 26 27 142 128 Godávari ... 1887-88 ... 18 450 5 455 304 3 307 67.5 60.0 67.4 25 22 197 85 1888-89 ... 19 659 24 683 551 16 567 83.6 66.7 83.0 36 26 304 221 1889-90 ... 18 1,372 17 1,389 967 8 975 70.5 47.0 70.2 78 65 642 260 Kistna ... 1887-88 ... 18 321 5 326 240 3 243 74.7 60.0 74.5 18 11 177 52 1888-89 ... 19 515 15 530 499 10 509 96.8 66.6 96.0 27 27 335 137 1889-90... 20 732 25 757 645 14 659 90.1 56.5 87.1 37 99 421 125 Kurnool ... 1887-88 ... 12 447 9 456 322 3 325 72.0 33.3 71.2 38 59 203 60 1888-89 ... 16 1,007 26 1,033 804 12 816 70.8 46.1 78.9 65 145 464 195 1889-90... 16 1,815 342 2,157 1,408 204 1,612 77.6 59.6 74.7 134 235 691 482 Madras Town. 1887-88 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1888-89 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1889-90 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madura ... 1887-88 ... 31 995 26 1,021 845 14 859 85.9 51.5 84.1 33 224 540 81 1888-89 ... 34 1,619 37 1,656 1,345 14 1,359 83.0 37.8 82.1 47 361 848 136 1889-90 ... 35 2,004 42 2,046 1,767 24 1,791 88.1 57.1 87.5 58 437 1,103 227 Malabar ... 1887-88 ... 15 377 ... 377 303 ... 303 80.4 ... 80.4 25 21 167 115 1888-89 ... 17 358 11 369 272 6 278 75.9 54.5 75.3 21 17 145 110 1889-90 ... 20 626 16 642 373 7 380 59.5 43.7 59.2 32 14 158 201 Nellore ... 1887-88 ... 18 1,440 23 1,463 1,304 20 1,324 90.5 86.8 90.4 81 133 855 316 1888-89 ... 21 962 7 969 826 3 829 85.8 42.8 85.5 46 111 565 150 1889-90 ... 22 1,231 3 1,234 1,053 3 1,056 85.5 100.0 85.6 56 116 657 280 Nílgiris ... 1887-88 ... 5 52 5 57 35 1 36 67.3 20.0 63.1 11 15 18 2 1888-89 ... 5 123 36 159 93 25 118 75.6 69.4 74.2 32 10 28 55 1889-90 ... 5 137 12 149 105 7 112 76.6 58.3 75.2 30 30 46 29 North Arcot. 1887-88... 15 377 2 373 329 1 330 88.7 50.0 88.4 25 61 220 48 1888-89 ... 17 417 ... 417 381 ... 381 91.3 ... 91.3 24 78 239 64 1889-90... 17 998 12 1,010 919 4 923 92.0 33.3 91.3 59 222 512 185 Salem ... 1887-88 ... 15 935 31 966 781 8 789 83.5 25.8 81.6 63 161 500 120 1888-89 ... 17 983 8 991 828 3 831 80.1 37.5 83.8 58 146 551 131 1889-90 ... 23 1,114 12 1,126 1,013 10 1,023 90.9 83.3 90.8 49 195 728 90 South Arcot. 1887-88 ... 13 689 15 704 565 4 569 82.0 26.6 80.8 53 69 397 99 1888-89 .. 15 690 16 706 578 2 580 83.7 12.5 82.1 47 65 371 142 1889-90 .. 18 1,727 21 1,748 1,489 9 1,498 86.2 42.9 85.7 97 210 947 332 South Canara. 1887-88 ... 13 596 40 636 446 22 468 74.8 55.0 73.5 49 44 189 213 1888-89 ... 15 320 35 355 260 20 280 83.8 57.1 78.6 25 18 115 127 1889-90 ... 16 426 31 457 329 18 347 77.2 58.1 75.9 29 33 159 137 Tanjore ... 1887-88 ... 37 1,742 35 1,777 1,482 18 1,500 85.1 51.4 84.4 48 151 1,010 321 1888-89 ... 37 2,281 53 2,134 1,996 37 2,033 87.5 69.8 95.2 58 214 1,332 450 1889-90... 37 2,527 95 2,622 2,116 47 2,163 83.7 49.5 82.4 71 234 1,307 575 Tinnevelly. 1887-88 ... 22 880 12 892 780 9 789 88.6 75.0 88.4 41 75 434 271 1888-89 ... 23 962 17 979 833 11 844 86.6 64.7 86.2 42 93 484 256 1889-90 ... 23 1,302 7 1,309 1,264 6 1,270 97.0 85.7 97.0 57 115 783 366 Trichino- poly. 1887-88 ... 11 341 8 349 322 ... 322 94.4 ... 94.4 32 28 220 74 1888-89 ... 11 677 5 682 614 5 619 90.6 100.0 90.7 62 45 374 195 1889-90 ... 14 1,628 43 1,671 1,503 40 1,543 92.3 93.0 92.3 119 184 878 441 Vizaga- patam. 1887-88 ... 15 742 81 823 688 56 744 92.7 69.1 90.4 55 120 451 117 1888-89 ... 17 614 48 662 572 30 602 94.7 62.5 90.9 39 90 337 145 1889-90 ... 19 2,150 123 2,273 2,008 96 2,104 93.3 78.0 92.5 119 535 1,123 350 Total ... 1887-88 ... 334 13,736 438 14,174 11,506 214 11,720 83.7 48.9 82.6 42 1,961 7,195 2,350 1888-89 ... 363 18,283 544 18,827 15,603 275 15,878 85.3 50.6 84.3 52 2,686 9,634 3,283 1889-90 ... 387 26,870 979 27,849 23,363 577 23,940 86.9 58.9 85.6 72 4,646 13,675 5,042 6
20 VACCINATION REPORT. IX. Table showing the Inspection work of Deputy Inspector of Vaccination during 1889-90. Circles. Number of inspecting officers. Number of villages inspected. Total number of persons vaccinated as reported by Vaccinators. Total successful as reported by Vac- cinators. Percentage of success as reported by Vaccinators. Number of days on inspection duty. Number of cases verified by Deputy Inspectors. Proportion per cent. of inspection to total number vaccinated. Total number of cases inspected by Deputy Inspector of all sorts. Total number of successful cases in- spected by Deputy Inspectors. Percentage of successful cases to total number inspected, as reported by Deputy Inspector. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. Gooty ... ... 1 ... 317 ... 8,804 8,395 95.3 192 3,618 ... 41.1 ... 3,618 2,951 81. Penukondah ... ... 1 ... 429 6,908 6,729 97.4 258 ... 3,766 ... 54.5 3,766 3,445 91. Bellary ... 1 ... 369 ... 13,800 13,485 97.7 200 7,254 ... 52.6 ... 7,254 6,595 90. Harpanahalli ... ... 1 ... 320 8,312 8,198 98.6 256 ... 5,063 ... 60.9 5,063 3,838 75. Chingleput ... 1 ... 301 ... 27,371 25,371 92.7 153 8,791 ... 32.1 ... 8,791 8,210 93. Saidápet ... 1 ... 538 ... 19,279 17,782 92.2 257 13,771 ... 71.0 ... 13,771 11,085 80. North Coimba- tore ... ... 1 ... VACCINATION REPORT. 21 X. Table showing the Percentage of Success of the Result of Vaccine Operations performed by different methods during 1889-90. Districts. Circles. Result of Vaccine operations Percentage of Success. From lymph in capillary tubes. From lymph in plates of glass. From lymph in bottles. From arm to arm. From lymph prepared from scabs. From animal lymph. From lymph in capillary tubes. From lymph in plates of glass. From lymph in bottles. From arm to arm. From lymph prepared from scabs. From animal lymph. Total. Success- ful. Total. Success- ful. Total. Success- ful. Total. Success- ful. Total. Success- ful. Total. Success- ful. Ananta- pur. Gooty ... ... 1,625 1,550 1,476 1,399 [28] [25] 3,143 3,049 2,532 2,372 ... ... 95.3 94.9 [89.3] 97.0 93.6 ... Penukonda ... 679 664 838 824 123 117 2,568 2,548 2,700 2,576 ... ... 97.8 98.3 95.1 99.2 95.4 ... Total of district ... 2,304 2,214 2,314 2,223 151 142 5,711 5,597 5,232 4,948 ... ... 96.0 96.1 94.0 98.0 94.5 ... Bellary. Bellary ... ... 911 895 1,570 1,529 554 536 5,801 5,711 1,491 1,392 * 3,473 * 3,422 98.3 97.4 96.8 98.4 93.4 98.5 Harpanahalle ... 891 282 988 976 398 390 3,702 3,672 819 797 ... ... 31.7 98.8 97.9 99.2 97.3 ... Total of district ... 1,802 1,177 2,558 2,505 952 926 9,503 9,383 2,310 2,189 3,473 3,422 65.3 97.9 97.2 98.7 94.7 98.5 Chingle- put. Chingleput ... 4,372 4,155 831 774 ... ... 22,062 20,347 106 [95] ... ... 95.0 93.1 ... 92.4 [89.6] ... Saidápet ... ... 1,519 1,321 [10] [9] ... ... 16,800 15,699 950 723 ... ... 86.9 [90.0] ... 93.4 76.1 ... Total of district ... 5,891 5,476 841 783 ... ... 38,862 36,046 1,056 818 ... ... 92.9 93.1 ... 92.7 77.4 ... Coimbatore. N. Coimbatore ... 1,188 1,163 4,210 4,108 [29] [29] 8,360 8,197 166 154 ... ... 97.7 97.5 [100.0] 98.1 92.7 ... S. Do. ... 516 504 3,027 2,913 ... ... 8,674 8,546 474 450 ... ... 97.7 96.2 ... 98.5 94.9 ... E. Do. ... 1,714 1,680 7,906 7,799 [6] [6] 15,047 14,920 167 164 ... ... 98.0 98.6 [100.0] 99.2 98.3 ... Total of district ... 3,418 3,347 15,143 14,820 35 35 32,081 31,663 807 768 ... ... 97.0 97.8 100.0 98.6 95.1 ... Cuddapah. Cuddapah ... ... 2,985 2,838 649 604 [20] [19] 1,762 1,734 1,530 1,399 ... ... 95.1 93.1 [95.0] 98.4 91.4 ... Madanapalle ... 1,248 1,216 810 786 200 196 1,790 1,764 4,273 4,140 ... ... 97.4 97.0 98.0 97.9 96.9 ... Sidhout ... ... 2,353 2,231 119 109 ... ... 2,480 2,432 508 472 3,268 2,986 94.8 91.6 ... 98.1 92.8 91.4 Total of district ... 6,586 6,285 1,578 1,499 220 215 6,032 5,930 6,311 6,011 3,268 2,986 95.4 94.9 97.7 98.3 95.8 91.4 Ganjam. Chatrapur ... 1,740 1,695 2,007 1,981 ... ... 10,016 9,969 [9] [9] ... ... 97.4 98.7 ... 99.5 [100.0] ... Chicacole ... ... 2,034 1,998 3,610 3,581 189 189 3,557 3,548 ... ... ... ... 98.2 99.2 100.0 99.7 ... ... Ganjam H. T. ... 1,028 921 384 369 ... ... 17,003 16,492 [28] [23] ... ... 89.5 96.1 ... 96.9 [82.1] ... Total of district ... 4,802 4,614 6,001 5,931 189 189 30,576 30,009 37 32 ... ... 96.8 98.8 100.0 98.1 96.2 ... Godávari. Ellore ... ... 2,871 2,549 [74] [71] ... ... 7,742 7,662 [28] [11] ... ... 88.8 [95.9] ... 98.9 [39.8] ... Pittapore ... ... 1,453 1,256 ... ... ... ... 6,663 6,563 ... ... ... ... 86.4 ... ... 98.4 ... ... Rajahmundry ... 837 727 542 507 ... ... 4,013 3,862 2,155 1,848 ... ... 86.8 93.5 ... 96.2 85.7 77.6 Total of district ... 5,161 4,532 616 578 ... ... 18,418 18,087 2,183 1,859 ... ... 87.8 93.8 ... 98.0 85.1 77.6 Kistna Guntúr ... ... 2,686 2,198 [17] [16] ... ... 2,277 2,225 343 293 ... ... 81.8 [94.1] ... 97.7 85.4 ... Masulipatam ... 3,941 3,651 ... ... ... ... 4,995 4,911 [67] [64] ... ... 92.6 ... ... 98.3 [95.5] ... Vinukondah ... 1,066 989 782 754 ... ... 1,326 1,309 1,446 1,316 ... ... 92.7 96.4 ... 98.7 91.3 ... Total of district... 7,693 6,838 799 770 ... ... 8,598 8,445 1,856 1,673 ... ... 88.8 96.3 ... 98.2 90.4 ... * Includes the work of Medical subordinates.
22 VACCINATION REPORT. X. Table showing the Percentage of Success of the Result of Vaccine Operations performed by different methods during 1889-90 VACCINATION REPORT. 23 X. Table showing the Percentage of Success of the Result of Vaccine Operations performed by different methods during 1889-9024 VACCINATION REPORT. XI. Table showing the Results of Animal Vaccination in the districts in which it was conducted during 1889-90. Circles. Number of months animal vaccination was carried on. Number of calves inoculated. Total vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total cost. Average cost of each successful case. Total cost including the pay of vacci- nators, &c. Average cost of each successful case in- cluding the pay of vaccinators. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS A. P. Bellary ... 9 months ... 251 * 3,674 3,622 35 17 98.5 590 15 0 0 2 7 VACCINATION REPORT. 25 XII. Table showing the Extent in Square Miles and Strength of Staff of each Vaccination Range. Districts. Circles. Number of Deputy Inspectors employed during 1889-90. Number of Vacci- nators employed daring 1889-90. Average area for each Deputy Inspector. Average area of each Vacci- nator. Anantapur ... Gooty ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 11 2,471 225 Penukonda ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 6 2,641 440 Total ... 2 17 5,085 299 Bellary ... Bellary ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 15 3,735 249 Harpanahalli ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 2,008 223 Total ... 2 24 5,755 239 Chingleput ... Chingleput ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 1,697 141 Saidápet ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 1,169 133 Total... 2 21 2,843 135 Coimbatore ... North Coimbatore ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 3,031 253 South do. ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 2,036 226 East do. ... ... ... ... ... 1 18 2,748 153 Total ... 3 39 7,841 201 Cuddapah ... Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 2,541 212 Madanapalle ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 14 3,858 275 Sidhout ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 2,858 291 Total ... 3 35 8,747 250 Ganjam ... Chatrapur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 18 1,987 110 Chicacole ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 1,151 96 Ganjam H. T. ... ... ... ... ... 1 7 5,240 749 Total ... 3 37 8,377 227 Godávari ... Ellore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 17 2,523 148 Pittápore ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 13 1,248 93 Rajahmundry ... ... ... ... ... 1 16 2,725 170 Total ... 3 46 5,745 125 Kistna ... ... Guntúr ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 14 2,524 180 Masulipatam ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 20 3,502 175 Vinukonda ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 2,436 271 Total ... 3 43 8,487 196 Kurnool ... Cumbum ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 4,099 455 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 13 3,447 265 Total ... 2 22 7,395 ... Madura... ... Dindigul ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 14 3,149 225 Madura ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 10 1,587 159 Paramagudi ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 19 3,672 193 Total ... 3 43 8,393 194 Malabar... ... Calicut ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 5,742 169 Tellicherry ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 10 Pálghat ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 Total... 3 34 5,742 169 Nellore ... ... Kávali ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 2,831 315 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 2,904 242 Ongole ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 2,985 332 Total ... 3 30 8,702 290 Nílgiris ... ... Nilgiris ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 936 311 Total... ... 3 936 311 North Arcot ... Chittoor ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 15 2,835 188 Vellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 1,975 165 Kárvetnagar ... ... ... ... ... 1 9 2,299 255 Total... 3 36 7,131 198
26 VACCINATION REPORT. XII. Table showing the Extent in Square Miles and Strength of Staff of each Vaccination RangeVACCINATION REPORT. 27 XIII. Abstract of Replies of District Surgeons to Circular No. 1095/V of 21st April 1890 regarding Methods to be adopted for improving Vaccination, &c. Number. District. Minimum number of cases required by Mode of punishment of Vaccinators for short work. Examinations passed or not. Animal lymph.28 VACCINATION REPORT. XIII. Abstract of Replies of District Surgeons to Circular No. 1095/V of 21st April 1890 regarding Methods to be adopted for improving Vaccination, &c.VACCINATION REPORT. 29 XIII. Abstract of Replies of District Surgeons to Circular No. 1095/V of 21st April 1890 regarding Methods to be adopted for improving Vaccination, &c.30 VACCINATION REPORT. XIII. Abstract of Replies of District Surgeons to Circular No. 1095/V of 21st April 1890 regarding Methods to be adopted for improving Vaccination, &c. VACCINATION REPORT. 31 XIII. Abstract of Replies of District Surgeons to Circular No. 1095/V of 21st April 1890 regarding Methods to be adopted for improving Vaccination, &c.APPENDIX. VACCINATION RETURNS.
VACCINATION RETURNS. 35 A36 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 37 30 Nellore. Kávali circle ... ... 373,748 132 9 4,614 4,359 8,973 997 8,936 956 5,430 8,400 37 36 94.0 97.3 22.4 0.1 ... ... ... ... 31 Nellore do. ... ... 397,873 137 12 5,906 5,402 11,308 942 11,197 580 7,466 10,919 111 82 97.5 73.8 27.4 0.2 ... ... ... ... 32 Ongole do. ... ... 411,910 138 9 4,548 4,335 8,883 987 8,873 619 6,070 7,976 10 5 89.8 50.0 19.3 0.01 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,183,531 136 30 15,068 14,096 29,164 972 29,006 2,155 18,966 27,295 158 123 94.1 77.8 23.7 0.1 26,049 22.01 998 0.8 33 Nílgiri. Nílgiri Circle ... ... 73,921 79 3 1,189 753 1,942 647 1,891 50 822 1,610 51 44 85.1 86.2 21.7 0.6 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 73,921 79 3 1,189 753 1,942 647 1,891 50 822 1,610 51 44 851 86.2 21.7 0.6 1,703 23.04 37 0.5 34 North Arcot. Chittoor circle ... ... 657,795 232 15 7,288 6,715 14,003 933 13,978 4,868 7,346 13,761 25 14 98.4 56.0 20.9 0.02 ... ... ... ... 35 Kárvetnagar circle ... 473,771 206 9 4,142 3,655 7,797 866 7,787 1,565 4,710 7,567 10 10 97.1 100.0 15.9 0.02 ... ... ... ... 36 Vellore do. ... 608,448 308 12 7,581 6,388 13,969 1,164 13,894 1,296 9,613 13,119 75 52 94.4 69.3 21.5 0.08 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,740,014 244 36 19,011 16,758 35,769 993 35,659 7,729 21,669 34,447 110 76 96.6 69.1 19.8 0.4 30,032 17.2 12,609 7.2 37 Salem. Krishnagiri circle ... 392,465 150 12 7,329 6,856 14,185 1,182 14,145 6,350 6,884 14,062 40 40 99.4 100.0 35.8 0.1 ... ... ... ... 38 Salem. do. ... 512,829 179 18 10,128 9,736 19,864 1,104 19,553 3,269 12,699 19,027 311 146 97.3 46.9 37.1 0.3 ... ... ... ... 39 Námakal do. ... 604,459 285 17 11,817 11,284 23,101 1,359 23,028 3,337 15,417 21,940 73 71 95.3 97.2 36.2 0.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,509,753 202 47 29,274 27,876 57,150 1,216 56,726 12,956 35,000 55,029 424 257 97.01 60.6 36.4 0.1 42,283 28.0 1,136 0.8 40 South Arcot. Cuddalore circle ... ... 1,122,846 340 17 11,959 9,856 21,815 1,283 21,815 2,156 13,868 20,813 ... ... 95.4 ... 18.5 ... ... ... ... ... 41 Vriddháchalam circle ... 628,510 401 12 6,031 4,884 10,915 910 10,915 1,519 7,354 10,552 ... ... 96.6 ... 16.8 ... ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,751,356 360 29 17,990 14,740 32,730 1,128 32,730 3,675 21,222 31,365 ... ... 95.8 ... 17.8 ... 25,193 14.3 2,382 1.4 42 South Canara. No. I. South Canara circle 573,167 300 14 8,326 6,961 15,287 1,091 14,995 674 6,100 13,575 292 205 90.5 70.2 23.7 0.3 ... ... ... ... 43 No. II. do. do. 354,248 178 10 5,908 4,626 10,534 1,053 10,507 620 3,781 9,996 27 10 95.1 37.03 28.2 0.03 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 927,415 238 24 14,234 11,587 25,821 1,078 25,502 1,294 9,881 23,571 319 215 92.4 67.4 25.4 0.2 33,261 35.8 640 0.7 44 Tanjore. Negapatam circle ... 881,387 601 16 9,821 8,703 18,524 1,157 18,497 2,420 12,350 17,764 27 20 90.6 74.1 20.1 0.02 ... ... ... ... 45 Tanjore do. ... 1,047,924 484 21 14,156 12,387 26,543 1,264 25,957 4,842 14,560 23,692 586 395 91.2 67.4 22.6 0.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,929,311 531 37 23,977 21,090 45,067 1,218 44,454 7,262 26,910 41,456 613 415 93.2 67.7 21.4 0.2 40,079 20.7 1,388 0.7 46 Tinnevelly. Sátúr circle ... ... 495,558 271 12 9,017 7,138 16,155 1,346 16,148 2,248 10,314 15,652 7 5 96.9 71.4 31.5 0.01 ... ... ... ... 47 Shermádevi circle ... 479,904 301 14 10,938 8,522 19,460 1,390 19,437 3,459 11,637 18,972 23 19 97.6 82.6 39.5 0.03 ... ... ... ... 48 Tinnevelly do. ... 666,819 342 16 10,754 8,400 19,154 1,197 19,132 2,479 12,137 18,617 22 16 97.3 72.7 27.9 0.02 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,642,281 305 42 30,709 24,060 54,769 1,304 54,717 8,186 34,088 53,241 52 40 97.3 76.9 32.4 0.02 43,532 26.5 1,377 0.8 49 Trichi- nopoly. Trichinopoly circle ... 1,110,811 313 23 19,546 18,626 38,172 1,660 37,754 4,482 23,566 37,062 418 389 98.1 93.1 33.3 0.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district... 1,110,811 313 23 19,546 18,626 38,172 1,660 37,754 4,482 23,566 37,062 418 389 98.1 93.1 33.3 0.3 21,330 192 449 0.4 50 Vizaga- patam. Gunapur circle ... ... 694,673 50 4 1,024 892 1,916 476 1,911 176 887 1,774 5 ... 92.8 ... 17.5 0.008 ... ... ... ... 51 Zemindary vaccinators. 3 1,306 1,061 2,367 790 2,361 368 1,391 2,251 6 6 95.3 100.0 Jeypore circle ... ... 5 2,792 2,685 5,477 1,095 5,477 642 2,460 5,347 ... ... 97.6 ... Zemindary vaccinators. 3 1,485 1,408 2,893 964 2,893 238 1,084 2,818 ... ... 97.4 ... Total of Hill tracts ... 694,673 50 15 6,607 6,046 12,653 844 12,642 1,424 5,822 12,190 11 6 96.4 54.5 17.5 0.008 ... ... ... ...
38 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 39 14 Municipalities. Coimbatore ... ... 38,967 12,989 2 803 754 1,557 778 1,557 662 763 1,494 ... ... 95.9 ... 38.3 ... 1,022 26.2 98 2.3 15 Conjeeveram ... ... 37,275 4,142 2 1,090 828 1,918 959 1,852 381 1,100 1,744 66 47 94.2 71.2 46.8 1.2 1,513 40.5 37 0.9 16 Coonoor ... ... ... 4,778 531 1 341 314 655 655 623 133 286 558 32 21 89.5 65.6 116.7 4.3 142 29.7 3 0.7 17 Cuddalore ... ... 43,545 3,629 1 818 536 1,354 1,354 1,354 298 677 1,194 ... ... 88.2 ... 27.4 ... 934 21.4 24 0.6 18 Cuddapah ... ... 18,982 999 1 249 179 428 428 378 135 155 274 50 32 72.5 64.0 14.4 1.7 404 21.2 16 0.8 19 Dindigul ... ... 14,182 7,091 1 629 651 1,280 1,280 1,190 695 431 1,161 90 60 97.3 66.6 81.8 4.2 1,097 77.3 30 2.1 20 Ellore ... ... ... 25,092 2,788 1 677 705 1,382 1,382 1,378 257 801 1,326 4 2 96.2 50.0 52.8 0.07 645 25.7 68 2.7 21 Erode ... ... ... 9,864 897 1 410 267 677 677 677 404 193 668 ... ... 98.6 ... 67.7 ... 477 48.3 7 0.7 22 Gudiyátam ... ... 16,690 ... 1 181 137 318 318 318 81 204 285 ... ... 99.1 ... 17.1 ... ... ... ... ... 23 Guntúr ... ... ... 19,646 1,691 1 585 418 1,003 1,003 902 304 449 882 101 41 97.7 4.6 44.8 2.08 268 13.6 10 0.5 24 Karúr ... ... ... 9,205 2,301 1 206 203 409 409 409 236 124 388 ... ... 94.9 ... 42.1 ... 419 45.5 2 0.2 25 Kumbakónam ... ... 50,098 16,699 2 756 608 1,364 682 1,362 156 876 1,310 2 2 963 100.0 26.1 0.03 1,365 27.2 41 0.8 26 Kurnool ... ... 20,329 4,066 1 1,176 517 1,693 1,693 1,134 384 427 1,060 559 559 93.4 100.0 52.1 27.4 935 45.9 45 2.2 27 Madras ... ... ... 405,848 15,031 24 13,281 11,221 24,502 1,021 22,779 15,243 5,259 22,100 1,723 1,404 97.01 81.4 54.4 3.4 29,942 73.7 828 2.0 28 Madura ... ... ... 76,847 18,452 3 1,855 1,232 3,087 1,029 3,087 1,971 921 3,015 ... ... 97.7 ... 39.2 ... 2,941 38.2 86 1.1 29 Mannárgudi ... ... 19,409 4,852 1 331 257 588 588 583 83 338 556 5 ... 95.3 ... 28.6 ... 520 26.7 19 0.9 30 Mangalore ... ... 32,099 3,567 1 803 657 1,460 1,460 1,460 429 636 1,373 ... ... 94.04 ... 42.7 ... 2,362 73.5 97 3.0 31 Masulipatam ... ... 35,056 8,764 1 840 464 1,304 1,304 1,302 107 778 1,221 2 2 93.7 100.0 34.8 0.05 1,115 31.8 22 0.6 32 Máyavaram ... ... 23,044 7,681 1 466 372 838 838 831 471 369 829 7 7 98.9 100.0 35.9 0.3 846 36.7 38 1.6 33 Negapatam ... ... 53,770 7,693 2 1,152 916 2,068 1,034 2,061 823 961 1,822 7 4 884 57.1 33.8 0.07 1,679 31.2 104 1.9 34 Nellore ... ... ... 27,505 1,100 1 535 524 1,059 1,059 1,059 602 358 995 ... ... 93.9 ... 36.1 ... 1,155 41.9 40 1.5 35 Ongole ... ... ... 9,200 2,300 1 455 379 834 834 834 68 573 721 ... ... 86.4 ... 78.4 ... 327 35.5 16 1.7 36 Ootacamund ... 12,335 1,121 1 594 426 1,020 1,020 928 247 442 803 92 89 86.5 96.7 65.09 7.2 547 44.3 21 1.7 37 Palamcottah ... ... 17,964 17,964 1 503 352 855 855 817 311 282 798 38 25 97.7 65.8 44.4 1.3 737 41.0 11 0.6 38 Pálghat ... ... 36,339 4,037 2 826 573 1,399 699 1,377 13 572 1,134 22 18 823 81.8 31.2 0.4 1,677 46.1 40 1.1 39 Parlákimeii ... ... 15,365 ... 1 410 335 745 745 745 307 282 726 ... ... 97.4 ... 47.2 ... ... ... ... ... 40 Periyakulam ... ... 16,446 ... 1 189 176 365 365 362 159 185 354 3 1 97.8 33.3 21.5 6.06 ... ... ... ... 41 Pálni ... ... ... 13,315 ... 1 242 258 500 500 492 204 260 477 8 6 96.9 75.0 35.8 0.4 ... ... ... ... 42 Rajahmundry ... ... 24,555 2,046 2 323 245 568 284 568 136 268 464 ... ... 81.7 ... 18.9 ... 1,253 51.0 62 2.5 43 Salem ... ... ... 59,631 16,889 4 1,114 978 2,092 523 2,053 907 889 1,890 39 23 92.1 58.9 31.6 0.8 1,739 29.1 108 1.8 44 Srírangam ... ... 19,773 2,825 1 702 695 1,397 1,397 1,380 249 827 1,328 17 15 96.2 88.2 67.1 0.7 428 21.6 35 1.7 45 Tanjore ... ... ... 54,745 6,843 3 1,165 586 1,751 584 1,593 222 815 1,528 158 101 95.9 63.9 27.9 1.8 1,626 29.7 64 1.2 46 Tellicherry ... ... 24,581 6,602 3 674 506 1,180 393 1,141 159 477 851 39 39 746 100.0 34.6 1.5 1,733 70.5 60 2.4 47 Tinnevelly ... ... 23,221 23,221 1 491 295 786 786 786 248 403 739 ... ... 94.02 .... 31.8 ... 699 30.1 85 1.5 48 Trichinopoly ... ... 84,449 8,445 6 3,074 1,975 5,049 841 4,939 913 2,600 4,613 110 98 93.4 89.1 54.6 1.1 3,599 42.6 89 1.1 49 Tirupatúr ... ... 14,278 ... 1 252 212 464 464 464 213 212 450 ... ... 96.9 ... 31.5 ... ... ... ... ... 50 Tirupati ... ... 13,232 ... 1 114 88 202 202 196 65 83 161 6 2 82.1 33.3 12.1 0.1 ... ... ... ... 51 Tuticorin ... ... 16,281 5,427 1 602 283 885 885 885 159 265 761 ... ... 85.9 ... 46.7 ... 573 35.1 20 1.2 52 Vaniyambádi ... ... 15,933 ... 1 205 178 383 383 383 190 188 381 ... ... 99.4 ... 23.8 ... ... ... ... ... 53 Vellore ... ... ... 40,958 9,373 2 807 706 1,513 756 1,508 587 699 1,451 5 ... 94.9 ... 35.4 ... 1,299 31.7 50 1.2 54 Vizagapatam ... ... 30,291 10,097 1 754 505 1,259 1,259 907 274 294 899 352 266 99.1 75.6 29.6 8.7 1,315 43.4 50 1.6 55 Vizianagrum ... ... 22,577 4,515 1 580 497 1,077 1,077 926 338 390 912 151 145 98.5 29.8 40.3 6.4 791 35.0 21 0.9 56 Wálajápet ... ... 10,387 10,387 1 166 126 292 292 288 108 142 282 4 3 97.9 75.0 27.1 0.2 240 23.1 9 0.8 Total of Municipalities... 1,861,508 4,872 106 49,010 36,569 85,570 807 81,442 32,975 30,715 76,215 4,128 3,361 93.5 81.4 40.9 1.8 79,552 42.7 2,975 1.6 Grand Total ... 30,868,504 225 793 465,588 382,311 847,899 40 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 41 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the official year 1889-90. Paid from Total. Number of all successful vaccinations and revacci- nation Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 2,223 5 8 ... ... 2,223 5 8 ... ... 2,223 5 8 8,395 0 4 3 1,813 3 9 ... ... 1,813 3 9 ... ... 1,813 3 9 6,729 0 4 3 4,036 9 5 ... ... 4,036 9 5 ... ... 4,036 9 5 15,124 0 4 2 3,905 7 0 ... ... 3,905 7 0 ... ... 3,905 7 0 13,485 0 4 7 2,421 8 4 ... ... 2,421 8 4 ... ... 2,421 8 4 8,198 0 4 9 6,326 15 4 ... ... 6,326 15 4 ... ... 6,326 15 4 21,G83 0 4 8 4,517 14 0 ... ... 4,517 14 0 ... ... 4,517 14 0 25,371 0 2 10 3,402 12 3 ... ... 3,402 12 3 ... ... 3,402 12 3 17,752 0 3 1 7,920 10 3 ... ... 7,920 10 3 ... ... 7,920 10 3 43,123 0 3 0 2,843 4 2 ... ... 2,843 4 2 ... ... 2,843 4 2 13,651 0 3 4 2,135 14 6 ... ... 2,135 14 6 ... ... 2,135 14 6 12,413 0 2 9 3,622 11 4 ... ... 3,622 11 4 ... ... 3,622 11 4 24,567 0 2 4 8,601 14 0 ... ... 8,601 14 0 ... ... 8,601 14 0 50,631 0 2 9 3,318 15 0 ... ... 3,318 15 0 ... ... 3,318 15 0 6,594 0 8 1 2,808 9 4 ... ... 2,808 9 4 ... ... 2,808 9 4 8,102 0 5 7 2,660 10 5 ... ... 2,660 10 5 ... ... 2,660 10 5 8,232 0 5 2 8,788 2 9 ... ... 8,788 2 9 ... ... 8,788 2 9 22,928 0 6 1 4,026 10 11 ... ... 4,026 10 11 ... ... 4,026 10 11 13,654 0 4 8 2,590 2 7 ... ... 2,590 2 7 ... ... 2,590 2 7 9,316 0 4 5 1,938 8 1 ... 1,938 8 1 ... ... ... 1,938 8 1 17,805 0 1 9 8,555 5 7 ... 1,938 8 1 6,616 13 6 ... ... 8,555 5 7 40,775 0 3 4 3,468 1 0 ... ... 3,468 1 0 ... ... 3,468 1 0 9,925 0 5 7 2,585 8 7 ... ... 2,585 8 7 ... ... 2,585 8 7 7,819 0 5 3 300 1 9 ... 300 1 9 ... ... ... 300 1 9 747 0 6 5 4,147 11 8 ... ... 4,147 11 8 ... ... 4,147 11 8 14,184 0 4 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10,501 7 0 ... 300 1 9 10,201 5 3 ... ... 10,501 7 0 32,676 0 5 2 3,072 15 11 ... ... 3,072 15 11 ... ... 3,072 15 11 4,732 0 10 5 4,134 14 6 ... ... 4,134 14 6 ... ... 4,134 14 6 8,626 0 7 8 2,142 0 9 ... ... 2,142 0 9 ... ... 2,142 0 9 4,418 0 7 9 9,349 15 2 ... ... 9,349 15 2 ... ... 9,349 15 2 17,776 0 8 5 2,481 11 10 ... ... 2,481 11 10 ... ... 2,481 11 10 10,408 0 3 10 2,597 6 2 ... ... 2,597 6 2 ... ... 2,597 6 2 13,704 0 3 0 5,079 2 0 ... ... 5,079 2 0 ... ... 5,079 2 0 24,112 0 3 4 3,370 10 8 ... ... 3,370 10 8 ... ... 3,370 10 8 16,995 0 3 2 2,519 10 1 ... ... 2,519 10 1 ... ... 2,519 10 1 13,888 0 2 11 4,184 14 2 ... ... 4,184 14 2 ... ... 4,184 14 2 22,519 0 2 11 10,075 2 11 ... ... 10,075 2 11 ... ... 10,075 2 11 53,402 0 3 0 2,265 14 11 ... ... 2,265 14 11 ... ... 2,265 14 11 10,816 0 3 4 3,111 5 7 ... ... 3,111 5 7 ... ... 3,111 5 7 14,481 0 3 5 2,007 9 10 ... ... 2,007 9 10 ... ... 2,007 9 10 12,863 0 2 6 7,384 14 4 ... ... 7,384 14 4 ... ... 7,384 14 4 38,160 0 3 1
42 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 43 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1889-9044 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 45 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1889-9046 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 47 B48 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 49 B50 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 51 B52 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 53 B54 APPENDIX. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned years. Establishment. Persons primarily vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. Government vaccinators .. 10,194 9,663 9,136 8,741 16,887 16,319 12,386 12,033 9,970 9,701 8,511 8,204 9,741 9,479 17,092 16,210 28,257 27,227 Local fund do. ... 470,605 435,696 526,329 493,415 591,352 553,890 617,475 580,624 608,729 579,261 584,711 557,732 618,588 590,853 670,318 643,761 708,653 680,355 Cantonment do. ... 5,213 4,941 3,446 3,207 3,734 3,461 3,434 3,159 2,462 2,295 2,850 2,677 3,375 3,293 4,316 3,912 3,341 3,285 Native States do. ... 3,635 3,286 3,838 3,652 4,751 4,436 4,506 4,291 4,082 3,915 4,429 4,216 4,042 3,885 2,270 2,160 5,254 5,069 Municipalities ... ... 80,286 70,980 83,533 75,950 91,665 84,452 97,765 88,281 92,946 87,968 70,065 65,614 71,710 67,405 81,566 77,180 81,442 76,215 Private vaccinators ... 137 117 45 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... 9,890 8,193 10,154 8,371 12,579 10,185 21,561 17,201 22,834 18,793 16,790 13,954 13,736 11,506 18,283 15,603 26,870 23,363 Medical subordinates ... 9,646 5,742 10,049 7,015 9,633 6,271 8,936 5,280 7,549 4,594 6,720 3,677 3,033 1,630 2,517 1,517 3,077 1,793 Army European ... 1,916 1,382 1,987 1,357 1,940 1,158 2,840 1,737 691 597 875 694 ... ... ... ... ... ... Native ... 4,372 3,093 4,414 3,374 4,121 3,212 4,415 3,655 2,784 2,288 2,297 1,987 ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 595,894 543,093 652,931 605,125 736,662 683,384 773,118 716,261 752,047 709,412 697,248 658,755 724,225 688,051 796,362 760,343 856,894 817,307
14TH OCTOBER 1890, Nos. 2618, 2619 L., LOCAL AMD MUNICIPAL. GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READ2 14TH OCTOBER 1890, Nos. 2618, 2619 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 3. Excluding the work done in the cantonments of Bangalore and Secunderabad, the proportion of the total number of operations performed during the year per 1,000 of the population was 28.3, against 26.1 in 1888-89 and 23.8 in 1887-88. Infantile vaccination, however, was in a very backward state, as only 20.4 per cent. of the number of children born during the year were successfully protected from small-pox. 4. The average work done by each vaccinator was 1,061 operations or 88 per mensem, against 986 or 82 per mensem in 1888-89, but the outturn is still quite inadequate. The Government is glad to observe that the average outturn of work for each Government vaccinator was more than double that of last year. Excluding these, the highest average (1,100 cases) is shown by the Local Fund vaccinators, and the lowest (617 cases) by the Cantonment vaccinators. As regards the quality of work, it appears that 95.7 per cent. of the operations performed by the Local Fund and Municipal vaccinators who work under the immediate supervision of Deputy Inspectors were reported to be successful; but the average result after inspection by the latter officers was only 91.4 per cent. In the case of operations conducted by other Municipal vaccinators, 93 per cent. were successful; while in the case of those performed by Medical subordinates attached to dispensaries and hospitals, the percentage was only 85.9. 5. Local Fund Circles.14TH OCTOBER 1890, Nos. 2618, 2619 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 3 1. Ongole. 2. Anantapur. 3. Rajahmundry. 4. Palamcottah. 5. Ellore. 6. Negapatam. 7. Tinnevelly. 8. Cuddapah. 9. Nellore. 10. Máyavaram. 11. Adóni. 12. Vellore. 13. Coonoor. 14. Ootacamund. 15 Chidambaram. 16. Erode. 17. Masulipatam. 18. Srírangam. 19. Dindigul. 20. Guntúr. 21. Coimbatore. 22. Vániyambádi. 23. Kurnool. 24. Kumbakónam. 25. Tirupati. in system of remuneration. The Government will be glad to receive the results of the Inspector of Vaccination's special inspection referred to in paragraph 11 of his report. Compulsory vaccination was in force in the 25 towns noted in the margin, in the last four of which it was introduced in the year under review, and its introduc- tion in Cocanada, Cuddalore, Trichinopoly and Vizagapatam has since been sanc- tioned by Government. It is satisfactory to note that the compulsory system has been well received by the people, and that in towns where compulsion was in force, the proportion of successful vaccinations on children under one year to registered births was 65 per cent. against 40 per cent. in other towns. The cost of each successful vaccination in Municipal towns, however, continued to be high, being As. 5-3 against As. 3-8, the average for the whole presidency, including rural tracts. 1887-88 .. .. .. .. 14,174 1888-89 .. .. .. .. 18,827 1889-90 .. .. .. .. 27,849 G.O., dated 14th January 1889, No. 24, Public. G.O., dated 19th October 1889, No. 827, Public, para 2. G.O., dated 29th October 1889, No. 1455 M. 7. Civil Dispensaries.4 14TH OCTOBER 1890, Nos. 2618, 2619 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. accepted his conclusion that the vaccine matter prepared by him can be preserved for periods extending to at least 40 days, if not longer. In consequence, orders have been issued for the establishment of the necessary number of central depôts from which the prepared lymph can be distributed, and it is hoped that, so soon as the arrange- ments for distribution are completed, the substitution of animal for human lymph in all operations will be possible. 9. The remarks of the Inspector of Vaccination in the latter portion of paragraph 15 of his report will be referred for the opinion of the Agents in Ganjam and Vizaga- patam, through the Judicial Department, and the suggestions made in paragraph 28 regarding the desirability of sending notice of outbreaks of small-pox to the District Medical Officer will be further considered in the Revenue Department. (True Extract.) J. F. PRICE, Chief Secretary. To the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras. REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1890-91. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1891.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1890-91. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1891.
OFFICE OF SANITARY COMMISSIONER, FORT ST. GEORGE, 30th June 1891. Despatched, 7th July 1891. No. 2629./S. From SURGEON-MAJOR J. A. LAING, Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, To THE CHIEF SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the Vaccination Report for the past official year. 2. The only changes made in the Vaccination Staff in the year 1890-91 consisted of the entertainment of 17 extra vaccinators, so that the total strength of the Vaccination Department was 57 Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination and 811 Vaccinators. Years. Total Number of Vaccina- tions. 1886 ... 705,587 1887-88 ... 738,480 1888-89 ... 809,417 1889-90 ... 875,748 1890-91 ... 960,560 3. It is satisfactory to notice the large increase in the number of vaccinations during 1890-91, a progressive improvement having steadily taken place since the year 1886 as shown in the margin. 4. Of the total number of vaccinations performed, 906,119 were cases of primary vaccination and 54,441 cases of re-vacci- nation. In the case of the primary vaccinations, 853,058 or 94.1 per cent. were successful and 24.1 per cent. of the infant population of the Presidency were successfully vaccinated during the year. In the case of the re-vaccinations, which were 35,587 more than in 1889-90, 43,880 or 80.6 per cent. were successful. 5. In only six districts was there a decrease in the number of operations as compared with last year's figures. The district of Chingleput shows the greatest decrease, 38,197 cases having been vaccinated in 1890-91 against 46,650 in 1889-90. In the Kistna District there was a large increase in the number of operations, 48,334 cases having been vaccinated in 1890-91 against 18,996 in 1889-90. 6. The expenditure amounted to Rs. 1,92,978-8-5 compared with Rupees 1,85,194-9-7 in the previous year, an increase of Rs. 7,783-14-10. Owing, how- ever, to the very large increase of operations the cost of each successful case fell from Annas 3-8 to Annas 3-3. 7. Animal vaccination was carried on in 17 districts (including Madras town) and in 39 municipalities during the year, but on the establishment of depôts from which lanoline vaccine was distributed, it was discontinued in six districts. 8. There were during the year 257,426 operations done with animal lymph (not including 75,159 cases done with lanoline paste), or considerably over one-third of the total number vaccinated. The percentage of success varied with the different forms of lymph employed, that from fresh lymph (calf-to-arm) giving the best result, viz., 95.9. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, J. A. LAING, Surgeon-Major, Sanitary Commissioner for Madras.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY DURING 1890-91. From Surgeon D. F. DYMOTT, M.B., Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, to the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, dated Fort St. George, 28th June 1891, No. 2552A/V . I have the honour to submit statistical returns and brief notes of vaccination in the Madras Presidency for the official year 1890-91. 2. I returned from sick leave and took charge from Surgeon-Major W. G. King on the 14th November 1890. From the 1st April to 14th November Dr. King visited, for vaccine and sanitary inspections, the districts of Anantapur, Tanjore, Malabar and Chingleput and the towns of Anantapur, Negapatam, Palghat and Conjeeveram. From the 15th November to the end of the year I visited, on inspection-duty, the districts of South Canara, Malabar, Ganjam and Vizagapatam and the towns of Mangalore, Cannanore, Tellicherry, Calicut, Cochin, Berhampore, Chicacole, Parlákimedi, Bimlipatam, Anakápalle, Vizianagrum and Vizagapatam. 3. The following statement shows the strength of establishment employed during the years 1889-90 and 1890-91 :6 VACCINATION REPORT. 6. The following table shows the number of operations according to- age :VACCINATION REPORT. 7 9. The following table compares the total work, amount of success, and average cost of each case in Local Fund districts :8 VACCINATION REPORT. Districts. Population. 1889-90. 1890-91. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to population. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to population. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Males. Females. Anantapur ... ... ... 303,026 291,956 8,685 7,027 55.3 44.7 2.8 2.4 6,801 5,670 54.5 45.5 2.2 1.9 Bellary ... ... ... 335,567 325,339 11,508 10,604 52.0 47.9 3.4 3.2 12,308 10,612 53.7 46.3 3.6 3.3 Chingleput ... ... ... 474,520 469,586 23,933 22,717 51.3 48.7 5.0 4.8 19,841 18,356 51.9 48.1 4.2 3.9 Coimbatore ... ... ... 779,006 820,648 26,165 25,319 50.8 49.2 3.4 3.0 24,912 24,029 50.9 49.1 3.2 2.9 Cuddapah ... ... ... 560,394 541,662 12,833 11,162 53.5 47.3 2.3 2.0 17,766 15,354 53.6 46.3 3.2 2.9 Ganjam ... ... ... 850,604 859,046 12,693 10,469 54.8 45.2 1.4 1.2 12,659 10,716 54.1 45.8 1.5 1.2 Godávari ... ... ... 849,908 863,101 17,695 14,872 54.3 45.6 2.1 1.7 18,849 16,322 53.6 46.4 2.2 1.9 Kistna ... ... ... 753,987 739,791 10,377 8,619 54.6 45.4 1.3 1.1 25,636 22,698 53.0 46.9 3.4 3.0 Kurnool ... ... ... 349,717 339,259 16,482 9,385 63.7 36.3 4.7 2.7 22,196 11,842 65.2 34.2 6.3 3.5 Madura ... ... ... 988,443 1,092,248 28,787 26,110 52.4 47.5 2.8 2.4 30,116 26,698 53.2 47.0 3.0 2.4 Malabar ... ... ... 1,092,233 1,110,884 28,798 12,420 69.8 30.0 2.6 1.1 31,079 12,946 70.6 29.4 2.9 1.2 Nellore ... ... ... 597,353 586,178 15,068 14,096 51.6 48.3 2.5 2.4 19,094 18,196 50.5 48.8 3.2 3.1 Nílgiris ... ... ... 41,950 31,971 1,189 753 61.2 38.8 2.8 2.3 1,224 921 57.1 42.9 2.9 2.9 North Arcot ... ... ... 884,882 885,054 19,011 16,758 53.1 46.8 2.1 1.9 23,081 20,852 52.5 47.4 2.6 2.3 Salem ... ... ... 753,899 795,029 29,274 27,876 51.2 48.8 3.8 3.5 28,880 27,484 51.2 48.7 3.8 3.4 South Arcot ... ... ... 875,054 896,302 17,990 14,740 54.9 45.0 2.1 1.6 20,489 17,523 53.9 46.1 2.3 1.9 South Canara ... ... ... 455,697 471,718 14,234 11,587 55.1 44.8 3.1 2.4 16,460 13,528 54.9 45.1 3.6 2.9 Tanjore ... ... ... 930,826 998,406 23,977 21,090 53.2 46.8 2.5 2.1 21,143 19,218 52.3 47.6 2.3 1.9 Tinnevelly ... ... ... 797,821 844,460 30,709 24,060 56.0 43.9 3.8 2.8 31,587 24,525 563 43.7 3.9 2.9 Trichinopoly ... ... ... 535,854 574,957 19,546 18,626 51.2 48.8 3.6 3.2 19,473 19,339 50.2 49.8 3.6 3.4 Vizagapatam ... ... ... 1,217,939 1,192,411 21,736 19,607 52.5 47.4 1.8 1.6 21,770 19,237 53.1 46.6 1.8 1.6 Total ... 14,428,680 14,710,006 390,690 327,897 54.3 45.6 2.7 2.2 425,364 356,066 54.4 45.6 2.9 2.4 11. During the year vaccination was made compulsory in the following towns VACCINATION REPORT. 9 Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vac- cinations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS. A. P. Adóni ... ... ... 1889-90 ... 22,441 535 523 1,058 1,046 647 338 20 12 11 61.9 32.3 1.9 1,016 96.1 91.7 0 2 11 1890-91 ... 937 570 1,507 1,222 961 207 ... 285 261 78.6 16.9 ... 1,429 95.6 91.6 0 2 3 Anantapur ... ... 1889-90 ... 4,907 202 155 357 294 201 76 10 63 46 68.4 25.8 3.4 333 97.6 73.01 0 9 6 1890-91 ... 225 152 377 331 230 62 2 ... ... 69.5 18.7 0.6 340 88.8 69.3 0 10 0 Anakápalle ... ... 1889-90 ... 13,341 295 134 429 288 70 190 27 141 120 24.3 65.9 9.4 407 99.6 85.1 0 6 11 1890-91 ... 347 155 502 362 80 212 59 140 103 22.1 58.6 16.3 454 96.9 73.6 0 6 5 Bellary ... ... 1889-90 ... 53,460 1,271 682 1,953 1,936 852 283 663 17 12 44.0 14.6 34.2 1,810 92.8 70.6 0 3 7 1890-91 ... 1,274 786 2,060 1,837 1,078 362 283 223 193 58.7 19.7 15.4 1,916 93.8 86.5 0 3 9 Berhampore ... ... 1889-90 ... 23,599 269 137 406 406 78 196 84 ... ... 19.2 48.3 20.7 358 88.2 ... 0 4 11 1890-91 ... 337 242 579 569 26 287 183 10 8 4.6 50.4 32.2 504 87.2 80.0 0 6 8 Bezváda ... ... 1889-90 ... 9,336 414 386 800 701 168 389 103 99 79 23.9 55.5 14.7 739 94.2 79.7 0 4 6 1890-91 ... 10,098 434 390 824 654 177 358 82 170 139 27.0 54.7 12.5 756 81.8 81.8 0 4 3 Bimlipatam ... ... 1889-90 ... 8,582 249 280 529 459 147 223 76 70 62 32.0 48.6 16.5 508 97.2 88.6 0 6 7 1890-91 ... 290 240 530 399 133 187 68 131 125 33.3 46.9 17.0 513 94.3 95.4 0 6 7 Calicut ... ... 1889-90 ... 57,085 1,897 438 2,335 2,335 84 545 1,355 ... ... 3.6 23.3 58.0 1,984 84.9 ... 0 2 10 1890-91 ... 1,899 23 2,622 2,622 288 800 1,202 ... ... 10.9 30.5 45.8 2,290 88.9 ... 0 3 0 Cannanore ... ... 1889-90 ... 26,386 692 634 1,326 1,326 308 594 224 ... ... 23.2 44.8 16.9 1,126 84.9 ... 0 4 5 1890-91 ... 655 485 1,140 1,109 239 451 402 31 l7 21.5 40.6 36.2 1,109 98.5 54.9 0 4 7 Chicacole ... ... 1889-90 ... 18,302 203 145 348 348 63 163 41 ... ... 18.1 46.8 11.8 267 76.7 ... 0 11 6 1890-91 ... 324 241 565 485 36 166 100 80 20 7.4 34.2 20.6 322 62.3 25.0 0 11 4 Chidambaram ... 1889-90 ... 19,837 469 418 887 887 255 546 38 ... ... 28.7 61.2 4.3 839 94.6 ... 0 5 7 1890-91 ... 409 365 774 774 263 421 42 ... ... 33.9 54.4 5.4 726 93.8 ... 0 7 9 Cochin ... ... 1889-90 ... 15,698 804 277 1,081 1,059 145 340 502 22 l4 13.7 32.1 47.4 1,001 93.2 63.7 0 3 1 1890-91 ... 637 376 1,013 912 83 386 349 101 68 8.9 42.5 38.2 886 89.7 67.3 0 2 9 Cocanada ... ... 1889-90 ... 30,441 284 217 501 489 25 118 50 12 5 5.1 24.1 10.2 198 39.4 41.7 0 5 6 1890-91 ... 1,034 740 1,774 1,697 91 504 400 77 46 5.4 29.7 23.6 1,041 58.6 59.7 0 4 8 Coimbatore ... ... 1889-90 ... 38,967 803 754 1,557 1,557 662 763 69 ... ... 42.5 49.0 4.4 1,494 95.9 ... 0 3 0 1890-91 ... 841 746 1,587 1,545 741 714 38 42 30 47.9 46.2 2.5 1,523 96.6 71.4 0 2 5 Conjeeveram ... ... 1889-90 ... 37,275 1,090 828 1,918 1,852 381 1,100 263 66 47 20.6 69.4 14.2 1,791 94.2 71.2 0 2 9 1890-91 ... 1,356 1,041 2,397 2,150 664 1,067 315 247 193 30.9 49.6 14.7 2,239 95.1 78.1 0 2 4 Coonoor ... ... 1889-90 ... 4,778 341 314 655 623 133 286 139 32 21 21.3 45.9 22.3 579 89.5 65.6 0 5 1 1890-91 ... 293 219 512 443 135 217 46 69 49 30.5 49.0 10.4 447 89.8 71.0 0 7 11 Cuddalore ... ... 1889-90 ... 43,545 818 536 1,354 1,354 298 677 219 ... ... 22.0 50.0 16.2 1,194 88.2 ... 0 4 7 1890-91 ... 1,300 994 2,294 2,272 595 1,191 267 22 15 26.2 52.4 11.8 2,070 90.4 68.4 0 4 5 Cuddapah ... ... 1889-90 ... 18,982 249 179 428 378 135 155 84 50 32 35.7 41.0 22.2 306 72.5 64.0 0 12 1 1890-91 ... 527 281 808 562 272 244 32 246 210 48.4 43.4 5.7 754 96.8 85.4 0 7 9 3
10 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vac- cinations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS. A. P. Dindigul ... ... 1889-90 ... 14,182 629 651 1,280 1,190 695 431 35 90 60 58.4 36.1 2.9 1,221 97.3 66.6 0 4 5 1890-91 ... 427 382 809 757 538 184 23 52 37 71.1 24.3 3.0 782 98.4 71.1 0 10 10 Ellore ... ... ... 1889-90 ... 25,092 677 705 1,382 1,378 257 801 268 4 2 18.6 58.1 19.4 1,328 96.2 50.0 0 3 6 1890-91 ... 806 764 1,570 1,487 378 811 285 83 72 25.4 54.5 19.1 1,546 99.1 86.8 0 3 4 Erode ... ... ... 1889-90 ... 9,864 410 267 677 677 404 193 71 ... ... 59.6 28.5 10.5 668 98.6 ... 0 4 3 1890-91 ... 284 233 517 511 241 236 30 6 6 47.1 46.2 5.8 513 99.2 100.0 0 6 1 Gudiyátam ... ... 1889-90 ... 16,690 181 137 318 318 81 204 ... ... ... 25.4 64.1 ... 285 99.1 ... 0 6 8 1890-91 ... 195 168 363 358 121 183 16 5 5 33.8 51.1 4.4 325 89.3 100.0 0 6 2 Guntúr ... ... 1889-90 ... 19,646 585 418 1,003 902 304 449 129 101 41 33.7 49.8 14.3 923 97.7 40.6 0 5 9 1890-91 ... 837 812 1,649 1,528 468 793 223 121 76 30.6 51.9 140.6 1,560 97.1 62.8 0 3 9 Karúr ... ... ... 1889-90 ... 9,205 206 203 409 409 236 124 28 ... ... 57.7 30.3 6.8 388 94.9 ... 0 5 1 1890-91 ... 181 153 333 316 185 95 17 17 8 58.5 30.1 5.3 305 93.9 47.l 0 6 4 Kumbakónam ... 1889-90 ... 50,098 756 608 1,364 1,362 156 876 278 2 2 11.4 64.3 20.4 1,312 96.3 100.0 0 7 1 1890-91 ... 775 692 1,467 1,427 233 963 129 40 22 16.3 67.5 9.0 1,347 92.9 55.0 0 8 4 Kurnool ... ... 1889-90 ... 20,329 1,176 517 1,693 1,134 384 427 249 559 559 33.9 37.7 22.0 1,619 93.4 100.0 0 3 8 1890-91 ... 779 320 1,099 727 338 275 49 372 372 46.5 37.8 6.7 1,034 91.1 100.0 0 3 9 Madras ... ... 1889-90 ... 405,848 13,281 11,221 24,502 22,779 15,243 5,259 1,598 1,723 1,404 66.9 23.1 7.0 23,504 97.01 81.4 0 7 2 1890-91 ... 13,343 11,139 24,482 22,933 15,544 5,124 1,885 1,549 1,307 67.7 22.3 8.2 23,860 99.3 91.3 0 6 6 Madura ... ... 1889-90 ... 76,847 1,855 1,232 3,087 3,087 1,971 921 123 ... ... 63.8 23.4 4.0 3,015 97.7 ... 0 1 11 1890-91 ... 1,769 1,422 3,191 3,165 1,255 1,519 198 26 22 39.6 47.9 6.2 2,994 93.9 84.6 0 2 4 Mannárgudi ... ... 1889-90 ... 19,409 331 257 588 583 83 338 35 5 ... 14.2 58.0 23.2 556 95.3 ... 0 4 10 1890-91 ... 356 244 600 516 49 351 104 84 70 9.4 68.0 20.1 574 97.6 83.3 0 5 7 Mangalore ... ... 1889-90 ... 32,099 803 657 1,460 1,460 429 636 308 ... ... 29.4 43.6 21.1 1,373 94.0 ... 0 2 7 1890-91 ... 632 558 1,190 1,161 350 558 128 29 17 30.1 50.7 11.0 1,083 91.8 58.6 0 2 8 Masulipatam ... ... 1889-90 ... 35,056 840 464 1,304 1,302 107 778 336 2 2 8.2 69.8 25.8 1,223 93.7 100.0 0 3 6 1890-91 ... 1,311 1,157 2,468 2,462 253 1,422 668 6 5 10.3 57.7 26.7 2,348 95.2 83.3 0 2 6 Máyavaram ... ... 1889-90 ... 23,044 466 372 838 831 425 369 35 7 7 56.7 44.4 4.2 836 98.9 100.0 0 5 7 1890-91 ... 425 389 814 778 482 241 44 36 26 61.9 30.9 5.6 793 98.6 72.2 0 5 1 Negapatam ... ... 1889-90 ... 53,776 1,152 916 2,068 2,061 823 961 38 7 4 39.9 46.6 1.8 1,826 88.4 57.1 0 4 11 1890-91 ... 1,476 1,138 2,614 2,446 1,097 983 125 168 109 44.8 40.2 5.1 2,314 90.1 64.9 0 3 9 Nellore ... ... 1889-90 ... 27,505 535 524 1,059 1,059 602 358 35 ... ... 56.8 33.8 3.3 995 93.9 ... 0 4 5 1890-91 ... 348 324 672 670 371 251 ... 2 2 55.3 37.4 ... 624 92.8 100.0 0 9 11 Ongole ... ... 1889-90 ... 9,200 455 379 834 834 68 573 80 ... ... 8.2 68.7 9.5 721 86.4 ... 0 3 10 1890-91 ... 214 196 410 389 84 219 49 21 15 21.6 56.3 12.9 367 90.4 71.4 0 9 3 Ootacamund ... ... 1889-90 ... 12,335 594 426 1,020 928 247 442 114 92 89 26.6 47.6 12.3 892 86.5 96.7 0 6 3 1890-91 ... 457 375 832 760 231 348 97 72 47 30.4 45.5 12.7 723 88.9 65.3 0 8 4
VACCINATION REPORT. 11 Palamcottah ... ... 1889-90 ... 17,964 503 352 855 817 311 282 205 38 26 38.0 34.5 25.1 823 97.7 65.8 0 4 8 1890-91 ... 445 425 870 849 286 369 178 21 11 33.7 43.4 20.9 844 98.1 52.4 0 3 11 Pálghat ... ... 1889-90 ... 36,339 826 573 1,399 1,377 13 572 549 22 18 0.9 41.5 39.9 1,152 82.3 81.8 0 4 5 1890-91 ... 767 577 1,344 1,314 24 711 493 30 28 1.0 54.1 36.7 1,256 93.4 93.3 0 3 8 Parlákimedi ... ... 1889-90 .. 15,365 410 335 745 745 307 282 137 ... ... 41.2 37.9 18.1 726 97.4 ... 0 4 3 1890-91 ... 317 140 457 398 100 155 124 59 45 25.1 38.9 31.2 424 95.2 76.3 0 5 8 Periyakulum ... ... 1889-90 ... 16,446 189 176 365 362 159 185 10 3 1 43.9 51.1 2.8 355 97.8 33.3 0 5 11 1890-91 ... 235 192 427 395 134 224 18 32 19 33.9 56.7 4.6 395 95.2 59.4 0 5 4 Palni ... ... ... 1889-90 ... 13,315 242 258 500 492 204 260 13 8 6 41.4 52. 2.6 483 96.9 75.0 0 4 0 1890-91 ... 277 231 508 495 215 240 9 13 8 43.4 48.5 1.8 472 93.7 61.6 0 4 1 Rajahmundry ... ... 1889-90 ... 24,555 323 245 568 568 136 268 60 ... ... 23.9 47.2 10.6 464 81.7 ... 0 15 4 1890-91 ... 1,274 1,074 2,348 1,962 458 1,031 260 386 182 23.3 52.8 13.2 1,931 89.1 47.1 0 4 0 Salem ... ... ... 1889-90 ... 59,631 1,114 978 2,092 2,053 907 889 94 39 23 44.1 43.3 4.5 1,913 92.1 58.9 0 4 9 1890-91 ... 1,064 930 1,994 1,969 890 816 114 25 15 45.2 41.4 5.8 1,835 92.4 60.0 0 6 1 Srírangam ... ... 1889-90 ... 19,773 702 696 1,397 1,380 249 827 251 17 15 18.0 59.9 18.2 1,343 96.2 88.2 0 1 7 1890-91 ... 731 667 1,398 1,398 297 879 181 ... ... 21.3 62.9 12.9 1,357 97.1 ... 0 2 4 Tanjore ... ... 1889-90 ... 54,745 1,165 586 1,751 1,593 222 875 491 158 101 13.9 51.2 30.8 1,629 95.9 63.9 0 4 7 1890-91 ... 1,095 579 1,674 1,503 209 665 555 171 126 13.9 44.2 36.9 1,555 95.1 73.7 0 4 9 Tellicherry ... ... 1889-90 ... 24,581 674 506 1,180 1,141 159 477 215 39 39 13.9 41.8 18.8 890 74.6 100.0 0 9 6 1890-91 ... 490 408 898 839 55 347 178 59 59 6.5 41.3 21.2 639 69.1 100.0 1 2 10 Tinnevelly ... ... 1889-90 ... 23,221 491 295 786 786 248 403 88 ... ... 31.5 51.3 11.2 739 94.0 ... 0 4 3 1890-91 ... 782 644 1,426 1,366 419 624 287 60 57 30.7 45.6 21.0 1,387 97.3 95.0 0 3 7 Trichinopoly ... ... 1889-90 ... 84,449 3,074 1,975 5,049 4,939 913 2,600 1,100 110 98 18.5 58.7 22.2 4,711 93.4 89.1 0 2 7 1890-91 ... 6,705 3,785 10,490 9,006 1,046 4,512 2,231 1,484 928 11.6 50.1 24.8 8,717 86.4 62.5 0 1 8 Tirupatúr ... ... 1889-90 ... 14,278 252 212 464 464 213 212 25 ... ... 45.9 45.7 5.4 450 96.9 ... 0 4 7 1890-91 ... 240 188 428 399 72 229 37 29 8 18.0 57.4 9.3 346 84.7 27.6 0 5 9 Tirupati ... ... 1889-90 ... 13,232 114 88 202 196 65 83 13 6 2 33.1 42.3 6.6 163 82.1 33.3 1 0 0 1890-91 ... 335 318 653 635 199 389 ... 18 6 31.3 61.2 ... 594 92.6 33.3 0 9 0 Tuticorin ... ... 1889-90 ... 16,281 602 283 885 885 159 265 337 ... ... 18.0 29.9 38.0 761 85.9 ... 0 5 2½ 1890-91 ... 734 334 1,068 1,067 143 395 422 1 1 13.4 37.0 39.5 961 89.9 100.0 0 4 8 Vaniyámbadi ... ... 1889-90 ... 15,933 205 178 383 383 190 188 3 ... ... 49.6 49.1 0.7 381 99.4 ... 0 5 3 1890-91 ... 388 348 736 736 219 458 23 ... ... 29.2 62.2 32.6 700 95.1 ... 0 5 9 Vellore ... ... 1889-90 ... 37,491 807 706 1,513 1,508 587 699 165 5 ... 38.9 46.3 10.9 1,451 94.9 ... 0 5 2 1890-91 ... 928 656 1,584 1,519 462 630 390 65 25 30.4 41.5 25.7 1,507 97.5 38.5 0 4 9 Vizagapatam ... ... 1889-90 ... 30,291 754 505 1,259 907 274 294 331 352 266 30.2 32.4 36.5 1,165 99.1 75.6 0 4 3 1890-91 ... 1,638 901 2,539 1,918 807 520 557 621 362 42.1 27.1 29.0 2,246 98.2 58.3 0 2 5 Vizianagrum ... ... 1889-90 ... 22,577 580 497 1,077 926 338 390 184 151 145 36.5 42.1 19.8 1,059 98.5 29.8 0 3 3 1890-91 ... 581 370 951 766 302 294 164 185 173 39.4 38.3 21.4 933 99.2 93.5 0 4 7 Wálajápet ... ... 1889-90 ... 10,387 166 126 292 288 108 142 32 4 3 37.5 49.3 11.1 285 97.9 75.0 0 7 8 1890-91 ... 178 142 320 297 146 126 20 23 9 49.1 42.4 6.7 301 98.3 39.1 0 6 7 Total ... 1889-90 ... 1,861,508 49,010 36,560 85,570 81,442 32,975 30,715 12,525 4,128 3,361 40.5 40.2 15.4 79,576 93.5 81.4 0 5 3 1890-91 ... 1,862,270 56,938 42,120 99,058 91,167 34,793 36,032 14,183 7,891 5,803 38.2 39.5 15.6 90,811 93.2 73.5 0 4 10
12 VACCINATION REPORT. 13. The following table shows particulars of the work done by Government vaccinators during the years 1889-90 and 1890-91:VACCINATION REPORT. 13 15. The following table shows the work done in dispensaries :14 VACCINATION REPORT. 16. Vaccination in Cantonments in 1890-91 compared with the work done in 1889-90:VACCINATION REPORT. 15 Circles. Number of inspecting officers. Number of villages visited. Total number of persons vaccinated. Number of days spent on inspection duty. Number of cases verified. Proportion per cent. of inspection to total number vaccinated. First-class Deputy Inspectors.. Second-class Deputy Inspector. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-cllass Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. Guntúr ... ... 1 ... 362 ... 18,199 276 9,102 ... 50.0 ... Masulipatam ... ... 1 ... 314 ... 18,222 197 8,969 ... 49.2 ... Vinukonda ... ... ... 1 ... 332 11,913 252 ... 6,014 ... 50.5 Cumbum ... ... 1 ... 389 ... 18,238 243 12,345 ... 67.7 ... Kurnool ... ... 1 ... 265 ... *15,729 189 8,269 ... 52.5 ... Dindigul ... ... 1 ... 571 ... *19,757 233 11,787 ... 59.6 ... Madura ... ... ... 1 ... 546 12,757 301 ... 9,774 ... 76.6 Paramakudi ... ... 1 ... 388 ... 24,550 218 11,261 ... 45.9 ... Tellicherry ... ... ... 1 ... 199 13,275 199 ... 6,697 ... 50.4 Calicut ... ... 1 ... 266 ... 17,080 288 9,615 ... 56.3 ... Pálghat ... ... ... 1 ... 276 13,667 207 ... 7,232 ... 52.9 Kávali ... ... 1 ... 502 ... 11,982 242 8,738 ... 72.9 ... Nellore ... ... ... 1 ... 429 13,974 218 ... 8,489 ... 60.7 Ongole ... ... ... 1 ... 434 11,334 223 ... 11,646 ... 16 VACCINATION REPORT. 18. Animal Vaccination.VACCINATION REPORT. 17 From preserved Animal Lymph. Circles. Total number vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Penukonda ... ... ... ... ... 19 5 14 ... 26.3 Harpanahalli ... ... ... ... ... 887 875 10 2 98.9 Saidápet ... ... ... ... ... 202 193 8 1 96.0 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 5 ... ... Guntúr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,239 971 191 77 83.6 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... ... 95 84 1 10 98.8 Cumbum ... ... ... ... ... 514 485 15 14 97.0 Paramakudi ... ... ... ... ... 44 37 4 3 90.2 Tellicherry ... ... ... ... ... 265 189 42 34 81.9 Calicut ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,072 3,697 274 101 93.1 Pálghat ... ... ... ... ... ... 180 67 112 1 37.4 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 392 360 31 1 92.0 Kávali ... ... ... ... ... ... 61 21 40 ... 34.0 Chittoor ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 6 1 ... 85.7 Karvetnagar ... ... ... ... ... 18 18 ... ... 100.0 Salem ... ... ... ... ... ... 983 704 205 74 77.4 Námakal ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 4 ... ... Krishnagiri ... ... ... ... ... 308 308 ... ... 100.0 Cuddalore ... ... ... ... ... ... 690 642 6 42 99.0 Vriddháchalam ... ... ... ... ... 77 73 ... 4 100.0 No. I, South Canara ... ... ... ... 22 20 ... 2 100.0 No. II, do. ... ... ... ... 15 13 2 ... 86.6 Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,659 3,057 398 204 88.5 Negapatam ... ... ... ... ... 144 139 2 3 98.6 Tinnevelly ... ... ... ... ... 762 712 27 23 96.3 Sátúr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85 72 13 ... 84.7 Shermádevi ... ... ... ... ... 549 525 14 10 97.4 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... 7,262 7,026 182 54 97.5 Vizianagrum ... ... ... ... ... 3,701 3,633 50 18 98.7 Total ... 26,261 23,932 1,651 678 93.5 Animal Vaccination of all kinds by Medical Subordinates. Districts. Total number vaccinated by all kinds of lymph. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Anantapur ... ... ... ... ... 17 10 7 ... 58.8 Bellary ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,660 1,537 60 63 96.2 Chingleput ... ... ... ... ... 1,293 1,157 118 18 90.7 Coimbatore ... ... ... ... ... 22 18 ... 4 81.8 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... 1,229 977 178 74 84.6 Ganjam ... ... ... ... ... ... 450 247 178 25 58.1 Godávari ... ... ... ... ... ... No animal vaccination was conducted. Kistna ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 27 1 ... 96.4 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,752 1,185 567 ... 67.6 Madras ... ... ... ... ... 286 225 32 29 87.5 Madura ... ... ... ... ... ... 196 132 54 10 70.9 Nílgiris ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 59 7 4 89.4 Malabar ... ... ... ... ... ... 122 35 62 25 36.1 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,620 1,404 175 41 88.9 North Aront ... ... ... ... ... ... 666 559 77 30 87.9 Salem ... ... ... ... ... ... 622 521 86 15 85.8 South Arcot ... ... ... ... ... 1,026 889 96 41 90.3 South Canara ... ... ... ... ... No animal vaccination was conducted. Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,581 2,935 583 63 83.4 Tinnevelly ... ... ... ... ... 379 321 58 ... 84.7 Trichinopoly ... ... ... ... ... 488 447 35 6 92.7 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... 3,338 2,282 868 188 72.4 Total ... 18,845 14,967 3,242 636 82.1 5
18 VACCINATION REPORT. Table showing Animal Vaccination conducted in the Municipalities. Municipalities. Direct from Calf. Preserved Animal Lymph. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Adóni ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 544 513 16 15 96.9 Anantapur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 10 7 ... 58.8 17 10 7 ... 58.8 Anakápalle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 181 158 23 ... 87.3 181 158 23 ... 87.3 Bellary ... ... ... ... ... ... 207 193 14 ... 93.2 1,504 1,400 104 ... 93.1 1,711 1,593 118 ... 93.1 Berhampore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32 28 4 ... 87.5 32 28 4 ... 87.5 Bezváda* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bimlipatam ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 245 233 11 1 95.5 245 233 11 1 95.5 Calicut ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,064 1,785 164 115 916 2,064 1,785 164 115 91.6 Cannanore* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chicacole ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 499 270 218 11 55.3 499 270 218 ll 55.3 Chidambaram ... ... ... ... ... 610 576 5 29 99.1 67 63 ... 4 100.0 677 639 5 33 99.2 Cochin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... 13 ... ... 13 ... 13 ... ... Cocanada* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Coimbatore* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Conjeeveram ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 28 2 1 93.3 ... ... ... ... ... 31 28 2 1 93.3 Coonoor ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 340 289 40 11 87.8 340 289 40 11 87.8 Cuddalore ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,181 1,101 58 22 94.9 242 221 15 6 93.2 1,423 1,322 73 28 94.8 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... ... 492 466 19 7 96.1 316 288 27 1 91.4 808 754 46 8 94.2 Dindigul ... ... ... ... ... ... 692 672 11 9 98.4 110 104 2 4 98.1 802 776 13 13 98.4 Ellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 65 63 2 ... 95.4 ... ... ... ... ... 65 63 2 ... 95.4 Erode* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gudiyátam ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 78 59 12 7 83.1 78 59 12 7 83.1 Guntúr ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,613 1,536 64 13 96.0 36 24 12 ... 66.7 1,649 1,560 76 13 95.3 Karúr* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kumbakónam ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,179 1,103 73 3 93.8 228 189 39 ... 83.8 1,407 1,292 112 3 92.1 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... ... 971 917 28 26 97.0 95 84 1 10 98.8 1,066 1,001 29 36 97.2 Madras ... ... ... ... ... ... 24,482 23,860 283 339 98.8 ... ... ... ... ... 24,482 23,860 283 339 98.8 Madura* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mannárgudi ... ... ... ... ... ... 600 575 22 3 96.3 ... ... ... ... ... 600 575 22 3 96.3 Mangalore ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 100.0 98 86 12 ... 87.7 102 90 12 ... 88.2 Masulipatam* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Máyavaram ... ... ... ... ... ... 752 738 12 2 98.4 62 55 7 ... 88.7 814 793 19 2 97.6 Negapatam ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,102 1,872 152 78 92.4 30 24 3 3 88.8 2,132 1,896 155 81 92.4 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 672 624 48 ... 92.9 ... ... ... ... ... 672 624 48 ... 92.9 Ongole ... ... ... ... ... ... 178 149 29 ... 83.7 ... ... ... ... ... 178 149 29 ... 83.7 Ootacamund ... ... ... ... ... ... 473 430 22 21 95.1 332 271 39 22 87.4 805 701 61 43 92.0 Palamcottah * ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pálghat* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Parlakimedi* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Periyakolam * ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Palni* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
VACCINATION REPORT. 19 Rajahmundry ... ... ... ... ... 952 779 114 59 87.2 ... ... ... ... ... 952 779 114 59 87.2 Salem ... ... ... ... ... 1,987 1,813 160 14 96.9 7 7 ... ... 100.0 1,994 1,820 160 14 91.9 Srírungam * ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 828 769 57 2 93.1 Tellicherry ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 1 1 50.0 895 638 188 69 77.3 898 639 189 70 77.2 Tinnevelly ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,025 995 10 20 99.0 1,025 995 10 20 99.0 Trichinopoly ... ... ... ... ... 9,203 7,590 249 1,364 96.8 100 87 9 4 90.6 9,303 7,677 258 1,368 96.7 Tirupatúr* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tirupati ... ... ... ... ... 641 594 47 ... 92.7 ... ... ... ... ... 641 594 47 ... 92.7 Tuticorin ... ... ... ... ... 134 131 3 ... 97.8 1,010 897 112 1 88.9 1,144 1,028 115 1 89.9 Vániyambádi ... ... ... ... ... 600 591 9 ... 98.5 74 63 11 ... 85.1 674 654 20 ... 97.0 Vellore ... ... ... ... ... 165 164 1 ... 99.4 ... ... ... ... ... 165 164 1 ... 99.4 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... 246 227 17 2 93.0 2,293 2,019 229 45 89.8 2,539 2,246 246 47 90.1 Vizianagram ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 125 115 7 3 94.3 125 115 7 3 94.3 Wálajápet ... ... ... ... ... 18 16 2 ... 88.8 4 3 1 ... 75.0 22 19 3 ... 86.4 Total ... 50,253 46,813 1,447 1,993 97.0 12,122 10,465 1,320 337 88.8 63,747 58,560 2,840 2,347 95.4 * Animal vaccination not carried out.
20 VACCINATION REPORT. From Lanoline Paste (exclusive of the cases done by Medical Subordinates). Circles. Total number vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Gooty ... ... ... ... ... ... 518 324 118 76 73.3 Penukonda ... ... ... ... ... 523 397 96 30 80.5 Bellary ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,088 1,818 137 133 92.9 Harpanahalli ... ... ... ... ... 627 544 73 10 88.1 Chingleput ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,449 7,670 458 321 94.3 Saidápet ... ... ... ... ... 6,860 6,184 544 132 91.9 North Coimbatore ... ... ... ... 1,163 931 155 77 85.7 South do. ... ... ... ... ... 806 312 130 364 70.5 East do. ... ... ... ... ... 2,376 1,857 343 176 84.4 Masulipatam ... ... ... ... ... 962 584 343 35 62.9 Guntúr ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,632 1,306 284 42 82.1 Vinukonda ... ... ... ... ... 1,816 1,637 142 37 92.1 Madura ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,874 1,727 107 40 94.2 Dindigul ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,423 3,612 550 261 86.8 Paramakudi ... ... ... ... ... 6,031 5,510 393 128 93.4 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,876 3,522 215 139 94.2 Ongole ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,846 2,526 276 44 90.1 Kávali ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,729 1,457 218 54 86.9 Chittoor ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,408 4,274 100 34 97.7 Vellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,859 5,360 377 122 93.4 Kárvetnagar ... ... ... ... ... 3,867 3,641 160 66 95.8 Salem ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,868 847 387 634 68.6 Krishnagiri ... ... ... ... ... 1,517 1,109 266 142 80.6 Námakal ... ... ... ... ... ... 504 185 116 203 61.4 Cuddalore ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,854 2,131 518 205 80.4 Vriadháchalam ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,390 1,110 174 106 86.4 No. I, South Canara ... ... ... ... 72 68 4 ... 94.4 No. II, do. ... ... ... ... ... 137 67 26 44 72.0 Trichinopoly ... ... ... ... ... 4,084 3,350 433 301 88.6 Total ... 75,159 64,060 7,143 3,956 90.0 Report of the progress made with animal vaccination, as required in paragraph 5 of letter from the Government of India, No. 297 of 15th October 1890 (Madras G.O. .No. 2882-L, dated 12th November 1890, Local and Municipal). On the 21 st April 1890 Dr. Laing, the Sanitary Commissioner, drew up a scheme for the extension, if not exclusive use, of animal lymph in the Madras Presidency. He proposed that a better class of vaccinators should be entertained and that the number of Deputy Sanitary Commissioners be raised from one to five. He suggested that the number of depôts should, with few exceptions, be at least one for each taluk and one for each municipality. Most of the depôts he selected had either a hospital or dispensary, and were either the, or near the, head-quarters of a tahsildar or deputy tahsildar. This scheme was not put into operation as, a little later on, Dr. W. G. King proposed a new method of preserving animal lymph by means of lanoline. On the 15th November 1890 Dr. King was put on special duty to experiment with his &quot; lanoline vaccine,&quot; and during the year he introduced it into 12 districts. Lanoline vaccine was still on its trial at the close of the year. In the Tanjore district Surgeon-Major Nailer prepared a paste with calf lymph and glycerine, which since has yielded good results. In the Kurnool district vaccination was carried on solely with animal lymph, the vaccinators travelling from village to village with inoculated calves and oper- ating from calf to arm. It was estimated that each vaccinator would be able to perform 500 cases monthly and probationers 150, but it was found necessary to reduce these figures to 250 and 100 respectively. The results for the year wereVACCINATION REPORT. 21 Excluding the unknown cases the percentage of success was 96.3. In 17 (including Madras town) districts calves were inoculated for the pur- pose of carrying on animal vaccination, but on the establishment of the lanoline vaccine depôts, many of the District Boards and municipalities dispensed with their own arrangements on being directed to obtain all lymph from the Government depôts. In January 1891, on Dr. Laing's representation, it was ruled that, in towns where vaccination was compulsory, the Municipal Councils might, if they so preferred, use lymph taken direct from the calf. In Bellary, Nellore and Tinnevelly districts some difficulty was experienced in procuring calves. In those districts where calf-to-arm vaccination was carried on, many opera- tions were also performed with calf lymph stored in tubes or between glass plates. In the town of Madras excellent results were obtained with calf-to-arm vac- cination, 24,143 operations yielded a percentage of success of 98.8. Excluding re-vaccinations, 99.8 per cent. of the cases were successful, a record which it will be hard to beat. 19. During the year three Deputy Inspectors died, one retired and one resigned. One Second-class Deputy Inspector was prosecuted for falsifying his returns and dismissed from the service. One First-class Deputy was reduced to the second-class grade for misconduct; and another was transferred and repri- manded for unsatisfactory work. Four Deputies were fined for various offences. The vacancies caused by death, &c., were filled by promoting first-class vaccinators. One Deputy Inspector was assaulted in the execution of his duty. 20. The service registers of the Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination have been maintained and brought up to date with the exception of five, belonging to vaccinators recently promoted to the grade of Deputy Inspector. Their services are under verification. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, DONALD F. DYMOTT, Surgeon, Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Madras. 6
APPENDIX. VACCINATION RETURNS.
VACCINATION RETURNS. 25 A26 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 27 30 Nellore. Kávali circle ... ... 373,748 132 9 6,284 5,698 11,982 1,331 11,416 1,141 7,137 10,474 566 311 91.7 54.9 28.0 0.8 28.8 ... ... ... ... 31 Nellore do. ... ... 397,873 137 12 7,063 6,911 13,974 1,164 13,595 790 8,826 12,814 379 222 94.2 58.5 32.2 0.5 32.7 ... ... ... ... 32 Ongole do. 411,910 138 9 5,747 5,587 11,334 1,259 11,313 612 7,241 10,030 21 7 88.6 33.3 24.3 0.2 24.4 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,183,531 136 30 19,094 18,196 37,290 1,243 36,324 2,543 23,204 33,318 966 540 93.2 55.9 28.1 0.4 28.6 25,376 21.4 735 0.6 33 Nílgiri. Nílgiri Circle ... ... 73,921 79 3 1,224 921 2,145 715 2,043 78 1,288 1,817 102 80 88.9 78.4 24.5 1.0 25.6 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 73,921 79 3 1,224 921 2,145 715 2,043 78 1,288 1,817 102 80 88.9 78.4 24.5 1.0 25.6 1,663 22.5 42 0.6 34 North Arcot. Chittoor circle ... ... 657,795 232 15 8,506 7,685 16,191 1,079 15,814 5,213 8,625 15,514 377 306 98.1 81.1 23.5 0.4 24.0 ... ... ... ... 35 Kárvetnagar circle 473,771 206 9 6,087 5,443 11,530 1,281 11,037 2,201 6,871 10,791 493 425 97.3 86.2 22.7 0.8 23.5 ... ... ... ... 36 Vellore do. ... 608,448 308 12 8,488 7,724 16,212 1,351 15,637 2,287 10,602 14,694 575 397 93.9 69.0 24.0 0.6 24.9 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,740,014 244 36 23,081 20,852 43,933 1,220 42,488 9,701 26,098 40,999 1,445 1,128 96.5 78.0 236 0.6 24.2 31,468 18.1 2,213 1.2 37 Salem. Krishnagiri circle ... 392,465 150 12 7,215 6,977 14,192 1,182 13,846 6,207 6,582 13,485 346 251 97.4 72.5 343 0.6 34.0 ... ... ... ... Salem do. ... 512,829 179 18 8,733 8,462 17,195 955 16,497 2,725 9,877 14,761 698 470 89.4 67.3 28.7 0.9 29.2 ... ... ... ... 39 Námakal do. ... 604,459 285 17 12,932 12,045 24,977 1,470 21,747 2,891 13,788 20,268 3,230 2,419 93.1 74.8 33.5 4.1 37.5 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,509,753 202 47 28,880 27,484 56,364 1,199 52,090 11,823 30,247 48,514 4,274 3,140 93.1 73.4 32.1 2.0 34.2 46,980 31.1 1,200 0.8 40 South Arcot. Cuddalore circle ... 1,122,846 340 17 12,460 10,765 23,225 1,366 22,931 2,749 14,178 21,460 294 239 93.6 81.3 19.1 0.2 19.3 ... ... ... ... 41 Vriddháchalam circle ... 628,510 401 12 8,029 6,758 14,787 1,233 14,448 2,411 8,923 13,689 339 288 94.7 84.9 21.7 0.4 22.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,751,356 360 29 20,489 17,523 38,012 1,311 37,379 5,160 23,101 35,149 633 527 94.0 83.3 20.0 0.3 20.4 26,296 150 2,016 1.1 42 South Canara. No.I. South Canara circle 573,167 300 15 9,897 8,663 18,560 1,237 17,980 1,360 7,943 17,291 580 470 96.1 81.0 30.1 0.8 30.9 ... ... ... ... 43 No. II. do. do. 354,248 178 10 6,563 4,865 11,428 1,143 11,073 532 4,285 10,460 355 301 94.4 84.7 29.5 0.8 30.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 927,415 238 25 16,460 13,528 29,988 1,199 29,053 1,892 12,228 27,751 935 771 95.2 82.4 29.9 0.8 30.7 31,092 33.5 555 0.6 44 Tanjore. Negapatam circle ... 881,387 601 16 9,365 8,465 17,830 1,114 17,284 2,238 11,321 16,629 546 452 96.2 82.8 18.8 0.5 19.3 ... ... ... ... 45 Tanjore do. ... 1,047,924 484 21 11,778 10,753 22,531 1,073 21,378 2,942 13,104 19,723 1,153 747 92.2 64.7 18.8 0.7 19.5 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,929,311 531 37 21,143 19,218 40,361 1,090 38,662 5,180 24,425 36,352 1,699 1,199 94.0 70.6 18.8 0.6 19.4 40,108 20.7 962 0.5 46 Tinnevelly. Sátúr circle ... ... 495,558 271 12 9,280 7,142 16,422 1,368 15,660 2,025 10,496 15,363 762 668 98.0 87.6 31.0 1.3 32.3 ... ... ... ... 47 Shermádevi circle ... 479,904 301 14 10,610 8,563 19,173 1,369 18,624 3,313 10,842 18,230 549 497 97.8 90.5 37.9 1.0 39.0 ... ... ... ... 48 Tinnevelly do. ... 666,819 342 16 11,697 8,820 20,517 1,282 19,008 2,887 12,324 18,907 1,509 1,473 99.4 97.6 28.3 2.2 30.5 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,642,281 305 42 31,587 24,525 56,112 1,336 53,292 8,225 33,662 52,500 2,820 2,638 98.5 93.5 31.9 1.6 33.6 47,515 28.9 1,174 0.7 49 Trichi- nopoly. Trichinopoly circle ... 1,110,811 313 25 19,473 19,339 38,812 1,687 36,731 3,401 22,712 35,369 2,081 1,959 96.2 94.1 30.0 1.7 31.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,110,811 313 25 19,473 19,339 38,812 1,687 36,731 3,401 22,712 35,369 2,081 1,959 96.2 94.1 30.0 1.7 31.8 24,897 22.4 407 0.3 50 Vizagapatam. Gunapur circle ... 694,673 50 4 1,079 807 1,886 465 1,863 164 919 1,675 23 8 89.9 34.8 l7.9 0.8 17.9 ... ... ... ... Zemindary vaccinators. 3 1,431 1,223 2,654 863 2,589 403 1,476 2,390 65 49 92.7 75.3 51 Jeypore circle ... ... 6 2,389 2,449 4,838 806 4,838 598 2,316 4,748 ... ... 98.1 ... Zemindary vaccinators. 6 1,802 1,947 3,749 625 3,749 530 1,697 3,627 ... ... 96.7 ... Total of Hill tracts ... 694,673 50 19 6,701 6,426 13,127 691 13,039 1,695 6,408 12,440 88 57 95.4 64.7 17.9 0.8 17.9 ... ... ... ...
28 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 29 14 Municipalities. Coimbatore ... ... 38,967 12,989 2 841 746 1,587 793 1,545 741 714 1,493 42 30 96.6 71.4 38.3 0.9 39.3 1,123 28.8 96 2.4 15 Conjeeveram ... ... 37,275 4,142 2 1,356 1,041 2,397 1,198 2,150 664 1,067 2,046 247 193 95.1 78.1 54.8 0.5 60.1 1,606 43.1 17 0.5 16 Coonoor ... ... ... 4,778 531 1 293 219 512 512 443 135 217 398 69 49 89.8 71.0 83.2 10.2 93.5 223 46.7 3 0.6 17 Cuddalore ... ... 43,545 3,629 3 1,300 994 2,294 765 2,272 595 1,191 2,055 22 15 90.4 68.4 47.1 0.3 47.5 999 22.9 23 0.5 18 Cuddapah ... ... 18,982 999 1 527 281 808 808 562 272 240 544 246 210 96.8 85.4 28.6 11.0 39.7 401 21.2 17 0.9 19 Dindigul ... ... 14,182 7,091 1 427 382 809 809 757 538 184 745 52 37 98.4 71.1 52.5 2.6 55.1 1,031 72.6 29 2.0 20 Ellore ... ... ... 25,092 2,788 1 806 764 1,570 1,570 1,487 378 811 1,474 83 72 99.1 86.6 58.7 2.8 61.6 757 30.1 2 0.08 21 Erode ... ... ... 9,864 897 1 284 233 517 517 511 241 236 507 6 6 99.2 100,0 51.3 0.6 53.0 540 54.7 2 0.2 22 Gudiyátam ... ... 16,690 ... 1 195 168 363 363 358 121 183 320 5 5 89.3 100,0 19.1 0.3 19.4 250 14.9 16 0.9 23 Guntúr ... ... ... 19,646 1,691 1 837 812 1,649 1,649 1,528 468 793 1,484 121 76 97.1 62.8 75.5 3.8 79.4 366 18.6 1 0.05 24 Karúr ... ... ... 9,205 2,301 1 181 152 333 333 316 185 95 297 17 8 93.9 47.1 32.2 0.8 33.1 407 44.2 2 0.2 25 Kumbakónam ... ... 50,098 16,699 2 775 692 1,467 733 1,427 233 963 1,325 40 22 92.9 55.0 26.4 0.4 26.9 1,357 27.8 51 1.0 26 Kurnool ... ... 20,329 4,066 1 779 320 1,099 1,099 727 338 275 662 372 372 91.1 100.0 32.5 18.2 50.8 1,135 55.8 35 1.7 27 Madras ... ... ... 405,848 15,031 24 13,343 11,139 24,482 1,020 22,933 15,544 5,124 22,553 1,549 1,307 99.3 91.3 55.6 3.7 59.3 25,351 62.4 24 1.06 28 Madura ... ... ... 76,847 18,452 3 1,769 1,422 3,191 1,064 3,165 1,255 1,519 2,972 26 22 93.9 84.6 38.6 0.2 38.8 2,968 38.6 80 1.4 29 Mannárgudi ... ... 19,409 4,852 1 356 244 600 600 516 49 351 504 84 70 97.6 83.3 25.9 3.6 29.5 499 25.6 15 0.8 30 Mangalore ... ... 32,099 3,567 1 632 558 1,190 1,190 1,161 350 588 1,066 29 17 91.8 58.6 33.2 0.5 33.7 2,300 71.6 97 3.0 31 Masulipatam ... ... 35,056 8,764 2 1,311 1,157 2,468 1,234 2,462 253 1,422 2,343 6 5 95.2 83.3 66.8 0.1 66.9 1,049 29.9 1 0.03 32 Máyavaram ... ... 23,044 7,681 1 425 389 814 814 778 482 241 767 36 26 98.6 72.2 33.2 1.1 34.3 801 34.7 24 1.0 33 Negapatam ... ... 53,776 7,693 2 1,476 1,138 2,614 1,307 2,446 1,097 983 2,205 168 109 90.1 64.9 41.0 2.0 43.0 1,705 31.7 59 1.0 34 Nellore ... ... ... 27,505 1,100 1 348 324 672 672 670 371 251 622 2 2 92.8 100.0 22.7 0.07 22.6 800 28.9 36 1.3 35 Ongole ... ... ... 9,200 2,300 1 214 196 410 410 389 84 219 352 21 15 90.4 71.4 38.2 1.6 39.9 410 44.5 12 1.3 36 Ootacamund ... ... 12,335 1,121 1 457 375 832 832 760 231 348 676 72 47 88.9 65.3 54.8 3.8 58.6 605 49.04 21 1.7 37 Palamcottah ... ... 17,964 17,964 1 445 425 870 870 849 286 369 833 21 11 98.1 52.4 46.3 0.6 46.9 796 44.3 4 0.2 38 Pálghat ... ... 36,339 4,037 2 767 577 1,344 672 1,314 24 711 1,228 30 28 93.4 93.3 33.7 0.7 34.5 1,623 44.6 31 0.8 39 Parlákimodi ... ... 15,365 ... 1 317 140 457 457 398 100 155 379 59 45 95.2 76.3 25.6 2.9 27.6 417 27.1 25 1.6 40 Periyakulam ... ... 16,446 ... 1 235 192 427 427 395 134 224 376 32 19 95.2 59.4 22.8 1.1 24.0 247 15.01 28 1.7 41 Pálni ... ... ... 13,315 ... 1 277 231 508 508 495 215 240 464 13 8 93.7 61.6 34.8 0.6 35.4 466 34.9 6 0.4 42 Rajahmuudry ... ... 24,555 2,046 2 1,274 1,074 2,348 1,174 1,962 458 1,031 1,749 386 182 89.1 47.1 71.2 7.3 78.6 997 40.6 6 0.2 43 Salem ... ... ... 59,631 16,889 4 1,064 930 1,994 498 1,969 890 816 1,820 25 15 92.4 60.0 30.5 0.2 30.7 1,782 29.7 109 1.8 44 Srírangam ... ... 19,773 2,825 1 731 667 1,393 1,398 1,398 297 879 1,357 ... ... 97.1 ... 68.6 ... 68.6 616 31.1 31 1.5 45 Tanjore ... ... ... 54,745 6,843 2 1,095 579 1,674 837 1,503 209 665 1,429 171 126 95.1 73.7 26.1 2.3 28.4 1,565 28.5 43 0.8 46 Tellicherry ... ... 24,581 6,602 3 490 408 898 296 839 55 347 580 59 59 69.1 100.0 23.5 2.4 25.9 1,547 62.9 55 2.2 47 Tinnevelly ... ... 23,221 23,221 1 782 644 1,426 1,426 1,366 419 624 1,330 60 57 97.3 95.0 57.2 2.4 59.6 675 29.06 15 0.6 48 Trichinopoly ... ... 84,449 8,445 6 6,705 3,785 10,490 1,748 9,006 1,046 4,512 7,789 1,484 928 86.4 62.5 92.2 10.9 103.2 1,874 22.1 103 1.2 49 Tirupatúr ... ... 14,278 ... 1 240 188 428 428 399 72 229 338 29 8 84.7 27.6 23.6 0.5 24.2 304 21.2 9 7.6 50 Tirupati ... ... 13,232 ... 1 335 318 653 653 635 199 389 588 18 6 92.6 33.3 44.4 0.4 44.9 112 8.4 4 0.3 51 Tuticorin ... ... 16,281 5,427 1 734 334 1,068 1,068 1,067 143 395 960 1 1 89.9 100.0 58.9 0.06 59.0 627 38.5 16 0.9 52 Vaniyambádi ... ... 15,933 ... 2 388 348 736 368 736 219 458 700 ... ... 95.1 ... 43.9 ... 43.9 255 16.0 5 0.3 53 Vellore ... ... ... 40,958 9,373 2 928 656 1,584 792 1,519 462 630 1,482 65 25 97.5 38.5 36.1 0.6 36.8 1,355 33.08 42 1.0 54 Vizagapatam ... ... 30,291 10,097 1 1,638 901 2,539 2,539 1,918 807 520 1,884 621 362 98.2 58.3 62.1 11.9 74.1 1,232 40.6 47 1.5 55 Vizianagrum ... ... 22,577 4,515 2 581 370 951 475 766 302 294 760 185 173 99.2 93.5 33.6 7.7 41.3 858 38.03 42 1.8 56 Wálajápet ... ... 10,387 10,387 1 178 142 320 320 297 146 126 292 23 9 98.3 39.1 28.1 0.8 28.9 265 25.5 13 1.2 Total of Municipalities... 1,862,270 4,872 112 56,938 42,120 99,058 884 91,167 34,793 36,032 85,008 7,891 5,803 93.2 73.5 45.6 3.2 48.9 75,509 40.5 1,781 0.9 Grand Total ... 30,869,266 225 811 505,436 412,441 917,877 30 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 31 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the official year 1890-91. Paid from Total. Number of all successful vaccinations and revacci- nations. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 2,396 6 5 ... ... 2,396 6 5 ... ... 2,396 6 5 5,306 0 7 2 1,882 12 2 ... ... 1,882 12 2 ... ... 1,882 12 2 6,052 0 5 0 4,279 2 7 ... ... 4,279 2 7 ... ... 4,279 2 7 11,358 0 6 0 4,502 2 8 ... ... 4,502 2 8 ... ... 4,502 2 8 14,834 0 4 10 1,696 9 10 ... ... 1,696 9 10 ... ... 1,696 9 10 7,282 0 3 8 6,198 12 6 ... ... 6,198 12 6 ... ... 6,198 12 6 22,116 0 4 6 4,039 9 4 ... ... 4,039 9 4 ... ... 4,039 9 4 20,542 0 2 10 3,219 2 11 ... ... 3,219 2 11 ... ... 3,219 2 11 14,737 0 3 5 7,258 12 3 ... ... 7,258 12 3 ... ... 7,258 12 3 35,279 0 3 3 2,963 9 0 ... ... 2,963 9 0 ... ... 2,963 9 0 12,624 0 3 9 2,296 15 3 ... ... 2,296 15 3 ... ... 2,296 15 3 12,182 0 3 0 3,594 5 4 ... ... 3,594 5 4 ... ... 3,594 5 4 21,582 0 2 7 8,854 13 7 ... ... 8,854 13 7 ... ... 8,854 13 7 46,388 0 3 1 3,444 2 7 ... ... 3,444 2 7 ... ... 3,444 2 7 10,106 0 5 5 3,730 15 11 ... ... 3,730 15 11 ... ... 3,730 15 11 10,733 0 5 5 3,802 15 3 ... ... 3,802 15 3 ... ... 3,802 15 3 10,201 0 5 11 10,978 1 9 ... ... 10,978 1 9 ... ... 10,978 1 9 31,040 0 5 8 3,393 9 10 ... ... 3,393 9 10 ... ... 3,393 9 10 15,036 0 3 7 2,853 10 0 ... ... 2,853 10 0 ... ... 2,853 10 0 8,158 0 5 7 1,875 7 11 ... 1,875 7 11 ... ... ... 1,875 7 11 7,823 0 3 10 8,122 11 9 ... 1,875 7 11 6,247 3 10 ... ... 8,122 11 9 31,017 0 4 2 3,516 4 4 ... ... 3,516 4 4 ... ... 3,516 4 4 11,944 0 4 9 1,704 5 5 ... ... 1,704 5 5 ... ... 1,704 5 5 7,313 0 3 8 313 14 0 ... 313 14 0 ... ... ... 313 14 0 635 0 7 10 4,249 1 9 ... ... 4,249 1 9 ... ... 4,249 1 9 15,186 0 4 5 5 0 0 ... 5 0 0 ... ... ... 5 0 0 941 ... 9,788 9 6 ... 318 14 0 9,469 11 6 ... ... 9,788 9 6 36,019 32 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 33 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1890-9134 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 35 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1890-9136 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 37 B38 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 39 B40 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 41 B42 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 43 B44 APPENDIX. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned years. Establishment. Persons primarily vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. Total number. Number success- fully vac- cinated. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1890.91. Govt. vaccinators. 10,194 9,663 9,136 8,741 16,887 16,319 12,386 12,033 9,970 9,701 8,511 8,204 9,741 9,479 17,092 16,210 28,257 27,227 17,820 16,684 Local fund do. ... 470,605 435,696 526,329 493,415 591,352 553,890 617,475 580,624 608,729 579,261 584,711 557,732 618,588 590,853 670,318 643,761 708,653 680,355 743,467 706,117 Cantonment do. ... 5,213 4,941 3,446 3,207 3,734 3,461 3,434 3,159 2,462 2,295 2,850 2,677 3,375 3,293 4,316 3,912 3,341 3,285 3,681 3,343 Native States do. ... 3,635 3,286 3,838 3,652 4,751 4,436 4,506 4,291 4,082 3,915 4,429 4,216 4,042 3,885 2,270 2,160 5,254 5,069 6,338 6,017 Municipalities ... 80,286 70,980 83,533 75,950 91,665 84,452 97,765 88,281 92,946 87,968 70,065 65,614 71,710 67,405 81,566 77,180 81,442 76,215 91,167 85,008 Private vaccinators ... 137 117 45 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... 9,890 8,193 10,154 8,371 12,579 10,185 21,561 17,201 22,834 18,793 16,790 13,954 13,736 11,506 18,283 15,603 26,870 23,363 38,888 33,162 Medical subordinates. 9,646 5,742 10,049 7,015 9,633 6,271 8,936 5,280 7,549 4,594 6,720 3,677 3,033 1,630 2,517 1,517 3,077 1,793 4,758 2,727 Army European ... 1,916 1,382 1,987 1,357 1,940 1,158 2,840 1,737 691 597 875 694 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Native ... 4,372 3,093 4,414 3,374 4,121 3,212 4,415 3,655 2,784 2,288 2,297 1,987 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 595,894 543,093 652,931 605,125 736,662 683,384 773,118 716,261 752,047 709,412 697,248 658,755 724,225 688,051 796,362 760,343 856,894 817,307 906,119 853,058
2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READ2 2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 5. In comparing the results obtained with lanoline vaccine and fresh animal lymph, Dr. King has taken the percentage of success obtained with fresh animal lymph as 93.22ND SEPTEMBER 1891, NOS. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 3 ENCLOSURES. From Surgeon-Major W. G. KING, M.B., C.M., D.P.H., on Special Duty, to the Chief Secretary to Government (through the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras), dated Bangalore, 4th August 1891, No. 417. I have the honour to point out that at page 7 of the Vaccination Report for the year 1890-91, it is stated as follows with reference to the success rate in districts :4 2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. From Surgeon-Major W. G. KING, M.B., on Special Duty, Bangalore, to the Chief Secretary to Government (through the Secretary to the Surgeon- General with the Government of Madras), dated Bangalore, 18th August 1891, No. 431. With reference to my letter No. 417, dated 4th August 1891, addressed to you through the Sanitary Commissioner, I have the honour to now forward statistical proof of the correctness of my assertion that the serious fall in the percentage of success mentioned in the report on vaccination for 1890-91 of 1.4 per cent, upon the total vaccinated, as compared with that of the previous year, is not due, as therein asserted, to the use of lanoline vaccine. My claim in the letter mentioned was that the most that could be said was that a decrease of either .4 or .5 per cent. had been so brought about, whilst it was probable that the further loss of from 1 per cent. or .9 per cent. was due to the large increase of operations, which must naturally yield a lower percen- tage of success, namely, under re-vaccination. Remembering, however, the proverbial saying that &quot; statistics can be made to prove anything,&quot; I thought it advisable to ask the Inspector of Vaccination to kindly supply me with the full statistics from which he had drawn his conclusions (see attached memorandum). 2. From a perusal of this memorandum, it is at once evident that the real difference between the percentage of success gained in 1889-90 and 1890-91 is not that between 95.9 and 94.5, but between 96.99 and 96.50, the loss per cent. by the inclusion of cases performed with lanoline vaccine being, therefore, not 1.4 per cent. but only .49 per cent. This curious difference of results, I find, is brought about by the Inspector of Vaccination having used the absolutely unsuitable method hitherto employed in the office of the Sanitary Commissioner as to reckoning the percentages of success. It has been the custom in that office to class all &quot; unknown &quot; cases with the unsuccessful. This mode, which I believe has met with the approval of Govern- ment ever since the Vaccination department existed, is good enough for showing how many cases of successful vaccination are known to have been inspected of the total vaccinated, and it is probable that for this purpose alone this peculiar method of sta- tistical investigation has been originally ordered. But, when it is used to demonstrate that the employment of a special form of lymph caused a loss of percentage of success, it is open to serious objection, and is in fact, useless. Employed thus, ceteris paribus, the only effect would be to exhibit the ratio of &quot; unknown,&quot; in each class respectively, inextricably mixed with the question of percentage of successful vaccination. It will be found that the number of &quot;unknown &quot; cases under the lanoline vaccine system is as 100 to 31.93 by all other methods2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 5 space to state that the results represent an average, which includes work from districts where vaccinators had not had more than a few weeks to adapt themselves to a new method, whilst where practice had been possible the percentage had been all that any reasonable professional man could wish. This fact he has left me to call attention to; and I do so accordingly. P.S.6 2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. of such officers as may fail to comply with these orders should be reported to Govern- ment, on or before the 10th of May, for such action as may be necessary. 2. The following statement shows the total number of operations performed by the several vaccine agencies employed during each of the last five years, together with the average cost of each successful case:2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 7 report cannot be accepted as altogether adequate. The results achieved in different circles varied extremely and will be dealt with by Government in reviewing the administration reports of the several District Boards, and in the general review of Local Fund operations for 1890-91. It is to be regretted that, in Anantapur, Chingleput, Coimbatore, Salem, Tanjore and Vizagapatam, there was a total falling off of 20,065 cases. The explanations furnished for this unsatisfactory result cannot be accepted and every effort should now be made to regain lost ground. In the case of Coimbatore, a similar shortfall was noticed last year and should not have been allowed to continue unchecked. In Kurnool, each vaccinator performed 2,836 opera- tions8 2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. the poor outturn, the average cost of each successful operation in Municipalities continued much higher than in Local Fund circles. It was especially so in Tellicherry, Chicacole, Dindigul, Anantapur, Nellore, Ongole and Tirupati. The quality of the work done appears to have been best in Erode and Vizianagrum, but was inferior to the figure recorded from Anakápalle and Vániyambádi in the preceding year, both of which have declined to an unsatisfactory extent. The greatest number of infants vaccinated by one man was in Adóni. The outturn in the Madras Municipality showed no improvement and was much less than in the surrounding district of Chingleput. The quality of the work done was slightly better and the cost of each successful opera- tion rather less than in the preceding year, but in every respect the administration of the Municipality as regards this department appears capable of improvement. The best work with respect to infantile vaccination was done in Adóni and Dindigul, where over 70 per cent. of the operations performed were on children under one year of age. Pálghat did extremely badly, and in Berhampore, Cocanada, Chicacole, Cochin, Tellicherry and Mannárgudi the matter was also almost entirely neglected. 7. Animal Vaccination.2ND SEPTEMBER 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 9 amount performed by municipal vaccinators elsewhere. The work done by the Kurnool experimental agency referred to in paragraph 8 of last year's review was excellent, each vaccinator performing 2,836 operations against 1,232 in 1889-90, and the rate of success, excluding unknown cases, being 96.3 per cent. The working of the system on its present basis has, therefore, been continued pending final orders with regard to Dr. King's lanoline paste (G.O., dated 8th July 1891, No. 1653 L.). 8. General Remarks.Govt. of {1891} Madras. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. Issued Recd. Encl. G.O., &c., 2nd Sept. 1891, Nos. 2117, 2118 L. SEPTEMBER. Vaccination. Reviewing the report on REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1891-92. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 10 annas.] 1892.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1891-92. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1892.
OFFICE OF SANITARY COMMISSIONER, FORT ST. GEORGE, 20th June 1892. No. 1798 A./S. From SURGEON LIEUT.-COL. J. A. LAING, Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, To THE CHIEF SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the Vaccination Report for the past official year. 2. During the year under review 820 vaccinators were employed or 9 more than in the previous year. The number of Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination, viz., 57, was the same as in 1890-91. Years. Total Number of Vaccina- tions. 1886 ... 705,587 1887-88 ... 738,480 1888-89 ... 809,417 1889-90 ... 875,748 1890-91 ... 960,560 1891-92 ... 1,053,420 3. It is satisfactory to notice the increase in the number of vaccinations during 1891-92, a progressive improvement having steadily taken place since the year 1886 as shown in the margin. 4. Of the total number of operations performed, 996,274 were primary with success in 927,719 cases (93.1 per cent. or 1.0 less than the corresponding ratio for 1890-91), and 57,146 were re-vaccinations with success in 42,785 cases (74.9 per cent. against 80.6 in the previous year). 5. In only three districts, viz., Coimbatore, Kurnool and Trichinopoly, was there a decrease in the number of operations when compared with last year's figures. The district of Trichinopoly shows the greatest decrease, 33,919 cases having been vaccinated in 1891-92 against 38,812 in 1890-91. In the Tinnevelly District there was a large increase in the number of operations, 69,085 cases being vaccinated in 1891-92 against 56,112 in 1890-91. The percentage of success in districts was 93.0 or 1.5 less than in the previous year, and was no doubt chiefly due to the changes made in the kind of lymph used. 6. The average number of operations performed by each man was 1,220 in 1891-92 against 1,120 in the previous year. The largest number of operations performed by each vaccinator was 2,490 in the Kurnool District, and the lowest 822 in the Nílgiris. 7. Vaccination was compulsory at the end of 1891-92 in 48 municipalities, having been introduced into 9 in the course of the year under review. The total number of operations was 110,590 in 1891-92 against 99,058 in 1890-91. 8. The total number of cases verified by Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination was 524,571 against 482,170 in the previous year. In six ranges against ten in 1890-91 the deputies failed to verify 50 per cent. of the cases vaccinated. Operations with animal lymph were conducted to varying extents in all the districts and municipalities. During the year there were 674,148 operations done with animal lymph or 64.0 per cent. of the total number vaccinated. The percentage of success varied with the different forms of lymph employed. The best results were obtained with fresh lymph direct from the calf, the rate of success being 96.4 per cent.; next that from preserved animal lymph with a percentage of 93.5, and the lowest results were those done with lanoline paste, the rate of success being 89.3. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, J. A. LAING, Surgeon Lieut.-Col., Sanitary Commissioner for Madras.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY DURING 1891-92. From Surgeon-Major D. F. DYMOTT, M.B., Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy- Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, dated Fort St. George, 17th June 1892, No. 562. I have the honour to submit statistical returns and brief notes of vaccination in the Madras Presidency for the official year 1891-92. 2. During the year I visited on inspection duty the districts of Anantapur, Bellary, Chingleput, Coimbatore, Cuddapah, Kistna, Kurnool, Nílgiris, North Arcot, Salem, South Arcot and Godávari, and the towns of Anantapur, Gooty, Adóni, Bellary, Conjeeveram, Coimbatore, Erode, Cuddapah, Bezváda, Guntúr, Masulipa- tam, Kurnool, Coonoor, Gudiyátam, Tirupati, Vellore, Wálajápet, Salem, Tiru- patúr, Vaniyámbadi, Chidambaram, Cuddalore, Cocanada, Ellore, Rajahmundry and Dowlaishweram. 3. The following statement compares the establishments employed during the years 1890-91 and 1891-92 :6 VACCINATION REPORT. 6. The following table shows the number of operations according to age :VACCINATION REPORT. 7 The cost of lanoline paste has not been included in the above figures, as it was not made known to this Department. 9. The following table compares the total work, amount of success, and average cost of each case in Local Fund districts :8 VACCINATION REPORT. 10. The following table shows the proportion of males to females vaccinated during 1891-92 by Local Fund Agency:VACCINATION REPORT. 9 Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vac- cinations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS. A. P. Adóni ... ... 1890-91 ... 22,441 937 570 1,507 1,222 961 207 ... 285 261 78.6 16.9 ... 1,429 95.6 91.6 0 2 3 1891-92 ... 796 505 1,301 1,050 776 214 ... 251 105 73.9 20.4 ... 1,095 94.3 41.8 0 3 11 Anantapur ... ... 1890-91 ... 4,907 225 152 377 331 230 62 2 ... ... 69.5 18.7 0.6 340 88.8 69.3 0 10 0 1891-92 ... 242 135 377 231 194 22 9 146 121 84.0 9.5 3.9 346 97.4 82.9 0 9 7 Anakápalle ... ... 1890-91 ... 13,341 347 155 502 362 80 212 59 140 103 22.1 586 163 454 96.9 73.6 0 6 5 1891-92 ... 515 457 972 878 229 534 92 94 59 26.1 60.8 10.5 914 96.2 62.8 0 3 2 Bellary ...... 1890-91 ... 53,460 1,274 786 2,060 1,837 1,078 362 283 223 193 58.7 19.7 15.4 1,916 93.8 86.5 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 2,003 1,486 3,489 3,326 1,626 1,194 483 163 142 48.9 35.9 14.5 3,345 96.3 87.1 0 3 5 Berhampore ... ... 1890-91 ... 23,599 337 242 579 569 26 287 183 10 8 4.6 50.4 32.2 504 87.2 80.0 0 6 8 1891-92 ... 770 669 1,439 1,437 71 718 250 2 1 4.9 50.0 17.4 1,040 72.3 50.0 0 5 3 Bezváda ... ... 1890-91 ... 10,098 434 390 824 654 177 358 82 170 139 27.0 54.7 12.5 756 81.8 81.8 0 4 3 1891-92 ... 479 381 860 696 251 299 80 164 127 36.1 43.0 11.5 757 90.5 77.4 0 5 6 Bimlipatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 8,582 290 240 530 399 133 187 68 131 125 33.3 46.9 17.0 513 94.3 95.4 0 6 7 1891-92 ... 301 204 505 346 152 147 32 159 147 43.9 42.5 9.2 478 95.7 92.5 0 7 3 Calicut ... ... 1890-91 ... 57,085 1,899 723 2,622 2,622 288 800 1,202 ... ... 10.9 30.5 45.8 2,290 88.9 ... 0 3 0 1891-92 ... 2,494 1,242 3,736 3,701 509 1,174 1,327 35 27 13.8 31.7 35.9 3,037 81.3 77.1 0 5 4 Cannanore ... ... 1890-91 ... 26,386 655 485 1,140 1,109 239 451 402 31 17 21.5 40.6 36.2 1,109 98.5 54.9 0 4 7 1891-92 ... 1,074 839 1,963 1,893 410 1,103 233 70 44 21.6 58.3 12.3 1,790 92.2 62.9 0 5 2 Chicacole ... ... 1890-91 ... 18,302 324 241 565 485 36 166 100 80 20 7.4 34.2 20.6 322 62.3 25.0 0 11 4 1891-92 ... 435 313 748 583 50 205 52 165 82 8.6 35.2 8.9 389 52.7 49.7 0 8 7 Chidambaram ... 1890-91 ... 19,837 409 365 774 774 263 421 42 ... ... 33.9 54.4 5.4 726 93.8 ... 0 7 9 1891-92 ... 410 340 750 750 266 417 35 ... ... 35.5 55.6 4.7 718 94.7 ... 0 6 6 Cochin ... ... 1890-91 ... 15,698 637 376 1,013 912 83 386 349 101 68 8.9 42.5 38.2 886 89.7 67.3 0 2 9 1891-92 ... 1,083 842 1,925 1,659 228 901 467 266 169 13.7 54.3 28.2 1,765 96.2 63.5 0 1 5 Cocanada ... ... 1890-91 ... 30,441 1,034 740 1,774 1,697 91 504 400 77 46 5.4 29.7 23.6 1,041 58.6 59.7 0 4 8 1891-92 ... 1,094 710 1,804 1,789 153 607 473 15 3 8.6 33.9 26.4 1,236 68.9 20.0 0 7 2 Coimbatore ... ... 1890-91 ... 38,967 841 746 1,587 1,545 741 714 38 42 30 47.9 46.2 2.5 1,523 96.6 71.4 0 2 5 1891-92 ... 857 845 1,702 1,656 760 606 46 46 30 45.9 36.6 2.8 1,442 85.2 65.2 0 3 0 Conjeeveram ... ... 1890-91 ... 37,275 1,356 1,041 2,397 2,150 664 1,067 315 247 193 30.9 49.6 14.7 2,239 95.1 78.1 0 2 4 1891-92 ... 1,435 1,343 2,778 2,710 1,126 1,352 154 68 44 41.5 49.9 5.6 2,676 97.1 64.7 0 2 4 Coonoor ... ... 1890-91 ... 4,778 293 219 512 443 135 217 46 69 49 30.5 49.0 10.4 447 89.8 71.0 0 7 11 1891-92 ... 330 323 653 587 176 302 53 66 53 30.0 51.4 9.0 584 90.5 80.3 0 6 7 Cuddalore ... ... 1890-91 ... 43,545 1,300 994 2,294 2,272 595 1,191 267 22 15 26.2 52.4 11.8 2,070 90.4 68.4 0 4 5 1891-92 ... 955 811 1,766 1,764 455 907 187 2 1 25.8 51.4 10.6 1,550 87.8 50.0 0 5 0 Cuddapah ... ... 1890-91 ... 18,982 527 281 808 562 272 244 32 246 210 48.4 43.4 5.7 754 96.8 85.4 0 7 9 1891-92 ... 412 297 709 665 333 271 59 44 30 501 40.7 8.8 693 99.7 68.2 0 11 3 3
10 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vac- cinations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS. A. P. Dindigul ... ... 1890-91 ... 14,182 427 382 809 757 538 184 23 52 37 71.1 24.3 3.0 782 98.4 71.1 0 10 10 1891-92 ... 495 533 1,028 957 595 302 7 71 44 62.2 31.6 0.7 948 94.5 62.0 0 7 9 Ellore ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 25,092 806 764 1,570 1,487 378 811 285 83 72 25.4 54.5 19.1 1,546 99.1 86.8 0 3 4 1891-92 ... 878 817 1,695 1,635 370 882 371 60 56 22.6 53.9 22.7 1,679 99.3 93.3 0 3 0 Erode ......... 1890-91 ... 9,864 284 233 517 511 241 236 30 6 6 47.1 46.2 5.8 513 99.2 100.0 0 6 1 1891-92 ... 351 276 627 627 243 241 85 ... ... 38.7 38.4 13.6 569 86.0 ... 0 5 7 Gudiyátam ... ... 1890-91 ... 16,690 195 168 363 358 121 183 16 5 5 33.8 51.1 4.4 325 89.3 100.0 0 6 2 1891-92 ... 357 331 688 653 223 381 6 35 29 34.1 58.3 0.9 639 93.4 82.8 0 8 4 Guntúr ... ... 1890-91 ... 19,646 837 812 1,649 1,528 468 793 223 121 76 30.6 51.9 14.6 1,560 97.1 62.8 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 548 477 1,025 959 463 304 99 66 36 48.3 31.7 10.3 902 90.3 54.5 0 5 2 Karkúr ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 9,205 181 152 333 316 185 95 17 17 8 58.5 30.1 5.3 305 93.9 47.1 0 6 4 1891-92 ... 182 168 350 350 189 87 112 ... ... 54.0 24.9 32.0 308 88.0 ... 0 6 4 Kumbakónam ... 1890-91 ... 50,098 775 692 1,467 1,427 233 963 129 40 22 16.3 67.5 9.0 1,347 92.9 55.0 0 8 4 1891-92 ... 771 779 1,550 1,473 515 825 68 77 66 34.3 56.0 4.6 1,474 95.6 85.7 0 8 4 Kurnool ... ... 1890-91 ... 20,329 779 320 1,099 727 338 275 49 372 372 46.5 37.8 6.7 1,034 91.1 100.0 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 445 310 755 643 294 313 11 112 96 45.7 48.7 1.7 739 96.1 85.6 0 9 9 Madras ... ... 1890-91 ... 405,848 13,343 11,139 24,482 22,933 15,544 5,124 1,885 1,549 1,307 67.7 22.3 8.2 23,860 99.3 91.3 0 6 6 1891-92 ... 13,474 11,628 25,102 22,451 15,798 4,606 1,761 2,651 2,142 70.4 20.5 7.8 24,307 98.7 80.8 0 6 7 Madura ... ... 1890-91 ... 76,847 1,769 1,422 3,191 3,165 1,255 1,519 198 26 22 39.6 47.9 6.2 2,994 93.9 84.6 0 2 4 1891-92 ... 1,433 1,229 2,662 2,662 929 1,176 106 ... ... 34.8 44.2 4.0 2,211 83.1 ... 0 4 8 Mannárgudi ... ... 1890-91 ... 19,409 356 244 600 516 49 351 104 84 70 9.4 68.0 20.1 574 97.6 83.3 0 5 7 1891-92 ... 299 317 616 583 142 347 92 33 29 24.3 59.5 15.8 610 99.7 87.9 0 9 0 Mangalore ... ... 1890-91 ... 32,099 632 558 1,190 1,161 350 558 128 29 17 30.1 50.7 11.0 1,083 91.8 58.6 0 2 8 1891-92 ... 887 771 1,658 1,658 489 902 170 ... ... 295 54.4 10.2 1,561 94.1 ... 0 2 4 Masulipatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 35,056 1,311 1,157 2,468 2,462 253 1,422 668 6 5 10.3 57.7 26.7 2,348 95.2 83.3 0 2 6 1891-92 ... 1,616 1,301 2,917 2,760 405 1,510 644 157 54 14.7 54.7 23.3 2,613 92.8 34.4 0 3 7 Máyavaram ... ... 1890-91 ... 23,044 425 389 814 778 482 241 44 36 26 61.9 30.9 5.6 793 98.6 72.2 0 5 1 1891-92 ... 433 396 829 787 510 216 24 42 17 64.8 27.4 3.0 767 95.3 40.5 0 5 9 Negapatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 53,776 1,476 1,138 2,614 2,446 1,097 983 125 168 109 44.8 40.2 5.1 2,314 90.1 64.9 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 1,160 892 2,052 2,004 1,137 645 107 48 38 56.7 32.2 5.4 1,927 94.3 79.2 0 5 8 Nellore ... ... 1890-91 ... 27,505 348 324 672 670 371 251 ... 2 2 55.3 37.4 ... 624 92.8 100.0 0 9 11 1891-92 ... 639 565 1,204 1,117 681 369 30 87 64 61.0 33.0 2.6 1,144 96.7 73.6 0 6 10 Ongole ... ... 1890-91 ... 9,200 214 196 410 389 84 216 49 21 15 21.6 56.3 12.9 367 90.4 71.4 0 9 3 1891-92 ... 475 258 733 673 318 216 104 60 15 47.2 32.1 15.4 653 94.8 25.0 0 4 2 Ootacamund ... ... 1890-91 ... 12,335 457 375 832 760 231 348 97 72 47 30.4 45.5 12.5 723 88.9 65.3 0 8 4 1891-92 ... 488 408 896 849 263 381 83 47 34 31.0 44.9 9.8 761 85.6 72.3 0 7 11
VACCINATION REPORT. 11 Palamcottah ... ... 1890-91 ... 17,964 445 425 870 849 286 369 178 21 11 33.7 43.4 20.9 844 98.1 52.4 0 3 11 1891-92 ... 563 497 1,060 1,030 437 426 139 30 23 42.4 41.4 13.4 1,025 97.3 76.7 0 3 11 Pálghat ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 36,339 767 577 1,344 1,314 24 711 493 30 28 1.0 54.1 36.7 1,256 93.4 93.3 0 3 8 1891-92 ... 716 548 1,264 1,214 38 730 393 50 34 3.1 60.1 32.3 1,195 95.6 68.0 0 4 11 Parlákimedi ... ... 1890-91 ... 15,365 317 140 457 398 100 155 124 59 45 25.1 38.9 31.2 424 95.2 76.3 0 5 8 1891-92 ... 637 658 1,295 1,295 451 518 108 ... ... 34.8 40.0 8.3 1,077 83.2 ... 0 2 10 Periyakulum ... ... 1890-91 ... 16,446 235 192 427 395 134 224 18 32 19 33.9 56.7 4.6 395 95.2 59.4 0 5 4 1891-92 ... 407 334 741 682 281 334 12 59 25 41.2 49.0 1.7 652 91.9 42.4 0 5 1 Palni ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 13,315 277 231 508 495 215 240 9 13 8 43.4 48.5 1.8 472 93.7 61.6 0 4 1 1891-92 ... 217 195 412 403 191 186 8 9 6 47.4 46.2 2.0 391 95.5 66.7 0 5 1 Rajahmundry ... ... 1890-91 ... 24,555 1,274 1,074 2,348 1,962 458 1,031 260 386 182 23.3 52.8 13.2 1,931 89.1 47.1 0 4 0 1891-92 ... 987 846 1,833 1,623 513 897 30 210 85 31.6 55.3 1.8 1,525 88.7 40.4 0 5 2 Salem ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 59,631 1,064 930 1,994 1,969 890 816 114 25 15 45.2 41.4 5.8 1,835 92.4 60.0 0 6 1 1891-92 ... 1,801 1,723 3,524 3,522 1,438 1,920 62 2 1 40.8 54.5 1.7 3,421 97.1 50.0 0 3 5 Srírangam ... ... 1890-91 ... 19,773 731 667 1,398 1,398 297 879 181 ... ... 21.3 62.9 12.9 1,357 97.1 ... 0 2 4 1891-92 ... 565 600 1,165 1,163 356 629 87 2 2 30.6 54.1 7.5 1,074 92.2 100.0 0 2 10 Tanjore ...... 1890-91 ... 54,745 1,095 579 1,674 1,503 209 665 555 171 126 13.9 44.2 36.9 1,555 95.1 73.7 0 4 9 1891-92 ... 784 698 1,482 1,446 308 840 243 36 22 21.3 58.1 16.8 1,413 96.2 61.1 0 6 2 Tellicherry ... ... 1890-91 ... 24,581 490 408 898 839 55 347 178 59 59 6.5 41.3 21.2 639 69.1 100.0 1 2 10 1891-92 ... 891 726 1,617 1,229 246 563 194 388 331 20.0 45.8 15.8 1,334 81.6 86.3 0 8 6 Tinnevelly ... ... 1890-91 ... 23,221 782 644 1,426 1,366 419 624 287 60 57 30.7 45.6 21.0 1,387 97.3 95.0 0 3 7 1891-92 ... 901 667 1,568 1,538 520 661 329 30 28 33.5 43.0 21.4 1,538 98.2 93.3 0 4 0 Trichinopoly ... ... 1890-91 ... 84,449 6,705 3,785 10,490 9,006 1,046 4,512 2,231 1,484 928 11.6 50.1 24.8 8,717 86.4 62.5 0 1 8 1891-92 ... 7,277 4,654 11,931 10,622 1,546 5,685 3,041 1,309 1,032 14.5 53.5 28.6 11,304 96.7 78.8 0 1 4 Tirupatúr ... ... 1890-91 ... 14,278 240 188 428 399 72 229 37 29 8 18.0 57.4 9.3 346 84.7 27.6 0 5 9 1891-92 ... 459 475 934 880 220 501 53 54 34 25.0 56.9 6.0 808 88.0 63.0 0 6 4 Tirupati ... ... 1890-91 ... 13,232 335 318 653 635 199 389 ... 18 6 31.3 61.2 ... 594 92.6 33.3 0 9 0 1891-92 ... 241 234 475 462 198 189 61 13 6 42.8 40.9 13.2 454 97.0 46.1 0 10 11 Tuticorin ... ... 1890-91 ... 16,281 734 334 1,068 1,067 143 395 422 1 1 13.4 37.0 39.5 961 89.9 100.0 0 4 8 1891-92 ... 785 291 1,076 940 190 377 302 136 123 20.2 40.1 32.1 992 92.4 90.4 0 4 11 Vaniyámbadi ... ... 1890-91 ... 15,933 388 348 736 736 219 458 23 ... ... 29.2 62.2 32.6 700 95.1 ... 0 5 9 1891-92 ... 587 513 1,100 1,098 566 458 49 2 51.5 41.7 4.5 1,073 97.7 ... 0 4 7 Vellore ... ... 1890-91 ... 37,491 928 656 1,584 1,519 462 630 390 65 25 30.4 41.5 25.7 1,507 97.5 38.5 0 4 9 1891-92 ... 1,287 763 2,050 1,954 762 748 378 96 25 39.0 38.3 19.3 1,913 96.6 26.0 0 3 9 Vizagapatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 30,291 1,638 901 2,539 1,918 807 520 557 621 362 42.1 27.1 29.0 2,246 98.2 58.3 0 2 5 1891-92 ... 1,202 769 1,971 1,795 1,106 419 231 176 90 61.6 23.3 12.9 1,846 97.9 51.1 0 2 11 Vizianagrum ... ... 1890-91 ... 22,577 581 370 951 766 302 294 164 185 173 39.4 38.3 21.4 933 99.2 93.5 0 4 7 1891-92 ... 571 382 953 767 205 390 153 186 165 26.7 50.9 19.9 913 97.5 88.7 0 5 4 Wálajápet ... ... 1890-91 ... 10,387 178 142 320 297 146 126 20 23 9 49.1 42.4 6.7 301 98.3 39.1 0 6 7 1891-92 ... 153 122 275 263 146 82 17 12 10 55.5 31.2 6.4 255 93.7 83.3 0 8 5 Total ... 1890-91 ... 1,862,270 56,938 42,120 99,058 91,167 34,793 36,032 14,183 7,891 5,803 38.2 39.5 15.6 90,811 93.2 73.5 0 4 10 1891-92 ... 61,647 48,943 110,590 102,488 41,047 41,229 13,622 8,102 5,947 40.1 40.2 13.3 101,845 93.4 73.4 0 5 1
12 VACCINATION REPORT. 13. The following shows particulars of work done by Government vaccinators in 1890-91 and 1891-92:VACCINATION REPORT. 13 15. The following table shows the work done in dispensaries:14 VACCINATION REPORT. 16. Vaccination in cantonments. Cantonments. Number of vaccinators. Number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vac- cination. Percentage of success. Cost of each successful case. Average number of operations per man. Total. Successful. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Total. Successful. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. RS. A. P. Banga- lore. 1890-91... 2 376 430 806 696 481 168 ... 110 93 96.8 84.5 0 7 3 403 1891-92... 2 423 536 959 638 463 145 ... 321 214 95.3 66.6 0 6 8 479 Secun- derabad. 1890-91... 4 1,656 1,400 3,056 2,985 1,462 1,232 ... 71 63 90.3 88.7 0 0 3 764 1891-92... 4 933 1,693 2,626 2,615 1,313 1,077 ... 11 6 91.4 54.5 0 0 4 656 Total... 1890-91... 6 2,032 1,830 3,862 3,681 1,943 1,400 ... 181 156 90.8 86.2 0 1 10 644 1891-92... 6 1,356 2,229 3,585 3,253 1,776 1,222 ... 332 220 92.2 66.3 0 2 0 597 17. The following table shows the inspection work of Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination for 1891-92:VACCINATION REPORT. 15 Circles. Number of inspecting officers. Number of villages visited. Total number of persons vaccinated. Number of days spent on inspection duty. Number of cases verified. Total number of cases inspected by Deputy Inspectors of all sorts. Total number of successful cases in- spected by Deputy Inspectors. Percentage of successful cases to total number inspected as reported by Deputy Inspectors. Proportion per cent. of inspection to total number vaccinated. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. Guntúr ... ... 1 ... 293 ... 18,754 226 12,861 ... 12,861 10,890 84.7 68.5 ... Masulipatam ... ... 1 ... 242 ... 19,964 165 10,323 ... 10,323 9,203 89.2 51.7 ... Vinukonda ... ... ... 1 ... 258 13,127 218 ... 7,579 7,579 6,567 86.6 ... 57.7 Cumbum ... ... 1 ... 393 ... 15,747 233 11,235 ... 11,235 10,379 92.4 71.3 ... Kurnool ... ... 1 ... 461 ... 14,884 203 8,366 ... 8,366 6,240 74.6 56.2 ... Dindigul ... ... 1 ... 545 ... 19,868 187 10,970 ... 10,970 9,920 90.4 55.2 ... Madura ... ... ... 1 ... 540 19,128 288 ... 13,774 13,774 13,084 95.0 ... 72.0 Paramakudi ... ... 1 ... 339 ... 22,259 226 8,149 ... 8,149 7,690 94.4 36.6 ... Tellicherry ... ... ... 1 ... 224 13,495 256 ... 7,895 7,895 7,649 96.9 ... 58.5 Calicut ... ... 1 ... 256 ... 20,008 278 10,445 ... 10,445 9,546 91.4 52.2 ... Pálghat ... ... ... 1 ... 267 15,993 224 ... 8,438 8,438 7,672 90.9 ... 52.7 Kávali ... ... ... 1 ... 455 10,674 212 ... 7,372 7,372 6,803 92.3 ... 69.0 Nellore ... ... 1 ... 633 ... 14,248 260 7,839 ... 7,839 7,394 94.3 55.0 ... Ongole ... ... ... 1 ... 207 13,097 117 ... 6,039 6,039 5,528 91.5 ... 46.1 Chittoor ... ... 1 ... 872 ... 18,259 267 10,623 ... 10,623 10,051 94.6 58.2 ... Kárvetnagar ... ... ... 1 ... 408 11,640 177 ... 5,676 5,676 5,373 94.7 ... 48.7 Vellore ... ... 1 ... 461 ... 18,942 226 11,383 ... 11,383 10,824 95.1 60.0 ... Krishnagiri ... ... ... 1 ... 908 16,707 229 ... 10,825 10,825 9,960 92.0 ... 64.8 Námakal ... ... ... 1 ... 684 24,375 283 ... 16,929 16,929 14,591 86.2 ... 69.4 Salem ... ... 1 ... 567 ... 22,492 251 12,517 ... 12,517 11,037 88.2 55.6 ... Cuddalore ... ... 1 ... 616 ... 32,251 238 17,196 ... 17,196 16,168 94.0 53.3 ... Vriddháchalam ... ... 1 ... 439 16,083 179 ... 10,309 10,309 9,905 96.1 ... 64.0 No. I, South Canara ... 1 ... 283 ... 22,256 222 10,840 ... 10,840 10,436 96.3 48.7 ... No. II, South Canara ... ... 1 ... 285 14,633 217 ... 7,873 7,873 7,628 96.9 ... 53.8 Negapatam ... ... 1 ... 737 ... 19,027 268 11,949 ... 11,949 11,367 95.1 62.8 ... Tanjore ... ... 1 ... 883 ... 22,537 272 12,003 ... 12,003 11,097 92.5 53.2 ... Sátúr ... ... ... 1 ... 457 21,137 280 ... 13,140 13,140 12,534 95.4 ... 62.1 Shermádevi ... ... ... 1 ... 743 25,163 246 ... 17,569 17,569 17,122 97.5 ... 69.8 Tinnevelly ... ... 1 ... 763 ... 22,785 257 15,397 ... 15,397 14,731 95.7 67.5 ... Trichinopoly ... ... 1 ... 628 ... 33,919 241 17,057 ... 17,057 16,590 97.2 50.3 ... Gunupur ... ... ... 1 ... 535 4,425 234 ... 3,542 3,542 3,093 87.3 ... 80.0 Vizagapatam ... ... ... 1 ... 544 * 26,063 295 ... 14,627 14,627 14,101 96.4 ... 56.2 Vizianagrum ... ... 1 ... 361 ... * 20,742 190 8,798 ... 8,798 8,283 94.1 42.4 ... Jeypore ... ... 1 ... 279 ... 8,113 216 4,928 ... 4,928 4,592 93.2 60.7 ... Total ... 33 19 16,868 8,604 885,777 11,894 344,653 179,918 524,571 483,712 92.2 57.8 62.1 * Including cases done in Municipal towns. In six ranges the deputies failed to verify 50 per cent. of the cases vaccinated. The Deputy Inspector, Gooty range, was reported to the President, District Board, who fined him Rs. 5. The Permagudi deputy verified only 36.6 per cent. of the work done. This man was on leave for three months; but, considering that the number of cases vacci- nated during the year in his range was less by 2,291 than in 1890-91, he has evidently neglected his duties. The President has been asked to fine him. In Ongole there were many changes which interfered with the work. In August 1891, the deputy of this range was dismissed the service. A vaccinator
16 VACCINATION REPORT. held charge till November when another deputy was appointed. This man fell sick and had to be removed. The present incumbent assumed charge on the 26th February 1892. The short work in the Kárvetnagar range was due to a want of harmony between the deputy and the vaccinators. The vaccinators combined and brought several charges against the deputy, which, however, they failed to prove. They were insubordinate and prevented him from properly inspecting their work. The deputy has since been transferred. The Deputy, No. I Circle, South Canara, has been called upon to explain his failure to verify the required number. Unless his explanation is satisfactory the President will be asked to fine him. In Vizianagrum range the Deputy Inspector suffered from bad health, and, on the 18th September, was declared unfit for further service. 18. Animal Vaccination.VACCINATION REPORT. 17 Preserved Animal Lymph. Circles. Total number vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Gooty ... ... ... ... ... 3,260 2,957 214 89 93.2 Penukonda ... ... ... ... ... 3,343 3,066 193 84 94.0 Bellary ... ... ... ... ... 3,391 3,285 60 46 98.2 Harpanahalli ... ... ... ... ... 1,170 1,147 14 9 98.8 Chingleput ... ... ... ... ... 1,282 1,124 89 69 92.6 Saidápet ... ... ... ... ... 1,476 1,338 97 41 93.2 North Coimbatore ... ... ... ... 324 167 127 30 56.8 South Coimbatore ... ... ... ... 252 102 122 28 45.5 East Coimbatore ... ... ... ... ... 415 264 139 12 65.5 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... 906 697 203 6 77.4 Madanapalle ... ... ... ... ... 318 285 31 2 90.2 Sidhout ... ... ... ... ... 850 712 115 23 86.0 Chatrapur ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,139 4,090 49 ... 98.8 Chicacole ... ... ... ... ... 3,131 3,067 59 5 98.1 Ganjam Hill Tracts ... ... ... ... 604 486 26 92 94.9 Rajahmundry ... ... ... ... ... 114 71 36 7 66.3 Ellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 52 16 2 76.5 Pithápuram ... ... ... ... ... 253 227 17 9 93.0 Masulipatam ... ... ... ... ... 62 47 9 6 83.9 Vinukonda ... ... ... ... ... 348 327 9 12 97.3 Guntúr ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,616 1,481 120 15 92.5 Cumbum ... ... ... ... ... ... 896 790 85 21 90.3 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... 916 852 23 41 97.4 Dindigul ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 21 13 ... 61.8 Paramakudi ... ... ... ... ... 1,359 1,261 83 15 93.8 Madura ... ... ... ... ... 2,328 2,184 101 43 95.6 Tellicherry ... ... ... ... ... 408 340 51 17 87.0 Calicut ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,385 1,246 105 34 92.2 Pálghat ... ... ... ... ... ... 223 124 83 16 59.9 Kávali ... ... ... ... ... ... 194 167 20 7 89.3 Ongole ... ... ... ... ... ... 266 146 111 9 56.8 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,090 1,922 46 122 97.7 Nílgiris ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,518 1,379 90 49 ... Chittoor ... ... ... ... ... ... 564 531 24 9 95.7 Kárvetnagar ... ... ... ... ... 133 114 17 2 87.0 Námakal ... ... ... ... ... 88 70 15 3 82.3 Salem ... ... ... ... ... ... 154 133 5 16 96.4 Krishnagiri ... ... ... ... ... 195 191 2 2 99.0 Cuddalore ... ... ... ... ... 619 578 21 20 96.5 No. I, South Canara ... ... ... ... 2,677 2,277 346 54 86.8 No. II, do. ... ... ... ... 1,259 1,046 130 83 88.9 Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,996 13,944 1,221 831 91.9 Negapatam ... ... ... ... ... 12,842 12,253 364 225 97.1 Tinnevelly ... ... ... ... ... 658 541 76 41 87.7 Sátúr ... ... ... ... ... ... 842 779 39 24 95.2 Shermádevi ... ... ... ... ... 189 185 1 3 99.5 Gunapur ... ... ... ... ... 323 263 31 29 89.4 Jeypore ... ... ... ... ... 107 70 37 ... 65.4 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... 15,872 15,503 322 47 97.9 Vizianagrum ... ... ... ... ... 6,558 6,270 155 133 97.6 Vriddháchalam ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 98,017 90,172 5,362 2,483 94.4 Animal Vaccination of all kinds by Medical Subordinates. Districts. Total number vaccinated by all kinds of lymph. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Anantapur ... ... ... ... ... 176 151 15 10 91.0 Bellary ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,097 1,381 154 562 89.9 Chingleput ... ... ... ... ... 4,374 3,961 373 40 91.4 Coimbatore ... ... ... ... ... 545 426 112 7 79.2 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... 1,656 1,205 364 87 76.8 Ganjam ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,176 761 413 2 64.8 Godávari ... ... ... ... ... ... 154 144 4 6 97.3 Kistna ... ... ... ... ... ... 595 444 142 9 75.7 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,707 1,289 259 159 83.3 Madura ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,953 3,777 893 283 80.8 Nílgiris ... ... ... ... ... ... 950 847 76 27 91.7 Malabar ... ... ... ... ... ... 820 577 168 75 77.4 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,580 1,435 87 58 94.3 North Arcot ... ... ... ... ... 2,888 2,272 533 83 81.0 Salem ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,355 1,840 459 56 80.0 South Arcot ... ... ... ... ... 1,809 1,486 228 95 86.7 South Canara ... ... ... ... ... 652 520 82 50 86.4 Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,992 3,570 1,199 223 74.8 Tinnevelly ... ... ... ... ... 384 335 31 18 91.5 Trichinopoly ... ... ... ... ... 1,001 889 54 58 94.3 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... 3,542 2,629 780 133 77.1 Total ... *38,406 29,939 6,426 2,041 82.3 * Includes 9,432 cases done with lanoline paste. 5
18 VACCINATION REPORT. Table showing Animal Vaccination conducted in the Municipalities. Municipalities. Direct from Calf. Preserved Animal Lymph. Lanoline Paste. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Adóni ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 886 731 30 125 96.0 ... ... ... ... ... 886 731 30 125 96.0 Anantapur ... 106 99 3 3 97.1 96 88 6 2 93.6 27 26 1 ... 96.3 228 213 10 5 95.5 Anakápalle ... ... ... ... ... ... 274 252 18 4 93.3 ... ... ... ... ... 274 252 18 4 93.3 Bellary ... 2,447 2,417 29 1 98.8 1,042 928 114 ... 89.1 ... ... ... ... ... 3,489 3,345 143 1 95.9 Berhampore ... 1,254 872 359 23 70.8 13 10 3 ... 76.9 110 104 4 2 96.3 1,377 986 366 25 72.9 Bezváda ... 73 73 ... ... 100.0 20 10 10 ... 50.0 284 248 21 15 92.2 377 331 31 15 91.4 Bimlipatam ... ... ... ... ... ... 505 478 25 2 95.0 ... ... ... ... ... 505 478 25 2 95.0 Calicut ... 865 765 88 12 88.4 1,455 1,147 264 44 81.3 1,416 1,125 148 143 79.4 3,736 3,037 500 199 85.8 Cannanore ... 777 761 6 10 99.2 350 330 17 3 95.1 319 251 45 23 84.8 1,455 1,342 68 45 95.1 Chicacole ... ... ... ... ... ... 748 389 353 6 52.4 ... ... ... ... ... 748 389 353 6 52.4 Chidambaram ... 516 493 4 19 99.0 3 3 ... ... 100.0 231 222 2 7 99.1 750 718 6 26 99.1 Cochin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 227 195 31 1 86.3 227 195 31 1 86.2 Cocanoda ... 1,028 758 190 80 73.9 ... ... ... ... ... 426 169 257 ... 39.7 1,454 927 447 80 63.1 Coimbatore ... 216 199 16 1 92.6 189 147 41 1 78.2 587 435 120 32 78.4 992 781 177 34 81.5 Conjeeveram ... 1,331 1,300 17 14 98.7 255 252 2 1 99.2 654 613 28 13 95.6 2,240 2,165 47 28 97.8 Coonoor ... ... ... ... ... ... 408 355 46 7 88.5 188 179 9 ... 95.2 596 534 55 7 90.6 Cuddalore ... 932 851 62 19 91.7 533 421 92 20 82.1 301 278 20 3 93.3 1,766 1,550 174 42 89.9 Cuddapah ... 708 692 11 5 98.4 ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 100.0 709 693 11 5 98.4 Dindigul ... 737 713 24 ... 96.7 ... ... ... ... ... 291 235 45 11 80.7 1,028 948 69 11 93.2 Ellore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Erode ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 60 10 ... 85.7 263 222 26 15 89.5 333 282 36 15 88.6 Gudiyátam ... 472 445 8 19 94.2 46 43 2 1 95.6 170 151 8 11 98.7 688 639 18 31 97.2 Guntúr ... 608 591 15 2 97.5 26 23 3 ... 88.5 391 288 94 9 75.4 1,025 902 112 11 88.9 Karúr ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 7 10 3 41.2 107 86 17 4 83.5 127 93 27 7 77.5 Kumbakónam ... 1,550 1,474 72 4 95.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,550 1,474 72 4 95.3 Kurnool ... 755 714 28 13 96.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 755 714 28 13 96.2 Madras ... 25,057 24,263 468 326 98.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25,057 24,263 468 326 98.1 Madura ... 935 825 55 55 93.7 1,081 965 60 56 94.1 646 421 176 49 70.5 2,662 2,211 291 160 88.3 Mannárgudi ... 547 542 3 2 99.4 63 62 1 ... 98.4 ... ... ... ... ... 610 604 4 2 99.3 Mangalore ... 1,167 1,131 34 2 97.1 329 314 15 ... 95.4 151 105 46 ... 69.5 1,647 1,550 95 2 94.2 Masulipatam ... 2,023 1,932 91 ... 95.5 ... ... ... ... ... 833 630 203 ... 75.6 2,856 2,562 294 ... 89.7 Máyavaram ... 723 681 41 1 94.3 39 29 2 8 93.5 67 57 10 ... 85.1 829 767 53 9 93.5 Negapatam ... 1,858 1,751 60 47 94.2 194 176 15 3 92.1 ... ... ... ... ... 2,052 1,927 75 50 96.2
VACCINATION REPORT. 19 Nellore ... 1,083 1,034 41 8 96.2 ... ... ... ... ... 121 110 11 ... 99.2 1,204 1,144 52 8 96.0 Ongole ... 408 386 17 5 95.8 5 5 ... ... 100.0 320 262 54 4 82.9 733 653 71 9 90.1 Ootacamund ... 28 28 ... ... 100.0 439 362 54 23 87.0 339 291 30 18 90.7 806 681 84 41 89.0 Palamcottah ... 358 342 14 2 96.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 358 342 14 2 96.0 Pálghat ... ... ... ... ... ... 241 223 18 ... 92.5 349 327 19 3 94.5 590 550 37 3 93.6 Parlákimedi ... ... ... ... ... ... 375 169 206 ... 45.1 ... ... ... ... ... 375 169 206 ... 45.0 Periyakulam ... 466 424 35 7 92.4 9 2 7 ... 22.2 221 189 30 2 86.3 696 615 72 9 89.5 Palni ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 19 5 ... 79.2 24 19 5 ... 79.1 Rajahmundry ... 1,604 1,359 145 100 90.4 101 76 6 19 92.7 128 90 22 16 80.4 1,833 1,525 173 135 89.8 Salem ... ... 3,524 3,421 90 13 97.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,524 3,421 90 13 97.4 Srírangam ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 301 261 39 1 87.0 301 261 39 1 87.0 Tanjore ... 513 485 28 ... 94.5 969 928 39 2 97.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1,482 1,413 67 2 95.4 Tellicherry ... 859 770 72 17 91.4 627 467 118 42 79.8 131 97 26 8 78.8 1,617 1,334 216 67 86.0 Tinnevelly ... 1,568 1,538 15 15 99.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,568 1,538 15 15 99.0 Trichinopoly ... 11,592 10,980 159 453 98.6 ... ... ... ... ... 339 324 3 12 99.1 11,931 11,304 162 465 98.5 Tirupatúr ... 932 807 99 26 86.5 2 1 1 .. 50.0 ... ... ... ... ... 934 808 100 26 88.9 Tirupati ... 402 384 13 5 96.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 402 384 13 5 96.7 Tuticorin ... 492 458 34 ... 93.1 436 397 39 ... 91.1 ... ... ... ... ... 928 855 73 ... 92.1 Vániyambádi ... 1,100 1,073 25 2 97.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,100 1,073 25 2 97.7 Vellore ... 843 779 59 5 93.0 ... ... ... ... ... 573 539 33 1 95.5 1,416 1,318 92 6 93.4 Vizagapatam ... 332 317 12 3 96.4 1,639 1,529 96 14 94.1 ... ... ... ... ... 1,971 1,846 108 17 94.4 Vizianagrum ... ... ... ... ... ... 808 771 32 5 96.0 ... ... ... ... ... 808 771 32 5 96.0 Wálajápet ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 1 6 ... 14.3 118 107 10 1 91.5 125 108 16 1 87.1 Total ... 72,788 68,927 2,542 1,319 *96.4 14,303 12,151 1,761 391 *37.3 10,654 8,657 1,593 404 *84.4 97,745 89,735 5,896 2,114 *93.8 * Unknown cases are excluded in calculating the percentage of success.
20 VACCINATION REPORT. From Lanoline Paste (inclusive of cases done by Medical Subordinates). Districts. Total number vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Anantapur ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,763 3,927 1,534 302 71.9 Bellary ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,529 5,253 170 106 96.8 Chingleput ... ... ... ... ... 16,146 14,570 1,204 372 92.4 Coimbatore ... ... ... ... ... ... 16,911 12,793 2,610 1,508 83.0 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 4 ... ... 100.0 Ganjam ... ... ... ... ... ... 536 314 222 ... 58.6 Godávari ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kistna ... ... ... ... ... ... 24,022 18,707 4,167 1,148 81.7 Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... ... 37 17 18 2 48.6 Madras ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,436 741 115 580 86.6 Madura ... ... ... ... ... ... 25,422 22,164 2,320 938 90.5 Malabar ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,254 13,136 1,330 788 90.8 Nellore ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,379 14,236 711 432 95.2 Nílgiris ... ... ... ... ... ... 864 783 53 28 93.7 North Arcot ... ... ... ... ... 17,406 16,341 664 401 96.0 Salem ... ... ... ... ... ... 18,516 16,212 1,618 686 90.9 South Arcot ... ... ... ... ... 14,219 13,232 576 411 95.8 South Canara ... ... ... ... ... 1,608 1,203 318 87 79.0 Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 99 40 58 1 40.8 Tinnevelly ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,654 1,149 449 56 71.9 Trichinopoly ... ... ... ... ... 10,940 9,248 914 778 91.0 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... 36 25 11 ... 69.4 Total ... 191,781 164,095 19,062 8,624 89.6 Report of the progress made with animal vaccination during the year. At the commencement of the year Surgeon-Major W. G. King was still experi- menting, in most of the districts, with lanoline-vaccine. In July the lanoline- vaccine supply was suddenly stopped, and other methods of carrying on vaccina- tion had to be re-started. Orders were passed on Surgeon-Major W. G. King's final report on the 3rd September 1891, when Government ruled that wherever possible, with a due re- gard to economy, fresh animal lymph should be employed in all vaccine operations for the future, and Dr. King's lanoline paste should be availed of only when the use of stored lymph cannot be avoided. The use of humanized lymph was ordered to be entirely discontinued. On the 10th October, Government directed (Order No. 860, Public), that the use of lanoline paste for vaccination purposes, made under the orders of Surgeon- Major W. G. King, should immediately cease, and that the lymph derived from it be disused as far as possible. In Tanjore, Surgeon-Major H. A. F. Nailer employed glycerine as a preserva- tive of calf lymph with considerable success. Towards the end of the year animal lymph was being used in every district VACCINATION REPORT. 21 19. During the year one Deputy Inspector retired from the service; one was dismissed for borrowing money from a vaccinator and for general bad conduct. Two first-class deputies were reduced to second class; and one second-class deputy was reduced to the grade of vaccinator for misconduct. Four deputies were fined for various offences. 20. The service registers of the Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination have been maintained and brought up to date, with the exception of five, belonging to men recently promoted, and which are now under verification. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, DONALD F. DYMOTT, Surgn.-Major, Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Madras. 17th June 1892.
APPENDIX. VACCINATION RETURNS. 7
VACCINATION RETURNS. 25 A26 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 27 30 Nellore. Kávali circle ... ... 373,748 132 9 5,518 5,156 10,674 1,186 10,557 1,147 6,604 9,812 117 74 92.9 63.2 26.3 0.2 26.5 ... ... ... ... 31 Nellore do. ... ... 397,873 137 12 7,110 7,138 14,248 1,187 14,141 1,125 8,913 13,375 107 69 94.6 64.5 33.6 0.2 33.8 ... ... ... ... 32 Ongole do. ... ... 411,910 138 10 6,734 6,363 13,097 1,310 12,988 865 7,591 11,389 109 81 87.7 74.3 27.6 0.2 27.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,183,531 136 31 19,362 18,657 38,019 1,226 37,686 3,137 23,108 34,576 333 224 91.7 67.3 29.2 0.2 29.4 26,490 22.4 508 0.4 33 Nílgiri. Nílgiri Circle ... ... 73,921 79 3 1,471 995 2,466 822 2,093 119 1,007 1,923 373 321 91.9 86.1 26.0 4.3 30.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 73,921 79 3 1,471 995 2,466 822 2,093 119 1,007 1,923 373 321 91.9 86.1 26.0 4.3 30.3 1,664 22.5 45 0.6 34 North Arcot. Chittoor circle ... ... 657,795 232 15 9,637 8,622 18,259 1,217 17,323 6,269 9,196 16,966 936 829 97.9 88.6 25.7 1.3 27.0 ... ... ... ... 35 Kárvetnagar circle ... 473,771 206 9 5,946 5,694 11,640 1,293 11,375 2,196 8,633 10,829 265 187 95.2 70.6 22.9 0.4 23.3 ... ... ... ... 36 Vellore do. ... 608,448 308 12 9,761 9,181 18,942 1,578 18,445 3,509 11,703 17,424 497 359 94.4 72.2 28.6 0.6 29.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,740,014 244 36 25,344 23,497 48,841 1,357 47,143 11,974 29,532 45,219 1,698 1,375 95.9 81.0 26.0 0.8 26.8 34,491 19.8 2,484 1.4 37 Salem. Krishnagiri circle ... 392,465 150 12 8,317 8,390 16,707 1,392 16,299 5,871 8,619 15,599 408 303 95.7 74.3 39.7 0.8 40.5 ... ... ... ... 38 Salem do. ... 512,829 179 18 11,309 11,183 22,492 1,249 21,874 3,925 14,178 20,385 618 445 93.2 72.0 39.7 0.9 40.6 ... ... ... ... 39 Námakal do. ... 604,459 285 19 12,117 12,258 24,375 1,283 22,295 3,508 14,370 20,343 2,080 1,584 91.1 76.2 33.6 2.7 36.3 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,509,753 202 49 31,743 31,831 63,574 1,502 60,468 13,304 37,167 56,327 3,106 2,332 93.2 75.0 37.3 1.5 38.8 50,074 33.2 1,127 0.7 40 South Arcot. Cuddalore circle ... 1,122,846 340 18 16,815 15,436 32,251 1,791 31,784 4,622 19,464 30,336 467 377 95.4 87.3 27.1 0.3 27.4 ... ... ... ... 41 Vriddháchalam circle ... 628,510 401 12 8,504 7,579 16,083 1,340 15,909 3,605 9,526 15,278 174 116 96.0 66.7 24.3 0.2 24.5 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,751,356 360 30 25,319 23,015 48,334 1,611 47,693 8,227 28,990 45,614 641 493 95.6 76.9 26.0 0.3 26.3 28,756 16.4 3,078 1.7 42 South Canara. No. I. South Canara circle 573,167 300 14 10,383 11,873 22,256 1,589 21,172 1,249 8,791 20,124 1,084 827 95.1 76.3 35.2 1.4 36.6 ... ... ... ... 43 No. II. do. do. 354,248 178 11 8,103 6,530 14,633 1,330 13,902 700 5,502 12,924 731 557 93.0 76.2 36.4 1.6 38.0 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 927,415 238 25 18,486 18,403 36,889 1,476 35,074 1,949 14,293 33,048 1,815 1,384 94.2 76.3 35.6 1.5 37.1 29,850 32.2 440 0.5 44 Tanjore. Negapatam circle ... 881,387 601 16 9,981 9,046 19,027 1,189 18,208 2,172 11,297 17,519 819 632 96.2 77.2 19.9 0.7 20.6 ... ... ... ... 45 Tanjore do. ... 1,047,924 484 21 11,700 10,837 22,537 1,073 21,284 2,794 13,148 19,183 1,253 773 90.1 61.7 18.3 0.7 19.0 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,929,311 531 37 21,681 19,883 41,564 1,123 39,492 4,966 24,445 36,702 2,072 1,405 92.9 67.8 19.0 0.7 19.7 38,674 20.0 998 0.5 46 Tinnevelly. Sátúr circle ... ... 495,558 271 12 11,601 9,536 21,137 1,761 19,369 3,606 11,667 18,539 1,768 1,359 95.7 76.9 37.4 2.7 40.1 ... ... ... ... 47 Shermádevi circle ... 479,904 301 14 14,129 11,034 25,163 1,797 23,625 4,976 12,889 22,982 1,538 1,339 97.3 87.0 47.9 2.8 50.7 ... ... ... ... 48 Tinnevelly do. ... 666,819 342 16 12,974 9,811 22,785 1,424 21,084 4,779 11,528 20,596 1,701 1,420 97.6 83.5 30.9 2.1 33.0 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,642,281 305 42 38,704 30,381 69,085 1,645 64,078 13,361 36,084 62,117 5,007 4,118 96.9 82.2 37.8 2.5 40.3 50,004 30.4 1,031 0.6 49 Trichi- nopoly Trichinopoly circle ... 1,110,811 313 18 17,072 16,847 33,919 1,884 31,039 3,775 20,330 29,473 2,880 2,620 94.9 91.0 26.5 2.3 28.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district... 1,110,811 313 18 17,072 16,847 33,919 1,884 31,039 3,775 20,330 29,473 2,880 2,620 94.9 91.0 26.4 2.3 28.8 28,092 25.3 423 0.4 50 Vizagapatam. Gunapur circle ... ... 694,673 50 3 1,143 941 2,084 695 2,079 309 1,052 1,858 5 5 89.4 100.0 17.3 0.01 17.3 ... ... ... ... 51 Zemindary vaccinators. 3 1,329 1,012 2,341 780 2,341 277 1,218 2,222 ... ... 94.9 ... Jeypore circle ... ... 5 1,948 1,878 3,826 765 3,826 411 2,049 3,719 ... ... 97.2 ... Zemindary vaccinators. 7 2,194 2,093 4,287 612 4,287 503 2,374 4,208 ... ... 98.2 ... Total of Hill tracts ... 694,673 50 18 6,614 5,924 12,538 697 12,533 1,500 6,693 12,007 5 5 95.8 100.0 17.3 0.01 17.3 ... ... ... ... 8
28 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 29 14 Municipalities. Coimbatore ... ... 38,967 12,989 2 857 845 1,702 851 1,656 760 606 1,412 46 30 85.2 65.2 36.2 0.7 36.27 1,221 31.3 94 2.4 15 Conjeeveram ... ... 37,275 4,142 2 1,435 1,343 2,778 1,389 2,710 1,126 1,352 2,632 68 44 97.1 64.7 70.6 1.2 71.8 1,614 43.3 27 0.7 16 Coonoor ... ... ... 4,778 531 1 330 323 653 653 587 176 302 531 66 53 90.5 80.3 111.1 11.1 122.2 301 62.9 4 0.8 17 Cuddalore ... ... ... 43,545 3,629 3 955 811 1,766 589 1,764 455 907 1,549 2 1 87.8 50.0 35.57 0.02 35.59 1,233 28.3 27 0.6 18 Cuddapah ... ... ... 18,982 999 1 412 297 709 709 665 333 271 663 44 30 99.7 68.2 34.9 1.6 36.5 704 37.0 16 0.8 19 Dindigul ... ... ... 14,182 7,091 1 495 533 1,028 1,028 957 595 302 904 71 44 94.5 62.0 63.7 3.1 66.8 870 61.3 27 1.9 20 Ellore ... ... ... 25,092 2,788 2 878 817 1,695 847 1,635 370 882 1,623 60 56 99.3 93.3 64.7 2.2 66.9 960 38.3 3 0.1 21 Erode ... ... ... 9,864 897 1 351 276 627 627 627 243 241 569 ... ... 86.0 ... 57.7 ... 57.7 561 56.7 3 0.3 22 Gudiyátam ... ... 16,690 ... 1 357 331 688 688 653 223 381 610 35 29 93.4 82.8 36.5 1.7 38.2 315 18.8 22 1.3 23 Guntúr ... ... ... 19,646 1,691 1 548 477 1,025 1,025 959 463 304 866 66 36 90.3 54.5 44.1 1.8 45.9 625 31.8 2 0.1 24 Karúr ... ... ... 9,205 2,301 1 182 168 350 350 350 189 87 308 ... ... 88.0 ... 33.5 ... 33.5 383 41.6 4 0.4 25 Kumbakónam ... ... 50,098 16,699 2 771 779 1,550 775 1,473 515 825 1,408 77 66 95.6 85.7 28.1 1.3 29.4 1,341 26.7 78 1.5 26 Kurnool ... ... 20,329 4,066 1 445 310 755 755 643 294 313 618 112 96 96.1 85.6 30.4 4.7 35.1 1,215 59.7 34 1.6 27 Madras ... ... ... 405,848 15,031 24 13,474 11,628 25,102 1,046 22,451 15,798 4,606 22,165 2,651 2,142 98.7 80.8 54.6 5.3 59.9 22,248 54.8 35 0.8 28 Madura ... ... ... 76,847 18,452 3 1,433 1,229 2,662 887 2,662 929 1,176 2,211 ... ... 83.1 ... 28.8 ... 28.8 2,957 39.8 139 1.8 29 Mannárgudi ... ... 19,409 4,852 1 299 317 616 616 583 142 347 581 33 29 99.7 87.9 29.9 1.5 31.4 492 25.3 25 1.3 30 Mangalore ... ... 32,099 3,567 2 887 771 1,658 829 1,658 489 902 1,561 ... ... 94.1 ... 48.6 ... 48.6 2,104 65.5 96 3.0 31 Masulipatam ... ... 35,056 8,764 2 1,616 1,301 2,917 1,458 2,760 405 1,510 2,559 157 54 92.8 34.4 73.0 1.5 74.5 1,325 37.8 9 0.2 32 Máyavaram ... ... 23,044 7,681 1 433 396 829 829 787 510 216 750 42 17 95.3 40.5 32.5 0.7 33.2 785 34.0 15 0.6 33 Negapatam ... ... 53,776 7,693 2 1,160 892 2,052 1,026 2,004 1,137 645 1,889 48 38 94.3 79.2 35.1 0.7 35.8 1,935 35.9 59 1.1 34 Nellore ... ... ... 27,505 1,100 1 639 565 1,204 1,207 1,117 681 369 1,080 87 64 96.7 73.6 39.3 2.3 41.6 1,146 41.6 15 0.5 35 Ongole ... ... ... 9,200 2,300 1 475 258 733 733 673 318 216 638 60 15 94.8 25.0 69.3 1.6 70.9 419 45.5 3 0.3 36 Ootacamund ... ... 12,335 1,121 1 488 408 896 896 849 263 381 727 47 34 85.6 72.3 58.9 2.8 61.7 632 51.2 25 2.0 37 Palamcottah ... ... 17,964 17,964 1 563 497 1,060 1,060 1,030 437 426 1,002 30 23 97.3 76.7 55.8 1.8 57.1 834 46.4 2 0.1 38 Pálghat ... ... 36,339 4,037 2 716 548 1,264 632 1,214 38 730 1,161 50 34 95.6 68.0 31.9 0.9 32.8 1,580 43.4 19 0.5 39 Parlákimedi ... ... 15,365 ... 1 637 658 1,295 1,295 1,295 451 518 1,077 ... ... 83.2 ... 70.1 ... 70.1 502 32.6 26 1.7 40 Periyakulam ... ... 16,446 ... 1 407 334 741 741 682 281 334 627 59 25 91.9 42.4 38.1 1.5 39.6 326 13.7 24 1.4 41 Pálni ... ... ... 13,315 ... 1 217 195 412 412 403 191 186 385 9 6 95.5 66.7 28.9 0.5 29.4 563 42.2 6 0.4 42 Rajahmundry ... ... 24,555 2,046 2 987 846 1,833 916 1,623 513 897 1,440 210 85 88.7 40.4 58.6 3.5 62.1 1,224 49.8 16 0.7 43 Salem ... ... ... 59,631 16,889 3 1,801 1,723 3,524 1,175 3,522 1,438 1,920 3,420 2 1 97.1 50.0 57.4 0.02 57.4 1,788 31.6 107 1.8 44 Srírangam ... ... 19,773 2,825 1 565 600 1,165 1,165 1,163 356 629 1,072 2 2 92.2 100.0 54.2 0.1 54.3 859 43.4 34 1.7 45 Tanjore ... ... ... 54,745 6,843 2 784 698 1,482 741 1,446 308 840 1,391 36 22 96.2 61.1 25.4 0.4 25.8 1,439 26.3 52 0.9 46 Tellicherry ... ... 24,581 6,602 3 891 726 1,617 539 1,229 246 563 1,003 388 331 81.6 86.3 40.8 13.5 54.3 1,276 51.9 55 2.2 47 Tinnevelly ... ... 23,221 23,221 1 901 667 1,568 1,568 1,538 520 661 1,510 30 28 98.2 93.3 65.0 1.2 66.2 832 35.8 21 0.9 48 Trichinopoly ... ... 84,449 8,445 6 7,277 4,654 11,931 1,988 10,622 1,546 5,685 10,272 1,309 1,032 96.7 78.8 121.6 12.2 133.8 4,939 58.5 119 1.4 49 Tirupatúr ... ... 14,278 ... 2 459 475 934 467 880 220 501 774 54 34 88.0 63.0 54.2 2.4 56.6 361 25.3 25 1.7 50 Tirupati ... ... 13,232 ... 1 241 234 475 475 462 198 189 448 13 6 97.0 46.1 33.9 0.4 34.3 230 17.3 8 0.6 51 Tuticorin ... ... 16,281 5,427 1 785 291 1,076 1,076 940 190 377 869 136 123 92.4 90.4 53.4 7.5 60.9 676 41.5 11 0.7 52 Vaniyambádi ... ... 15,933 ... 2 587 513 1,100 550 1,098 566 458 1,073 2 ... 97.7 ... 67.3 ... 67.3 395 24.7 21 1.3 53 Vellore ... ... ... 40,958 9,373 2 1,287 763 2,050 1,025 1,954 762 748 1,888 96 25 96.6 26.0 46.1 0.6 46.7 1,386 33.8 50 1.2 54 Vizagapatam ... ... 30,291 10,097 1 1,202 769 1,971 1,971 1,795 1,106 419 1,756 176 90 97.9 51.1 57.9 3.0 60.9 1,453 47.9 61 2.0 55 Vizianagrum ... ... 22,577 4,515 2 571 382 953 476 767 205 390 748 186 165 97.5 88.7 33.1 7.3 40.4 764 33.8 36 1.6 56 Wálajápet ... ... 10,387 10,387 1 153 122 275 275 263 146 82 245 12 10 93.7 83.3 23.6 0.9 24.5 267 25.7 19 1.8 Total of Municipalities... 1,862,270 4,872 119 61,647 48,943 110,590 929 102,488 41,047 41,229 95,898 8,102 5,947 93.4 73.4 51.5 3.2 54.7 78,093 41.9 1,907 1.2 Grand Total ... 30,869,266 225 817¾ 545,127 460,941 1,006,068 30 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 31 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the official year 1891-92. Paid from Total. Number of all successful vaccinations and revacci- nations. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 2,813 13 4 ... ... 2,813 13 4 ... ... 2,813 13 4 7,431 0 6 0 2,092 0 7 ... ... 2,092 0 7 ... ... 2,092 0 7 6,591 0 5 1 4,905 13 11 ... ... 4,905 13 11 ... ... 4,905 13 11 14,022 0 5 7 5,068 14 4 ... ... 5,068 14 4 ... ... 5,068 14 4 15,239 0 5 4 1,961 13 1 ... ... 1,961 13 1 ... ... 1,961 13 1 7,356 0 4 3 7,030 11 5 ... ... 7,030 11 5 ... ... 7,030 11 5 22,595 0 5 0 4,372 14 10 ... ... 4,372 14 10 ... ... 4,372 14 10 23,216 0 3 0 3,302 11 4 ... ... 3,302 11 4 ... ... 3,302 11 4 15,851 0 3 4 7,675 10 2 ... ... 7,675 10 2 ... ... 7,675 10 2 39,067 0 3 2 2,865 7 9 ... ... 2,865 7 9 ... ... 2,865 7 9 13,671 0 3 4 2,604 7 1 ... ... 2,604 7 1 ... ... 2,604 7 1 11,899 0 3 6 3,611 14 0 ... ... 3,611 14 0 ... ... 3,611 4 0 17,262 0 3 4 9,081 12 10 ... ... 9,081 12 10 ... ... 9,081 12 10 42,832 0 3 5 4,700 10 5 ... ... 4,700 10 5 ... ... 4,700 10 5 11,933 0 6 3 4,824 10 8 ... ... 4,824 10 8 ... ... 4,824 10 8 17,484 0 4 5 3,666 7 7 ... ... 3,666 7 7 ... ... 3,666 7 7 7,670 0 7 8 13,191 12 8 ... ... 13,191 12 8 ... ... 13,191 12 8 37,087 0 5 8 3,592 10 1 ... ... 3,592 10 1 ... ... 3,592 10 1 16,803 0 8 5 2,696 11 0 ... ... 2,696 11 0 ... ... 2,696 11 0 10,385 0 4 2 2,387 9 2 ... 2,387 9 2 ... ... ... 2,387 9 2 6,188 0 6 2 8,676 14 3 ... 2,387 9 2 6,289 5 1 ... ... 8,676 14 3 33,376 0 4 2 3,706 10 8 ... ... 3,706 10 8 ... ... 3,706 10 8 13,809 0 4 4 2,968 9 4 ... ... 2,968 9 4 ... ... 2,968 9 4 12,144 0 3 11 32 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 33 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1891-9234 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 35 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1891-9236 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 37 B38 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 39 B40 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 41 B42 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 43 B44 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 45 COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned years. Establishment. Persons primarily vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1890-91. 1891-92. Govt. vaccinators ... 10,194 9,663 9,136 8,741 16,887 16,319 12,386 12,033 9,970 9,701 8,511 8,204 9,741 9,479 17,092 16,210 28,257 27,227 17,820 16,684 16,375 14,906 Local fund do. ... ... 470,605 435,696 526,329 493,415 591,352 553,890 617,475 580,624 608,729 579,261 584,711 557,732 618,588 590,853 670,318 643,761 708,653 680,355 743,467 706,117 820,195 768,616 Cantonment do. ... ... 5,213 4,941 3,446 3,207 3,734 3,461 3,434 3,159 2,462 2,295 2,850 2,677 3,375 3,293 4,316 3,912 3,341 3,285 3,681 3,343 3,253 2,998 Native States do. ... ... 3,635 3,286 3,838 3,652 4,751 4,436 4,506 4,291 4,082 3,915 4,429 4,216 4,042 3,885 2,270 2,160 5,254 5,069 6,338 6,017 6,628 6,430 Municipalities ... ... 80,286 70,980 83,533 75,950 91,665 84,452 97,765 88,281 92,946 87,968 70,065 65,614 71,710 67,405 81,566 77,180 81,442 76,215 91,167 85,008 100,830 95,898 Private vaccinators ... ... 137 117 45 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... 9,890 8,193 10,154 8,371 12,579 10,185 21,561 17,201 22,834 18,793 16,790 13,954 13,736 11,506 18,283 15,603 26,870 23,363 38,888 33,162 43,531 36,104 Medical subordinates ... 9,646 5,742 10,049 7,015 9,633 6,271 8,936 5,280 7,549 4,594 6,720 3,677 3,033 1,630 2,517 1,517 3,077 1,793 4,758 2,727 3,804 2,724 Army European ... ... 1,916 1,382 1,987 1,357 1,940 1,158 2,840 1,737 691 597 875 694 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Native ... ... 4,372 3,093 4,414 3,374 4,121 3,212 4,415 3,655 2,784 2,288 2,297 1,987 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 595,894 543,093 652,931 605,125 736,662 683,384 773,118 716,261 752,047 709,412 697,248 658,755 724,225 688,051 796,362 760,343 856,894 817,307 906,119 853,058 996,274 927,719
6TH AUGUST 1892, No. 1790, 1790-A. L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READ2 6TH AUGUST 1892, Nos. 1790, 1790-A L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 1890-91 .. .. .. .. 482,170 1891-92 .. .. .. .. 524,571 the average cost of each such case remained the same as in 1890-91, viz., As. 3-7, owing to a corresponding increase in the total cost of the vaccine establishments. The total number of cases verified by Deputy Inspec- tors of Vaccination exhibits a satisfactory increase of 42,401 over that of the pre- vious year, and the ranges in which these officers failed to verify less than 50 per cent. of the cases vaccinated, declined from ten in 1890-91 to six in the year under report. The explanation of this shortcoming is inadequate. The Deputy Inspector, Permagudi range, who has been reported for short work in two successive years, should be severely dealt with. The figures given under the heading &quot;Percentage of successful cases to total number inspected&quot; in the statement appended to paragraph 17 appear in some instances open to doubt, notably in that of the Ganjam Hill tracts where, notwithstanding the known facts that the vaccinators are bad and good lymph is difficult to obtain, the percentage of successful cases amongst those inspected is alleged to have been 96.6 per cent. The work done by medical subordinates was, on the whole, satisfactory, particularly in the case of the Chingleput district which was far ahead of other districts in this respect. 3. Excluding the work done in the cantonments of Bangalore and Secunderabad, the proportion per mille of the total number of operations performed during the year to the total population according to the census of 1881 was 34.1 against 31.0 in 1890-91 and 28.3 in 1889-90. Infantile vaccination, however, has not received the attention that it should, as, although there was an increase of 28,366 in the total number of successful operations on children under one year of age, the proportion per cent. of such cases to the total number of registered births fell from 24.1 in 1890-91 to 22.5 during the year under review. 4. The work done in the year under review by the Government establishment in the Hill tracts of the Northern Circars was even less than the short work of 1890-91. In Ganjam, Jeypore and Peddapur Agencies the falling off was most marked, though Ganjam still showed the highest average outturn of work per vaccinator. No attempt has been made to explain the discreditable results under notice. This is a point into which, although the staff is under the control of the respective Agency officers, the Inspector of Vaccination should have made enquiry. The Agents of the districts concerned will now be called upon in the Judicial Department to account for the falling off within their charges. 5. Local Fund Circles.6TH AUGUST 1892, Nos. 1790, 1790-A L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 3 Chingleput (1,767), Tinnevelly (1,645), and South Arcot (1,611). There was some improvement in the four districts (Nílgiris, Ganjam, Anantapur and Godávari) where work was most unsatisfactory in 1890-91, and marked improvement in Salem and South Canara. As regards the quality of the work turned out, Ganjam again stands first and Bellary and Vizagapatam second ; Anantapur, where the work has consider- ably deteriorated, is last. There was a great falling off, too, in Madura and Kistna. The average cost of each successful case was slightly less than in the previous year. 1. Bezváda. 5. Pálghat. 2. Bimlipatam. 6. Tanjore. 3. Cochin. 7. Tuticorin. 4. Karúr. 8. Wálajápet. 6. Municipalities.4 6TH AUGUST 1892, Nos. 1790, 1790-A L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. figures for the previous year were 22,933, 99.3 and As. 6-6. There was a slight improvement in infantile vaccination, but in other respects there was no advance. Turning to the towns in which the results of the year under review were better than those of 1890-91, it is observed that Nellore nearly doubled its outturn, while Ongole made satisfactory progress. Matters improved in Tellicherry and Gudiyá- tam6TH AUGUST 1892, Nos. 1790, 1790-A L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 5 8. General Remarks.Govt of {1892} Madras. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. Issued Read. Encl. G.O., &c., 6th August 1892, Nos. 1790, 1790-A L. AUGUST. Vaccination. Reviewing the report on REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1892-93. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 10 annas.] 1893.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1892-93. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1893.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY DURING 1892-93. From Surgeon-Major D. F. DYMOTT, M.B., Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, to the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, dated Fort St. George, 12th June 1893, No. 9244 VACCINATION REPORT. The percentage of success both in primary operations and in re-vaccinations was greater than that of the previous year. 6. The operations according to age wereVACCINATION REPORT. 5 Districts. Total number of vaccinations. Number of successful vaccinations. Ratio per cent. of successful cases. Average cost of each successful case. Average number of operations performed by each vaccinator. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. Primary vac- cination. Re-vaccina- tion. Primary vac- cination. Re-vaccina- tion. Primary vac- cination. Re-vaccina- tion. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. Anantapur ... 12,471 16,719 16,261 10,975 383 13,575 447 15,203 443 91.0 83.9 96.2 0 6 0 0 5 7 0 5 4 734 983 957 Bellary ... ... 22,920 23,240 24,417 21,010 1,106 22,110 485 23,845 159 96.5 97.2 98.3 0 4 6 0 5 0 0 5 5 955 968 1,017 Chingleput ... 38,197 41,972 36,715 34,526 753 38,691 376 34,242 262 92.3 93.0 94.0 0 3 3 0 3 2 0 3 4 1,661 1,767 1,596 Coimbatore ... 48,941 48,608 65,948 45,632 756 42,573 259 59,886 1,119 94.7 88.1 92.5 0 3 1 0 3 5 0 2 6 1,255 1,246 1,691 Cuddapah ... 33,120 39,971 39,345 30,348 692 36,006 1,081 36,588 890 93.7 92.8 95.3 0 5 8 0 5 8 0 5 3 946 1,142 1,124 Ganjám ... ... 23,375 27,515 28,365 22,193 1,001 26,704 484 27,128 428 99.2 98.8 97.1 0 3 8 0 3 8 0 3 8 730 888 915 Gódávari ... 35,171 45,472 44,152 34,075 368 42,670 1,074 41,213 516 97.9 96.2 94.5 0 4 1 0 4 0 0 4 4 782 1,011 920 Kistna ... ... 48,334 51,845 50,973 43,665 1,027 43,681 915 46,852 751 92.4 86.0 93.4 0 3 10 0 3 10 0 3 7 1,028 1,058 1,062 Kurnool ... 34,038 29,876 25,945 23,585 7,992 21,563 7,035 19,926 4,978 92.7 95.7 96.0 0 3 3 0 4 1 0 4 7 2,836 2,490 2,162 Madura ... ... 56,814 61,255 85,641 51,961 2,196 54,469 1,669 79,500 1,868 98.6 91.6 95.0 0 2 10 0 2 9 0 2 2 1,353 1,458 2,039 Malabar ... 44,025 49,496 60,960 39,614 1,025 43,330 1,501 55,570 1,230 92.3 90.6 93.2 0 3 1 0 3 1 0 2 7 1,159 1,269 1,385 Nellore ... ... 37,290 38,019 38,953 33,318 540 34,576 224 35,457 265 90.8 91.5 91.7 0 4 2 0 4 3 0 4 1 1,243 1,226 1,257 Nilgiris ... ... 2,145 2,466 2,992 1,817 80 1,923 321 2,492 267 88.4 91.0 95.6 0 8 5 0 8 3 0 5 8 715 822 931 North Arcot ... 43,933 48,841 55,706 40,999 1,128 45,219 1,375 51,847 1,993 95.9 95.4 96.7 0 3 9 0 3 10 0 3 9 1,220 1,357 1,506 Salem ... ... 56,364 63,574 66,410 48,514 3,140 56,327 2,332 60,729 2,207 91.6 92.3 94.8 0 2 9 0 2 4 0 2 2 1,199 1,502 1,413 South Arcot ... 38,012 48,334 62,718 35,149 527 45,614 493 60,163 203 938 95.4 96.3 0 3 1 0 2 10 0 3 3 1,311 1,611 1,792 South Canara ... 29,988 36,889 45,473 27,751 771 33,048 1,384 41,885 1,744 95.1 93.3 95.9 0 2 10 0 2 5 0 1 11 1,199 1,476 1,736 Tanjore ... ... 40,361 41,564 41,560 36,352 1,199 36,702 1,405 37,132 1,114 93.0 91.7 92.0 0 3 2 0 3 4 0 3 5 1,090 1,101 1,123 Tinnevelly ... 56,112 69,085 80,586 52,500 2,638 62,117 4,118 73,153 4,882 98.3 95.9 96.8 0 2 9 0 2 4 0 2 1 1,336 1,645 2,015 Trichinopoly ... 38,812 33,919 46,272 35,369 1,959 29,473 2,620 42,280 2,912 96.2 94.6 97.7 0 2 4 0 2 1 0 2 1 1,687 1,884 3,085 Vizagapatam ... 41,007 41,641 48,599 36,764 3,391 38,287 2,216 44,557 1,711 97.7 97.2 95.4 0 2 7 0 2 8 0 2 8 1,243 1,262 1,473 Total ... 781,430 860,301 967,991 706,117 32,672 768,658. 31,814 889,648 29,942 94.5 93.0 95.0 0 3 5 0 3 4 0 3 1 1,182 1,302 1,449 2
6 VACCINATION REPORT. I regret to say that the work decreased in seven districtsVACCINATION REPORT. 7 Districts. Population according to census of 1891. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. * Propor- tion per cent. to popula- tion. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent. to total number vaccinated. * Propor- tion per cent. to popula- tion. Total number vaccinated. Proportion per cent to total number vaccinated. Propor- tion per cent to popula- tion. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. Anantapur ... 358,818 342,737 6,801 5,670 54.5 45.5 2.2 1.9 8,975 7,744 53.7 46.3 2.9 2.7 8,783 7,478 54.0 46.0 2.4 2.2 Bellary ... 415,506 398,910 12,308 10,612 53.7 46.3 3.6 3.3 12,377 10,863 53.3 46.7 3.7 3.3 12,740 11,677 52.2 47.8 3.1 2.9 Chingleput ... 552,161 542,219 19,841 18,356 51.9 48.1 4.2 3.9 21,543 20,429 51.3 48.6 4.5 4.3 18,557 18,158 50.5 49.5 3.4 3.3 Coimbatore ... 948,177 987,199 24,912 24,029 50.9 49.1 3.2 2.9 24,562 24,046 50.5 49.4 3.1 2.9 33,710 32,238 51.1 48.9 3.6 3.3 Cuddapah ... 637,655 617,038 17,766 15,354 53.6 46.3 3.2 2.9 21,922 18,049 54.8 45.2 3.9 3.3 21,084 18,261 53.6 46.4 3.8 3.0 Ganjám ... 735,819 793,374 12,659 10,716 54.1 45.8 1.5 1.2 14,688 12,827 53.0 46.6 1.7 1.5 15,377 12,988 54.2 45.8 2.1 1.6 Gódávari ... 935,469 960,180 18,849 16.322 53.6 46.4 2.2 1.9 24,142 21,330 53.0 46.9 2.8 2.5 22,791 21,361 51.6 48.4 2.4 2.2 Kistna ... ... 896,594 876,079 25,636 22,698 53.0 46.9 3.4 3.0 27,591 24,254 53.2 46.7 3.6 3.2 26,934 24,039 52.8 47.2 3.0 2.7 Kurnool ... ... 420,491 408,440 22,196 11,842 65.2 34.2 6.3 3.5 19,963 9,913 66.8 33.1 5.7 2.9 16,517 9,428 63.7 36.3 3.9 2.3 Madura ... ... 1,181,863 1,285,607 30,116 26,698 53.2 47.0 3.0 2.4 32,191 29,064 52.4 47.4 3.3 2.6 44,358 41,283 51.8 48.2 3.8 3.2 Malabar ... ... 1,219,904 1,244,250 31,079 12,946 70.6 29.4 2.9 1.2 33,055 16,441 66.7 33.2 3.0 1.4 40,060 20,900 65.7 34.3 3.3 1.7 Nellore ... ... 716,860 706,680 19,004 18,196 50.5 48.8 3.2 3.1 19,362 18,657 50.9 49.0 3.3 3.2 19,619 19,334 50.4 49.6 2.7 2.7 Nilgiris ... ... 45,032 33,663 1,224 921 57.1 42.9 2.9 2.9 1,471 995 59.6 40.3 3.5 3.1 1,714 1,278 57.3 42.7 3.8 3.8 North Arcot ... 1,052,211 1,039,877 23,081 20,852 52.5 47.4 2.6 2.3 25,344 23,497 51.8 48.1 2.9 2.6 29,105 26,601 52.2 47.8 2.8 2.6 Salem ... ... 914,033 948,511 28,880 27,484 51.2 48.7 3.8 3.4 31,743 31,831 49.9 50.0 4.2 4.0 33,902 32,508 51.0 48.9 3.7 3.4 South Arcot ... 1,046,858 1,049,998 20,489 17,523 53.9 46.1 2.3 1.9 25,319 23,015 52.4 47.6 2.8 2.5 32,177 30,541 51.3 48.7 3.1 2.9 South Canara ... 487,842 523,595 16,460 13,528 54.9 45.1 3.6 2.9 18,486 18,403 50.1 49.8 4.0 3.9 24,432 21,041 53.7 46.3 5.0 4.0 Tanjore ... ... 965,348 1,050,688 21,143 19,218 52.3 47.6 2.3 1.9 21,681 19,883 52.1 47.8 2.3 2.0 21,691 19,869 52.2 47.8 2.2 1.9 Tinnevelly ... 899,150 948,384 31,587 24,525 56.3 43.7 3.9 2.9 38,704 30,381 56.0 43.9 4.9 3.6 45,097 35,489 56.0 44.0 5.0 3.8 Trichinopoly ... ... 609,250 651,226 19,473 19,339 50.2 49.8 3.6 3.4 17,072 16,847 50.3 49.6 3.2 2.9 23,183 23,089 50.1 49.9 3.8 3.5 Vizagapatam ... 915,636 935,370 21,770 19,237 53.1 46.6 1.8 1.6 21,900 19,741 52.5 47.4 1.8 1.7 25,146 23,453 51.7 48.3 2.7 2.5 Total ... 15,954,677 16,344,025 425,364 356,066 54.4 45.6 2.9 2.4 462,091 398,210 53.7 46.3 3.2 2.0 516,977 451,014 53.4 46.6 3.2 2.1 11. At the close of the year there were only four municipal towns in which vaccination was not compulsory, viz., Bimlipatam, Cochin, Karúr and Tanjore. In many towns where vaccination is compulsory, though people may be prose- cuted for failing to comply with the Act, comparatively few of them are actually punished. 12. The work of vaccination in the different municipalities is shown in the following table :8 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vacci- nations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS. A. P. Adóni ... ... 1890-91 ... 26,243 937 570 1,507 1,222 961 207 ... 285 261 78.6 16.9 ... 1,429 95.6 91.6 0 2 3 1891-92 ... 796 505 1,301 1,050 776 214 ... 251 105 73.9 20.4 ... 1,095 94.3 41.8 0 3 11 1892-93 ... 534 523 1,057 1,053 636 231 18 4 2 60.4 21.9 1.7 887 84.0 50.0 0 6 6 Anantapur ... ... 1890-91 ... 6,994 225 152 377 331 230 62 2 46 46 69.5 18.7 0.6 340 88.8 100.0 0 10 0 1891-92 ... 242 135 377 231 194 22 9 146 121 84.0 9.5 3.9 346 97.4 82.9 0 9 7 1892-93 ... 268 114 382 220 186 26 4 162 142 84.5 11.8 1.8 358 98.2 87.7 0 8 0 Anakápalle ... ... 1890-91 ... 17,010 347 155 502 362 80 212 59 140 103 22.1 58.6 16.3 454 96.9 73.6 0 6 5 1891-92 ... 515 457 972 878 229 534 92 94 59 26.1 60.8 10.5 914 96.2 62.8 0 3 2 1892-93 ... 671 621 1,292 1,201 328 693 161 91 56 27.3 57.7 13.4 1,238 98.4 61.5 0 2 9 Bellary ... ... 1890-91 ... 59,467 1,274 786 2,060 1,837 1,078 362 283 223 193 58.7 19.7 15.4 1,916 93.8 86.5 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 2,003 1,486 3,489 3,326 1,626 1,194 483 163 142 48.9 35.9 14.5 3,345 96.3 87.1 0 3 5 1892-93 ... 2,166 1,615 3,781 3,451 1,784 1,187 359 330 295 51.7 34.4 10.4 3,623 96.4 89.4 0 4 6 Berhampur ... ... 1890-91 ... 23,653 337 242 579 569 26 287 183 10 8 4.6 50.4 32.2 504 87.2 80.0 0 6 8 1891-92 ... 770 669 1,439 1,437 71 718 250 2 1 4.9 50.0 17.4 1,040 72.3 50.0 0 5 3 1892-93 ... 552 481 1,033 1,033 220 535 37 ... ... 21.3 51.8 3.6 792 76.6 ... 0 5 3 Bezwada ... ... 1890-91 ... 20,741 434 390 824 654 177 358 82 170 139 27.0 54.7 12.5 756 81.8 81.8 0 4 3 1891-92 ... 479 381 860 696 251 299 80 164 127 36.1 43.0 11.5 757 90.5 77.4 0 5 6 1892-93 ... 916 726 1,642 1,579 482 914 146 63 46 30.5 57.8 9.2 1,588 97.7 73.0 0 6 8 Bimlipatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 9,827 290 240 530 399 133 187 68 131 125 33.3 46.9 17.0 513 94.3 95.4 0 6 7 1891-92 ... 301 204 505 346 152 147 32 159 147 43.9 42.5 9.2 478 95.7 92.5 0 7 3 1892-93 ... 237 209 446 335 182 118 25 111 103 54.3 35.2 7.5 428 97.0 92.8 0 8 3 Calicut ... ... 1890-91 ... 66,078 1,899 723 2,622 2,622 288 800 1,202 ... ... 10.9 30.5 45.8 2,290 88.9 ... 0 3 0 1891-92 ... 2,494 1,242 3,736 3,701 509 1,174 1,327 35 27 13.8 31.7 35.9 3,037 81.3 77.1 0 5 4 1892-93 ... 3,252 1,334 4,586 4,565 489 1,261 1,858 21 11 10.7 27.6 40.7 3,619 79.0 52.4 0 4 3 Cannanore ... ... 1890891 ... 27,418 655 485 1,140 1,109 239 451 402 31 17 21.5 40.6 36.2 1,109 98.5 54.9 0 4 7 1891-92 ... 1,074 889 1,963 1,893 410 1,103 233 70 44 21.6 58.3 12.3 1,790 92.2 62.9 0 5 2 1892-93 ... 1,756 1,105 2,861 2,248 780 867 587 613 594 34.7 38.5 26.1 2,828 99.4 96.9 0 5 3 Chicacole ... ... 1890-91 ... 18,241 324 241 565 485 36 166 100 80 20 7.4 34.2 20.6 322 62.3 25.0 0 11 4 1891-92 ... 435 313 748 583 50 205 52 165 82 8.6 35.2 8.9 389 52.7 49.7 0 8 7 1892-93 ... 410 389 799 732 151 222 101 67 27 20.6 30.3 13.8 501 64.8 40.3 0 6 6 Chidambaram ... 1890-91 ... 18,640 409 365 774 774 263 421 42 ... ... 33.9 54.4 5.4 726 93.8 ... 0 7 9 1891-92 ... 410 340 750 750 266 417 35 ... ... 35.5 55.6 4.7 718 94.7 ... 0 6 6 1892-93 ... 508 457 965 965 448 456 28 ... ... 46.4 47.2 2.9 932 96.6 ... 0 6 9 Cochin ... ... 1890-91 ... 17,601 637 376 1,013 912 83 386 349 101 68 8.9 42.5 38.2 886 89.7 67.3 0 2 9 1891-92 ... 1,083 842 1,925 1,659 228 901 467 266 169 13.7 54.3 28.2 1,765 96.2 63.5 0 1 5 1892-93 ... 739 394 1,133 919 132 402 342 214 172 14.3 43.7 37.2 1,048 95.3 80.4 0 2 5
VACCINATION REPORT. 9 Cocanada ... ... 1890-91 ... 40,553 1,034 740 1,774 1,697 91 504 400 77 46 5.4 29.7 23.6 1,041 58.6 59.7 0 4 8 1891-92 ... 1,094 710 1,804 1,789 153 607 473 15 3 8.6 33.9 26.4 1,236 68.9 20.0 0 7 2 1892-93 ... 1,365 1,298 2,663 2,635 559 805 1,094 28 7 21.2 30.5 41.5 2,465 93.3 25.0 0 4 10 Coimbatore ... ... 1890-91 ... 46,383 841 746 1,587 1,545 741 714 38 42 30 47.9 46.2 2.5 1,523 96.6 71.4 0 2 5 1891-92 ... 857 845 1,702 1,656 760 606 46 46 30 45.9 36.6 2.8 1,442 85.2 65.2 0 3 0 1892-93 ... 981 869 1,850 1,771 1,029 586 43 79 48 58.1 33.0 2.4 1,706 93.6 60.8 0 2 5 Conjeeveram ... ... 1890-91 ... 42,548 1,356 1,041 2,397 2,150 664 1,067 315 247 193 30.9 49.6 14.7 2,239 95.1 78.1 0 2 4 1891-92 ... 1,435 1,343 2,778 2,710 1,126 1,352 154 68 44 41.5 49.9 5.6 2,676 67.1 64.7 0 2 4 1892-93 ... 746 775 1,521 1,493 1,033 400 46 28 26 69.1 26.7 3.0 1,505 99.1 92.9 0 6 0 Coonoor ... ... 1890-91 ... 6,049 293 219 512 443 135 217 46 69 49 30.5 49.0 10.4 447 89.8 71.0 0 7 11 1891-92 ... 330 323 653 587 176 302 53 66 53 30.0 51.4 9.0 584 90.5 80.3 0 6 7 1892-93 ... 361 254 615 550 190 185 100 65 56 34.5 33.6 18.1 531 80.9 86.1 0 10 10 Cuddalore ... ... 1890-91 ... 47,355 1,300 994 2,294 2,272 595 1,191 267 22 15 26.2 52.4 11.8 2,070 90.4 68.4 0 4 5 1891-92 ... 955 811 1,766 1,764 455 907 187 2 1 25.8 51.4 10.6 1,550 87.8 50.0 0 5 0 1892-93 ... 1,717 1,211 2,928 2,924 638 1,582 442 4 3 21.8 54.1 15.1 2,665 91.0 75.0 0 3 5 Cuddapah ... ... 1890-91 ... 17,379 527 281 808 562 272 244 32 246 210 48.4 43.4 5.7 754 96.8 85.4 0 7 9 1891-92 ... 412 297 709 665 333 271 59 44 30 50.1 40.7 8.8 693 99.7 68.2 0 11 3 1892-93 ... 367 258 625 528 213 253 52 97 79 40.3 47.9 9.8 597 98.1 81.4 0 8 11 Dindigul ... ... 1890-91 ... 20,203 427 382 809 757 538 184 23 52 37 71.1 24.3 3.0 782 98.4 71.1 0 10 10 1891-92 ... 495 533 1,028 957 595 302 7 71 44 62.2 31.6 0.7 948 94.5 62.0 0 7 9 1892-93 ... 597 589 1,186 1,126 839 248 11 60 35 74.5 22.0 0.9 1,133 97.5 58.3 0 8 4 Ellore ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 29,382 806 764 1,570 1,487 378 811 285 83 72 25.4 54.5 19.1 1,546 99.1 86.8 0 3 4 1891-92 ... 878 817 1,695 1,635 370 882 371 60 56 22.6 53.9 22.7 1,679 99.3 93.3 0 3 0 1892-93 ... 1,119 1,000 2,119 2,079 655 1,049 342 40 38 32.0 50.4 16.4 2,095 98.9 95.0 0 2 11 Erode ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 12,330 284 233 517 511 241 236 30 6 6 47.1 46.2 5.8 513 99.2 100.0 0 6 1 1891-92 ... 351 276 627 627 243 241 85 ... ... 38.7 38.4 13.6 569 86.0 ... 0 5 7 1892-93 ... 437 336 773 773 309 344 68 ... ... 39.9 44.5 8.8 721 93.3 ... 0 4 3 Gudiyáttam ... ... 1890-91 ... 18,747 195 168 363 358 121 183 16 5 5 33.8 51.1 4.4 325 89.3 100.0 0 6 2 1891-92 ... 357 331 688 653 223 381 6 35 29 34.1 58.3 0.9 639 93.4 82.8 0 8 4 1892-93 ... 364 333 697 692 352 310 ... 5 4 50.9 44.8 ... 666 95.7 80.0 0 11 5 Guntúr ... ... 1890-91 ... 23,359 837 812 1,649 1,528 468 793 223 121 76 30.6 51.9 14.6 1,560 97.1 62.8 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 548 477 1,025 959 463 304 99 66 36 48.3 31.7 10.3 902 90.3 54.5 0 5 2 1892-93 ... 428 391 819 789 492 247 45 30 27 62.3 31.3 5.7 811 99.4 90.0 0 6 10 Karúr ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 10,750 181 152 333 316 185 95 17 17 8 58.5 30.1 5.3 305 93.9 47.1 0 6 4 1891-92 ... 182 168 350 350 189 87 112 ... ... 54.0 24.9 32.0 308 88.0 ... 0 6 4 1892-93 ... 221 207 428 420 175 166 22 8 6 41.7 39.5 5.2 369 86.4 75.0 * ... Kumbakónam ... 1890-91 ... 54,307 775 692 1,467 1,427 233 963 129 40 22 16.3 67.5 9.0 1,347 92.9 55.0 0 8 4 1891-92 ... 771 779 1,550 1,473 515 825 68 77 66 34.3 56.0 4.6 1,474 95.6 85.7 0 8 4 1892-93 ... 861 777 1,638 1,568 622 793 93 70 66 39.6 50.5 5.9 1,574 96.2 94.3 0 8 7 Kurnool ... ... 1890-91 ... 24,376 779 320 1,099 727 338 275 49 372 372 46.5 37.8 6.7 1,034 91.1 100.0 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 445 310 755 643 294 313 11 112 96 45.7 48.7 1.7 739 96.1 85.6 0 9 9 1892-93 ... 511 527 1,038 990 579 378 13 48 48 58.5 38.2 1.3 1,018 98.0 100.0 0 8 6 Madras ... ... 1890-91 ... 452,518 13,343 11,139 24,482 22,933 15,544 5,124 1,885 1,549 1,307 67.7 22.3 8.2 23,860 99.3 91.3 0 6 6 1891-92 ... 13,474 11,628 25,102 22,451 15,798 4,606 1,761 2,651 2,142 70.4 20.5 7.8 24,307 98.7 80.8 0 6 7 1892-93 ... 1,4215 10,643 24,858 21,421 13,719 4,769 2,626 3,437 3,185 64.0 22.3 12.2 24,299 98.6 92.7 0 6 2½ Madura ... ... 1890-91 ... 87,428 1,769 1,422 3,191 3,165 1,255 1,519 198 26 22 39.6 47.9 6.2 2,994 93.9 84.6 0 2 4 1891-92 ... 1,433 1,229 2,662 2,662 929 1,176 106 ... ... 34.8 44.2 4.0 2,211 83.1 ... 0 4 8 1892-93 ... 3,097 2,057 5,154 4,757 1,968 1,698 487 397 347 41.3 35.7 10.2 4,501 87.3 87.4 0 3 3 Mannárgudi ... ... 1890-91 ... 20,395 356 244 600 516 49 351 104 84 70 9.4 68.0 20.1 574 97.6 83.3 0 5 7 1891-92 ... 299 317 616 583 142 347 92 33 29 24.3 59.5 15.8 610 99.7 87.9 0 9 0 1892-93 .. 460 464 924 901 330 497 71 23 20 36.6 55.1 7.8 918 99.7 87.0 0 5 4 * Not available.
10 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vac- cinations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS. A. P. Mangalore ... ... 1890-91 ... 40,922 632 558 1,190 1,161 350 558 128 29 17 30.1 50.7 11.0 1,083 91.8 58.6 0 2 8 1891-92 ... 887 771 1,658 1,658 489 902 170 ... ... 29.5 54.4 10.2 1,561 94.1 ... 0 2 4 1892-93 ... 1,420 1,323 2,743 2,522 896 1,573 24 221 219 45.5 62.3 0.9 2,732 99.6 99.1 0 2 5 Masulipatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 38,809 1,311 1,157 2,468 2,462 253 1,422 668 6 5 10.3 57.7 26.7 2,348 95.2 83.3 0 2 6 1891-92 ... 1,616 1,301 2,917 2,760 405 1,510 644 157 54 14.7 54.7 23.3 2,613 92.8 34.4 0 3 7 1892-93 ... 1,528 1,387 2,915 2,883 879 1,424 488 32 23 30.5 49.4 16.9 2,814 96.8 71.9 0 4 8 Máyavaram ... ... 1890-91 ... 23,765 425 389 814 778 482 241 44 36 26 61.9 30.9 5.6 793 98.6 72.2 0 5 1 1891-92 ... 433 396 829 787 510 216 24 42 17 64.8 27.4 3.0 767 95.3 40.5 0 5 9 1892-93 ... 412 381 793 775 583 154 27 18 18 75.2 19.8 3.5 782 98.6 100.0 0 6 2 Negapatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 59,221 1,476 1,138 2,614 2,446 1,097 983 125 168 109 44.8 40.2 5.1 2,314 90.1 64.9 0 3 9 1891-92 ... 1,160 892 2,052 2,004 1,137 645 107 48 38 56.7 82.2 5.4 1,927 94.3 79.2 0 5 8 1892-93 ... 1,230 1,051 2,281 2,219 1,246 812 102 62 41 56.1 36.6 4.6 2,201 97.3 66.1 0 4 3 Nellore ... ... 1890-91 ... 29,336 348 324 672 670 371 251 ... 2 2 55.3 37.4 ... 624 92.8 100.0 0 9 11 1891-92 ... 639 565 1,204 1,117 681 369 30 87 64 61.0 33.0 2.6 1,144 96.7 73.6 0 6 10 1892-93 ... 851 549 1,400 1,124 735 317 49 276 209 65.4 28.2 4.4 1,310 97.9 75.7 0 6 6 Ongole ... ... 1890-91 ... 10,860 214 196 410 389 84 216 49 21 15 21.6 56.3 12.9 367 90.4 71.4 0 9 3 1891-92 ... 475 258 733 673 318 216 104 60 15 47.2 32.1 15.4 653 94.8 25.0 0 4 2 1892-93 ... 247 209 456 419 207 113 50 37 14 49.4 26.9 11.9 384 88.3 37.8 0 7 5 Ootacamund ... ... 1890-91 ... 15,053 457 375 832 760 231 348 97 72 47 30.4 45.5 12.5 723 88.9 65.3 0 8 4 1891-92 ... 488 408 896 849 263 381 83 47 34 31.0 44.9 9.8 761 85.6 72.3 0 7 11 1892-93 ... 616 504 1,120 1,040 401 418 54 71 57 38.2 39.8 5.1 1,030 92.7 80.3 0 6 5 Palamcottah ... ... 1890-91 ... 18,686 445 425 870 849 286 369 178 21 11 33.7 43.4 20.9 844 98.1 52.4 0 3 11 1891-92 ... 563 497 1,060 1,030 437 426 139 30 23 42.4 41.4 13.4 1,025 97.3 76.7 0 3 11 1892-93 ... 584 435 1,019 927 439 339 114 92 76 47.3 36.5 12.3 968 96.2 82.6 0 6 3 Palghat ... ... 1890-91 ... 39,481 767 577 1,344 1,314 24 711 493 30 28 1.0 54.1 36.7 1,256 93.4 93.3 0 3 8 1891-92 ... 716 548 1,264 1,214 38 730 393 50 34 3.1 60.1 32.3 1,195 95.6 68.0 0 4 11 1892-93 .. 845 690 1,535 1,507 35 781 622 28 24 2.3 51.8 41.3 1,462 95.4 85.8 0 5 7 Parlákimedi ... ... 1890-91 ... 16,390 317 140 457 398 100 155 124 59 45 25.1 38.9 31.2 424 95.2 76.3 0 5 8 1891-92 ... 637 658 1,295 1,295 451 518 108 ... ... 34.8 40.0 8.3 1,077 83.2 ... 0 2 10 1892-93 ... 389 330 719 719 240 151 25 ... ... 33.4 21.0 3.4 416 57.9 ... 0 6 0 Periyakulum ... ... 1890-91 ... 16,363 235 192 427 395 134 224 18 32 19 33.9 56.7 4.6 395 95.2 59.4 0 5 4 1891-92 ... 407 334 741 682 281 334 12 59 25 41.2 49.0 1.7 652 91.9 42.4 0 5 1 1892-93 ... 484 432 916 879 578 265 17 37 24 65.7 30.1 1.9 884 99.2 64.9 0 6 0 Palni ... ... ... 1890-91 ... 16,940 277 231 508 495 215 240 9 13 8 43.4 48.5 1.8 472 93.7 61.6 0 4 1 1891-92 ... 217 195 412 403 191 186 8 9 6 47.4 46.2 2.0 391 95.5 66.7 0 5 1 1892-93 ... 501 426 927 860 373 417 38 67 48 43.3 48.5 4.4 876 96.3 71.6 0 2 9
VACCINATION REPORT. 11 Rajahmundry ... ... 1890-91 ... 28,397 1,274 1,074 2,348 1,962 458 1,031 260 386 182 23.3 52.8 13.2 1,931 89.1 47.1 0 4 0 1891-92 ... 987 846 1,833 1,623 513 897 30 210 85 31.6 55.3 1.8 1,525 88.7 40.4 0 5 2 1892-93 ... 1,203 714 1,917 1,735 443 1,007 ... 182 51 25.5 58.0 ... 1,501 83.6 28.0 0 5 9 Salem 1890-91 ... 67,710 1,064 930 1,994 1,969 890 816 114 25 15 45.2 41.4 5.8 1,835 92.4 60.0 0 6 1 1891-92 ... 1,801 1,723 3,524 3,522 1,438 1,920 62 2 1 40.8 54.5 1.7 3,421 97.1 50.0 0 3 5 1892-93 ... 2,288 2,252 4,540 4,531 2,402 1,897 95 9 7 53.0 41.9 2.1 4,401 97.0 77.7 0 2 6 Srírangam ... ... 1890-91 ... 21,632 731 667 1,398 1,398 297 879 181 ... ... 21.3 62.9 12.9 1,357 97.1 ... 0 2 4 1891-92 ... 565 600 1,165 1,163 356 629 87 2 2 30.6 54.1 7.5 1,074 92.2 100.0 0 2 10 1892-93 ... 571 532 1,103 1,091 399 560 85 12 6 36.6 51.3 7.8 1,050 95.7 50.0 0 2 11 Tanjore ... ... 1890-91 ... 54,390 1,095 579 1,674 1,503 209 665 555 171 126 13.9 44.2 36.9 1,555 95.1 73.7 0 4 9 1891-92 ... 784 698 1,482 1,446 308 840 213 36 22 21.3 58.1 16.8 1,413 96.2 61.1 0 6 2 1892-93 ... 840 717 1,557 1,530 279 1,040 188 27 19 18.2 67.9 12.3 1,526 98.5 70.4 0 7 1 Tellicherry ... ... 1890-91 ... 27,196 490 408 898 839 55 347 178 59 59 6.5 41.3 21.2 639 69.1 100.0 1 2 10 1891-92 ... 891 726 1,617 1,229 246 563 194 388 331 20.0 45.8 15.8 1,334 81.6 86.3 0 8 6 1892-93 ... 919 782 1,701 1,467 485 726 146 234 168 33.0 49.5 9.9 1,525 92.5 71.8 0 7 11 Tinnevelly ... ... 1890-91 ... 24,768 782 644 1,426 1,366 419 624 287 60 57 30.7 45.6 21.0 1,387 97.3 95.0 0 3 7 1891-92 ... 901 667 1,568 1,538 520 661 329 30 28 33.5 43.0 21.4 1,538 98.2 93.3 0 4 0 1892-93 ... 1,073 863 1,936 1,936 774 680 374 ... ... 39.9 35.1 19.3 1,828 94.4 ... 0 4 8 Trichinopoly ... ... 1890-91 ... 90,609 6,705 3,785 10,490 9,006 1,046 4,512 2,231 1,484 928 11.6 50.1 24.8 8,717 86.4 62.5 0 1 8 1891-92 ... 7,277 4,654 11,931 10,622 1,546 5,685 3,041 1,309 1,032 14.5 53.5 28.6 11,304 96.7 78.8 0 1 4 1892-93 ... 3,819 2,752 6,571 5,959 1,139 3,397 1,186 612 457 19.1 57.0 19.9 6,179 96.0 74.7 0 2 9 Tiruppattúr ... ... 1890-91 ... 16,499 240 188 428 399 72 229 37 29 8 18.0 57.4 9.3 346 84.7 27.6 0 5 9 1891-92 ... 459 475 934 880 220 501 53 54 34 25.0 56.9 6.0 808 88.0 63.0 0 6 4 1892-93 ... 466 478 944 913 399 468 18 31 18 43.7 51.2 1.9 903 96.9 58.1 0 4 6 Tirupati ... ... 1890-91 ... 14,242 335 318 653 635 199 389 ... 18 6 31.3 61.2 ... 594 92.6 33.3 0 9 0 1891-92 ... 241 234 475 462 198 189 61 13 6 42.8 40.9 13.2 454 97.0 46.1 0 10 11 1892-93 ... 268 259 527 512 324 147 30 15 9 63.2 28.7 5.8 508 97.5 60.0 0 10 10 Tuticorin ... ... 1890-91 ... 25,107 734 334 1,068 1,067 143 395 422 1 1 13.4 37.0 39.5 961 89.9 100.0 0 4 8 1891-92 ... 785 291 1,076 940 190 377 302 136 123 20.2 40.1 32.1 992 92.4 90.4 0 4 11 1892-93 ... 653 381 1,034 1,034 215 590 145 ... ... 20.8 57.0 14.0 950 91.9 ... 0 5 11 Vániyambádi ... ... 1890-91 ... 15,838 388 348 736 736 219 458 23 ... ... 29.2 62.2 32.6 700 95.1 ... 0 5 9 1891-92 ... 587 513 1,100 1,098 566 458 49 2 ... 51.5 41.7 4.5 1,073 97.7 ... 0 4 7 1892-93 ... 482 409 891 891 532 320 34 ... ... 59.7 35.9 3.8 886 99.4 ... 0 4 5 Vellore ... ... 1890-91 ... 44,925 928 656 1,584 1,519 462 630 390 65 25 30.4 41.5 25.7 1,507 97.5 38.5 0 4 9 1891-92 ... 1,287 763 2,050 1,954 762 748 378 96 25 39.0 38.3 19.7 1,913 96.6 26.0 0 3 9 1892-93 ... 1,312 836 2,148 1,919 1,073 605 195 229 137 55.9 31.5 10.1 2,010 97.6 59.8 0 4 11 Vizagapatam ... ... 1890-91 ... 34,487 1,638 901 2,539 1,918 807 520 557 621 362 42.1 27.1 29.0 2,246 98.2 58.3 0 2 5 1891-92 ... 1,202 769 1,971 1,795 1,106 419 231 176 90 61.6 23.3 12.9 1,846 97.9 51.1 0 2 11 1892-93 ... 905 629 1,534 1,441 1,016 280 93 93 40 70.5 19.4 6.4 1,429 96.4 43.0 0 3 0 Vizianagrum ... ... 1890-91 ... 30,881 581 370 951 766 302 294 164 185 173 39.4 38.3 21.4 933 99.2 93.5 0 4 7 1891-92 ... 571 382 953 767 205 390 153 186 165 26.7 50.9 19.9 913 97.5 88.7 0 5 4 1892-93 ... 739 652 1,391 1,291 310 724 228 100 82 24.0 56.0 17.6 1,344 97.8 82.0 0 3 9 Walajapet ... ... 1890-91 ... 10,485 178 142 320 297 146 126 20 23 9 49.1 42.4 6.7 301 98.3 39.1 0 6 7 1891-92 ... 153 122 275 263 146 82 17 12 10 55.5 31.2 6.4 255 93.7 83.3 0 8 5 1892-93 ... 268 254 522 513 224 241 23 9 9 43.6 46.9 4.4 497 95.1 100.0 0 4 11 Total ... 1890-91 ... 2,100,967 56,938 42,120 99,058 91,167 34,793 36,032 14,183 7,891 5,803 38.2 39.5 15.6 90,811 93.2 73.5 0 4 10 1891-92 ... 61,647 48,943 110,590 102,488 41,047 41,229 13,622 8,102 5,947 40.1 40.2 13.3 101,845 93.4 73.4 0 5 1 1892-93 ... 64,769 50,184 114,953 106,364 46,156 40,668 13,789 8,589 7,199 43.4 38.2 13.0 107,812 94.6 83.8 0 5 1 4
12 VACCINATION REPORT. Compared with the work of last year, there was a decrease in the following municipalities :VACCINATION REPORT. 13 The work appears to be steadily diminishing. The decrease of 1,294 cases in the Ganjám hill tracts is said to be owing to the absence of small-pox and to the bad work turned out by the vaccinators. The people are unwilling to submit to vaccination, except when small-pox is actually prevailing. In the Jeypore hill tracts the staff was incomplete, which partly accounts for the decrease of 1,000 cases. It is said to be impossible to keep the staff up to proper strength on the present low rate of pay. A calf vaccine depôt is to be established at Polavaram for the Gódávari Agency tracts. 14. Table showing the work done in Native States. Native States (Zemindaries). Number of vaccinators. Number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vac- cination. Percentage of success. Cost of each successful case. Average number of operations per man. Total. Successful. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Total. Successful. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. RS. A. P. Jeypore. 1890-91... 6 1,802 1,947 3,749 3,749 530 1,697 1,400 ... ... 96.7 ... 0 2 6 625 1891-92... 7 2,194 2,093 4,287 4,287 503 2,374 1,331 ... ... 98.2 ... 0 2 8 612 1892-93... 7 2,422 2,249 4,671 4,671 428 2,642 1,342 ... ... 94.5 ... 0 3 6 667 Gunupur. 1890-91... 3 1,431 1,223 2,654 2,589 403 1,476 511 65 49 92.7 75.3 0 3 3 863 1891-92... 3 1,329 1,012 2,341 2,341 277 1,218 727 ... ... 94.9 ... 0 4 6 780 1892-93... 3 1,210 1,002 2,212 2,189 209 1,112 763 23 18 95.2 78.3 0 3 1 737 Total. 1890-91... 9 3,233 3,170 6,403 6,338 933 8,173 1,911 65 49 94.9 75.3 0 2 10 711 1891-92... 10 3,523 3,105 6,628 6,628 780 3,592 2,058 ... ... 97.0 ... 0 3 4 663 1892-93... 10 3,632 3,251 6,883 6,860 637 3,754 2,105 23 18 94.7 78.3 0 3 9 688 There was a small increase in the outturn of work. 15. The work done in dispensaries is shown in the following table : 14 VACCINATION REPORT. Districts. Number of dispensaries. Number vaccinated. Number vaccinated successfully. Percentage of success. Average number vaccinated at each dispensary. Success of primary vaccination. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Under one year. Above one and under six years. Above six years. Anantapur. 1890-91 ... 9 582 37 619 547 17 564 94.0 45.9 91.1 69 254 204 89 1891-92 ... 9 641 2 643 603 ... 603 94.7 ... 94.7 71 285 290 28 1892-93 ... 10 628 18 646 570 10 580 90.8 55.5 89.8 65 227 322 31 Bellary ... 1890-91 ... 18 1,243 793 2,036 1,108 736 1,844 89.1 92.9 90.6 113 682 387 39 1891-92 ... 19 1,178 840 2,018 1,091 217 1,308 92.6 25.8 64.8 106 634 439 18 1892-93... 19 1,409 66 1,475 1,254 45 1,299 89.0 68.2 88.1 82 510 509 235 Chingleput. 1890-91... 16 4,666 129 4,675 4,236 72 4,508 90.8 55.8 89.8 292 1,352 2,284 600 1891-92 ... 16 4,527 134 4,661 4,155 91 4,246 91.8 66.4 91.1 291 1,456 2,058 641 1892-93 ... 16 4,434 166 4,600 4,045 67 4,112 91.2 40.4 89.4 287 1,441 1,889 715 Coimbatore 1890-91... 16 939 18 957 824 17 841 85.7 93.3 87.9 60 230 432 162 1891-92... 17 965 55 1,020 784 36 820 81.2 65.5 80.4 60 241 382 161 1892-93 ... 20 1,280 49 1,329 940 29 969 73.4 59.2 72.2 66 272 478 190 Cuddapah... 1890-91 ... 13 943 76 1,019 747 25 772 79.2 33.3 75.8 78 186 351 210 1891-92... 13 1,052 12 1,064 829 1 830 78.8 8.3 78.0 82 197 454 178 1892-93 ... 13 538 38 576 473 15 488 87.9 39.5 84.7 44 93 234 146 Ganjám ... 1890-91 ... 14 472 31 503 351 21 372 74.4 67.7 74.0 36 38 194 119 1891-92 ... 14 2,098 170 2,268 914 85 999 43.6 50.0 44.0 162 123 540 251 1892-93 ... 17 1,867 27 1,894 1,248 11 1,259 66.8 40.7 66.5 111 295 638 415 Gódávari ... 1890-91 ... 18 1,476 11 1,487 1,171 5 1,176 79.3 45.4 79.7 83 82 665 424 1891-92 ... 21 1,985 95 2,080 1,523 75 1,598 76.7 78.9 76.8 99 137 912 474 1892-93 ... 20 2,698 119 2,817 2,005 64 2,069 74.3 53.8 73.4 141 151 1,083 771 Kistna ... 1890-91... 21 767 11 778 646 8 654 84.2 72.7 84.1 37 47 431 168 1891-92 ... 22 1,015 29 1,044 785 15 800 77.3 51.7 76.6 47 86 396 303 1892-93... 22 1,026 44 1,070 915 39 954 89.2 88.6 89.1 59 180 444 391 Kurnool ... 1890-91 ... 18 2,589 840 3,429 1,880 735 2,615 72.6 87.5 76.3 190 269 926 685 1891-92... 18 845 304 1,149 701 248 949 83.0 81.6 82.6 64 124 364 213 1892-93 ... 18 824 179 1,003 669 164 833 81.1 91.6 83.1 59 150 287 232 Madras Town. 1890-91 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1891-92... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1892-93 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madura ... 1890-91 ... 36 4,342 431 4,773 3,701 232 3,933 85.2 53.8 82.4 133 788 2,462 451 1891-92 ... 41 4,799 413 5,212 3,702 237 3,939 77.1 57.4 75.6 127 1,058 2,119 525 1892-93 ... 41 2,575 271 2,846 1,942 166 2,108 75.6 61.3 74.1 71 639 1,133 170 Malabar ... 1890-91 ... 22 727 43 770 560 29 589 77.0 67.4 76.5 35 24 154 282 1891-92... 23 1,401 42 1,443 1,064 27 1,091 75.9 64.3 75.7 63 102 372 590 1892-93 ... 24 1,151 65 1,216 871 29 900 75.7 44.6 74.0 61 49 234 588 Nellore ... 1890-91... 25 1,694 29 1,723 1,434 11 1,445 84.6 37.9 83.3 69 149 962 323 1891-92 ... 26 3,535 45 3,580 3,190 30 3,220 90.2 66.7 89.9 138 381 2,056 753 1892-93... 27 910 7 917 793 5 798 87.1 71.4 87.0 46 97 513 183 Nílgiris ... 1890-91 ... 4 100 66 166 92 61 153 92.0 92.4 92.2 41 19 21 52 1891-92 .. 4 87 333 420 70 284 354 80.4 85.3 84.3 105 1 24 45 1892-93... 3 29 ... 29 28 ... 28 96.6 ... 96.6 14 4 7 17 North Arcot. 1890-91 ... 20 2,532 191 2,723 2,205 115 2,320 87.0 60.2 85.2 136 403 1,366 436 1891-92 ... 20 2,945 144 3,089 2,641 90 2,731 89.7 61.1 88.4 154 628 1,526 487 1892-93 ... 20 2,553 34 2,587 2,385 27 2,412 93.4 79.4 93.2 129 539 1,502 344 Salem ... 1890-91 ... 24 1,626 88 1,714 1,445 68 1,513 88.8 77.2 88.2 71 269 1,016 160 1891-92 .. 23 2,423 43 2,466 2,079 36 2,115 85.8 83.7 85.7 107 566 1,260 253 1892-93 ... 24 2,844 296 3,140 2,400 140 2,540 84.4 47.3 80.9 143 668 1,415 317 South Arcot. 1890-91 .. 21 2,232 56 2,288 1,900 29 1,929 85.1 51.8 84.3 109 423 1,132 345 1891-92 .. 23 1,916 74 1,990 1,594 20 1,614 83.2 27.0 81.1 86 423 984 187 1892-93... 24 811 17 828 664 9 673 81.9 52.9 81.3 36 186 400 78 South Canara. 1890-91 ... 15 483 26 509 366 10 376 75.8 38.5 73.9 34 38 221 107 1891-92 ... 15 590 68 658 474 52 526 80.3 76.5 79.9 44 51 256 167 1892-93 ... 17 1,002 167 1,169 875 130 1,005 87.3 77.8 86.0 78 61 490 324 Tanjore ... 1890-91 ... 38 6,219 585 6,804 5,239 450 5,689 84.2 76.9 83.6 179 647 3,293 1,299 1891-92 ... 36 6,086 644 6,730 5,002 399 5,401 82.2 62.0 80.3 187 587 3,150 1,265 1892-93 ... 37 4,740 539 5,279 4,218 392 4,610 89.0 72.7 87.1 165 488 2,617 1,113 Tinnevelly. 1890-91 ... 24 1,598 40 1,638 1,396 15 1,411 87.3 37.5 86.1 68 126 867 403 1891-92... 25 1,592 87 1,679 1,425 46 1,471 89.5 52.9 87.6 67 136 796 493 1892-93... 25 1,438 108 1,546 1,150 64 1,214 80.0 59.2 78.5 62 158 630 362 Trichino- poly. 1890-91... 15 1,619 97 1,716 1,422 86 1,508 87.8 68.0 87.9 114 163 947 312 1891-92 .. 15 1,287 105 1,392 1,188 48 1,236 92.3 95.7 88.7 93 119 893 176 1892-93 ... 15 1,164 74 1,238 1,024 38 1,062 88.0 51.4 85.8 83 225 627 172 Vizaga- patam. 1890-91... 19 2,039 197 2,236 1,892 143 2,035 92.8 72.6 91.1 118 427 1,025 440 1891-92... 23 2,564 182 2,746 2,290 130 2,420 89.3 71.4 88.1 119 601 1,173 516 1892-93... 23 2,037 99 2,136 1,817 52 1,869 89.2 52.5 87.5 97 289 990 538 Total ... 1890-91... 410 38,888 3,795 42,683 33,162 2,885 36,047 85.6 76.0 84.5 104 6,616 19,340 7,206 1891-92 ... 427 43,531 3,821 47,352 36,104 2,167 38,271 82.9 56.7 80.8 111 7,936 20,444 7,724 1892-93... 439 35,958 2,383 38,341 30,292 1,496 31,788 84.2 62.8 82.9 87 6,722 16,442 7,128 There was a decrease of 9,011 cases. This was to be expected, as, in accord- ance with G.O., dated 9th May 1892, No. 1066 L., Local and Municipal, the vaccination to be done by the Medical department is now discretionary. Medical subordinates often experience difficulty in obtaining a supply of lymph.
VACCINATION REPORT. 15 16. Vaccination in cantonments. Cantonments. Number of vaccinators. Number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vac- cination. Percentage of success. Cost of each successful case. Average number of operations per man. Total. Successful. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Total. Successful. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. RS. A. P. Banga- lore. 1890-91... 2 376 430 806 696 481 168 ... 110 93 96.8 84.5 0 7 3 403 1891-92... 2 423 536 959 638 463 145 ... 321 214 95.3 66.6 0 6 8 479 1892-93... 2 419 282 701 616 447 132 ... 85 65 94.0 76.5 0 8 9 350 Secun- derabad. 1890-91... 4 1,656 1,400 3,056 2,985 1,462 1,232 ... 71 63 90.3 88.7 0 0 3 764 1891-92... 4 933 1,693 2,626 2,615 1,313 1,077 ... 11 6 91.4 54.5 0 0 4 656 1892-93... 4 2,320 3,068 5,388 4,590 1,607 1,747 873 798 537 92.1 67.3 0 4 1 1,347 Total... 1890-91... 6 2,032 1,830 3,682 3,681 1,943 1,400 ... 181 156 90.8 86.2 0 1 10 644 1891-92... 6 1,356 2,229 3,585 3,253 1,776 1,222 ... 332 220 92.2 66.3 0 2 0 597 1892-93... 6 2,739 3,350 6,089 5,206 2,054 1,879 873 883 602 92.3 68.2 0 4 8 1,015 The increase was considerable. During the year a Deputy Inspector was put in charge of the vaccination work at Secunderabad. 17. The following table shows the inspection work of Deputy Inspectors of vaccination for 1892-93 :16 VACCINATION REPORT. Circles. Number of Inspecting officers. Number of villages visited. Total number of persons vaccinated. Number of days spent on inspection duty. Number of cases verified. Total number of cases inspected by Deputy Inspectors of all sorts. Total number of successful cases in- spected by Deputy Inspectors. Percentage of successful cases to total number inspected as reported by Deputy Inspectors. Proportion per cent. of inspection to total number vaccinated. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. Rajahmundry ... ... 1 ... 483 ... 20,651 257 16,149 ... 16,149 14,998 92.9 78.2 ... Guntúr ... ... 1 ... 279 ... 17,044 222 9,811 ... 9,811 8,613 87.8 57.5 ... Masulipatam ... ... 1 ... 285 ... 22,226 173 10,080 ... 10,080 9,477 94.0 45.3 ... Vinukonda ... ... ... 1 ... 365 11,703 248 ... 8,936 8,936 8,001 89.5 ... 76.3 Cumbum ... ... 1 ... 278 ... 14,318 277 7,431 ... 7,431 6,763 91.0 51.8 ... Kurnool ... ... 1 ... 462 ... 11,634 265 8,863 ... 8,863 7,124 80.3 76.1 ... Dindigul ... ... 1 ... 599 ... 30,993 232 17,430 ... 17,430 16,495 94.6 56.2 ... Madura ... ... ... 1 ... 663 23,927 304 ... 15,293 15,293 14,117 92.3 ... 63.9 Paramagudi ... ... 1 ... 542 ... 30,721 219 16,281 ... 16,281 15,910 97.7 52.9 ... Tellicherry ... ... ... 1 ... 242 16,939 255 ... 9,552 9,552 9,434 98.7 ... 56.3 Calicut ... ... 1 ... 263 ... 24,551 277 13,872 ... 13,872 12,860 92.7 56.5 ... Palghat ... ... ... 1 ... 244 19,470 219 ... 10,066 10,066 9,091 90.3 ... 51.7 Nellore ... ... 1 ... 639 ... 14,860 278 7,921 ... 7,921 7,627 96.3 53.3 ... Kávali ... ... ... 1 ... 504 11,649 237 ... 9,004 9,004 7,480 83.0 ... 77.2 Ongole ... ... ... 1 ... 355 12,444 199 ... *12,048 12,048 9,656 80.1 ... 96.8 Chittoor ... ... 1 ... 740 ... 18,717 234 10,225 ... 10,225 9,829 96.1 54.6 ... Kárvetnagar ... ... ... 1 ... 519 16,860 245 ... 12,184 12,184 11,888 97.5 ... 72.2 Vellore ... ... 1 ... 463 ... 20,129 208 12,474 ... 12,474 11,849 94.9 61.4 ... Salem ... ... 1 ... 494 ... 24,533 278 13,032 ... 13,032 11,769 90.3 53.1 ... Krishnagiri ... ... ... 1 ... 1,240 14,648 278 ... 12,990 12,990 12,073 92.9 ... 88.6 Námakkal ... ... ... 1 ... 659 27,229 260 ... 15,510 15,510 13,295 85.7 ... 56.9 Cuddalore ... ... ... ... 634 ... 40,823 216 20,458 ... 20,458 19,764 96.6 50.1 ... Vriddhaohalum ... ... 1 ... 559 21,895 250 ... 14,184 14,184 13,771 97.0 ... 64.7 No. I, South Canara ... 1 ... 281 ... 26,668 215 13,706 ... 13,706 13,302 97.0 51.0 No. II, South Canara ... ... 1 ... 278 18,805 237 ... 10,211 10,211 9,593 93.9 ... 53.7 Tanjore ... ... 1 ... 1,176 ... 23,427 300 14,739 ... 14,739 13,576 92.1 62.9 ... Negapatam ... ... 1 ... 748 ... 18,133 255 12,130 ... 12,130 11,505 94.8 66.8 ... Tinnevelly ... ... 1 ... 799 ... 28,566 239 20,854 ... 20,854 19,766 94.7 73.0 ... Sáttúr ... ... ... 1 568 24,602 323 ... 18,203 18,203 17,206 99.3 ... 73.9 Sérmádévi ... ... ... 1 ... 616 27,418 188 ... *20,379 20,379 19,947 97.8 ... 74.3 Trichinopoly ... ... 1 ... 634 ... 46,272 238 24,130 ... 24,130 23,703 98.2 52.1 ... Gunupur ... ... ... 576 5,183 279 ... 4,278 4,278 3,803 88.8 ... 82.5 Jeypore ... ... 1 ... 405 ... 7,601 152 4,116 ... 4,116 3,349 81.4 54.1 ... Vizagapatam ... ... ... 1 291 26,770 196 ... 11,321 11,321 10,786 95.3 ... 42.3 Vizianagrum ... ... 1 ... 318 ... VACCINATION REPORT. 17 Circles. Length of time animal vaccination was carried on. Number of calves inocu- lated. Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Anantapur ... ... Whole year ... 61 366 359 6 1 98.4 41 37 4 ... 90.2 407 396 10 1 97.5 Penukonda ... ... 11 months and 23 days. 72 1,430 1,351 25 54 98.2 66 43 20 3 68.3 1,496 1,394 45 57 96.9 Bellary ... ... Whole year ... ... 369 5,313 5,245 29 39 99.5 3 1 ... 2 100.0 5,316 5,246 29 41 99.5 Harpanahalli ... Do. ... ... 191 3,239 3,212 19 8 99.4 4 2 2 2 50.0 3,243 3,214 21 8 99.4 Chingleput ... ... Do. ... ... 207 16,378 15,539 613 226 96.2 169 129 29 11 81.6 16,547 15,668 642 237 96.0 Saidapet ... ... Do. ... ... 233 13,515 12,737 564 214 95.8 100 66 30 4 68.8 13,615 12,803 594 218 95.6 North Coimbatore ... Do. ... ... Not given. 12,197 11,075 443 679 96.2 730 568 52 110 91.6 12,927 11,643 495 789 95.9 South Coimbatore ... 7 months and 14 days. 100 7,796 6,767 452 577 93.7 159 55 79 25 41.0 7,955 6,822 531 602 92.8 East Coimbatore ... 7 months and 25 days. 148 12,056 11,127 560 369 95.4 403 336 54 13 86.2 12,459 11,463 614 382 94.9 Caddapah ... 4 months and 24 days. 288 9,930 9,411 307 212 96.8 549 350 113 86 75.6 10,479 9,761 420 298 85.9 Madanapalle ... Whole year ... ... 466 13,569 13,408 149 12 98.9 283 222 59 2 79.0 13,852 13,630 208 14 98.5 Sidhout ... ... Do. ... 184 6,045 5,750 228 67 96.2 199 159 39 1 80.3 6,244 5,909 267 68 95.7 Chatrapur ... ... No itinerating calf depots were maintained. Preserved lymph only was used. Chicacole ... ... Gaujám hill tracts ... No animal vaccination. Ellore ... ... 4½ months ... ... 26 969 920 34 15 96.4 16 13 ... 3 100.0 985 933 34 18 96.4 Pithápuram ... ... 5 months ... ... 29 2,262 1,944 174 144 91.8 25 17 5 3 97.3 2,287 1,961 179 147 91.6 Rajabmondry ... 9 months ... ... 61 2,529 2,274 198 57 92.0 22 14 8 ... 63.6 2,551 2,288 206 57 91.7 Guntúr ... ... Whole year ... 77 5,269 5,053 159 57 96.8 61 39 22 ... 63.9 5,330 5,092 181 57 96.6 Masulipatam ... Do. ... ... Not given. 729 721 5 3 99.3 16 16 ... ... 100.0 745 737 5 3 99.3 Vinukonda ... ... Do. ... ... 143 5,850 5,437 330 83 94.3 105 80 21 4 79.2 5,955 5,517 351 87 94.0 Cumbum ... ... Do. ... ... 278 10,463 10,136 195 132 98.1 2,600 2,531 59 10 97.7 13,063 12,667 254 142 98.0 Kurnool ... ... Do. ... ... 246 9,193 8,715 256 222 97.1 2,336 2,209 62 65 97.2 11,529 10,924 318 287 97.2 Madras ... ... Do. ... ... 630 20,945 20,638 91 216 99.6 3,437 3,185 113 139 96.6 24,382 23,823 204 355 99.1 Dindigul ... ... Do. ... ... 371 28,790 26,834 992 964 96.4 1,021 594 258 169 69.7 29,811 27,428 1,250 1,133 95.6 Madura ... ... Do. ... ... 201 21,926 21,210 398 318 98.2 547 494 36 17 93.2 22,473 21,704 434 335 98.0 Paramagudi ... Do. ... ... 383 28,713 28,098 390 225 98.6 880 701 143 36 83.1 29,593 28,799 533 261 98.4 Tellicherry ... ... Do. ... ... 77 880 861 16 3 98.2 99 90 9 ... 90.9 979 951 25 3 97.4 Calicut ... ... Do. ... ... 77 2,649 2,534 102 13 96.1 18 10 8 ... 55.6 2,667 2,544 110 13 95.9 Palgbat ... ... Do. ... ... 78 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,512 1,428 48 36 96.7 Nilgiris ... ... No itinerating calf depôt was maintained. *85 33 2 ... 94.3 Kávali ... ... Whole year ... ... 70 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,796 3,486 146 164 93.2 Nellore ... ... Do. ... ... 80 4,572 4,424 44 104 99.0 24 18 3 3 85.7 4,596 4,442 47 107 99.0 Ongole ... ... Do. ... ... 44 2,875 2,267 391 217 85.3 ... ... ... ... ... 2,875 2,267 391 217 85.3 Chittoor ... ... Do. ... ... 220 7,625 7,529 60 36 99.2 422 369 35 18 91.3 8,047 7,898 95 54 98.8 Vellore ... ... Do. ... ... 177 9,466 8,969 273 224 970 710 609 75 26 89.0 10,176 9,578 348 250 96.5 * These cases were done with a calf borrowed from the depôt vaccinator.
18 VACCINATION REPORT. Circles. Length of time animal vaccination was carried on. Number of calves inocu- lated. Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Karvetnagar ... 9 months and 19 days. 123 8,460 8,348 93 19 98.9 203 188 15 ... 92.6 8,663 8,536 108 19 98.8 Salem ... ... Whole year...... 123 8,721 8,243 250 228 98.2 219 145 52 22 73.6 8,940 8,388 302 250 96.5 Krishnagiri ... ... Do....... 65 2,514 2,444 59 11 97.6 151 130 20 1 86.6 2,665 2,574 79 12 97.0 Námakkal ... ... Do....... 85 7,660 6,951 294 415 95.9 832 741 36 55 95.4 8,492 7,692 330 470 96.9 Cuddalore ... ... Do....... 419 39,890 38,523 639 728 98.4 154 121 23 10 84.0 40,044 38,644 662 738 98.3 Vriddhachalam ... Do....... 223 21,285 20,625 371 289 98.2 91 79 7 5 91.9 21,376 20,704 378 294 98.2 No. I. South Canara. No itinerating calf depots were maintained. Glycerine paste only was used. No. II. do. ... Tanjore ... ... Negapatam ... ... Tinnevelly ... ... Whole year ...... 182 22,799 22,342 419 38 98.1 1,471 1,301 161 9 89.0 24,270 23,643 580 47 97.6 Sáttúr ... ... Do....... 179 19,114 18,669 232 213 98.2 1,445 1,211 156 78 88.6 20,559 19,880 388 291 98.1 Sérmádévi ... Do....... 183 19,242 18,602 375 265 98.0 1,579 1,556 13 10 99.2 20,821 20,158 388 275 98.1 Trichinopoly ... Do....... 444 41,668 40,756 486 426 98.8 2,859 2,728 67 64 97.6 44,527 43,484 553 490 98.7 Yizagapatam ... Do....... 32 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 125 121 4 ... 96.8 Vizianagarain ... Do....... 87 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 439 426 2 11 99.5 Jeypore ... ... No itinerating calf depots were maintained. Preserved lymph only was used. Gunupore ... ... Total ... * 6,732 458,892 440,048 10,721 8,123 VACCINATION REPORT. 19 The percentage of success is satisfactory. In most of the districts, batches of vaccinators itinerate with inoculated calves and vaccinate subjects direct from calf to arm. The vaccinators complain, however, that under this system they are kept too much away from their head-quarters. 19. The following shows the results obtained with preserved animal lymph, excluding cases given in the next table showing results obtained with glycerine paste:20 VACCINATION REPORT. 20. Table showing the results obtained with glycerine paste: VACCINATION REPORT. 21 In October 1892 some &quot; Emulsified Pure Calf Lymph,&quot; prepared at the Insti- tute of Dr. Pissin of Berlin, was sent out by Mr. Rebman, the London agent. The lymph was used on three children. Every insertion failed, though subsequent successful vaccination with local lymph showed that the subjects were susceptible. The frequent use of humanized lymph in the inoculation of calves has not been found necessary in this presidency. Further, it has not been found necessary to look for any new source of strength to the stock of lymph, or to repeat the experi- ments successfully carried out by MM. Eternod and Haxiers in 1890 of inocu- lating calves with small-pox virus. It is no doubt true that the animal lymph in many places is not yet satisfactory, but in certain centres we have as good stock as we could wish for. 21. Table showing results and cost of animal vaccination of all sorts in Local Fund circles:22 VACCINATION REPORT. 22. Table showing animal vaccination of all kinds by medical subordinates, including both primary operations and re-vaccinations :VACCINATION REPORT. 23 Municipalities. Direct from Calf. Preserved Animal Lymph. Glycerine Paste. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Adóni ... ... 94 90 3 1 96.8 963 797 133 33 85.7 ... ... ... ... ... 1,057 887 136 34 86.7 Anantapar ... 19 19 ... ... 100.0 293 269 11 13 96.1 23 23 ... ... 100.0 335 314 11 13 96.6 Anakápalle ... ... ... ... ... ... 515 491 14 10 97.2 ... ... ... ... ... 515 491 14 10 97.2 Bellary ... 2,368 2,291 68 9 97.1 1,381 1,322 59 ... 95.7 32 10 22 ... 31.3 3,781 3,623 149 9 96.0 Berhampur ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,033 792 209 32 79.1 ... ... ... ... ... 1,033 792 209 32 79.1 Bezwada ... 1,642 1,588 22 32 98.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,642 1,588 22 32 98.6 Bimlipatam ... ... ... ... ... ... 473 455 18 ... 96.3 ... ... ... ... ... 473 455 18 ... 96.2 Calicut ... 1,893 1,666 150 77 91.7 2,693 1,953 522 218 78.9 ... ... ... ... ... 4,586 3,619 672 295 84.3 Cannanore ... 614 613 ... 1 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... 2,248 2,215 27 6 98.8 2,862 2,828 27 7 99.1 Chicacole ... ... ... ... ... ... 799 501 290 8 63.3 ... ... ... ... ... 799 501 290 8 63.3 Chidambaram ... 965 932 13 20 98.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 965 932 13 20 98.6 Cochin ... 4 4 ... ... 100.0 17 10 5 2 66.7 60 59 1 ... 98.3 81 73 6 2 92.4 Cocanada ... 2,596 2,398 152 46 94.0 67 67 ... ... 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... 2,663 2,465 152 46 94.2 Coimbatore ... 1,405 1,323 51 31 96.3 341 285 43 13 86.9 9 4 5 ... 44.4 1,755 1,612 99 44 94.2 Conjeeveram ... 1,158 1,145 7 6 99.4 363 360 2 1 99.4 ... ... ... ... ... 1,521 1,505 9 7 99.4 Coonoor ... ... ... ... ... ... 186 116 61 9 65.5 382 372 2 8 96.9 568 488 63 17 88.6 Cuddalore ... 2,671 2,451 160 60 93.9 248 214 26 8 89.2 9 ... 9 ... ... 2,928 2,665 195 68 93.2 Cuddapah ... 542 515 25 2 95.4 83 82 1 ... 98.8 ... ... ... ... ... 625 597 26 2 95.8 Dindigul ... 1,186 1,133 37 16 96.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,186 1,133 37 16 96.8 Ellore ... ... 24 23 1 ... 95.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 23 1 ... 95.8 Erode 437 410 20 7 95.3 104 82 19 3 81.2 ... ... ... ... ... 541 492 39 10 92.7 Gudiyáttam ... 697 666 26 5 96.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 697 666 26 5 96.2 Guntúr ... 780 772 4 4 99.5 39 39 ... ... 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... 819 811 4 4 99.5 Karúr ... Information not received. Kumbakónam ... 1,618 1,555 58 5 96.4 20 19 1 ... 95.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1,638 1,574 59 5 96.4 Kurnool ... 1,038 1,018 4 16 99.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,038 1,018 4 16 99.6 Madras ... 24,382 23,823 204 355 99.2 408 408 ... ... 100.0 68 68 ... ... 100.0 24,858 24,299 204 355 99.2 Madura ... 3,540 3,184 222 134 93.5 1,606 1,317 154 135 89.5 8 ... 8 ... ... 5,154 4,501 384 269 92.1 Mannárgudi ... 918 913 3 2 99.7 ... ... ... ... ... 6 5 ... 1 100.0 924 918 3 3 99.7 Mangalore ... 1,045 1,043 2 ... 99.8 239 237 2 ... 99.1 1,459 1,452 5 2 99.7 2,743 2,732 9 2 99.7 Masulipatam ... 2,915 2,814 101 ... 96.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,915 2,814 101 ... 96.5 Máyavaram ... 750 739 11 ... 98.5 ... ... ... ... ... 43 43 ... ... 100.0 793 782 11 ... 98.6 Negapatam ... 1,750 1,692 36 22 97.9 531 509 22 ... 95.9 ... ... ... ... ... 2,281 2,201 58 22 97.4 Nellore ... 1,364 1,288 74 2 94.6 22 22 ... ... 100.0 14 ... l4 ... ... 1,400 1,310 88 2 93.7 7
24 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Direct from Calf. Preserved Animal Lymph. Glycerine Paste. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Ongole ... 404 339 43 22 88.7 52 45 4 3 91.8 ... ... ... ... ... 456 384 47 25 89.1 Ootacamund ... 72 62 6 4 91.2 216 174 29 13 85.7 808 779 22 7 97.3 1,096 1,015 57 24 94.7 Palamcottah ... 1,019 968 33 18 96.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,019 968 33 18 96.7 Palghat ... 34 33 1 ... 97.1 786 746 40 ... 94.5 56 56 ... ... 100.0 876 835 41 ... 95.3 Parlákimedi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 719 416 302 1 57.9 719 416 302 1 57.9 Periyakulam ... 910 878 27 5 97.0 6 6 ... ... 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... 916 884 27 5 97.0 Palni ... 463 434 23 6 95.0 4 4 ... ... 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... 467 438 23 6 95.4 Rajahmundry ... 1,779 1,416 245 118 85.2 138 85 48 5 63.9 ... ... ... ... ... 1,917 1,501 293 123 83.7 Salem ... ... 4,521 4,386 123 12 97.1 19 15 4 ... 80.0 ... ... ... ... ... 4,540 4,401 127 12 97.2 Srírangam* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tanjore ... 244 242 2 ... 99.2 1 1 ... ... 100.0 1,312 1,283 27 2 97.9 1,557 1,526 29 2 98.1 Tellicherry ... 866 759 82 25 90.2 3 1 1 1 50.0 832 765 58 9 93.0 1,701 1,525 141 35 91.5 Tinnevelly ... 1,936 1,828 58 50 96.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,936 1,828 58 50 91.6 Trichinopoly ... 6,571 6,179 160 232 97.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,571 6,179 160 232 97.5 Tiruppattúr ... 545 529 16 ... 97.1 399 374 25 ... 93.7 ... ... ... ... ... 944 903 41 ... 95.7 Tirnpati ... 527 508 19 ... 96.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 527 508 19 ... 96.4 Tuticorin ... 612 571 41 ... 93.4 422 379 43 ... 89.8 ... ... ... ... ... 1,034 950 84 ... 91.9 Vániyambádi ... 843 839 4 ... 99.5 46 45 1 ... 97.8 ... ... ... ... ... 889 884 5 ... 99.4 Vellore ... 2,080 1,944 131 5 93.8 3 1 2 ... 33.3 ... ... ... ... ... 2,083 1,945 133 5 93.6 Vizagapatam ... 34 34 ... ... 100.0 1,500 1,395 84 21 94.3 ... ... ... ... ... 1,534 1,429 84 21 94.5 Vizianagrum ... 1,391 1,344 43 4 96.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,391 1,344 43 4 96.9 Walajapet ... 135 131 4 ... 97.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 135 131 4 ... 97.0 Total ... 83,401 79,532 2,515 1,354 96.9 16,019 13,618 1,873 528 87.9 8,088 7,550 502 36 93.8 107,508 100,700 4,890 1,918 95.4 * No animal vaccination was conducted during the year.
VACCINATION REPORT. 25 24. Statement comparing the results obtained with different kinds of animal lymph in Local fund circles for the three years ending 31st March 1893 excluding cases the results of which are unknown :26 VACCINATION REPORT. might, however, with advantage, be made compulsory in certain large compact unions. From reports received it appears that the deputy inspectors have noticed 31 cases of small-pox occurring after successful vaccination; all the cases were reported to be mild. In the whole of my experience I have never heard of a case of leprosy in this Presidency being traceable to vaccination ; neither have I ever heard the danger of inoculation with leprosy advanced by the people as an excuse for not submitting to vaccination. 27. There being no reserve, it sometimes happens that when a deputy inspec- tor takes short leave, a vaccinator of the same district is put in charge of his office, but no proper supervision is exercised over the other vaccinators and the work falls off. The salary available for the acting man is so small that it does not pay to send a vaccinator, competent to act, from any great distance. For this reason it would be well to have a reserve of two second-class deputy inspectors who would draw pay from Provincial funds when not employed by District Boards. These reserve men would ordinarily remain in Madras for thorough training in animal vaccina- tion ; they could at any time relieve other deputies who had to come to the Madras depôt to learn the work. 28. A new statement, No. V, showing particulars of vaccination verified by inspecting officers, is added to the report. The order regarding this statement was received during the year. The numbers verified by commissioned officers are small; some of the Civil Surgeons did not clearly understand what was required and submitted reports which were of no use. The practice hitherto pursued by most of the District Surgeons and by myself was to examine, on our visits to a town or village, a number of children in the streets and in schools and to note the proportions vaccinated, marked by small-pox, and unprotected. 29. During the year one deputy inspector died, and one retired on a pen- sion. One first-class deputy was reduced to second-class, and two second-class men were reduced to the grade of vaccinator for misconduct. Nine deputies were fined for various offences. First-class Deputy Inspectors M. Buthroodeen, Rajahmundry Range, and C. Soobroya Chetty, Madras Town, deserve praise for the way in which they have conducted their duties. 30. The service registers of the Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination have been maintained and brought up to date, with the exception of seven, belonging to men recently promoted, which are now under verification. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, DONALD F. DYMOTT, Surgeon-Major, M.B., Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, Madras.
APPENDIX. VACCINATION RETURNS. 8
VACCINATION RETURNS. 29 A30 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 31 30 Nellore. Kávali circle ... ... 1,423,540 164 9 5,847 5,802 11,649 1,294 11,436 1,490 7,201 10,610 213 117 92.8 54.9 24.9 0.2 25.1 ... ... ... ... 31 Nellore do. ... ... 12 7,370 7,490 14,860 1,239 14,747 2,761 8,516 14,295 113 91 96.9 80.5 ... ... ... ... 32 Ongole do. ... ... 10 6,402 6,042 12,444 1,244 12,340 1,283 6,522 10,552 104 57 85.5 54.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,423,540 164 31 19,619 19,334 38,953 1,257 38,523 5,534 22,239 35,457 430 265 92.0 61.6 24.9 0.2 25.1 29,047 20.4 435 03 33 Nilgiri Circle ... ... 78,695 85 3 1,714 1,278 2,992 931 2,695 218 1,322 2,492 297 267 92.5 89.9 31.7 3.4 35.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 78,695 85 3 1,714 1,278 2,992 931 2,695 218 1,322 2,492 297 267 92.5 89.9 31.7 3.4 35.1 1,808 22.9 79 0.8 34 North Arcot. Chittoor circle ... ... 2,092,088 293 15 9,694 9,023 18,717 1,248 17,837 5,640 10,334 17,584 880 786 98.6 89.3 24.8 0.9 25.7 ... ... ... ... 35 Vellore do. ... 12 10,518 9,611 20,129 1,677 19,099 4,183 11,868 18,081 1,030 851 94.7 82.6 ... ... ... ... 36 Karvetnagar circle ... 10 8,893 7,967 16,860 1,686 16,464 3,252 9,981 16,182 396 356 98.3 89.9 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,092,088 293 37 29,105 26,601 55,706 1,506 53,400 13,075 32,183 51,847 2,306 1,993 97.1 86.4 24.8 0.9 25.7 37,988 18.2 2,762 1.3 37 Salem. Krishnagiri circle ... 464,385 178 12 7,407 7,241 14,648 1,221 14,259 5,938 6,957 13,950 389 341 97.8 87.7 30.0 0.7 30.8 ... ... ... ... 38 Salem do. ... 666,224 233 18 12,487 12,046 24,533 1,363 24,003 5,659 14,824 23,010 530 370 95.9 69.8 34.5 0.6 35.1 ... ... ... ... 39 Námakkal do. ... 731,935 345 17 14,008 13,221 27,229 1,602 25,563 4,731 15,271 23,769 1,666 1,496 92.9 89.8 82.5 2.0 34.5 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,862,544 249 47 33,902 32,508 66,410 1,413 63,825 16,328 37,052 60,729 2,585 2,207 95.2 85.4 32.6 1.2 33.8 52,966 28.4 1,282 0.6 40 South Arcot. Cuddalore circle ... 1,370,247 415 21 21,050 19,773 4,823 1,944 40,668 9,092 23,608 39,060 155 122 96.0 78.7 28.5 0.6 28.6 ... ... ... ... 41 Vriddhachalam circle ... 726,609 464 14 11,127 10,768 21,895 1,564 21,799 5,581 13,362 21,103 96 81 96.8 84.4 29.0 0.1 29.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,096,856 431 35 32,177 30,541 62,718 1,792 62,467 14,673 36,970 60,163 251 203 96.3 80.9 28.7 0.1 28.8 33,144 15.4 3,872 1.8 42 South Canara. No. I. South Canara circle 611,971 320 *16 14,261 12,407 26,668 1,667 25,168 1,958 11,244 24,569 1,500 1,056 97.6 70.4 40.1 1.7 41.8 ... ... ... ... 43 No. II. do. do. 399,466 201 11 10,171 8,634 18,805 1,710 17,889 1,375 7,730 17,316 916 688 96.7 75.1 43.3 1.7 45.1 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,011,437 260 27 24,432 21,041 45,473 1,684 43,057 3,333 18,974 41,885 2,416 1,744 97.3 72.2 41.3 1.7 43.0 31,205 30.7 520 0.5 44 Tanjore. Negapatam circle ... 898,215 612 16 9,493 8,640 18,133 1,133 17,463 1,876 11,764 16,619 670 511 95.2 76.3 18.5 0.6 19.1 ... ... ... ... 45 Tanjore do. ... 1,117,821 516 21 12,198 11,229 23,427 1,115 22,425 2,855 14,216 20,513 1,002 603 91.5 60.1 18.3 0.5 18.9 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 2,016,036 555 37 21,691 19,869 41,560 1,123 39,888 4,731 25,980 37,132 1,672 1,114 93.1 66.6 18.5 0.5 18.9 38,099 18.9 1,376 06 46 Tinnevelly. Sáttúr circle ... ... 588,645 322 13 14,406 10,196 24,602 1,892 22,847 5,094 12,117 22,285 1,755 1,439 97.5 81.9 37.8 2.4 40.3 ... ... ... ... 47 Sérmádévi circle ... 512,974 322 12 14,856 12,562 27,418 2,284 25,441 5,304 14,632 24,582 1,977 1,947 96.6 98.5 47.9 3.8 51.7 ... ... ... ... 48 Tinnevelly do. ... 745,915 383 15 15,835 12,731 28,566 1,904 26,852 7,557 13,220 26,286 1,714 1,496 97.8 87.3 35.2 2.0 37.2 ... ... ... ... Total of district ... 1,847,534 343 40 45,097 35,489 80,586 2,015 75,140 17,955 39,969 73,153 5,446 4,882 97.4 89.6 39.6 2.6 42.2 54,323 29.4 1,452 0.7 49 Trichi- nopoly. Trichinopoly circle ... 1,260,476 355 15 23,183 23,089 46,272 3,085 43,221 5,284 28,557 42,280 3,051 2,912 97.8 95.4 33.5 2.3 35.8 ... ... ... ... Total of district... 1,260,476 355 15 23,183 23,089 46,272 3,085 43,221 5,284 28,557 42,280 3,051 2,912 97.8 95.4 33.5 2.3 35.8 30,293 24.0 578 0.4 50 Vizagapatam. Gunapur circle ... ... ... ... 3 1,609 1,362 2,971 990 2,951 508 1,406 2,504 20 20 84.9 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Zemindary vaccinators. ... ... 3 1,210 1,002 2,212 737 2,189 209 1,112 2,084 23 18 95.2 78.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jeypore circle ... ... ... ... 5 1,421 1,405 2,826 565 2,824 108 1,704 2,672 2 2 94.6 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51 Zemindary vaccinators. ... ... 7 2,422 2,249 4,671 667 4,671 428 2,642 4,412 ... ... 94.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total of Hill tracts ... ... ... 18 6,662 6,018 12,680 704 12,635 1,253 6,864 11,672 45 40 92.4 88.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... * Two temporary vaccinators.
32 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 33 14 Municipalities. Coimbatore ... ... 46,383 15,461 2 981 869 1,850 925 1,771 1,029 586 1,658 79 48 93.6 60.8 35.7 1.0 36.7 1,298 28.0 68 1.4 15 Conjeeveram ... ... 42,548 10,637 2 746 775 1,521 760 1,493 1,033 400 1,479 28 26 99.1 92.9 34.7 0.6 35.4 1,844 43.3 31 0.7 16 Coonoor ... ... ... 6,049 672 1 361 254 615 615 550 190 185 475 65 56 80.9 86.1 78.5 9.3 87.8 412 68.1 5 0.8 17 Cuddalore ... ... 47,355 4,305 3 1,717 1,211 2,928 976 2,924 638 1,582 2,662 4 3 91.0 75.0 56.2 0.1 56.3 1,356 30.7 32 0.7 18 Cuddapah ...... 17,379 915 1 367 258 625 625 528 213 253 518 97 79 98.1 81.4 29.8 4.5 34.3 592 34.1 17 1.0 19 Dindigul ... ... 20,203 10,101 1 597 589 1,186 1,186 1,126 839 248 1,098 60 35 97.5 58.3 54.3 1.7 56.1 917 45.4 27 1.3 20 Ellore ... ... ... 29,382 3,265 2 1,119 1,000 2,119 1,059 2,079 665 1,049 2,057 40 38 98.9 95.0 70.0 1.3 71.3 1,229 41.8 10 0.3 21 Erode ......... 12,330 1,121 1 437 336 773 773 773 309 344 721 ... ... 93.3 ... 58.5 ... 58.5 578 46.9 5 0.4 22 Gudiyáttam ... ... 18,747 18,747 1 364 333 697 697 692 352 310 662 5 4 95.7 80.0 35.3 6.2 35.5 332 17.7 28 1.6 23 Guntúr ... ... ... 23,359 1,797 1 428 391 819 819 789 492 247 784 30 27 99.4 90.0 33.6 1.2 34.7 769 32.9 11 0.4 24 Karúr ... ... ... 10,750 10,750 1 221 207 428 428 420 175 166 363 8 6 86.4 75.0 33.8 0.6 34.3 361 33.6 4 0.4 25 Kumbakónam ... ... 54,307 18,102 2 861 777 1,638 819 1,568 622 793 1,508 70 66 96.2 94.3 27.8 1.2 29.0 1,347 24.8 78 1.5 26 Kurnool ... ... 24,376 4,875 3 511 527 1,038 346 990 579 378 970 48 48 98.0 100.0 39.8 2.0 41.8 1,267 51.9 34 1.4 27 Madras......... 452,518 16,019 24 14,215 10,643 24,858 1,036 21,421 13,719 4,769 21,114 3,437 3,185 98.6 92.7 46.7 7.0 53.7 22,716 50.2 48 0.1 28 Madura......... 87,428 6,725 3 3,097 2,057 5,154 1,718 4,757 1,968 1,698 4,154 397 347 87.3 87.4 47.5 4.0 51.5 2,833 32.4 169 1.9 29 Mannárgudi ... ... 20,395 5,099 1 460 464 924 924 901 330 497 898 23 20 99.7 87.0 44.0 0.9 45.0 537 26.3 26 1.3 30 Mangalore ... ... 40,922 8,184 2 1,420 1,323 2,743 1,371 2,522 896 1,573 2,513 221 219 99.6 99.1 61.4 5.4 66.8 2,019 49.3 93 2.3 31 Masulipatam ... ... 38,809 9,702 2 1,528 1,387 2,915 1,457 2,883 879 1,424 2,791 32 23 96.8 71.9 71.9 0.6 72.5 1,650 42.5 47 1.2 32 Mayavaram ... ... 23,765 7,922 1 412 381 793 793 775 583 154 764 18 18 98.6 100.0 32.1 0.8 32.9 789 33.2 17 0.7 33 Negapatam ... ... 59,221 8,460 2 1,230 1,051 2,281 1,140 2,219 1,246 812 2,160 62 41 97.3 66.1 36.5 0.7 37.2 2,016 34.0 54 0.9 34 Nellore ... ... ... 29,336 1,173 1 851 549 1,400 1,400 1,124 735 317 1,101 276 209 97.9 75.7 37.5 7.1 44.7 1,277 43.5 11 0.3 35 Ongole ... ... ... 10,860 2,715 1 247 209 456 456 419 207 113 370 37 14 88.3 37.8 34.1 1.3 35.4 461 42.4 2 0.2 36 Ootacamund ... ... 15,053 1,368 1 616 504 1,120 1,120 1,049 401 418 973 71 57 92.7 80.3 64.6 3.8 68.4 669 44.4 23 1.5 37 Palamcottah ... ... 18,686 6,229 1 584 435 1,019 1,019 927 439 339 892 92 76 96.2 82.6 47.7 4.1 51.8 878 47.0 6 0.3 38 Palghat ... ... 39,481 4,387 2 845 690 1,535 767 1,507 35 781 1,438 28 24 95.4 85 8 36.4 0.6 37.0 1,487 37.7 26 0.7 39 Parlákimedi ... ... 16,390 5,463 1 389 330 719 719 719 240 151 416 ... ... 57.9 ... 254 ... 25.4 680 41.5 25 1.5 40 Periyakulam ... ... 16,363 606 1 484 432 916 916 879 578 65 860 37 24 99.1 64.9 52.6 1.5 54.0 425 26.0 48 2.9 41 Palni ... ... ... 16,940 2,420 1 501 426 927 927 860 373 417 828 67 48 96.3 71.6 48.9 2.8 51.7 510 30.1 8 0.5 42 Rajahmundry ... ... 28,397 2,366 2 1,203 714 1,917 958 1,735 443 1,007 1,450 182 51 83.6 28.0 51.1 1.8 52.9 1,302 45.8 32 1.1 43 Salem ... ... 67,710 11,285 3 2,288 2,252 4,540 1,513 4,531 2,402 1,897 4,394 9 7 97.0 77.7 64.9 0.1 65.0 2,172 32.1 104 1.5 44 Srírangam ... ... 21,632 3,090 1 571 532 1,103 1,103 1,091 399 560 1,044 12 6 95.7 50.0 48.3 0.3 48.5 958 44.3 33 1.5 45 Tanjore ... ... ... 54,390 6,799 2 840 717 1,557 779 1,530 279 10,40 1,507 27 19 98.5 70.4 27.7 0.3 28.1 1,457 26.8 63 1.1 46 Tellicberry ... ... 27,196 6,799 3 919 782 1,701 567 1,467 485 726 1,357 234 168 92.5 71.8 49.9 6.2 56.1 1,193 43.9 58 2.1 47 Tinnevelly ... ... 24,768 24,768 2 1,073 863 1,936 968 1,936 774 680 1,828 ... ... 94.4 ... 73.8 ... 73.8 1,038 41.9 23 0.9 48 Trichinopoly ... ... 90,609 9,061 5 3,819 2,752 6,571 1,314 5,959 1,139 3,397 5,722 612 457 96.0 74.7 63.2 5.0 68.2 6,502 71.8 126 1.4 49 Tiruppattúr ... ... 16,499 4,125 2 466 478 944 472 913 399 468 885 31 18 96.9 58.1 53.6 1.1 54.7 460 27.9 31 1.9 50 Tirupati ... ... 14,242 ... 1 268 259 527 527 512 324 147 499 15 9 97.5 60.0 35.0 0.6 35.6 269 18.9 6 0.4 51 Tuticorin ... ... 25,107 8,369 1 653 381 1,034 1,034 1,034 215 590 950 ... ... 91.9 ... 37.8 ... 37.8 785 31.3 32 1.3 52 Vániyambádi ... ... 15,838 15,838 2 482 409 891 445 891 532 320 886 ... ... 99.4 ... 55.9 ... 55.9 562 35.5 22 1.4 53 Vellore ... ... ... 44,925 11,231 2 1,312 836 2,148 1,074 1,919 1,073 605 1,873 229 137 97.6 59.8 41.7 3.l 44.7 1,436 31.9 60 1.3 54 Vizagapatam ... ... 34,487 11,496 1 905 629 1,534 1,534 1,441 1,016 280 1,389 93 40 96.4 43.0 40.3 1.2 41.4 1,589 46.1 60 1.7 55 Vizianagram ... ... 30,881 7,720 2 739 652 1,391 695 1,291 310 724 1,262 100 82 97.8 82.0 40.9 2.7 43.5 809 26.2 33 1.0 56 Wallajapet ... ... 10,485 10,485 1 268 254 522 522 513 224 241 488 9 9 95.1 100.0 46.5 0.9 47.4 280 26.7 15 1.4 Total of municipalities... 2,100,967 5,499 118 64,769 50,184 114,953 974 106,364 46,156 40,668 100,613 8,589 7,199 94.6 83.8 47.9 3.4 51.3 84,436 40.1 2,280 1.1 Grand Total ... 35,830,282 261 824 650,631 515,569 1,126,200 1,367 1,070,559 252,737 552,778 1,019,213 55,641 43,706 95.2 78.5 28.4 1.2 28.7 802,614 22.1 30,709 0.9 * Work performed in jails, police hospitals, revenue and other departments.
34 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 35 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the official year 1892-93. Paid from Total. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vacci- nations. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. AS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 2,959 4 2 ... ... 2,959 4 2 ... ... 2,959 4 2 7,574 0 6 3 2,230 0 7 ... ... 2,230 0 7 ... ... 2,230 0 7 8,072 0 4 5 5,189 4 9 ... ... 5,189 4 9 ... ... 5,189 4 9 15,646 0 5 4 5,458 3 7 ... ... 5,458 3 7 ... ... 5,458 3 7 16,253 0 5 4 2,644 1 4 ... ... 2,644 1 4 ... ... 2,644 1 4 7,751 0 5 5 8,102 4 11 ... ... 8,102 4 11 ... ... 8,102 4 11 24,004 0 5 5 3,808 10 10 ... ... 3,808 10 10 ... ... 3,808 10 10 18,848 0 3 3 3,376 15 3 ... ... 3,376 15 3 ... ... 3,376 15 3 15,656 0 3 5 7,185 10 1 ... ... 7,185 10 1 ... ... 7,185 10 1 34,504 0 3 4 4,068 10 6 ... ... 4,068 10 6 ... ... 4,068 10 6 18,188 0 3 7 2,343 7 10 ... ... 2,343 7 10 ... ... 2,343 7 10 15,972 0 2 4 3,631 15 9 ... ... 3,631 15 9 ... ... 3,631 15 9 26,845 0 2 2 10,044 2 1 ... ... 10,044 2 1 ... ... 10,044 2 1 61,005 0 2 6 4,226 7 3 ... ... 4,226 7 3 ... ... 4,226 7 3 11,871 0 5 8 4,737 5 11 ... ... 4,737 5 11 ... ... 4,737 5 11 15,948 0 4 9 3,351 6 6 ... ... 3,351 6 6 ... ... 3,351 6 6 9,659 0 5 6 12,315 3 8 ... ... 12,315 3 8 ... ... 12,315 3 8 37,478 0 5 3 3,451 1 9 ... ... 3,451 1 9 ... ... 3,451 1 9 15,144 0 3 7 2,922 8 3 ... ... 2,922 8 3 ... ... 2,922 8 3 12,412 0 3 9 2,535 14 0 ... 2,535 14 0 ... ... ... 2,535 14 0 5,104 0 7 11 8,909 8 0 ... 2,535 14 0 6,373 10 0 ... ... 8,909 8 0 32,660 0 4 4 3,903 8 8 ... ... 3,903 8 8 ... ... 3,903 8 8 13,881 0 4 5 2,839 14 0 ... ... 2,839 14 0 ... ... 2,839 14 0 9,018 0 5 0 *...... ... ... ... ... ... ... 592 ... 4,632 0 7 ... ... 4,632 0 7 ... ... 4,632 0 7 18,830 0 3 11 36 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 37 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1892-9338 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 39 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1892-9340 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 41 B42 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 43 B44 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 45 B46 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 47 B48 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 49 COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned years. Establishment. Persons primarily vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. Govt. vaccinators ... 10,194 9,663 9,136 8,741 16,887 16,319 12,386 12,033 9,970 9,701 8,511 8,204 9,741 9,479 17,092 16,210 28,257 27,227 17,820 16,684 16,375 14,906 15,038 13,823 Local fund do. ... 470,605 435,696 526,329 493,415 591,352 553,890 617,475 580,624 608,729 579,261 584,711 557,732 618,588 590,853 670,318 643,761 708,653 680,355 743,467 706,117 820,195 768,616 932,209 889,648 Cantonment do. ... 5,213 4,941 3,446 3,207 3,734 3,461 3,434 3,159 2,462 2,295 2,850 2,677 3,375 3,293 4,316 3,912 3,341 3,285 3,681 3,343 3,253 2,998 5,206 4,806 Native States do. ... 3,635 3,286 3,838 3,652 4,751 4,436 4,506 4,291 4,082 3,915 4,429 4,216 4,042 3,885 2,270 2,160 5,254 5,069 6,338 6,017 6,628 6,430 6,860 6,496 Municipalities... 80,286 70,980 83,533 75,950 91,665 84,452 97,765 88,281 92,946 87,968 70,065 65,614 71,710 67,405 81,566 77,180 81,442 76,215 91,167 85,008 100,830 95,898 106,364 100,613 Private vaccinators. 137 117 45 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries... 9,890 8,193 10,154 8,371 12,579 10,185 21,561 17,201 22,834 18,793 16,790 13,954 13,736 11,506 18,283 15,603 26,870 23,363 38,888 33,162 45,531 36,104 35,958 30,292 Medical subordinates 9,646 5,742 10,049 7,015 9,633 6,271 8,936 5,280 7,549 4,594 6,720 3,677 3,033 1,630 2,517 1,517 3,077 1,793 4,758 2,727 3,804 2,724 4,882 3,827 Army. European... 1,916 1,382 1,987 1,357 1,940 1,158 2,840 1,737 691 597 875 694 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Native 4,372 3,093 4,414 3,374 4,121 3,212 4,415 3,655 2,784 2,288 2,297 1,987 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 595,894 543,093 652,931 605,125 736,662 683,384 773,118 716,261 752,047 709,412 697,248 658,755 724,225 688,051 796,362 760,343 856,894 817,307 906,119 853,058 996,274 927,719 1,106,517 1,049,505
50 APPENDIX. STATEMENT No.V showing particulars of Vaccination verified by Inspecting Officers. Districts. Total number of persons vac- cinated. Total number inspected Percentage of inspection to total number vaccinated Percentage of cases found successful to total number inspected Percentage of success reported by Vaccinators. By Deputy Sanitary Commissioner or Civil Surgeons. By Native Superin- tendents or other Inspecting Officers. By Deputy Sanitary Commissioner or Civil Surgeons. By Native Superin- tendents or other Inspecting Officers. By Deputy Sanitary Commissioner or Civil Surgeons. By Native Superin- tendents or other Inspecting Officers. Anantapur... ... ... 17,289 690 9,487 4.0 54.9 99.0 80.6 96.2 Bellary... ... ... ... 31,409 ... 13,895 ... 44.2 ... 93.4 97.5 Chingleput... ... ... ... 42,841 5,169 23,019 12.1 54.1 100.0 94.6 94.2 Coimbatore... ... ... ... 71,627 6,078 36,621 8.5 51.1 91.7 93.5 92.5 Cuddapah... ... ... ... 41,224 ... 26,444 ... 64.1 ... 90.0 95.3 Ganjám... ... ... 38,677 l3 21,748 0.03 48.4 77.0 86.1 94.5 Gódávari... ... ... 57,584 ... 31,363 ... 54.5 ... 92.4 93.9 Kistna... ... ... 57,419 ... 28,827 ... 50.2 ... 90.5 94.1 Kurnool... ... ... 28,552 1,684 16,294 5.8 56.1 99.2 85.2 96.1 Madura... ... ... ... 97,884 ... 49,004 ... 50.1 ... 94.9 94.6 Malabar... ... ... 75,675 625 33,490 0.8 41.5 82.4 93.7 92.5 Nellore... ... ... 42,159 ... 28,973 ... 68.7 ... 85.5 91.7 Nilgiris... ... ... ... 4,871 177 ... 3.7 ... 92.1 ... 91.4 North Arcot... ... ... ... 63,519 ... 34,883 ... 54.9 ... 96.2 96.5 Salem... ... ... 77,164 ... 41,532 ... 53.8 ... 89.4 95.0 South Arcot... ... ... ... 68,080 1,216 34,642 1.8 50.9 99.8 96.8 96.0 South Canara ... ... ... ... 49,793 5 23,917 0.01 45.1 80.0 95.7 96.2 Tanjore ... ... ... ... 55,042 ... 26,869 ... 48.8 ... 93.3 92.8 Tinnevelly... ... ... ... 87,255 ... 59,436 ... 68.1 ... 95.8 96.7 Trichinopoly... ... ... ... 55,657 ... 24,130 ... 43.4 ... 98.2 97.2 Vizagapatam... ... ... ... 69,873 23 32,953 0.03 44.2 95.7 91.4 90.5 Madras... ... ... ... Information not available. Total ... 1,133,594 15,680 597,527 3.4 52.9 92.8 92.7 94.8
19TH JULY 1893, Nos. 1585, 1586 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READ2 19TH JULY 1893, Nos. 1585, 1586 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. The total number of operations performed in 1892-93 exceeded that in 1891-92 by 111,121 cases or 10.5 per cent. There was, however, a continued and lamentable decline in the work done by the Government vaccinators in the Agency tracts. The decision to make vaccination discretionary in dispensaries naturally caused a reduction under class (e). The average cost of successful cases was reduced by 2 pies and stood at As. 3-5, a result which is ascribed by the Inspector to the use of glycerine paste in the place of lymph taken direct from the calf. In separate proceedings (G.O., dated 19th May 1893, No. 1102 L.), the Government has ordered the maintenance of statistics in regard to glycerine paste, as the evidence, while showing the excellence and cheapness of the medium of preservation favoured by Dr. Dymott, does not, in the opinion of the Governor in Council, establish its superiority over lanoline in cases where the vaccine paste has to be kept for long periods. The total number of cases verified by the deputy Inspectors rose from 524,571 to 597,527. The energy displayed by the deputy Inspector of the Trichinopoly range, who is said to have verified 24,130 cases, is noted. 3. If the figures relating to the cantonments of Bangalore and Secunderabad are excluded, the total number of operations performed during the year was 32.5 per mille of the population according to the census of 1891. Infantile vaccination appears to have received increased attention, as the number of children of less than a year old who were successfully vaccinated exceeded that of the previous year by 48,807 and was 31.1 per cent. of the total number of births registered. The report should, in future, contain information regarding the births in the several areas dealt with, as in the absence of this, it is not possible to determine in what localities infantile vaccination received attention and where it was neglected. 4. The work done by the Government vaccinators in the agency tracts showed a further decline as compared with the previous year, although there was some improve- ment in Peddápuram and Gunupur. The average number of operations performed by a vaccinator in all these tracts taken together was only 688 against 750 and 778 in the two preceding years, while the average in the case of individual agencies ranged between 331 in Gudem and 990 in Gunupur. The explanation offered by the Inspector of Vaccination in paragraph 13 of the report insufficiently accounts for the decline. Endeavours should be made to obtain better results. 5. Local Fund areas.19TH JULY 1893, Nos. 1585, 1586 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 3 6. Municipalities.4 19TH JULY 1893, Nos. 1585, 1586 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. of the report that two reserve Deputy Inspectors of Vaccination should be entertained is not one proper to an administration report, and should form the subject of a separate communication from the Sanitary Commissioner. (True Extract.) J. F. PRICE, Chief Secretary. To the Sanitary Commissioner. Govt. of {1893} Madras. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. Issued Recd. Encl. G.O., &c., 19th July 1893, Nos. 1585, 1586 L. JULY. Vaccination. Reviewing the report on REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1893-94. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. [PRICE, 10 annas.] 1894.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY FOR THE YEAR 1893-94. MADRAS: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1894.
OFFICE OF SANITARY COMMISSIONER, CAMP MADURA, 19th June 1894. No. T/8. From SURGEON-LT.-COLONEL W. G. KING, M.B., C.M., D.P.H., Acting Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, To THE CHIEF SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Local and Municipal Department, Fort St. George. SIR, I have the honour to forward the Administration Report by the Inspector of Vaccination for the year 1893-94. 2. The outturn of work fulfilled is, I would respectfully submit, satisfactory. The total number of cases performed by vaccinators per head has increased, showing that activity has prevailed throughout all branches of the department. The large increase of re-vaccination is, I think, having regard to the great import- ance of the adult population receiving the full confirmation of protection afforded by the operation in infancy, a feature of great importance sanitarily and economi- cally. Taking, however, into consideration the fact that, although there is a total increase of operations to the extent of 14,291, a decline of 1,109 cases of primary operations has occurred, the conclusion might be arrived at by Government, that the greater attention paid to the vaccination of adolescents had led to neglect of the primary operation. I have shown, however, in the ' Annual Report of the Sanitary Commissioner' for 1893, paragraph 9, that during 1892 and 1893, there were over 94,000 less births in the Registration Circles of the Presidency than the registered rate for 1891 would warrant being looked forREPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY DURING 1893-94. From Surgeon-Captain W. B. BANNERMAN, M.D., Inspector of Vaccination and Deputy Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, to the Sanitary Commissioner for Madras, dated Fort St. George, 16th June 1894, No. 8252 VACCINATION REPORT. There has been a decrease of 1,109 under primary vaccination, but a large increase (15,400) under re-vaccination, and therefore a total increase of 14,291 over last year. The decrease in primary vaccination is to be largely attributed to the fact that, compulsory vaccination having now been enforced in the larger municipalities for some years, the majority of the child population have been operated on; that is to say, that there has been a decrease in the available population under 10 years of age, as the arrears of the children formerly unprotected have now been largely overtaken ; and it is seen that there is an actual decrease in municipalities under this head of 2,463. A large decrease under dispensary vacci- nation was only what was to be expected, as the provisions of G.O., No. 1066 L., Local and Municipal, of 9th May 1892, came to be more widely known and acted on. The actual decrease is 9,828 as compared with 9,011 cases last year. The increase under re-vaccination is largely due to the issuing of circular letters by the Acting Sanitary Commissioner to Presidents of District Boards and Chairmen of Municipal Councils, calling their attention to the importance of re- vaccination and explaining that, unless this measure were adopted, a large unprotected adult popu- lation would arise, amongst whom an epidemic might at any time occur. The districts showing the largest increase are as follows :VACCINATION REPORT. 3 Establishment. Ages successfully vaccinated in 1892.93. Total number of per- sons vaccinated in 1892.93. Ages successfully vaccinated in 1893.94. Total number of per- sons vaccinated in 1893.94. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Government ... ... 1,625 7,126 5,072 15,142 1,687 7,901 4,427 15,805 Local Funds ... ... 202,227 499,199 188,222 967,991 184,433 493,564 219,054 992,390 Native States ... ... 637 3,754 2,105 6,883 390 3,683 1,463 6,359 Municipalities ... ... 46,156 40,668 13,789 114,953 47,940 39,329 10,881 113,837 Cantonments ... ... 2,054 1,879 873 6,089 1,804 1,327 276 5,489 Civil dispensaries ... ... 6,722 16,442 7,128 38,341 5,617 12,757 4,705 28,513 Medical subordinates ... 38 152 3,637 15,142 56 147 1,740 16,439 Total ... 259,459 569,220 220,826 1,164,541 241,927 558,708 242,546 1,178,832 7. As ordered by Government in G.O., No. 1585 L., dated 19th July 1893, the following statement has been prepared to show the progress of infantile vaccination in the various districts and municipalities. The names have been arranged in order of merit:4 VACCINATION REPORT 8. The average number of operations per man increased in Local Fund circles and municipalities, but decreased in other establishments as shown below :VACCINATION REPORT. 5 The work shows a decrease in the nine districts noted below, those marked by an asterisk having also showed a decrease last year. The reasons for this, as supplied by the Deputy Inspectors, are given under each name. * Kurnool (9,944).6 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Monthly average. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vacci- nations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS A. P. Adóni ... ... 1892-93 ... 26,243 534 523 1,057 88 1,053 636 231 18 4 2 60.4 21.9 1.7 887 84.0 50.0 0 6 6 1893-94 ... 660 631 1,291 108 1,291 798 365 31 ... ... 61.8 28.3 2.4 1,194 93.9 ... 0 5 4 Anantapur ... ... 1892-93 ... 6,994 268 114 382 32 220 186 26 4 162 142 84.5 11.8 1.8 358 98.2 87.7 0 8 0 1893-94 ... 253 130 383 32 244 200 38 4 139 104 82.0 15.5 1.6 346 99.2 70.7 0 9 10 Anakápalle ... ... 1892-93 ... 17,010 671 621 1,292 108 1,201 328 693 161 91 56 27.3 57.7 13.4 1,238 98.4 61.5 0 2 9 1893-94 ... 738 558 1,296 108 1,123 340 645 117 173 123 30.3 57.4 10.4 1,225 98.6 77.3 0 2 5 Bellary ... ... 1892-93 ... 59,467 2,166 1,615 3,781 315 3,451 1,784 1,187 359 330 295 51.7 34.4 10.4 3,623 96.4 89.4 0 4 6 1893-94 ... 1,646 1,293 2,939 245 2,683 1,553 824 181 256 223 57.9 30.7 6.7 2,781 96.0 87.4 0 5 0 Berhampur ... ... 1892-93 ... 23,653 552 481 1,033 86 1,033 220 535 37 ... ... 21.3 51.8 3.6 792 76.6 ... 0 5 3 1893-94 ... 484 448 932 78 922 123 461 110 10 4 13.3 50.0 11.9 698 77.0 40.0 0 5 10 Bezwada ... ... 1892-93 ... 20,741 916 726 1,642 137 1,579 482 914 146 63 46 30.5 57.8 9.2 1,588 97.7 73.0 0 6 8 1893-94 ... 944 804 1,748 146 1,524 546 794 137 224 185 35.7 52.0 9.0 1,662 96.9 89.8 0 6 10 Bimlipatam ... ... 1892-93 ... 9,827 237 209 446 37 335 182 118 25 111 103 54.3 35.2 7.5 428 97.0 92.8 0 8 3 1893-94 ... 384 208 592 49 398 154 178 59 194 172 38.7 44.7 14.8 563 98.2 89.6 0 5 11 Calicut ... ... 1892-93 ... 66,078 3,252 1,334 4,586 382 4,565 489 1,261 1,858 21 11 10.7 27.6 40.7 3,619 79.0 52.4 0 4 3 1893-94 ... 3,032 1,292 4,324 360 4,316 536 1,478 1,831 8 ... 12.4 34.2 42.4 3,845 93.4 ... 0 4 1 Cannanore ... ... 1892-93 ... 27,418 1,756 1,105 2,861 238 2,248 780 867 587 613 594 34.7 38.5 26.1 2,828 99.4 96.9 0 5 3 1893-94 ... 1,082 684 1,766 147 1,488 714 363 394 278 257 47.9 24.4 26.5 1,728 99.0 94.1 0 5 9 Chicacole ... ... 1892-93 ... 18,241 410 389 799 67 732 151 222 101 67 27 20.6 30.3 13.8 501 64.8 40.3 0 6 6 1893-94 ... 418 430 848 71 707 184 218 74 141 59 26.0 30.8 10.5 535 69.2 41.8 0 6 3 Chidambaram ... 1892-93 .. 18,640 508 457 965 80 965 448 456 28 ... ... 46.4 47.2 2.9 932 96.6 ... 0 6 9 1893-94 ... 423 358 811 68 804 411 337 26 7 7 51.1 41.9 3.2 781 98.3 100.0 0 7 2 Cochin ... ... 1892-93 ... 17,601 739 394 1,133 94 919 132 402 342 214 172 14.3 43.7 37.2 1,048 95.3 80.4 0 2 5 1893-94 ... 754 395 1,149 96 925 192 369 341 224 191 20.7 39.9 36.8 1,093 98.1 85.6 0 1 10 Cocanada ... ... 1892-93 ... 40,553 1,365 1,298 2,663 239 2,635 559 805 1,094 28 7 21.2 30.5 41.5 2,465 93.3 25.0 0 4 10 1893-94 ... 1,289 1,283 2,572 215 2,538 626 1,417 442 34 12 24.3 55.8 17.4 2,497 98.6 35.3 0 4 10 Coimbatore ... ... 1892-93 ... 46,383 981 869 1,850 154 1,771 1,029 586 43 79 48 58.1 33.0 2.4 1,706 93.6 60.8 0 2 5 1893-94 ... 822 798 1,620 135 1,602 984 523 38 18 11 61.4 32.6 2.4 1,556 97.3 61.1 0 5 1 Conjeeveram ... ... 1892-93 ... 42,548 746 775 1,521 127 1,493 1,033 400 46 28 26 69.1 26.7 3.0 1,505 99.1 92.9 0 6 0 1893-94 ... 797 655 1,452 121 1,316 989 286 30 136 121 75.1 21.7 2.3 1,426 99.5 89.6 0 6 2 Coonoor ... ... 1892-93 ... 6,049 361 254 615 51 550 190 185 100 65 56 34.5 33.6 18.1 531 80.9 86.1 0 10 10 1893-94 ... 296 242 538 45 477 208 188 76 61 58 43.6 39.4 15.9 530 100.0 95.1 0 7 4 Cuddalore ... ... 1892-93 ... 47,355 1,717 1,211 2,928 244 2,924 638 1,582 442 4 3 21.8 54.1 15.1 2,665 91.0 75.0 0 3 5 1893-94 ... 1,925 1,088 3,013 251 2,611 576 1,395 612 402 299 22.0 53.4 23.4 2,882 99.4 81.5 0 3 2 Cuddapah ... ... 1892-93 ... 17,379 367 258 625 52 528 213 253 52 97 79 40.3 47.9 9.8 597 98.1 81.4 0 8 11 1893-94 ... 254 208 462 38 415 170 40 162 47 34 41.0 9.6 39.0 406 91.4 75.5 0 7 5
VACCINATION REPORT. 7 Dindigul ... ... 1892-93 ... 20,203 597 589 1,186 99 1,126 839 248 11 60 35 74.5 22.0 0.9 1,133 97.5 58.3 0 8 4 1893-94 ... 499 516 1,015 85 926 638 270 1 89 72 68.9 29.1 0.1 981 99.2 88.9 0 8 9 Ellore ... ... ... 1892-93 ... 29,382 1,119 1,000 2,119 177 2,079 655 1,049 342 40 38 32.0 50.4 16.4 2,095 98.9 95.0 0 2 11 1893-94 ... 1,282 1,015 2,297 191 2,255 443 1,512 263 42 39 19.6 67.0 11.7 2,257 98.9 95.1 0 2 9 Erode ... ... ... 1892-93 ... 12,330 437 336 773 64 773 309 344 68 ... ... 39.9 44.5 8.8 721 93.3 ... 0 4 3 1893-94 ... 328 253 581 49 544 268 167 60 37 27 49.3 30.7 11.0 522 91.0 73.0 0 7 7 Gudiyáttam ... ... 1892-93 ... 18,747 364 333 697 58 692 352 310 ... 5 4 50.9 44.8 ... 666 95.7 80.0 0 11 5 1893-94 ... 351 352 703 59 691 305 276 86 12 10 44.3 39.9 12.4 677 98.5 83.3 0 6 7 Guntúr ... ... 1892-93 ... 23,359 428 391 819 68 789 492 247 45 30 27 62.3 31.3 5.7 811 99.4 90.0 0 6 10 1893-94 ... 628 542 1,170 97 1,001 676 251 52 169 142 67.5 25.0 5.2 1,121 99.0 87.6 0 6 3 Karúr ... ... 1892-93 ... 10,750 221 207 428 36 420 175 166 22 8 6 41.7 39.5 5.2 369 86.4 75.0 *... 1893-94 ... 152 137 289 24 261 49 110 14 28 12 18.8 42.1 5.4 185 66.3 48.0 1 1 5 Kumbakónam ... 1892-93 ... 54,307 861 777 1,638 137 1,568 622 793 93 70 66 39.6 50.5 5.9 1,574 96.2 94.3 0 8 7 1893-94 ... 838 823 1,661 138 1,620 779 745 40 41 39 48.1 46.0 2.5 1,603 96.9 95.1 0 7 9 Kurnool ... ... 1892-93 ... 24,376 511 527 1,038 87 990 579 378 13 48 48 58.5 38.2 1.3 1,018 98.0 100.0 0 8 6 1893-94 ... 683 357 1,040 87 633 311 212 37 407 243 49.1 33.5 5.8 803 98.9 68.2 0 10 9 Madras ... ... 1892-93 ... 452,518 14,215 10,643 24,858 2,072 21,421 13,719 4,769 2,626 3,437 3,185 64.0 22.3 12.2 24,299 98.6 92.7 0 6 2 1893-94 ... 13,693 9,951 23,644 1,970 19,140 13,194 4,923 709 4,504 3,413 68.9 25.7 3.7 22,239 99.5 90.2 0 6 6 Madura ... ... 1892-93 ... 87,428 3,097 2,057 5,154 429 4,757 1,968 1,698 487 397 347 41.3 35.7 10.2 4,501 87.3 87.4 0 3 3 1893-94 ... 3,286 2,073 5,359 447 4,256 2,566 1,381 226 1,103 1,028 60.3 32.4 5.3 5,201 98.5 94.5 0 2 3 Mannárgudi ... ... 1892-93 .. 20,395 460 464 924 77 901 330 497 71 23 20 36.6 55.1 7.8 918 99.7 87.0 0 5 4 1893-94 ... 451 415 866 72 829 406 336 62 37 31 49.0 40.5 7.5 835 98.3 83.8 0 5 9 Mangalore ... ... 1892-93 ... 40,922 1,420 1,323 2,743 229 2,522 896 1,573 24 221 219 45.5 62.3 0.9 2,732 99.6 99.1 0 2 5 1893-94 ... 1,409 1,234 2,643 220 2,344 834 1,468 ... 299 293 35.6 62.6 ... 2,595 98.2 98.0 0 2 4 Masulipatam ... ... 1892-93 ... 38,809 1,528 1,387 2,915 243 2,883 879 1,424 488 32 23 30.5 49.4 16.9 2,814 96.8 71.8 0 4 8 1893-94 ... 1,473 988 2,461 205 2,239 741 1,088 346 222 157 33.1 48.6 15.4 2,332 97.1 70.7 0 5 0 Máyavaram ... ... 1892-93 ... 23,765 412 381 793 66 775 583 154 27 18 18 75.2 19.8 3.5 782 98.6 100.0 0 6 2 1893-94 ... 431 438 869 72 863 562 148 34 6 6 65.0 17.1 3.8 750 86.2 100.0 0 6 8 Negapatam ... ... 1892-93 ... 59,221 1,230 1,051 2,281 190 2,219 1,246 812 102 62 41 56.1 36.6 4.6 2,201 97.3 66.1 0 4 3 1893-94 ... 2,176 1,679 3,855 321 3,683 1,975 1,432 151 172 134 53.6 38.9 4.1 3,692 98.3 85.9 0 3 1 Nellore ... ... 1892-93 ... 29,336 851 549 1,400 117 1,124 735 317 49 276 209 65.4 28.2 4.4 1,310 97.9 75.7 0 6 6 1893-94 ... 828 507 1,335 111 1,071 776 227 59 264 205 72.4 21.2 5.5 1,267 99.1 77.6 0 6 2 Ongole ... ... 1892-93 ... 10,860 247 209 456 38 419 207 113 50 37 14 49.4 26.9 11.9 384 88.3 37.8 0 7 5 1893-94 ... 271 230 501 42 447 228 98 58 54 19 51.0 21.9 13.0 403 91.2 35.2 0 7 3 Ootacamund ... ... 1892-93 .. 15,053 616 504 1,120 93 1,049 401 418 54 71 57 38.2 39.8 5.1 1,030 92.7 80.3 0 6 5 1893-94 ... 453 370 823 69 755 361 278 53 68 59 47.8 36.8 7.0 751 92.7 88.0 0 6 8 Palamcottah ... ... 1892-93 ... 18,686 584 435 1,019 85 927 439 339 114 92 76 47.3 36.5 12.3 968 96.2 82.0 0 6 3 1893-94 ... 483 338 821 68 733 464 201 66 88 73 62.9 27.4 9.0 801 99.3 83.0 0 7 7 Palghat ... ... 1892-93 ... 39,481 845 690 1,535 128 1,507 35 781 622 28 24 2.3 51.8 41.3 1,462 95.4 85.8 0 5 7 1893-94 ... 2,189 1,739 3,928 327 3,925 369 1,991 1,492 3 2 9.4 50.7 38.0 3,854 98.7 66.6 0 1 1 Parlákimedi ... ... 1892-93 ... 16,390 389 330 719 60 719 240 151 25 ... ... 33.4 21.0 3.4 416 57.9 ... 0 6 0 1893-94 ... 417 445 862 72 862 344 242 60 ... ... 39.9 28.1 7.0 646 74.9 ... 0 2 11 Periyakulum ... ... 1892-93 ... 16,363 484 432 916 76 879 578 265 17 37 24 65.7 30.1 1.9 884 99.2 64.9 0 6 0 1893-94 ... 451 408 859 72 769 561 188 5 90 61 72.9 24.4 0.6 815 99.2 71.8 0 7 10 Palni ... ... ... 1892-93 ... 16,940 501 426 927 77 860 373 417 38 67 48 43.3 48.5 4.4 876 96.3 71.6 0 2 9 1893-94 ... 427 350 777 65 678 387 193 24 99 75 57.1 28.4 3.5 679 89.5 78.1 0 4 0 Rajahmundry ... ... 1892-93 ... 28,397 1,203 714 1,917 160 1,735 443 1,007 ... 182 51 25.5 58.0 ... 1,501 83.6 28.0 0 5 9 1893-94 ... 742 588 1,330 111 1,246 520 634 ... 84 57 41.7 50.9 ... 1,211 93.9 72.1 0 6 9 Salem ... ... ... 1892-93 ... 67,710 2,288 2,252 4,540 378 4,531 2,402 1,897 95 9 7 53.0 41.9 2.1 4,401 97.0 77.7 0 2 6 1893-94 ... 1,318 1,321 2,639 220 2,638 2,109 399 23 1 1 79.9 15.1 0.9 2,532 96.8 100.0 0 3 7 Srívangam ... ... 1892-93 ... 21,632 571 532 1,103 92 1,091 399 560 85 12 6 36.6 51.3 7.8 2,050 95.7 50.0 0 2 11 1893-94 ... 480 495 975 81 923 386 393 82 52 46 41.8 42.6 8.9 907 93.4 95.8 0 3 5 * Not available.
8 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Population. Total number vaccinated. Monthly average. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Proportion per cent. to total primarily vaccinated. Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vac- cinations. Percentage of success. Average cost of each success- ful case. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. RS. A P. Tanjore ... ... 1892-93 ... 54,390 840 717 1,557 130 1,530 279 1,040 188 27 19 18.2 67.9 12.3 1,526 98.5 70.4 0 7 1 1893-94 ... 1,461 1,506 2,967 247 2,918 437 1,936 477 49 26 15.0 66.3 16.3 2,876 97.8 57.8 0 1 2 Tellicherry ... ... 1892-93 ... 27,196 919 782 1,701 142 1,467 485 726 146 234 168 33.0 49.5 9.9 1,525 92.5 71.8 0 7 11 1893-94 ... 1,029 855 1,884 157 1,772 718 836 114 112 87 40.5 47.2 6.4 1,755 97.5 82.8 0 4 2 Tinnevelly ... ... 1892-93 ... 24,768 1,073 863 1,936 161 1,936 774 680 374 ... ... 39.9 35.1 19.3 1,828 94.4 ... 0 4 8 1893-94 ... 1,010 854 1,864 155 1,864 794 697 319 ... ... 42.6 37.4 17.1 1,810 97.1 ... 0 4 4 Trichinopoly ... ... 1892-93 ... 90,609 3,819 2,752 6,571 548 5,959 1,139 3,397 1,186 612 457 19.1 57.0 19.9 6,179 96.0 74.7 0 2 9 1893-94 ... 3,206 2,864 6,070 506 5,473 1,452 3,176 683 597 489 26.5 58.0 12.5 5,800 97.9 88.4 0 3 0 Tiruppattúr ... ... 1892-93 ... 16,499 466 478 944 79 913 399 468 18 31 18 43.7 51.2 1.9 903 96.9 58.1 0 4 6 1893-94 ... 352 310 662 55 662 492 129 29 ... ... 74.3 19.5 4.4 650 98.2 ... 0 4 11 Tirapati ... ... 1892-93 ... 14,242 268 259 527 44 512 324 147 30 15 9 63.2 28.7 5.8 508 97.5 60.0 0 10 10 1893-94 ... 285 288 573 48 568 382 158 ... 5 4 67.2 27.8 ... 544 95.0 80.0 0 11 2 Tuticorin ... ... 1892-93 ... 25,107 653 381 1,034 86 1,034 215 590 145 ... ... 20.8 57.0 14.0 950 91.9 ... 0 5 11 1893-94 ... 1,015 770 1,785 149 1,785 478 1,019 209 ... ... 26.8 57.1 11.7 1,706 95.6 ... 0 3 4 Vániyambádi ... ... 1892-93 ... 15,838 482 409 891 74 891 532 320 34 ... ... 59.7 35.9 3.8 886 99.4 ... 0 4 5 1893-94 ... 528 445 973 81 973 577 320 37 ... ... 59.3 32.9 3.8 934 96.1 ... 0 4 0 Vellore ... ... 1892-93 ... 44,925 1,312 836 2,148 179 1,919 1,073 605 195 229 137 55.9 31.5 10.1 2,010 97.6 59.8 0 4 11 1893-94 ... 1,149 881 2,030 169 1,881 1,190 627 54 149 99 63.3 33.3 2.9 1,970 99.5 66.4 0 5 7 Vizagapatam ... ... 1892-93 ... 34,487 905 629 1,534 128 1,441 1,016 280 93 93 40 70.5 19.4 6.4 1,429 96.4 43.0 0 3 0 1893-94 ... 1,024 606 1,630 136 1,409 1,009 306 50 221 87 71.6 21.7 3.5 1,452 97.4 41.6 0 3 10 Vizianagram ... ... 1892-93 ... 30,881 739 652 1,391 116 1,291 310 724 228 100 82 24.0 56.0 17.6 1,344 97.8 82.0 0 3 9 1893-94 ... 1,036 800 1,836 153 1,739 529 904 229 97 79 30.4 52.0 13.2 1,741 96.3 82.3 0 2 10 Walajapet ... ... 1892-93 ... 10,485 268 254 522 44 513 224 241 23 9 9 43.6 46.9 4.4 497 95.1 100.0 0 4 11 1893-94 ... 255 269 524 44 507 329 139 12 17 11 64.9 27.4 2.4 491 94.7 64.7 0 7 8 Total ... 1892-93 ... 2,100,967 64,769 50,184 114,953 9,579 106,364 46,156 40,668 13,789 8,589 7,199 43.4 38.2 13.0 107,812 94.6 83.8 0 5 1 1893-94 ... 64,290 49,547 113,837 9,486 102,267 47,940 39,329 10,881 11,570 8,986 46.9 38.4 10.6 107,136 97.0 85.0 0 5 1
VACCINATION REPORT. 9 The work has decreased in the following 29 municipalities, those marked with an asterisk having shown decline last year also :10 VACCINATION REPORT. 15. Table showing work done in Native States :VACCINATION REPORT. 11 17. Vaccination in cantonments is shown below. There is an increase of 80 in Bangalore and a decrease of 680 in Secunderabad, giving a total decrease of 600. The Medical Officer in charge accounts for this by saying that most of the available cantonment population have already been operated on. Cantonments. Number of vaccinators. Number vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vac- cination. Percentage of success. Cost of each successful case. Average number of operations per man. Total. Successful. Males. Females. Total. Under one year. Over one and under six years. Above six years. Total. Successful. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. RS. A. P. Banga- lore. 1892-93... 2 419 282 701 616 447 132 ... 85 65 94.0 76.5 0 8 9 350 1893-94 ... 2 476 305 781 675 477 165 ... 106 75 95.1 70.8 0 7 10 390 Secun- derabad. 1892-93... 4 2,320 3,068 5,388 4,590 1,607 1,747 873 798 537 92.1 67.3 0 4 1 1,347 1893-94... 4 2,603 2,105 4,708 3,038 1,327 1,162 276 1,670 1,160 93.3 71.4 0 9 2 1,177 Total... 1892-93... 6 2,739 3,350 6,089 5,206 2,054 1,879 873 883 602 92.3 68.2 0 4 8 1,015 1893-94... 6 3,079 2,410 5,489 3,713 1,804 1,327 276 1,776 1,235 93.6 71.4 0 8 11 915 18. The following table shows the inspection work of Deputy Inspectors during the year. Circles. Number of Inspecting officers. Number of villages visited. Total number of persons vaccinated. Number of days spent on inspection duty. Number of cases verified. Total number of cases inspected by Deputy Inspectors of all sorts. Total number of successful cases in- spected by Deputy Inspectors. Percentage of successful cases to total number inspected as reported by Deputy Inspectors. Proportion per cent. of inspection to total number vaccinated. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. Anantapur ... ... 1 ... 346 ... 11,088 276 6,694 ... 6,694 5,133 76.7 60.4 ... Penukonda ... ... ... 1 ... 420 8,622 261 ... 4,699 4,699 4,117 87.6 ... 54.5 Bellary ... ... ... 1 ... 428 ... 17,187 282 9,947 ... 9,947 9,383 94.3 57.9 ... Harpanahalli ... ... ... 1 ... 537 7,841 241 ... 5,006 5,006 4,565 91.2 ... 63.8 Saidapet ... ... ... ... *794 ... 16,385 259 11,681 ... 11,681 11,223 96.1 71.3 ... Chingleput ... ... ... ... 678 ... 26,047 258 15,065 ... 15,065 14,579 96.8 57.8 ... North Coimbatore ... ... ... 572 ... 14,928 210 11,299 ... 11,299 10,655 94.3 75.7 ... South Coimbatore ... ... 1 ... *562 17,156 244 ... 13,280 13,280 11,467 86.3 ... 77.4 East Coimbatore ... ... ... 286 ... 26,081 200 17,315 ... 17,315 16,337 94.3 66.4 ... Cuddapah ... ... ... ... 386 ... 11,722 313 8,148 ... 8,148 7,493 92.0 69.5 ... Madanapalle ... ... ... ... * 2,038 ... 13,919 232 7,076 ... 7,076 6,791 96.0 50.8 ... Siddhavattam ... ... ... ... *582 ... 10,241 255 7,136 ... 7,136 5,066 71.0 69.7 ... Chatrapur ... ... ... ... 318 ... 14,707 176 7,022 ... 7,022 5,667 80.7 47.7 ... Chicacole ... ... ... ... 499 ... 11,863 259 9,598 ... 9,598 8,424 87.8 80.9 ... Ganjám Hill tracts ... ... ... 283 ... 4,247 112 3,675 ... 3,675 3,412 92.8 86.5 ... Ellore ... ... ... ... 345 ... 19,791 201 13,934 ... 12 VACCINATION REPORT. Circles. Number of Inspecting officers. Number of villages visited. Total number of persons vaccinated. Number of days spent on inspection duty. Number of cases verified. Total number of cases inspected by Deputy Inspectors of all sorts. Total number of successful cases in- spected by Deputy Inspectors. Percentage of successful cases to total number inspected as reported by Deputy Inspectors. Proportion per cent. of inspection to total number vaccinated. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. First-class Deputy Inspectors. Second-class Deputy Inspectors. Madura ... ... ... 1 ... 725 24,743 297 ... 17,398 17,398 16,552 95.1 ... 70.3 Paramagudi ... ... 1 ... 684 ... 35,233 221 21,582 ... 21,582 21,184 98.2 61.3 ... Tellicherry ... ... ... 1 ... 266 19,578 271 ... 11,113 11,113 11,090 99.8 ... 66.7 Calicut ... ... 1 ... 252 ... 23,685 228 12,605 ... 12,605 12,020 95.4 53.2 ... Palghat ... ... ... 1 ... 270 22,606 243 ... 12,847 12,847 12,110 94.3 ... 56.8 Nellore ... ... 1 ... *707 ... 14,244 271 7,606 ... 7,606 7,216 94.9 53.4 ... Kávali ... ... ... 1 ... 446 8,592 210 ... 7,146 7,146 6,604 92.4 ... 83.2 Ongole ... ... ... 1 ... 337 7,975 177 ... VACCINATION REPORT. 13 Circles. Length of time animal vaccination was carried on. Number of calves inocu- lated. Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Anantapur ... ... 4 days ... ... 2 153 151 2 ... 98.9 15 15 ... ... 100.0 168 166 2 ... 98.8 Penukonda ... ... Whole year ... ... 71 226 225 1 ... 99.6 20 16 2 2 88.9 246 241 3 2 98.8 Bellary ... ... Do. ... ... 439 8,669 8,568 50 51 99.4 35 25 7 3 78.1 8,704 8,593 57 54 98.2 Harpanahalli ... Do. ... ... 201 4,207 4,146 37 24 99.1 72 64 7 1 90.1 4,279 4,210 44 25 98.9 Chingleput ... ... Do. ... ... 212 8,747 8,464 197 86 97.7 379 338 29 12 92.1 9,126 8,802 226 98 97.5 Saidapet ... ... Do. ... ... 195 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,956 6,677 178 101 97.4 North Coimbatore ... 9 months and 27 days. 177 9,636 8,300 697 639 92.3 86 35 41 10 46.1 9,722 8,335 738 649 91.9 South Coimbatore ... 10 months and 26 days. 177 13,693 12,494 568 631 95.7 169 72 76 21 48.6 13,862 12,566 644 652 95.1 East Coimbatore ... 10 months and 8 days. 268 21,736 19,547 1,367 822 93.5 602 396 174 32 69.5 22,338 19,943 1,541 854 92.8 Cuddapah ... Whole year ... ... 220 5,889 5,610 192 87 96.7 280 203 54 23 79.0 6,169 5,813 246 110 95.9 Madanapalle ... Do. ... ... 310 7,514 7,474 40 ... 99.5 163 133 30 ... 81.6 7,677 7,607 70 ... 99.1 Siddbavattam ... Do. ... ... 94 1,587 1,531 40 l6 97.5 58 50 8 ... 86.2 1,645 1,581 48 16 97.7 Chatrapur ... ... No itinerating calf depots were maintained. Glycerine paste was used. Chicacole ... ... Ganjám Hill tracts... Ellore ... ... Whole year ... ... 84 2,797 2,557 164 76 94.0 39 28 3 8 90.3 2,836 2,585 167 84 93.9 Pithápurarm ... ... Do. ... ... 89 5,594 5,053 328 213 93.9 43 12 30 1 28.6 5,637 5,065 358 214 93.4 Rajahmundry ... 9 months and 10 days. 29 1,040 935 63 42 93.7 ... ... ... ... ... 1,040 935 63 42 93.7 Guntúr ... ... Whole year ... ... 289 4,446 4,317 103 26 97.7 6 6 ... ... 100.0 4,452 4,323 103 26 97.7 Masulipatam ... 11 months and 2 days. 264 1,877 1,815 53 9 97.2 97 80 17 ... 82.5 1,974 1,895 70 9 96.4 Vinukonda ... ... Whole year ... ... 172 3 3 ... ... 100.0 19 17 2 ... 89.5 22 20 2 ... 90.9 Cumbum ... ... Do. ... ... ... 4,875 4,780 60 35 98.8 1,268 1,215 42 11 96.7 6,143 5,995 102 46 98.3 Kurnool ... ... Do. ... ... 220 7,747 6,792 399 556 94.5 621 525 53 43 90.8 8,368 7,317 452 599 94.2 Madras ... ... Do. ... ... 628 18,777 18,464 95 218 99.5 4,504 3,413 372 719 90.2 23,281 21,877 467 937 97.9 Dindigul ... ... Do. ... ... 386 27,017 25,814 642 561 96.8 1,564 1,178 222 164 84.1 28,581 26,992 864 725 96.9 Madura ... ... Do. ... ... 151 18,680 18,211 242 227 98.7 1,492 1,425 36 31 97.4 20,172 19,636 278 258 98.6 Paramagudi ... Do. ... ... 421 26,886 26,455 296 135 98.5 1,031 892 100 39 89.9 27,917 27,347 396 174 98.6 Tellicherry ... ... Do. ... ... 257 948 937 9 2 99.0 8 8 ... ... 100.0 956 945 9 2 99.1 Calicut ... ... Do. ... ... 150 940 912 14 14 98.5 56 35 19 2 64.8 996 947 33 16 96.5 Palghat ... ... Do. ... ... 161 525 504 4 17 99.2 29 17 11 1 60.7 554 521 15 18 97.2 Nilgiris ... ... No itinerating calf depot was maintained. Glycerine paste only was used. Kávali ... ... 11 months ... ... 64 2,218 2,040 83 95 96.1 13 7 2 4 77.8 2,231 2,047 85 99 96.0 Nellore ... ... Whole year ... ... 99 3,357 3,260 38 59 98.8 3 ... ... 3 ... 3,360 3,260 38 62 98.8 Ongole ... ... 6 months and 14 days. 26 766 651 79 36 89.2 ... ... ... ... ... 766 651 79 36 89.2 Chittoor ... ... Whole year ... ... 400 9,202 9,097 61 44 98.4 425 403 21 1 95.0 9,627 9,500 82 45 99.1 Vellore ... ... Do. ... ... 238 7,694 7,384 181 129 97.6 1,255 938 298 19 75.9 8,949 8,322 479 148 94.6 4
14 VACCINATION REPORT. Circles. Length of time animal vaccination was carried on. Number of calves inocu- lated. Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of suc- cess. Karvetnagar ... Whole year ... ... 230 7,366 7,312 48 6 99.4 224 218 5 1 97.8 7,590 7,530 53 7 99.3 Salem ... ... 1 month and 28 days. 17 1,335 1,319 7 9 99.5 136 46 35 55 56.8 1,471 1,365 42 64 97.0 Krishnagiri ... ... 3 months and 20 days. 15 784 769 15 ... 98.1 39 37 ... 2 100.0 823 806 15 2 98.2 Námakkal ... ... 3 months ... ... 12 741 707 15 19 97.9 139 125 6 8 96.2 880 832 21 27 97.5 Cuddalore ... ... Whole year ... ... 475 41,717 40,595 610 512 98.5 251 197 23 31 89.5 41,968 40,792 633 543 98.5 Vriddhachalam ... Do. ... ... 267 26,217 25,739 231 247 99.1 210 193 7 10 96.5 26,427 25,932 238 257 99.1 No. I, South Canara. No itinerating calf depôts were maintained. Glycerine paste only was used. No. II, South Canara. Tanjore ... ... Negapatam ... ... Tinnevelly ... ... Whole year ... ... 268 27,434 27,062 292 80 98.9 2,394 2,128 241 25 89.8 29,828 29,190 533 105 98.2 Sáttúr ... ... Do. ... ... 222 27,012 25,762 371 879 98.6 2,930 2,466 207 257 92.3 29,942 28,228 578 1,136 98.0 Sérmádévi ... Do. ... ... 216 18,442 17,500 283 659 98.4 2,362 2,239 37 86 98.4 20,804 19,739 320 745 98.4 Trichinopoly ... Do. ... ... 509 43,200 42,392 479 329 98.9 3,294 3,192 59 43 98.2 46,494 45,584 538 372 98.8 Vizagapatam ... Do. ... ... 114 46 46 ... ... 100.0 ... ... ... ... ... 46 46 ... ... 100.0 Vizianagram ... Do. ... ... 236 686 681 4 1 99.4 9 9 ... ... 100.0 695 690 4 1 99.4 Jeypore ... ... No itinerating calf depôts were maintained. Preserved animal lymph only was used. Gunupur ... ... Total ... 9,075 422,426 406,375 8,460 7,591 97.9 26,340 22,396 2,276 1,668 90.8 455,722 435,448 10,914 9,360 97.6
VACCINATION REPORT. 15 The percentage of success is almost the same as last year. I cannot but think that the system of moving inoculated calves about from village to village, as is now- done, is a cruel one, and must tend to the deterioration of the lymph. For these reasons and also on the score of economy several districts are now starting a central depôt at the head-quarters of the District Medical and Sanitary Officer, where glycerine paste can be made and distributed by post to all the vaccinators. The danger of these depôts is, of course, that, unless very carefully looked after, the delicate process of lymph culture is neglected by the vaccinator in charge, and then suddenly it is found that the lymph has become worthless, and much valuable time is lost before the stock can be renewed and propagated afresh. This actually happened in three districts during the year under report. 20. The next two tables show the results obtained with animal lymph stored in glass tubes or plates, and similar lymph preserved with glycerine :16 VACCINATION REPORT. Circles. Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Anantapur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Penukonda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bellary ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Harpanahalli ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chingleput ... ... ... 14,875 14,370 309 196 97.9 1,819 1,576 168 75 90.2 16,694 16,946 477 271 97.1 Saidapet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... North Coímbatore ... ... 3,732 2,508 1,141 83 68.7 68 19 40 9 39.2 3,800 2,527 1,181 92 68.1 South Coimbatore ... ... 2,535 1,325 1,115 95 54.3 84 22 46 16 32.4 2,619 1,347 1,161 111 53.7 East Coimbatore ... ... 3,704 2,031 1,628 45 55.5 39 30 9 ... 76.9 3,743 2,061 1,637 46 55.7 Cuddnpah ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madanapalle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Siddhavattam ... ... ... 7 ... 7 ... ... 15 ... 15 ... ... 22 ... 22 ... ... Chatrapur ... ... ... 12,383 11,535 753 95 93.9 107 107 ... ... 100.0 12,490 11,642 753 95 93.9 Chicacole ... ... ... 9,280 8,802 455 23 89.3 573 557 15 1 97.4 9,853 9,359 470 24 95.2 Ganjám Hill tracts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 147 111 12 24 90.2 Ellore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pithápuram ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rajahmundry ... ... ... 142 120 22 ... 84.5 ... ... ... ... ... 142 120 22 ... 84.5 Guntúr ... ... ... ... 741 728 8 5 98.9 17 15 2 ... 88.2 758 743 10 5 98.7 Masulipatam ... ... ... 2,598 2,432 146 20 94.3 28 22 3 3 88.0 2,626 2,454 149 23 94.3 Vinukonda ... ... ... 13,063 11,361 1,258 441 90.0 522 452 57 13 88.8 13,585 11,813 1,315 457 89.9 Cumbum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Kurnool ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Madras ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dindigul ... ... ... 296 269 11 16 96.1 ... ... ... ... ... 296 269 11 16 96.1 Madura ... ... ... ... 1,076 989 57 30 94.6 102 99 ... 3 100.0 1,178 1,088 57 33 95.0 Paramagudi ... ... ... 65 60 4 1 93.8 20 17 2 1 89.5 85 77 6 2 92.8 Tellicherry ... ... ... 17,801 17,329 299 173 98.3 620 574 33 13 94.6 18,421 17,903 332 186 98.2 Calicut ... ... ... ... 18,478 17,390 698 390 96.1 362 221 113 28 66.2 18,840 17,611 811 418 95.6 Palghat ... ... ... ... 21,595 20,131 908 556 95.7 399 217 141 41 60.6 21,994 20,348 1,049 597 95.1 Nilgiris ... ... ... ... 2,377 2,297 45 35 98.1 136 117 15 4 88.6 2,513 2,414 60 39 97.6 Kávali ... ... ... ... 262 255 2 5 99.2 1 ... ... 1 ... 263 255 2 6 99.2 Nellore ... ... ... ... 586 552 25 9 95.7 ... ... ... ... ... 586 552 25 9 95.7 Ongole ... ... ... ... 334 172 153 9 52.9 ... ... ... ... ... 334 172 153 9 52.9 Chittoor ... ... ... 18 17 1 ... 94.4 ... ... ... ... ... 18 17 1 ... 94.4 Vellore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Karvetnagar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Salem ... ... ... ... 19,581 18,312 736 533 96.1 1,056 768 138 150 84.7 20,637 19,080 874 683 95.6 Krishnagiri ... ... ... 10,930 10,413 394 123 96.4 329 298 23 8 92.8 11,259 10,711 417 131 96.3 Námakkal ... ... ... 19,111 17,752 906 453 95.1 3,146 2,890 137 119 95.4 22,257 20,642 1,043 572 95.2 Cuddalore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vriddhachalam ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... No. I, South Canara ... ... 21,026 18,831 1,821 374 91.2 1,044 500 480 64 61.0 22,070 19,331 2,301 438 89.4 No. II, South Canara ... 14,988 14,146 493 349 96.6 740 502 130 108 79.4 15,728 14,648 623 467 95.9 Tanjore ... ... ... ... 29,188 27,514 925 749 96.7 1,869 1,395 323 151 81.2 31,057 28,909 1,248 900 95.9 Negapatam ... ... ... 19,001 17,849 632 520 96.5 685 501 72 112 87.4 19,686 18,350 704 632 95.4 Tinnevelly ... ... ... 743 709 26 8 96.5 89 77 4 8 95.1 832 786 30 16 96.3 Sáttúr ... ... ... ... 95 90 2 3 97.8 5 4 ... 1 100.0 100 94 2 4 97.9 Sérmádévi ... ... ... 2,518 2,301 42 175 98.2 362 349 2 11 99.4 2,880 2,650 44 186 98.4 Trichinopoly ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Vizagapatam ... ... ... 28,973 28,108 633 232 98.0 819 655 142 22 82.2 29,792 28,763 775 254 97.4 Vizianagram ... ... ... 26,342 24,109 1,321 912 94.8 657 506 116 35 81.3 26,999 24,615 1,437 947 94.5 Jeypore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gunupur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 318,444 294,807 16,976 6,661 94.6 15,713 12,490 2,226 997 84.9 334,304 307,408 19,214 7,682 94.1
VACCINATION REPORT. 17 The percentage of success is slightly in favour of the lymph in tubes (i.e., without any preservative added), but if the very bad results obtained in Coimba- tore, where the system was newly started and broke down utterly, be deducted, an average percentage of success of 95.2 is got with glycerine paste. 21. Table showing results and cost of animal vaccination of all sorts in Local Fund circles :18 VACCINATION REPORT. Districts. Direct from Calf. Preserved Animal Lymph. Glycerine Paste. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Anantapur ... ... ... ... ... ... 539 458 75 6 85.9 ... ... ... ... ... 539 458 75 6 85.9 Bellary ... ... 1,230 1,193 21 16 98.3 240 218 20 2 91.6 210 160 8 42 95.2 1,680 1,571 49 60 97.0 Chingleput ... 231 209 21 1 90.9 2,155 2,017 117 21 94.5 2,177 2,046 120 11 94.5 4,563 4,272 258 33 94.3 Coimbatore ... 1,481 703 777 1 47.5 395 269 123 3 68.6 696 375 318 3 54.1 2,572 1,347 1,218 7 52.5 Cuddapah ... 559 455 102 2 81.7 95 63 28 4 69.2 71 50 20 1 71.4 725 568 150 7 79.1 Ganjám ... ... 396 256 115 25 69.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1,627 1,276 313 38 80.3 2,023 1,532 428 63 78.2 Gódávari ... 596 362 233 1 60.8 52 49 3 ... 94.2 1,058 391 659 8 37.2 1,706 802 895 9 47.3 Kistna ... Information not received. Kurnool ... 457 379 52 26 87.9 468 369 63 36 85.4 1 1 ... ... 100.0 926 749 115 62 86.7 Madura ... ... 277 268 4 5 98.5 1,542 1,213 327 2 78.8 45 38 4 3 90.5 1,864 1,519 335 10 81.9 Nilgirís ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59 59 ... ... 100.0 59 59 ... ... 100.0 Malabar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... l8 l4 2 2 87.5 221 206 9 6 95.8 239 220 11 8 95.2 Nellore ... 304 248 56 ... 81.6 77 70 7 ... 90.9 22 22 ... ... 100.0 403 340 63 ... 84.4 North Arcot ... 1,571 1,020 545 6 65.2 407 397 8 2 98.0 51 48 ... 3 100.0 2,029 1,465 553 11 72.6 Salem ... ... 145 141 3 1 97.9 80 70 6 4 92.1 1,676 1,456 146 74 90.9 1,901 1,667 155 79 91.5 South Arcot ... 1,121 817 304 ... 72.9 14 9 3 2 75.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1,135 826 307 2 72.9 South Canara ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,533 3,244 218 71 93.7 3,533 3,244 218 71 93.7 Tanjore .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 370 306 62 2 83.2 370 306 62 2 83.2 Tinnevelly ... 2,381 1,922 356 103 84.4 556 349 164 43 68.0 266 203 45 18 81.9 3,203 2,474 565 164 81.4 Trichinopoly ... 1,340 1,021 294 25 77.6 156 140 13 3 91.5 49 29 19 1 60.4 1,545 1,190 326 29 78.5 Vizagapatam ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,971 1,574 343 54 82.1 1,962 1,530 357 75 81.1 3,933 3,104 700 129 81.6 Total ... 12,089 8,994 2,883 212 75.7 8,765 7,279 1,302 184 84.8 14,094 11,440 2,298 356 83.3 34,948 27,713 6,483 752 81.0
VACCINATION REPORT. 19 23. Table showing animal vaccination conducted in municipalities including both primary and re-vaccination operations :20 VACCINATION REPORT. Municipalities. Direct from Calf. Preserved Animal Lymph. Glycerine Paste. Total. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Unknown. Percentage of success. Salem ... ... 2,398 2,325 63 10 97.4 ... ... ... ... ... 241 207 20 14 91.1 2,639 2,532 83 24 96.9 Srírangam ... 130 122 4 4 96.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 130 122 4 4 97.0 Tanjore ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,096 2,048 40 8 98.0 871 828 43 ... 95.0 2,967 2,876 83 8 97.2 Tellicherry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,884 1,755 61 68 96.6 1,884 1,755 61 68 96.6 Tinnevelly ... 1,864 1,810 22 32 98.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,864 1,810 22 32 98.8 Trichinopoly ... 5,588 5,346 149 93 97.3 482 454 26 2 94.5 ... ... ... ... ... 6,070 5,800 175 95 97.7 Tiruppattúr ... ... ... ... ... ... 662 650 12 ... 98.1 ... ... ... ... ... 662 650 12 ... 98.2 Tirupati ... 573 544 28 1 95.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 573 544 28 1 95.1 Tuticorin ... 1,785 1,706 79 ... 95.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,785 1,706 79 ... 95.6 Vániyambádi ... 664 658 5 1 99.2 22 22 ... ... 100.0 284 251 33 ... 88.3 970 931 38 1 96.1 Vellore ... 1,018 990 28 ... 97.2 1,012 980 32 ... 96.8 ... ... ... ... ... 2,030 1,970 60 ... 97.0 Vizagapatam ... 129 113 12 4 90.4 1,501 1,339 146 16 90.1 ... ... ... ... ... 1,630 1,452 158 20 90.2 Vizianagram ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,836 1,741 82 13 95.5 1,836 1,741 82 13 95.5 Walajapet ... 30 30 ... ... 100.0 54 52 2 ... 96.2 440 409 31 ... 92.9 524 491 33 ... 93.7 Total ... 72,270 68,705 2,000 1,565 97.2 10,794 9,877 809 108 92.4 26,924 24,881 1,624 419 93.9 109,988 103,463 4,433 2,092 95.9
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Reg. No. 1577-Copies 275 Zinco. Survey Office. Madras. 1894
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Reg. No. 1578-Copies 275 Zinco. Survey Office Madras. 1894
VACCINATION REPORT. 21 24. Human lymph has been used in the following districts to the extent shown after each :APPENDIX. VACCINATION RETURNS.
24 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 25 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1893-94. vaccination. Re-vaccination. Percentage of success- ful cases. Persons successfully vaccinated per 1,000 of population. Average number of persons successfully vaccinated during previous 5 years. Average annual number of deaths from small- pox during previous 5 years. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Unknown. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Over 1 and under 6 years. Total of all ages. Primary vacci- nation. Re-vaccination. Total. Number. Ratio per 1,000. Number. Ratio per 1,000. 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 6,723 10,295 305 14 474 407 65 2 97.1 86.2 26.2 0.8 27.0 ... ... ... ... 5,063 8,060 213 130 219 183 18 18 97.4 91.0 ... ... ... ... 11,786 18,355 518 144 693 590 83 20 97.3 87.7 26.2 0.8 27.0 14,107 20.1 531 0.7 7,374 16,818 181 136 52 42 7 3 98.9 85.7 31.5 0.1 31.6 ... ... ... ... 4,372 7,581 140 39 81 70 10 1 98.2 87.5 27.0 0.2 27.3 ... ... ... ... 11,746 24,399 321 175 133 112 17 4 98.7 86.8 30.0 0.1 30.1 22,467 27.5 964 1.2 10,015 23,008 535 286 2,218 1,932 197 89 97.7 70.8 39.9 3.4 43.3 ... ... ... ... 6,291 14,831 458 238 858 728 99 31 97.0 88.0 28.6 1.4 30.0 ... ... ... ... 16,306 37,839 993 524 3,076 2,660 296 120 97.4 90.0 34.6 2.4 37.0 37,654 34.4 458 0.4 4,192 12,114 1,901 755 158 58 81 19 86.4 41.7 22.7 0.1 22.8 ... ... ... ... 7,620 14,445 1,714 744 253 94 122 37 89.4 43.5 24.2 0.2 24.3 ... ... ... ... 10,982 21,578 2,995 867 641 426 183 32 87.8 70.0 26.8 0.5 27.3 ... ... ... ... 22,794 48,137 6,610 2,366 1,052 578 386 88 87.9 60.0 24.9 0.3 25.2 51,137 26.4 1,262 0.6 6,034 10,591 391 222 518 339 134 45 96.4 71.7 23.9 0.8 24.7 ... ... ... ... 4,315 8,280 207 81 1,673 1,548 108 17 97.6 93.5 26.8 5.0 31.8 ... ... ... ... 7,522 13,592 102 6 219 171 48 ... 99.3 78.1 27.0 0.3 27.4 ... ... ... ... 17,871 32,463 700 309 2,410 2,058 290 62 97.0 87.6 25.9 1.6 27.5 28,715 22.9 1,124 0.9 9,439 13,694 802 102 109 109 ... ... 94.5 100.0 15.3 0.5 15.8 ... ... ... ... 1,575 10,725 471 29 638 621 16 1 95.8 97.5 ... ... ... ... 1,767 3,824 300 123 ... ... ... ... 92.7 ... ... ... ... ... 12,781 28,243 1,573 254 747 730 16 1 94.7 97.9 15.3 0.5 15.8 35,912 19.5 1,520 0.8 8,446 18,666 610 338 177 145 18 14 96.8 89.0 28.8 0.2 29.0 ... ... ... ... 11,428 16,538 722 453 109 70 37 2 95.8 65.4 43.1 0.2 43.3 ... ... ... ... 3,647 5,457 236 180 15 12 1 2 95.9 92.3 9.3 0.1 9.4 ... ... ... ... 1,738 3,394 254 29 89 76 11 ... 93.0 87.4 ... ... ... ... 25,259 44,055 1,822 100 390 303 67 20 96.0 81.9 22.2 0.2 22.4 38,721 19.5 2,318 1.2 10,823 18,395 739 454 150 126 21 3 96.1 85.7 26.8 0.2 27.0 ... ... ... ... 12,088 20,630 1,161 160 299 245 50 4 94.6 83.1 29.3 0.3 29.6 ... ... ... ... 6,830 11,364 1,258 444 541 469 59 13 90.0 88.8 29.8 1.2 31.1 ... ... ... ... 29,741 50,389 3,158 1,058 990 840 130 20 94.1 86.6 28.4 0.5 28.9 33,541 18.9 3,284 1.9 3,131 6,033 100 41 1,459 1,396 52 11 98.4 96.4 14.9 3.4 18.3 ... ... ... ... 4,583 6,792 399 556 621 525 53 43 94.5 90.8 16.0 1.2 17.2 ... ... ... ... 7,714 12,825 499 597 2,080 1,921 105 54 96.3 94.8 15.5 2.3 17.8 25,800 31.1 1,081 1.3 13,246 28,381 737 661 1,646 1,223 244 179 97.5 83.4 34.9 1.5 36.4 ... ... ... ... 11,567 22,278 396 340 1,729 1,651 40 38 98.3 97.6 37.9 2.8 40.8 ... ... ... ... 18,076 33,326 442 191 1,274 1,059 158 57 98.7 87.0 31.3 0.9 32.3 ... ... ... ... 42,889 83,985 1,575 1,192 4,649 3,933 442 274 98.2 89.9 34.0 1.6 35.6 58,572 23.7 1,688 0.7 and in Statement No. III unl no. vn cases have not been taken into account. for a greater part of the year. 7
26 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 27 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1893-9428 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 29 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1893-9430 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 31 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1893-9432 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 33 DEPARTMENT. in the Madras Presidency during the official year 1893-94. Paid from Number of all successful vaccinations and re-vacci- nations. Average cost of each suc- cessful case. Total cost. Imperial funds. Provincial funds. Local funds. Municipalities. Native states, zemin- dars, or private funds. Total. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. 3,278 0 4 ... ... 3,278 0 4 ... ... 3,278 0 4 10,702 0 4 11 2,336 12 1 ... ... 2,336 12 1 ... ... 2,336 12 1 8,243 0 4 6 5,614 12 5 ... ... 5,614 12 5 ... ... 5,614 12 5 18,945 0 4 9 5,257 7 2 ... ... 5,257 7 2 ... ... 5,257 7 2 16,860 0 4 11 2,878 6 0 ... 9 11 0 2,868 11 0 ... ... 2,878 6 0 7,651 0 6 0 8,135 13 2 ... 9 11 0 8,126 2 2 ... ... 8,135 13 2 24,511 0 5 4 3,863 3 4 ... ... 3,863 3 4 ... ... 3,863 3 4 24,940 0 2 6 3,271 10 7 ... ... 3,271 10 7 ... ... 3,271 10 7 15,559 0 3 4 7,134 13 11 ... ... 7,134 13 11 ... ... 7,134 13 11 40,499 0 2 10 3,353 9 0 ... ... 3,353 9 6 ... ... 3,353 9 6 12,172 0 4 5 2,517 5 11 ... ... 2,517 5 11 ... ... 2,517 5 11 14,539 0 2 9 4,128 11 3 ... ... 4,128 11 3 ... ... 4,128 11 3 22,004 0 8 0 9,999 10 8 ... ... 9,999 10 8 ... ... 9,999 10 8 48,715 0 3 3 4,105 12 2 ... ... 4,105 12 2 ... ... 4,105 12 2 10,930 0 6 0 4,477 0 0 ... ... 4,477 0 0 ... ... 4,477 0 0 13,763 0 5 2 3,474 10 6 ... ... 3,474 10 6 ... ... 3,474 10 6 9,828 0 5 8 12,057 6 8 ... ... 12,057 6 8 ... ... 12,057 6 8 34,521 0 5 7 3,385 6 10 ... ... 3,385 6 10 ... ... 3,385 6 10 13,803 0 3 11 3,037 9 1 ... 90 2 5 2,947 6 8 ... ... 3,037 9 1 11,346 0 4 3 2,285 12 6 ... 2,285 12 6 ... ... ... 2,285 12 6 3,824 0 9 6 8,708 12 5 ... 2,375 14 11 6,332 13 6 ... ... 8,708 12 5 28,973 0 4 10 4,489 14 0 ... ... 4,489 14 0 ... ... 4,489 14 0 18,811 0 3 10 4,069 2 6 ... ... 4,069 2 6 ... ... 4,069 2 6 16,608 0 3 11 1,386 8 8 ... ... 1,386 8 8 ... ... 1,386 8 8 5,469 0 4 1 1,375 10 10 ... 1,375 10 10 ... ... ... 1,375 10 10 3,470 0 6 5 11,321 4 0 ... 1,375 10 10 9,945 9 2 ... ... 11,321 4 0 44,358 0 4 1 4,463 7 6 ... ... 4,463 7 6 ... ... 4,463 7 6 18,521 0 3 10 4,538 15 10 ... ... 4,538 15 10 ... ... 4,538 15 10 20,875 0 3 6 2,515 9 7 ... 13 4 0 2,502 5 7 ... ... 2,515 9 7 11,833 0 3 5 11,518 0 11 ... 13 4 0 11,504 12 11 ... ... 11,518 0 11 51,229 0 3 7 2,217 1 6 ... ... 2,217 1 6 ... ... 2,217 1 6 7,429 0 4 9 2,777 10 11 ... ... 2,777 10 11 ... ... 2,777 10 11 7,317 0 6 1 4,994 12 5 ... ... 4,994 12 5 ... ... 4,994 12 5 14,746 0 5 5 4,057 12 4 ... ... 4,057 12 4 ... ... 4,057 12 4 29,604 0 2 2 2,821 1 0 ... ... 2,821 1 0 ... ... 2,821 1 0 23,929 0 1 11 5,038 11 3 ... ... 5,038 11 3 ... ... 5,038 11 3 34,385 0 2 4 11,911 8 7 ... ... 11,917 8 7 ... ... 11,917 8 7 87,918 0 2 2 4,243 4 6 ... ... 4,243 4 6 ... ... 4,243 4 6 19,047 0 3 6 3,568 2 0 ... ... 3,568 2 0 ... ... 3,568 2 0 22,105 0 2 6 3,164 10 11 ... ... 3,164 10 11 ... ... 3,164 10 11 20,910 0 2 5 10,976 1 5 ... ... 10,976 1 5 ... ... 10,976 1 5 62,062 0 2 10 9
34 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 35 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1893-9436 APPENDIX. AVACCINATION RETURNS. 37 DEPARTMENT. Madras Presidency during the official year 1893-9438 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 39 B40 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 41 B42 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 43 B44 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 45 B46 APPENDIX. BVACCINATION RETURNS. 47 COMPARATIVE STATEMENT No. IV showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Madras Presidency in each of the undermentioned years. Establishment. Persons primarily vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. Total number. Number success- fully vaccinated. 1884. 1885. 1886. 1887-88. 1888-89. 1889-90. 1890-91. 1891-92. 1892-93. 1893-94. Government vaccinators ... 12,386 12,033 9,970 9,701 8,511 8,204 9,741 9,479 17,092 16,210 28,257 27 227 17,820 16,684 16,375 14,906 15,038 13,823 15,667 14,015 Local fund do. ... ... 617,475 580,624 608,729 579,261 584,711 557,732 618,588 590,853 670,318 643,761 708,653 680,355 743,467 706,117 820,195 768,610 932,209 889,648 948,275 897,051 Cantonment do. ... ... 3,431 3,159 2,462 2,295 2,850 2,677 3,375 3,293 4,3l6 3,912 3,341 3,285 3,681 3,343 3,253 2,998 5,206 4,806 3,713 3,407 Native States do. ... ... 4,506 4,291 4,082 3,915 4,429 4,216 4,042 3,885 2,270 2,160 5,254 5,069 6,338 6,017 6,628 6,430 6,860 6,496 6,359 5,536 Municipalities ... ... ... 97,765 88,281 92,946 87,968 70,065 65,614 71,710 67,405 81,566 77,180 81,442 76,215 91,167 85,008 100,830 95,898 106,364 100,613 102,267 98,150 Dispensaries ... ... ... 21,561 17,201 22,834 18,793 10,790 13,954 13,736 11,506 18,283 15,603 26,870 23,363 38,888 33,162 45,531 36,104 35,958 30,292 26,541 23,079 Medical subordinates ... ... 8,936 5,280 7,549 4,594 6,720 3,677 3,033 1,630 2,517 1,517 3,077 1,793 4,758 2,727 3,804 2,724 4,882 3,827 2,586 1,943 Total ... 765,863 710,869 748,572 706,527 694,076 656,074 724,225 688,051 796,362 760,343 856,894 817,307 906,119 853,058 996,274 927,719 1,106,517 1,049,505 1,105,408 1,043,181
48 APPENDIX. STATEMENT No. V showing particulars of Vaccination verified by Inspecting Officers. Districts. Total number of persons vac- cinated. Total number inspected Percentage of inspection to total number vaccinated Percentage of cases found successful to total number inspected Percentage of success reported by Vaccinators. By Deputy Sanitary Commissioner or Civil Surgeons. By Native Superin- tendents or other Inspecting Officers. By Deputy Sanitary Commissioner or Civil Surgeons. By Native Superin- tendents or other Inspecting Officers. By Deputy Sanitary Commissioner or Civil Surgeons. By Native Superin- tendents or other Inspecting Officers. Anantapur ... ... ... ... 20,632 690 11,393 3.3 55.2 94.8 81.2 96.0 Bellary ... ... ... ... 32,063 1,265 15,363 39 47.9 73.0 92.9 96.8 Chingleput ... ... ... ... 48,447 4,040 26,746 8.3 57.1 * 96.5 96.2 Coimbatore ... ... ... ... 63,227 4,411 41,894 7.0 66.3 77.3 91.8 82.8 Cuddapah ... ... ... ... 26TH JULY 1894, Nos. 1385, 1386 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. GOVERNMENT OF MADRAS. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENT. READ2 26TH JULY 1894, Nos. 1385, 1386 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. vaccination statistics of the Presidency should be made reliable. The inspection work turned out by the Deputy Inspector of the Madras Town range should in future be stated. 3. Excluding the figures relating to the cantonments of Bangalore and Secun- derabad, the total number of operations performed during the year was 32.9 per mille of the population according to the census of 1891 against 32.5 per mille in 1892-93. Infantile vaccination, however, exhibited a decrease, the number of children under one year, who were successfully vaccinated, being only 240,123 against 257,405 in the previous year and but 25.6 per cent. of the number of births registered against 31.1 per cent. in 1892-93. The explanations offered for this decrease in paragraph 6 of the report and paragraph 2 of the Sanitary Commissioner's covering letter may be correct, but it remains to be proved that they are so. The figures of the current year will probably afford sufficient data to show whether the causes assigned for the falling off which has occurred rest upon any sufficient basis. From the statement appended to paragraph 7 it appears that infantile vaccination was especially backward in the districts of Gódávari, Ganjám, South Canara, Madura, Nilgiris and Malabar and in the municipalities of Cochin, Palghat, Tanjore, Calicut, Berhampur and Karúr. The special attention of the local bodies concerned will be drawn to the matter. 1890-91.. .. .. .. 778 1891-92.. .. .. .. 750 1892-93 .. .. .. .. 688 1893-94 .. .. .. .. 608 4. There was a slight increase in the total amount of work done in the year under review by the Government establishment in the Agency tracts of Ganjám, Vizaga- patam and Gódávari. There was, however, a large decrease in the Ganjám hill tracts, which is attributed to the absence of some of the vaccinators for long periods. The average number of operations performed by a vaccinator in all these tracts taken together has displayed a continuous falling off during the last four years as shown in the margin. The attention of the Col- lectors concerned will be drawn to the Inspector's remarks in this connection in paragraph 14 of the report with the remark that Government trusts that they will spare no effort to promote vaccination in these Agency tracts. Coimbatore .. .. .. .. 26TH JULY 1894, Nos. 1385, 13815 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 3 in the different local fund areas will be more fully noticed by Government in review- ing the administration reports of the several district boards. With reference to the suggestion made by Dr. King in paragraph 4 of his letter that vaccination should be made compulsory in major unions at least, his attention will be drawn to paragraph 8 of G.O., dated 2nd July 1894, No. 1210 L. 6. Vaccination is now compulsory in all the 56 municipalities, including the city of.Madras, having been introduced into 4 of these, viz., Tanjore, Karúr, Bimlipatam and Cochin, during the year under review. It is to be regretted that the work done by the municipal vaccinators instead of improving has actually declined, the total number of operations performed by them having fallen from 114,953 in 1892-93 to 113,837 in the year under review. In no less than 29 towns was there a retrogression. The Inspector of Vaccination ascribes this falling off to the decrease in the available population under 10 years of age. But this explanation cannot be accepted as satisfac- tory, seeing that the number of children successfully protected from small-pox during the year under review was only 65.8 per cent. of the total number of births registered in municipalities. In Madras, Trichinopoly, Masulipatam, Palamcottah, Cuddapah, Srírangam, Berhampur, Coonoor and Conjeeveram the work has fallen off during both the last two years. The special attention of the councils concerned is drawn to this subject and the Government trusts that they will in future render compulsory vaccination a reality instead of as is in far too many instances at present a mere name. The average outturn of work by each vaccinator in municipalities was 990 cases against 1,495 in local fund areas and exceeded 1,000 cases in only 23 towns. It was high in Tinnevelly (1,864), Madura (1,796), Tuticorin (1,785) and Bezwada (1,748) and especially low in Karúr (289), Tiruppattúr (331), Anantapur (383), Cuddapah (462), Berhampur (466) and Vániyambádi (486). The average cost of each successful case was, as in 1892-93, As. 5-1, showing that municipal vaccination compares unfavorably in this respect also with that in local fund areas, where the average was only As. 3-1. It was highest in Anantapur, Dindigul, Karúr, Kurnool and Tirupati, being more than As. 8, while in Anakápalle, Cochin, Ellore, Madura, Mangalore, Palghat, Parlákimedi, Tanjore and Vizianagram it was less than As. 3. The munici- pal councils first named should take steps to reduce the cost to a reasonable figure. The total number of operations performed in the town of Madras again declined, being 23,644, against 24,858 in the previous year. Of the former, 19,140 were primary vaccinations and 4,504 re-vaccinations against 21,421 and 3,437 respectively in 1892-93, the number of successful cases being in the one instance 99.5 per cent. and in the other 90.2 against 98.6 and 92.7 respectively. The cost of each successful case rose from As. 6-2 to As. 6-6. The attention of the Municipal Commissioners will be drawn to these not altogether satisfactory results. The work done in the several municipal towns will, as usual, be more fully dealt with in reviewing their administration reports. 7. The total number of operations performed with animal lymph was 1,077,580, or only 101,252 less than the total number of all operations, and of these 1,007,334 or 95.4 per cent. were successful, the corresponding figures for the previous year being 884,525, 832,021 and 94.1. The districts in which human lymph was partially used were Gódávari, Nellore, Salem, Vizagapatam, Kistna, Ganjám and Malabar, but in three of these the practice was discontinued during the latter part of the year and it is stated that arrangements are being made in the others for the supply of animal lymph. The percentage of success was the highest in the case of calf-to- arm vaccination as will be seen from the following table :4 26TH JULY 1894, Nos. 1385, 1386 L., LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. 8. The proposal made by Dr. King regarding the establishment of a central vaccine institute is out of place in a periodical report, but will be considered when the question of the reorganization of the department comes to be dealt with. The further report called for from the Sanitary Commissioner in G.O., dated 25th May 1893, No. 1148 L., regarding this subject and referred to in paragraph 8 of the review of' the last year's report has just been received and will be disposed of in due course. The suggestion made by the Inspector of Vaccination in paragraph 25 of his report regarding the amendment of the Revenue Board's Standing Order, No. 195, will be considered in the Revenue Department. (True Extract.) J. F. PRICE Chief Secretary. To the Sanitary Commissioner. Govt. of {1894} Madras. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL. Issued Recd. Encl. G.O., &c., 26th July 1894, Nos. 1385, 1386 L. JULY. Vaccination. Reviewing the report on 