REPORT ON THE Vaccine Operations CONDUCTED BY THE SPECIAL VACCINATION DEPARTMENT CENTRAL PROVINCES FOR THE YEAR 1868 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPORE Printed at the Chief Commissioner's Office Press, 1869.
REPORT ON THE Vaccine Operations CONDUCTED BY THE SPECIAL VACCINATION DEPARTMENT, CENTRAL PROVINCES FOR THE YEAR 1888. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPORE: Printed at the Chief Commissioner's Office Press, 1869.
BOOK CIRCULAR No XXX. FROM THE ASST. SECY. TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To ALL COMMISSIONERS OF DIVISION, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpore. the 6th July 1869. SIR, I am desired by the Officiating Chief Commissioner to forward Report by the Superintendent General of Vaccination, on the working of the Vaccine Department in the Central Provinces for the year 1868, together with Mr. Morris' Review thereon, for general information and guidance. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. NEILL, [Not translated.] Offg. Asst. Secretary.
No. 1974/197 FROM THE ASST SECY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SUPDT. GENERAL OF VACCINATION, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpore, the 6th July 1869. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your report on the operations of the Vaccine Department during the past year. 2. The districts in which the work of the department was chiefly carried on were Wurdah and Baitool, but a portion of your establish- ment was also employed for a time in that part of the Chanda district which adjoins Nagpore and Wurdah. 3. The districts of Baitool, Wurdah and Chanda had never been visited by you, so that you entered upon a new field. The total num- ber of persons vaccinated by your establishment was 43,484. Of these, 22,399 belonged to Wurdah, 17,098 to Baitool, 3,393 to Chanda, and the remaining persons vaccinated belonged to Chindwara and Mundla. The percentage of successful cases was 79.34. 4. During the past season, therefore, more has been done than in any previous year, but the percentage of successful operations has been somewhat lower than in 1868. This may be in part due to the great heat of the weather during the past season. 5. From your report it appears that neither in Wurdah nor in Baitool did you meet with any serious opposition. The prejudice of the people against vaccination seems to have been removed with- out much difficulty, and the opposition shown was of that passive kind which almost invariably attends the introduction of any new thing among a nation so conservative and tenacious of ancient habits and customs as the Hindus. In the Hingunghat Tehseel of the Wur- dah district alone do you mention anything like active opposition, but even that you appear to have overcome by a personal visit. 6. The Officiating Chief Commissioner is glad to learn that in the Wurdah and Baitool districts you have had no reason to complain of any want of assistance on the part of the Native Government offi- cials. They are undoubtedly able to do much in dispelling ground- ess alarm and explaining the true object of vaccination.
2 7. Apart from the establishment under your special care, opera- tions were carried on by Civil Surgeons aided by Municipal Vaccin- nators. The number of persons vaccinated by them amounted to 64,827, and 80 per cent of the operations are returned as successful. 8. In the Sumbulpore district again, a separate establishment was entertained, which vaccinated 23,416 persons, 93 per cent of the operations being successful; you express yourself in every way satisfied with what has been done in Sumbulpore, and the Officiating Chief Commissioner is glad to learn that the people of that district have shown themselves so ready to accept vaccination. The careful supervision exercised by Mr. Harrison has no, doubt tended to secure the success of the establishment. 9. The number of district operations performed exceeds by 50 per cent the number performed last season. In para. 30 of your re- port you point out how, in many cases, the returns of Municipal or District Vaccinators are still incorrect and unreliable. The reason of this appears to be that Civil Surgeons continue to extend the ope- rations of Vaccinators beyond a circle which they can themselves supervise. They should be very careful to select only thoroughly re- liable men to send to places which they are not able to visit frequently. 10 The temptation to send in a favourable return is undoubtedly very great to a Native Vaccinator, but because their returns are in some instances found incorrect the Officiating Chief Commissioner would not condemn the labours of all these men, or say that Muni- cipal Vaccinators are likely to do more evil than good. Mr. Morris thinks you go perhaps too far when you say that &quot; one failure that is positive and palpable will outweigh 100 successes that cannot be clearly demonstrated,&quot; if you would by this signify that because 1 person out of every 100 said to be properly vaccinated is attacked by small-pox, the people will disbelieve that the escape of the ninety- and-nine is in any way due to their having been vaccinated ; and the connexion between making false returns and receiving bribes is not so very close. Many a man might reconcile the former to his con- science who would shrink from the latter. 11. The Officiating Chief Commissioner thinks that a mistake is not unfrequently made in assuring natives that vaccination is an absolute and infallible prevention against small-pox, for cases are on record in which persons vaccinated have contracted the disease. The Sanitary Commissioner in his Annual Report has quoted from a letter from the Deputy Commissioner of Chindwara, reporting an outbreak of small-pox in Chindwara itself, where the majority of the children attacked had been previously vaccinated ; and the Commissioner of Nagpore has, the Officiating Chief Commissioner learns, reported to you a similar instance that occurred at Khodamaindee, in the Nagpore district 12. The Sanitary Commissioner has given his opinion that in cases of the occurrence of small-pox after vaccination the inefficacy of the operation is owing to its having been performed too lightly.
3 13. I am here to quote the following passages from a letter from the Sanitary Commissioner. He writes:INDEX. PARA. Districts in which vaccination was carried on in season 1868-69 ... 2 Nagpore and Chindwara left to Municipal Vaccinators ... ... 3 Establishment ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Character of Vaccinators ... ... ... ... ... 5 Commencement of operations and first visit of Superintendent Gene- ral to Wurdah ... ... ... ... ... 6-8 Distribution of Lymph ... ... ... ... ... 9-10 Assistance given by Deputy Commissioners and Tehseel officrars ... 13-14 Feclmg of the people ... .. .. .. .. .. 15 Visit to Hingunghat Tehseel ... ... ... ... ... 16-17 Visit to Huzzoor and Arvee Tehseels ... ... ... ... 18-19 Termination of second visit to the Wurdah district ... ... 20 One division sent to Chanda ... ... ... ... ... 21 Difficulties in Baitool ... ... ... ... ... 23 False Vaccinators setting the people against the operation, and extract- ing bribes ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 Small-pox near the Zillah Station ... ... ... ... 25 Commencement of work in Baitool ... ... ... ... 26 Visit to Baitool ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 Assistance from Tehseel authorities ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 Work of Municipal Vaccinators ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 Operations in the Chanda district ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 Small-pox in the Chindwara and Nagpore districts ... ... ... ... 32 Individuals recommended ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 Comparison of work done with preceding years ... ... ... ... 34 Sub-establishment at Sumbulpore ... ... ... ... 35 District Reports and Returns ... ... ... ... ... ... 36
No. 209. FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION, Central Provinces and Berars. To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpore, the 31 st May 1869. SIR, I have the honor to report, for the information of the Chief Com- missioner, the results of the operations of the Vaccine Department for the year ending 30th April 1869. 2. With the permission of the Chief Commissioner, the establishment was directed to work in the Wurdah and Baitool districts, but during the season a division of the Vaccinators, under a Native Superintendent, was moved into the Chanda district, and one man was sent to Mundla. 3. In a letter to the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, No. 186, dated 20th November 1867, I recommended that, should an European Superintendent not be appointed, a Native Inspector on a moderate salary should be put in charge of the districts of Nagpore and Chindwara, having under him a certain number of Vaccinators, so that vaccination, which had been successfully intro- duced, might'be carried on under my general superintendence. This recommendation was not complied with, and those two districts were left to the Municipal Vaccinators, working under the orders of the Civil medical Officers. 4. On commencing work for the season, there were wanting 5 Vaccinators to complete the establishment. These were at once supplied from candidates who had been qualifying for the appointment. And on October 15th 1868, the department was complete, comprising 3 Native Superintendents and 30 Vacci- nators. On October 22nd a first class Vaccinator was transferred as a Superinten- dent to Sumbulpore, and his place immediately filled by another recruit; and no further change took place till January of the present year, when two of the new men were discharged for making false returns. In February a third was dismissed for assaulting a village official and extorting a bribe. At the begin- ning of the same month 5 Vaccinators threw up their appointments on being ordered into the Chanda district; and, at the end of March, a Vaccinator was sent to assist the medical Officer of Mundla.
2 5. With the exception of the 3 men dismissed, and the 5 who deserted, the conduct of the establishment has been good. I personally examined portions of the work of every Vaccinator, compared them with the register and village lists, and found them correct, with some very slight and venial exceptions, as to the number of perfect vesicles, &c. The Native Superintendents, who are constantly moving about through their divisions, overlooking the work, make similar reports from week to week, so that the returns submitted may be depended upon as correct. 6. The weather in October was exceptionally hot, and no attempts to vac- cinate were made before the 15th of that month. On that day the establishment was present at Wurdah, and the 3 Native Superintendents commenced vac- cinating with,3 12. Each Tehseel was sub-divided, and a Vaccinator appointed to each sub-division furnished with a list of the towns and villages, to all of which he was directed to proceed, presenting his credentials to the Patail or Kamdar, on arrival, and seeking his assistance in collecting the people, and explaining the object of his visit. The recruits were attached to first-class Vaccinators, and ordered to work under their direction, and with their assistance. 13. Every aid was afforded by Captain Ricketts, the Deputy Commissioner, who took great interest in the progress of the work, and I found him most willing to adopt any suggestion likely to further it. On at least one occasion he changed his route on finding that there was opposition to the Vaccinators, and by per- sonal influence induced the people to accept the operation; and on all occasions when I was not myself present, by explanation and advice endeavoured to overcome the apathy of the chief men whom he met on his tour. 14. At Wurdah I had theopportunity of pointing out to the three Tehseel- dars in what way they could assist, and they seeing the interest taken in the operation by their chief, used their influence also in favour of vaccination. 15. The operation was almost unknown in the district, and the passive re- sistance at first almost general. The people had an undefined dread of a new thing, or from apathy were unwilling to take the trouble to bring their children. Small-pox was present in the district, especially in the Hingunghat Tehseel; and in the villages near the Chanda district, where the disease was most severe, the opposition was active, the Vaccinators being threatened and driven away from the villages. In one case a Vaccinator was assaulted and placed in durance by a Malgoozar. Representations had to be made to the Extra-Assistant Commis- sioner, and to the Tehseeldar, who enquired into the complaints, and it was in this Tehseel that Captain Ricketts used his influence to overcome the objections of the people. At Hingunghat itself some persons suffering from small-pox were placed in chuppahs outside the town. Large numbers were subsequently vacci- nated in the place and its neighbourhood, and the disease stopped. 16. On returning from Berar on December 12th I directed my march through the Hinghunghat Tehseel, taking in the towns of Nandowree and Koyra, and their neighbourhoods, where small-pox was present, and where the opposition had been greatest. 17. I found the people impressed with the idea that small-pox was to be the result of the operation of vaccination, but I was everywhere able to remove their fears, and at my first halt vaccinated 102, at my second 149, third 162, fourth 212, and so on. And at Koyra itself, 272 were brought to me from 19 villages, and amongst them the grandchild of the Malgoozar of Koyra, who was induced to consent only after much explanation and persuasion. In all, 1435 from 63 villages in this Tehseel were vaccinated by me, and my subordinates had much less trouble after my visit. 18. In the Huzzoor and Arvee Tehseels, through which I marched in January and February, my Vaccinators had met with partial success. My time was chiefly occupied in examining the work done and comparing with registers and village lists; but at every halt, numbers who had hitherto held aloof brought their children to be vaccinated by myself, and I was able by personal com- munication to remove any doubt or fears that might be remaining. 19. At Arvee, the head-quarters of the Tehseel of the same name, very little had been done.
4 There is a large community of Marwarees in the town,5 and instructed, operated upon as many as he could get submitted to him, but found great difficulty in persuading parents to bringing their children to him though he was in the habit of bribing the latter with pice. The numbers vaccinated did not have any appreciable effect in preventing the spread of the disease. 26. The men of my establishment began to arrive early in February, and were all in the district before the middle of the month. At that time small- pox was scattered throughout the district. 27. On March 20th I entered Baitool from East Berar, and was met by the Naib Tehseeldar of Badnoor at the town of Bainsdahee on the western border of the district. On the 20th and following day I operated upon 479, collected from 19 villages; on the 22nd, 221 were brought from 14 villages; on 23rd, 380 from 17 villages, and so on. Immediately round the Civil Station itself 705 were vaccinated by me in two days, and before I left the district I had vaccinated 3,675 from 165 towns and villages, besides examining the work of my Vaccinators and comparing it with their returns as I went along. 28. I found the people everywhere in a condition of expectation. My Vaccinators had spread themselves through the Tehseels, and where they had not been able themselves to persuade parents, had nevertheless so excited their in- terest, that on my arrival at any place hundreds were readily collected from neighbouring villages, many voluntarily coming eight or ten miles to hear my ex- planations, and to submit themselves or their children to the operation at my hands. A number of infants seven or eight days old were so brought. 29. The Tehseel authorities gave me excellent assistance in advertising my route and collecting the people. They also took great interest in the work itself, and in places that I was not able to visit my Superintendents report that the work went on well after my departure. 30. During my progress through both.Wurdah and Baitool I endeavoured to examine the work of the Municipal Vaccinators. This I could not do satis- factorily, there were no lists at any village, the Vaccinators themselves were not present with their registers, so that I could not compare returns with work done. A few persons I found successfully vaccinated, but many instances of failure were brought to my notice, and many were revaccinated by myself. Two undoubted instances of false returns I detected. At Waltora, a village in the Arvee tehseel, Wurdah district, nine children reported to have been suc- cessfully vaccinated by the Municipal Vaccinator, were re-vaccinated by me. Of these 9 cases, I was unsuccessful, in 2 the result could not be found out, but in 6, proper vesicles followed my operation,--a positive proof that they had not been successfully vaccinated before, as reported by the Municipal Vaccinator. His returns therefore must be considered untrustworthy. In Baitool, in the neighbourhood of Bainsdahee, or the extreme border of the district, a place not likely to be visited by the Civil Medical Officer, 22 persons were brought to me as having been vaccinated by the Municipal Vaccinator six weeks before my arrival. No one had come to examine the results of the operations, which I found had all failed. On examining the Vaccinator's register at Badnoor I discovered that he had entered 2 taken at random as failures, but the 20 others as successes.
6 All the excuse the man offered for (1) his neglect in not re-visiting the place to examine results, and (2) for his false return, was that &quot;he was a new Vaccinator.&quot; Such men as these, working without constant supervision, bring vaccination into discredit. Where the operation is new the people know nothing of &quot; vesicles,&quot; that are the essentials, but look upon the puncture from the lancet, or scratch with the needle, as all that is necessary. If told that the operation is successful they are perfectly satisfied, and afterwards on their children contracting small-pox, blame the operation, and not the operator, One failure that is positive and palpable will outweigh 100 successes that cannot be clearly demonstrated. A man that will deliberately make a false return cannot be trusted not to receive bribes. At the town of Mandwee, near Atnair, 59 had been vaccinated by me, 55 successfully and 4 unsuccessfully. Of the former all escaped small-pox, but the 4 latter all contracted the disease, and 1 died. The Municipal Vaccinator had operated upon 36,7 32. As noted above in para. 3, the districts of Chindwara and Nagpore were left this season to the Municipal Vaccinators. From Chindwara I have one report, dated April 28th, of 6 cases of small- pox, all recovering; but from Nagpore the number is greater, as might be expected. Small-pox was present in Chanda, Wurdah, and East Berar, bordering on the district, as well as in the south-western portion of Baitool, approaching close to it. From each of these directions the disease might be expected to extend itself, and, with the example of Chanda before one, it might be presumed that the epidemic would have been severe and wide-spread, had not the people been largely protected. At the present time there are a few cases occurring in different parts of the district, but up to April 30th there have been 536 cases, and 57 deaths, in 66 towns and villages, including the City of Nagpore. Omitting this last, the numbers are reduced to 4,412 cases, and 43 deaths, from 65 villages, the highest of these numbers hardly representing the number of children born since the last vaccinating season. 33. I have to bring to the favourable notice of the Chief Commissioner the services of Native Superintendent Mahomed Nuzzur Ali, whom I sent into Chanda. I have always found this officer careful, attentive, zealous, and trust- worthy, and would ask the favour of his being granted a khillut to the amount of a month's pay,8 There appears to be no opposition to the operation in those parts of Sumbul- pore visited by the Vaccinators during the past season ; and in future years the villages of the Gurjat Chiefs and Zemindars will no doubt be protected, the exam- ple at Rampore being very promising; and it may be possible, a year or two hence, when the operation will be more generally known, to induce the large Zemin- dars to entertain Vaccinators on their own estates. 37. The employment of old inoculators is much to be commended, so many men being withdrawn from a mischievous employment, and their energies directed to prevent, rather than to encourage, the spreading of small-pox. The Native Superintendent, as well as the Civil Surgeon, will be able to see that they do not revert to their old practices. 38. After so good a commencement it is desirable that vaccination be sys- tematically carried on, and I should recommend the establishment being main- tained, as at present, under the immediate supervision of the Civil Surgeon, who has shown so much zeal and good management. 39. I object, however, as a rule, to the employment of district Vaccinators, working away from direct European supervision; from my own experience the work and returns are not to be depended upon. 40. If the return from Sumbulpore for the year 1867-68 be omitted from the general district return of that year, as it is from the present, it will be seen that the number of district operations of the present season is more than 50 per cent in excess of that of the preceding year, being 64,827 and 38,938 respectively, the chief increase being at Jubbulpore, Belaspore, Raepore, Saugor, Chanda, and Hoshungabad. 41. The most marked decrease is at Nursingpore, the difference being 2,069. No report has been received, but the Medical Officer notes on the return that the Vaccinator only operated upon 18, at a cost of Rs. 66-11-8. In Dumoh, Nimar, and Bhundara the numbers are lower this year. The Civil Surgeon at Dumoh reports that the people had suffered much from defìciency of food, and that many children were brought to him in so emaciated a condition that he refused to vaccinate them. Small-pox, however, appears to have been very pre- valent and fatal, as many as 927 deaths having been reported between the beginning of February, and the first week in April. A number of children in Dumoh itself who were vaccinated last year, escaped the small-pox, though the disease must have been severe in the town, 159 having died. This immunity ought to have made the operation more popular. The objection that vaccina- tion is an offence to Bhowanee I have rarely found to have much weight after careful explanation, for the same objectors, as a rule, are willing to use internal as well as external remedies for the cure of small-pox when contracted. In Nimar the decrease is attributed by the Medical Officer to the change of Native Doctor at one Dispensary, and to the want of funds to employ another Vaccinator. From Bhundara no report has been received. The cost of the operations this year, as it was the last, is the highest on the list. From Chindwara no report has been received, but the returns are far from satisfactory. Two Vaccinators have been retained throughout the year, at a cost of Rs. 204, the total number vaccinated being 135, and of these only 67 success- fully. The operation is thoroughly well known throughout the district, and it is difficult to understand why so small a number have been operated upon, and the rates of success so low,9 returns are very favourable. In a note he draws attention to the marked immunity of certain towns in which Vaccinators have been employed. From Belaspore, though the numbers are high, the ratio of success is low, but many cases returned as doubtful may be successful. There is no report accom- panying the return. At Raepore the Native Doctor and Vaccinator appear to have done well. The people have evidently been taught the difference between cow-pox and small-pox, which is a great gain; for, on the latter disease appearing, there is fre- quently a fear on the part of the ignorant villagers that vaccination will extend rather than prevent its ravages. The Medical Officers of Saugor and Chanda make no remarks. At Hoshungabad, owing to want of Municipal funds, there has been a direct return to the system of Dispensary Vaccinators. The Civil Surgeon's report points to some of the difficulties Native Vaccinators have to contend with, as well as to the willingness of the people to submit to the operation when an European super- vises. The Civil Surgeon of Seonee does not appear to have been as well sup- ported by the Tehseel authorities as he deserved. Though there was a slight falling off in two divisions, the numbers were brought above those of last year by the favourable returns from Vara-Seonee. Without the co-operation of the District officials, European as well as Native, vaccination as a new thing will not go on satisfactorily. The Medical Officer of Baitool reports the success of measures adopted at Tekaree, and refers to the misconduct of one of the Municipal Vaccinators. A considerable number of per- sons vaccinated by him afterwards contracted the small-pox. Mr. Price's remarks tend rather to discourage the appointment of extra district Vaccinators, the Native Doctors themselves not being above suspicion. The Medical Officer of Wurdah believes that more work would have been done by the local Vaccinators, had the Vaccine Establishment not been present. With that opinion I cannot concur. The people had been familiarized with the operation by Vaccinators spread all over the district, and accepted vaccination at the hands of the first man who offered it, careless whether the operators were engaged by Government or the Municipalities. I have alluded to the work at Arvee above, para. 19. The Native Doctor in charge at Balaghat had not vaccinated, as no special Vaccinator was allowed. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. BRAKE, Surgeon, Superintendent of Vaccination, Central Provinces.
10 A.11 ANNUAL RETURN showing the districts in which vaccination has been performed by the Vaccine Establishment, Central Provinces, during the season 1868-69. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 DISTRICTS. Period. Population of district. Number of Vacci- nators. By whom paid. Total number vaccinated. Successful. Failed. *Doubtful. Unknown. Percentage successful cases. Chindwara... ... 7 days 294,818 3 Superintendents. Government. 301 154 71 63 13 51.12 8 Vaccinators. Wurdah... ... 3 months 343,485 3 Superintendents. 22,399 18,579 1,762 1,797 261 82.94 30 Vaccinators. Baitool... ... 3 months 244,854 2 Superintendents. 17,098 13,025 1,785 2,111 177 76.17 17 Vaccinators. Chanda... ... 3 months 441,824 1 Superintendent. 3,393 2,515 406 303 169 74.12 4 Vaccinators. Mundla 1 month 187,699 1 Vaccinator. 293 230 63 ... ... 78.49 Total... 43,484 34,503 4,087 4,274 620 79.34 * The cases returned as &quot;doubtful&quot; are those in which true vaccine vesicles have appeared, but have been broken before the seventh day. The persons are in all probability protected from small-pox. This would give a percentage of 89.17 successful.
12 B.13 AGGREGATE Return of Vaccine Operations performed in the Central Provinces during the year 1868-69. BY WHOM PERFORMED. Total number vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful or unknown. Percentage of successful cases. Vaccine Department, Head-quarters. 43,484 34,503 4,087 4,894 79.34 Do. Sub-ditto. Sumbulpore.. 23,416 21,982 1,388 46 93.87 Municipal Vaccinators... ... 64,827 52,033 9,512 3,282 80.26 Total... 131,727 108,518 14,987 8,222 82.38
14 Religion and Caste of persons operated upon by the Vaccine Department, Central Provinces, during the year 1868-69. Christians... ... 5 Hindoos,15 ANNUAL RETURN showing sex and age of persons vaccinated by Vaccine Department, Central Provinces, during the year 1868-69. Sex. No. Male.. .. .. .. 20,842 Female.. .. .. .. 22,642 Total.. .. 34,484 Age. No. Under 1 year... ... 7,077 From 1 year to 5 years. ... 27,204 6 to 10 ... ... 7,014 11 to 15 ... ... 1,540 16 to 20 ... ... 568 21 to 25 ... ... 57 26 to 30 ... ... 23 above 30 years. ... ... 1 Total... ... 43,484 VACCINE DEPARTMENT. Year 1868-69. Number of towns and villages in which all not previously suffering from small-pox have been vaccinated, as certified by signature of Malgoozars or Head men.. ... .. .. .. 1,794 Number of towns and villages in which Vaccine operations have been performed, but some persons still remain unprotected*.. .. .. .. .. *308 Total.. 2,102 Number of persons in 308 towns and villages still unprotected as certified by signature of Malgoozars or Head man ... ... *1,761 * Much dependence cannot be placed on these numbers though given by the Malgoozars or Head men themselves. J BRAKE, Surgeon, Superintendent, Vaccination, Central Provinces.
16 Copy of a letter from Mr. J. E. Harrison, Civil Medical Officer, Sumbulpore, to the Superintendent General of Vaccination, Central Provinces and Berars, Nag- pore,17 6. The operations of the Vaccinators were wholly confined to the Khalsa part of the district. Many of the Zemindars and several of the Guijat Chiefs begged me to send the Vaccinators into their estates also, but I was of course unable to do so. Towards the end of last month, however, the Rajah of Rheracole was very ill, and I went with the permission of the Deputy Commissioner to his village of Rampore to visit him, and while there he begged me to vaccinate all the members of his family. I sent for some lymph, and did so; and as soon as it became known that I was operating, the children of the whole neighbourhood were brought to me for vaccination, and in the few days that I was there I operated on 1,133 subjects, with most successful results 7. The returns which are now submitted and which have been prepared in the same form as the returns which accompanied your Annual Report for last year, show that the total number vaccinated has been 23,416. In 21,982 cases the operation has proved successful; in 1,388 it has failed, and in 46 cases the result has been doubtful. The percentage of success- ful cases is thus 93 87. This may be considerd somewhat high, but my own observation leads me to believe that it is not incorrect. 8. Of the whole of the establishment employed under me I am glad to be able to report favourably. Noor Mahomed, Native Doctor of the Dispensary, also has done excellent service, and acted as Superintendent, until the arrival of Mahomed Moorad from Nagpore. 9. In conclusion I would beg to express to you my thanks for the aid and assistance from time to time afforded me, and more especially, for your support in obtaining sanction to the special establishment which has been placed at my disposal; and I trust at the same time that the results achieved may be held to be satisfactory, and such as to justify you in recom- mending that this establishment should be placed on a permanent footing, so as to enable me to carry on the operation throughout the district.
18 ANNUAL RETURN of Vaccine Operations performed by Civil Surgeons and Vaccinators in the Sumbulpore District of the Central Provinces, for 1868-69. DISTRICT. Period. Population of the District. Number of Vaccinators. By whom paid. Total num- ber vaccinated. Result. Percentage of success. Cost. Successful. Failed. Doubtful or unknown. Rs. A. P. Sumbulpore. From 1st September 1868 to 30th April 1869,19 Sex and age of persons vaccinated in the Sumbulpore District, during the season 1868-69. I.20 ANNUAL RETURN showing the monthly results of vaccinations performed by the Vaccine Department at Sumbulpore during the year 1868-69. MONTHS. Number of Vaccinators. Total vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Re-vaccin- ated. Percentage of success. September 1868 2 Vaccinators 5 2 3 .. .. .. 40 October REPORT ON THE VACCINATION OPERATIONS CONDUCTED BY THE SPECIAL VACCINE DEPARTMENT, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1889. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPORE; Printed at the Chief Commissioner's Office Press. 1870.
No. 1536/150 FROM THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER AND SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpore, the 13th June 1870. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your report on the Vac- .cine operations in the Central Provinces during the year 1869-70. 2. Besides the special vaccination establishment which worked chiefly in the districts of Bhundara and Chanda, a smaller number of vaccinators under a Superintendent were, under the direction of the Civil Surgeon of Sumbulpore, employed in that district, and in other districts vaccinators were employed by Municipalities and the local authorities, their work being supervised by the Civil Surgeon of the district, 3. The number of persons vaccinated is shown to be 127,600 of whom 35,332 were vaccinated by the special Government Department, 37,711 by the Sumbulpore Staff of vaccinators, and 54,557 by vaccinators paid from Muni- cipal and Local Funds, 4. The successful operations formed, in the case of the special department, 88.5 per cent of the whole, in Sumbulpore 94 per cent, and in the case of dis- trict vaccinators 80 per cent. 5. The various establishments have, the Chief Commissioner considers, worked well. The marked success which has been attained in Sumbulpore is highly gratifying, and Mr. Morris is also glad to see that though Civil Sur- geons, in accordance with the instructions issued last year, have restricted the area of their operations in order to supervise more carefully the work of the vaccinators they employ, still much has been done in many districts. The Chief Commissioner is convinced that no better plan, or one more likely to lead to ultimate success, can be adopted by Civil Surgeons, than to employ all the vac- cinators at their disposal within a limited area, so that the effects of vaccina- tion may become more quickly apparent by the area over which vaccination has been fully carried out, entirely ceasing to suffer from out-breaks of small-pox.
2 6. In the 19th and two following paras. of your report, you advert to the effect wrought in the Chindwara district by the special vaccination establish- ment which for three years was employed in that district, and by the Munici- pal vaccinators since. In spite of their efforts small-pox still continues to visit the district periodically. You also show that when the special establish- ment was withdrawn in 1868 and sent elsewhere, the proportion of chil- dren vaccinated (in the Nagpore and Chindwara districts, to which the operations of the whole establishment had before been entirely confined), to the unvaccinated was only 30 per cent, and you further estimate the number of chil- dren born every year in these districts at 33,000. You accordingly express your opinion that the measure &quot; of bringing operations by the establishment to a close- in these districts in 1868, was premature, and we now find that in Chindwara small-pox happens to be as prevalent as in the adjoining districts of Sconce and Baitool.&quot; 7. The Chief Commissioner quite concurs in your remarks and he consi- ders that the erratic employment of the Government establishment in one dis- trict after another should be stopped, and that in future, in directing the opera- tions of this Establishment, the principle which was laid down when the Vaccination Department was first created should be continually kept in view. That principle was that a small establishment should commence work within the limited area of two districts, and should continue vaccinating in these districts until small-pox entirely disappeared. It was distinctly admitted that Govern- ment could not afford to entertain a staff of vaccinators sufficiently strong to introduce vaccination thoroughly all over the country, and it was also accepted as undeniable that nowhere could vaccination become a complete success unless the people themselves came to believe in it, and of them- selves seek to obtain the protection which it affords. To prove to them the efficacy of vaccination, it was considered that it would be necessary to show that in a tract of country in which vaccination was thoroughly intro- duced, small-pox disappeared. The Government establishment was there- fore sanctioned that it might endeavour to secure this result in a certain part of the Central Provinces, when it was thought the remainder of the population would welcome vaccination and enable simple and permanent arrangements to be made for the vaccination of all young children, so as to render the whole population proof against small-pox. 8. A departure has been made from the principle laid down. The Chief Commissioner would now keep the whole establishment in a single district, and not move it until the whole population had been vaccinated, were it not that Government has been obliged to add the duties of Superintendent of vaccination to those of the Sanitary Commissioner. It is impossible for the Sanitary Commissioner to perform efficiently these duties. He cannot supervise the working of the establishment with that care which is so essential to success. As matters stand, Mr. Morris thinks it will be best that the Vaccination establishment which consists of 3 Superintendents and 30 vacci- nators should be divided into 3 parties. One of those parties will be
3 attached to the Baitool district, a second to the Chindwara district, and the third to Seonee. They will be placed under the charge of the Civil Surgeons of these districts who during the working months will have ample time to supervise their working. You yourself would direct operations generally, and the Chief Commissioner thinks you might be able to visit each of these districts twice a year, if not oftener, while work is going on and ascertain what progress is being made. The Chief Commissioner has selected these districts because in them the work of the Civil Surgeon is less heavy than in most of the others, and in Chindwara and Baitool the people are already familiar with vaccination. 9. While the Government establishment is employed in this manner, the Civil Surgeons of other districts, will, the Chief Commissioner trusts, con- tinue to exert themselves to introduce vaccination thoroughly in circles of villages near their head-quarters, where they can readily supervise the work of their vaccinators. Considering the immense success which has attended the efforts of the Civil Surgeon of Sumbulpore, the Chief Commissioner does not think there is any reason to fear that similar results will not reward efforts made in Baitool, Chindwara and Seonce. 10. In paras 38 and 39 of your report you sketch out a scheme for the appointment of permanent vaccinators. You would appoint a vaccinator to every circle into which a district is divided for the registration of vital statis- tics, each circle containing from 100 to 150 villages and a population of from 40,000 to 50,000. A Superintendent would be appointed over a certain number of circles. This system, you think, might be commenced by very small beginnings and gradually extended. But while the Chief Commissioner approves highly of your scheme in many ways, and thinks it would answer admirably if vacci- nation were more generally accepted by the people, he fears that the small results which could at first be shown, would fail to impress the people and convince them of the benefit of vaccination. Still in most districts the Sudder Circle of registration might be adopted by Civil Surgeons as the area in which to employ the vaccinators which Municipalities or Local Funds may be able to appoint. 11. The remarks in your paras 40 and 41 on the importance of obtaining efficient men as vaccinators and the difficulty experienced in finding such men, appear to the Chief Commissioner valuable, and he commends them to the notice of all Civil Surgeons. 12. Surveying generally the results of the past 5 years, it appears that a large number of persons have been vaccinated, but very little has been done compared with what remains to be done. In your para 34 you show the frightful extent to which small-pox prevails in these Provinces and your statis- tics generally indicate how much work is still before us. Yet it is something to think that in Nagpore (your para 16) and in Jubbulporc (para 20) even the very partial vaccination of the people which has been effected has produced some result.
4 13. Mr. Harrison of Sumbulpore deserves the highest credit for the work which he has performed in Sumbulpore. The people of that district seem to have quite accepted vaccination, and Mr. Harrison reports that he has closed operations in the Khalsa. He wishes now to return the Government establish- ment and to employ it next season in the Khalsa Zemindaries, but, apart from the consideration of their distance from Sumbulpore itself and the diffi- culty which would lie in the way of supervision, the Chief Commissioner thinks that if the people of Sumbulpore have come so thoroughly to appreciate vacci- nation, they may now be expected to raise sufficient funds for keeping up such establishments as may be required. The persons who used to inoculate formerly might be taught to vaccinate and might become local vaccina- tors. This is of course on the supposition that in Sumbulpore vaccination is now thoroughly understood. The operation to be performed is by no means difficult. At any rate the Chief Commissioner fears that in the present state of the finances he cannot recommend the present establishment to be sanctioned for another year. 14. In conclusion I am to convey the Chief Commissioner's thanks for your very careful report which gives evidence of the thought you have bestowed on the subject of vaccination, and I am to express Mr. Morris' hope that though your other duties may interfere to prevent your maintaining that close personal control over the vaccination establishments which would have been so desirable, you will aid the officers under whom these esta- blishments are placed with such advice and assistance as you may be able to give, and continue to give to this very important subject your best con- sideration. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. NEILL, Offg. Secretary.
INDEX. PARA. Duty of superintending Vaccine operations transferred to Sanitary Commissioner... ... ... 1 Special Establishment ... ... 2 Districts in which operations have been carried ... ... ... 3 Sources from which lymph was derived ... ... ... 4 Operations successful early in the season ... ... ... 5 Success of operations in Bhundara and Chanda ... ... ... 6 Numbers vaccinated by establishments in 1869-70 compared with former years ... ... ... 7 Ratio of successful cases ... ... ... 8 Conduct of establishment ... ... 9 Special establishment for Sumbulpore again sanctioned ... ... 10 Success in Sumbulpore ... ... 11 Vaccination by local Vaccinators ... ... ... 12 Nagpore Division ... ... ... 13 Results in the District of Nagpore ... ... ... 14 Amount of protection afforded by operations in the Nagpore District... 15 Effect on prevalence of small-pox .. .. .. 16 Operations in Wurdah ... ... ... 17 Do. Chandah ... ... ... 18 Do. Chindwara ... ... ... 19 Prevalence of small-pox in Chindwara .. ... ... ... 20 Bringing vaccine operations by the special establishment in Nagpore and Chindwara to a close in 1868, a premature measure... ... ... 21 Vaccine operations in Hoshungabad ... ... ... 22 Do. Saugor ... ... ... 23 Do. Seonee ... ... ... 24 Operations restricted in some districts .. ... ... 25 Do. Jubbulpore ... ... 26 Do. Nimar ... ... ... 27 Do. Raepore ... ... ... 28 Do. Belaspore ... ... ... 29 Do. Dumoh ... ... ... 30 Cost of operations by vaccine establishments 31 Sumbulpore Do. ... ... 32 Local Vaccination ... ... ... 33 General results of operations ... ... ... 34 Feelings of the people with regard to vaccination... 35 Excess of females vaccinated over males ... ... ... 36 Proposed method of carrying on operations in future... ... ... 37 to 42
Report on Vaccine operations in the Central Provinces, from April 1869 to March 1870. 1. In accordance with the Resolution of Government, No. 526, dated 26th January 1870, the appointment of Superintendent General of Vaccination in the Central Provinces and Berar was abolished, and the general superinten- dence of vaccine operations in these Provinces added to the duties of the Sanitary Commissioner. The office was made over on the 22nd February 1870, but I was at that time in a part of the Province at a distance from the Districts in which the vaccine establishment was at work, and I did not practically take up the duties of the office till the end of March when the season, in which operations have been usually carried on, was nearly at an end. For the matter of this report therefore, I am for the most part dependent upon the Statements furnished by the Native Superintendents of Vaccination and other records in the office. 2. The working establishment under the Superintendent General of Vac- cination sanctioned by Government consists of:2 were then moved into the Chanda District, the third continued to work in Bhundara till the middle of March, when it was transferred to the Wurrora Sub-division of Chanda. In Bhundara due assistance was rendered to the Vaccinators by the local authorities and no active opposition appears to have been offered by the people. 31,011 persons were vaccinated or 41 per 1,000 of the total population. At the last Census the proportion of the population under 14 years of age was 40 per 100; the number vaccinated would, therefore, amount to about 10 per cent of the juvenile portion of the population. In former years, vaccine operations had been confined to the Sudder town and immediate neighbourhood, but the extent to which this infant population had previously suffered from small-pox, or the ratio of the number vaccinated this year to the unprotected portion of the population cannot be estimated. In the Berhamporee Sub-division the Vaccinators were fairly successful in carrying on operations, but in the Mhool Tehseel the Tehsecldar happened to be absent and the Vaccinators were unable to effect much. 7. Compared with the previous year, the returns show a diminution of 8,152 in the number of operations or 4,209 in the number successful. This diminution is in a great measure owing to the date of making up the returns having been changed from the 30th April to the 31st March, so that the returns for this year include the operations of 11 months only. Up to March, when the establishment was at work in the populous District of Bhundara, the operations had considerably exceeded the number returned in the corres- ponding months of the previous year, but in March, when operations were carried on among the more scattered population of the Chanda District, the number diminished. Chanda moreover, had been severely ravaged by small-pox in the previous year and there were consequently fewer children unprotected. 8. The ratio of successful cases per cent was 88.5 or 5 per cent in excess of the average of former years. The ratio of success varied under different vaccinators, but it continued high throughout the season. In the city of Nagpore operations have been continued up to the present time with no diminu- tion in the ratio of successful cases, but since the beginning of the month, the vesicle in many cases attains its perfect development rather more rapidly on the 6th or 7th day instead of on the 7th or 8th. 9. The establishment has worked well through the season, but a vaccina- tor having preferred a' complaint against Native Superintendent Nuzeer Ally of his having taken money from him, I enquired into the matter and finding not only that the charge was true in the case brought to notice, but also that he had taken money from all the vaccinators under him, I thought it right to dismiss him though he had been well reported in previous Report. 10. The success of the special establishment sanctioned in 1868 for carry- ing on vaccine operations in Sumbulpore under the Civil Surgeon had been so remarkable that sanction for its continuance through another year was obtained. The results of this year's operation have even exceeded those of the first year, and I would draw special attention to Mr. Harrison's report which is appended. 11. The district of Sumbulpore affords an instance which is, I believe, unique of the whole population of a tract of country giving up inoculation for vaccination. In the course of the last two years 61,127 persons have been vaccinated out of a population of 452,348, equal to 13.5 per cent of the total population or 30 per cent of the population under 14 years of age, and when it is considered that out of 900 villages in which these operations were performed in the two years. Doctor Harrison was able to visit upwards of 700 scattered
3 over an area of 6,000 square miles of country most of which is hill and jungle, I think it will be allowed that Mr. Harrison has done good work. Of the efficacy of the vaccination that has been performed, the remarkable immunity of the district from small-pox may be taken as evidence. Small-pox broke out in the village of Talputtia in the Lupunga circle in the end of April, and in the course of the next few weeks 99 cases occurred in a population of 1,750 and of these 8 died in the course of May and June. As soon as information of the out-break was received, Vaccinators were sent out and all the children in the neighbouring villages were vaccinated; the epidemic was thus prevented from spreading and from that time till the end of the year one death only was reported from the whole district. 12. Vaccination has been carried on more or less in all districts by local Vaccinators under the supervision of Civil Surgeons ; the results are shown in Table V. 13. An increase in the number of vaccine operations appears in the returns from the districts of the Nagpore Division, chiefly from Nagpore, Chanda, and Wurdah. In the Vaccination Report for 1868-69 it was notified that operations would not in future be carried on in the Nagpore District by the special establishment, and the District was left to Municipal Vaccinators. In the Wurdah District also operations by the establishment were brought to a close in the season of 1868-69, it was therefore necessary to make provision as far as means were available to keep up and extend the amount of protection that had been effected by the special establishment, particularly as at the end of the season of 1868-69, small-pox was becoming prevalent in the northern part of the District. Accordingly in August last, the Commissioner of the Division addressed the Deputy Commissioner on the subject, calling for increased action in the work of vaccination, at the same time pointing out the necessity for arranging for the due supervision of the work. 14. The results have been on the whole satisfactory. From the Nagpore District 16,662 operations have been returned of which 80 per cent were success- ful ; of this number 4,788 were performed in the city of Nagpore under the constant supervision of the Civil Surgeon, who is able to affirm that &quot; the true vaccine disease was established at first and has since been carefully kept up. As a rule, 6 vesicles were raised in each case, and he has therefore no doubt that a very considerable degree of protection has been secured in Nagpore.&quot; From the nature of his duties as Civil Surgeon of an important Station, Doctor Beatson is unable to afford much time for District work, and he is there- fore unable to bestow much supervision on vaccine operations performed in the different parts of the district. He has reason to believe that the work at Oomrair and Boree was good, but he was not quite satisfied with the results of his inspection at Mohpa. In the town of Oomrair and the villages in the neighbourhood, vaccine operations have been carried on for the last 3 years by the Native Doctor with the assistance of a Municipal vaccinator, and during the last 2 years the town has been almost free of small-pox. When I inspected it in December last, I found that nearly all the younger children I could examine had been vacci- nated and out of 38 boys in the branch school from 6 to 8 years of age 23 had vaccination scars, 11 had small-pox in infancy and 4 only were unprotected. 15. The number vaccinated by the special establishment in the districts of Nagpore and Chindwara are not shown separately in the annual statement for the year 1867-68, but taking the proportion of the operations performed in the two districts in the previous year, the number vaccinated by the esta- blishment in the two years 1866-67 and 1867-68 would have been 35,489. Add to this 30,082 operations performed by the Municipal vaccinators in the same two
4 years and in the season of 1868-69 and 1869-70, and we get a total of 65,571 persons vaccinated in the four years 1866-67 to 1869-70. Of this number about four-fifths or 50,000 would have been under 6 years of age. Calculating by the rates of births and infant mortality that prevail in England, the number of children under 6 years of age at any one time in the District of Nagpore would be 103,000, and this number relatively corresponds with the proportion that the children under 14 years bear to the total population according to the Census of 1866. The number of vaccinations then performed by the vaccine establishment and the local vaccinators together in the Nagpore District amount to 50 per cent of the population under 6 years of age, but as these operations were extended over four years, the ratio of operations to population at the age of 10 would more correctly show the proportion of vaccination to unvaccinated children, and this would not be more than 50,000 to 160,000, or 31 per cent. 16. These figures are not very encouraging. There is, however, reason to believe that the large number of vaccinations that has been performed has greatly checked the prevalence of small-pox among the population, for although it has been very prevalent in the surrounding districts, Nagpore has experienced comparative immunity. The Oomrair Sub-division has been almost entirely free for the last two years, but in the spring of the present year it spread into the Katole Division from Chindwara, and the town of Mohpa and several villages in that locality have suffered severely. That it did not spread further in the Nagpore District, must I think be attributed in great part to the measures adopted by the local authorities in the commencement of the season to keep up and extend the protective influence of vaccination. 17. In the Wurdah District 3,461 vaccinations were performed in the course of the past season by 3 Municipal vaccinators under the supervision of the Medical Officer who reports: &quot; At Wurdah, Anjee, Sailoo, Paonar and Deolee (towns of the district within a day's ride from the Sudder) I vaccinated about 84 children. Many of these that were vaccinated by the vaccinators of &quot;Wurdah and Hingunghat, have been seen by me either on the 4th or four subsequent days, or after the scabs had fallen off, and I was quite satisfied with the results in all. As for Arvee, I was unfortunately not able to judge of the work done by the man attached to that Tehseelee, as he was, on both my visits, out in the interior carrying on his work, but the Native Doctor assured me that the work had been satisfactorily done at the Dispensary under his immediate supervision. I mean the cases vaccinated in the town of Arvee itself. The Vaccinator at Arvee was more fortunate than those at Hingunghat and Wurdah, for the people in these parts appeared to know and appreciate the good effects of vaccination. In two villages through which I passed, I was glad to learn from the Malgoozars of those villages that the inhabitants looked out anxiously for the visits of the Vaccinator, and stated to me that their villages had been wholly exempt the year previous from small-pox, and this they had the good sense to attribute to the virtues of vaccination. In Wurdah, and Hingunghat Circles, the Vacci- nators met with a good deal of opposition and the Malgoozars appeared to be equally as powerless as the Vaccinators. In one or two instances Malgoozars refused to co-operate and were severely reprimanded and cautioned, but throughout the Vaccinators had enough to do in contending with the prejudices of the people. In many villages parents absconded from their homes with their children on the arrival of the Vaccinators and could hardly be persuaded to return. With only 3 men in the District, much cannot be expected.&quot; 18. In the Chanda District 4,618 and in Bhundara 2,259 vaccinations are returned, but the returns are not accompanied by any remarks from the Civil Medical Officer.
5 19. Of the Districts in the other divisions an increased number of opera- tions is returned from Chindwara, Hoshungabad, Saugor, and Seonce. In the District of Chindwara operations had been carried on by the vaccine establish- ment from 1865-66 to 1867-68 and at the end of the latter season they were brought to a close. Two Vaccinators paid by municipalities were employed in 1868-69, but little appears to have been done. In 1869 as the prevalence of small-pox was increasing, 4 Vaccinators were entertained and they have been employed through the past season. Only 1,041 operations have been performed, which of course have had but little effect in checking the spread of the disease. 20. In the past year, from April 1869 up to date, 4,838 cases of small-pox and 361 deaths have been reported from Chindwara, of which 3,760 cases and 303 deaths have occurred since January last in a population of 327,875. In Linga, a village with a population of 350, near Chindwara which I inspected in March last, I found 30 cases of small-pox. By a return furnished by the Deputy Commissioner, 13 of these children were under 3 years of age, the remainder varied from 3 to 9 years, of these 9 had been vaccinated, 7 by the vaccine establishment in April 1868, and 2 previously. Several children who had been vaccinated at the same time, presented good scars and had escaped small-pox. 21. In 1865 the present Vaccine establishment was organized for the purpose of thoroughly and completely protecting from small-pox the popu- lation of a defined area, and the districts of Chindwara and Nagpore were selected as the field for the experiment, comprising 8,000 square miles with a population of nearly 1,000,000. Operations were carried on in these Districts till May 1868. In the first season not much was effected, but in the seasons of 1866-67 and 1867-68, 56,467 persons were vaccinated of which 47,677 were children under 6 years of age. It was then thought that operations might be brought to a close in these Districts, and the field of operations transferred to other districts. The number of children under 6 years of age at any one time in the districts of Chindwara and Nagpore would be not less than 155,000 and the proportion of children vaccinated to unvaccinated when vaccine operations were brought to a close would have been not more than 30 per cent ; moreover, the number of children born annually in these districts may be estimated at 33,000, therefore supposing that all children born in previous years had been protected, it would still be necessary in order to render the population proof against small-pox that nearly 30,000 vaccinations should be performed annually, but the number of children vaccinated by the special establishment in neither year of its opera- tions reached this number even including all children under 6 years of age. It must then I think be considered that the measure of bringing operations by the establishment to a close in these districts in 1868, was premature. And we now find that in Chindwara small-pox happens to be as prevalent as in adjoining dis- tricts of Seonee and Baitool. In fact it would appear that an area of from 8,000 to 10,000 square miles with a population of one million is a sufficient field for the permanent operations of one European Superintendent and a proportionate staff of Vaccinators. 22. In the Hoshungabad District, Doctor Cullen has always been zealous in doing his best to extend vaccination, but the people of the Nerbudda valley are much averse to the practice, and little can be done excepting under the immediate supervision of the Civil Surgeon. In all 2,296 operations were per- formed by 2 Vaccinators. The following extract from Doctor Cullen's report describes the arrangement made by him for the inspection of the work. &quot; Work was commenced very late in the season, as the first three supplies of lymph failed. The Superintendent of the Dispensary wrote everywhere for vaccine
6 matter to Nagpore, Saugor, Agra, and Bombay, and it was lymph given by Doctor Martin, Superintendent of Vaccination at Bombay, that first took. Two Vaccinators have been working for 5 months, viz , from November to the end of March. The accompanying statement shows the result of their labours at Hoshungabad and Hurda. The Native Doctor at Seonee operated on a few, but the Native Doctor at Sohagpore did nothing in this line, and when taxed with this failing, stated he was much opposed by the Natives and the Tehseeldar gave him no support. This I bel7 26. In Jubbulpore, owing to this restriction of the field of operation; the number has fallen to 6,599 in the present year, from 15,662 returned in the previous year; but that the large number of operations performed in Jubbulpore in 1867-68 and 1868-69 have had a sensible effect on the mortality is, I think, shown in the following comparative table showing the number of vaccinations and the mortality from small-pox in three districts of Jubbulpore, Saugor, and Dumoh. In these three districts small-pox broke out severely, almost simul- taneously in the fall of 1868 ; it continued to prevail with equal virulence in each district throughout 1869, and all these districts are now almost equally free from it; they afford therefore a very fair opportunity for showing the effects of the partial vaccination of a population on the mortality from small-pox during a violent epidemic. It will be observed that in Jubbulpore the ratio of mortality was considerably below that of the other two districts. Districts, Population under Re- gistration. Number vaccinated in 1867-68 and 1868-69. Number of deaths from small-pox in 1869. Number vaccinated per 1,000 of popula- tion. Number of deaths from small-pox per 1,000 of population. Jubbulpore ... ... ... ... 423,659 19,806 2,372 46.7 5.6 Dumoh ... ... ... ... 157,026 2,965 2,014 18.8 12.8 Saugor ... ... ... ... 490,249 9,038 5,434 18.4 11.1 27. In Nimar the Civil Surgeon would have been glad to undertake the supervision of a circle having a radius of 20 miles from the station, but as no provision had been made in the budget for travelling allowance for the medical Officer, he was obliged to confine his operations to the town of Khundwa itself, and very little was done. 28. In Raepore Doctor Trimncll limited the operations of his four Vacci- nators to the town of Raepore and a circle having a radius of 5 miles. This was sub-divided into 4 Divisions, a certain number of villages being allotted to each Vaccinator. 50 villages were vaccinated and of these 40 were inspected by Doctor Trimnell himself. 2,780 operations were returned. The ratio of success, 69.5, appears small, but only those have been returned as successful which Doctor Trimnell was able to inspect. 29. In Belaspore little or nothing has been done,8 the separate appointment of Superintendent of Vaccination having been abolished in February. The average cost of each operation by the Vaccine establishment was 6 annas and 3 pies, or d.9¼. 32. The total cost of the Sumbulpore establishment amounted to Rs. 863, and the average cost of each operation was 4 pies, or one half-penny. 33. The sums expended from municipal and local Funds in all districts amounted to Rs. 4,476-7-1, and the average cost of each operation was one anna and eight pies. This average was to some degree enhanced by the high rate of cost in certain districts as Nursingpore, Belaspore and Dumoh, where, from the circum- stances mentioned above, little use was made of the Vaccinators that had been entertained. In the districts of Jubbulpore, Nagpore, Hoshungabad, Wurdah and Sconce, where good work was done, the rate varied from 2 pies at Wurdah to 1 anna 10 pies at Seonee. The largest sums were expended on vaccine operations in the District of Nagpore, where the total cost of operations was Rs. 905, and for this sum 17,000 operations were performed at the rate 1¼ anna for each operation. 34. The total number vaccinated in the Provinces during the year by all establishments, as shown in Table III, amounted to 127,600 against 131,727 in the previous year. This apparent diminution, however, is more than accounted for by the fact of the returns for this year showing the operations of 11 months only. Making allowance for the difference of time to which the returns refer, the number of operations would exceed that of the previous year, and so far the results of the year are satisfactory, In the Districts of the Nagpore Division, in Hoshungabad, in Sconce and in some other districts, efforts have been made to render local vaccination more systematic and ensure better supervision. When, however, we com- pare the numbers vaccinated with the prevalence of small-pox during the past year, we find that the work done is small indeed with what is still required. From the statistics of 1869, it appears that out of a population under regis- tration of a little less than 5 millions, 16,844 deaths from small-pox were returned, and if we extend this proportion to the whole population of the Province which is a little over 9 millions, the total deaths from small-pox in the Pro- vince would amount to 30,000. Judging by returns received from several districts during the past year, the ratio of deaths to cases of small-pox appears to be about 13 per cent, and at this rate the number of cases over the whole Province in the course of last year would have amounted to 200,000. When we consider the amount of suffering, blindness and disfigurement that this number of cases of small-pox represents, and that similar aggravations of the prevalence of the disease occur at intervals of two or three years, it is evident that further extension of the protective influence of vaccination is most urgent- ly called for, and that the means available for the purpose should be used to the best advantage. 35. With regard to the feelings of the people on the subject of vacci- nation, it varies greatly in different parts of the Province, but on the whole great progress has been made. In the Saugor and Nerbudda territories the people are still greatly averse to it. In Sumbulpore, on the other hand, the whole population has taken to it instead of inoculation. In the Nagpore country the people do not yet quite like it, but there is no strong feeling
9 against it. In the city of Nagpore the better classes very generally adopt,10 under vaccination, a Native Superintendent would be appointed, and eventually a Native Superintendent would be required for each Tehseel Sub-division of a District. This system could only be commenced by very small beginnings, for neither the money nor the establishment are at present available, but I think that in each District a circle of vaccination comprising the villages of the Sudder circle of Registration might be instituted at once under the immediate supervision of the Civil Surgeon, and in time as Vaccinators were trained and means become available, the system might be expanded and additional circles brought under vaccination. 40. The greatest obstacle to the extension of vaccination in these Pro- vinces is the difficulty of obtaining efficient Vaccinators, those employed hitherto have been for the most part Mahomedans of low standing, a class that is much disliked by the Hindoo population, and they are generally most untrustworthy; it would appear too that they are not generally con tented with the service. In 1869, on a division of the establishment being transferred for operation into the Chanda District, 5 out of 10 refused to go and resigned ; and of 30 Vaccinators now belonging to the establishment 12 were entertained at the commencement of the last working season, 17 only have been two years in the Department, and of these there is not one fit for promotion to the vacant appointment of Superintendent. Vaccinators to work well with the people should as far as possible be natives of the tract of country in which they are employed and of as good caste as can be induced to take service and at first it will be necessary that District Medical Officers should direct their attention chiefly to procuring and training good Vaccinators. 41. In districts where the Sudder town is large there should be no diffi- culty in training Vaccinators, but where this is not the case, a larger number should be employed in the circle under the Civil Surgeon than the work within the circle absolutely requires. Native Superintendents should be more highly paid and selected from the more influential castes, and I believe it is more im- portant that they should possess caste and position that will give them influence with the people than that they should be qualified as Medical practitioners, and for this reason I should not be disposed to place Native Doctors or Sub-Assistant Surgeons in these appointments. Under the Native Superintendent of vaccina- tion would be combined the sanitary inspection of the villages within their sub-divisions and the duty of primarily enquiring into the circumstances attending out-breaks of epidemic disease or any unusual prevalence of disease, and with the staff of vaccinators under them they might effect much good in the distribution of medicines. 42. The Vaccinators and Superintendents would be entirely under the orders of the District Authorities, subject to inspection by the Sanitary Com- missioner, and I believe that District Officers would find an organization of this kind of great value at all times, but particularly in seasons of sickness and distress such as this Province passed through last year. Proposals more in detail for carrying on vaccination on the plan I have above described will be submitted separately. S. C. TOWNSEND, Sanitary Commissioner.
11 A.12 A.13 A.14 A.B.17 Copy of a letter from J. E. Harrison, Esq., Civil Medical Officer, Sumbulpore, to the Superintendent General of Vaccination, Central Provinces,18 7. Of the whole establishment employed, I am glad to be able to report favorably. The Native Superintendent Mahomed Morrad has performed his duties entirely to my satisfaction and I have also received considerable assistance from Noor Mahomed, the Native Doctor attached to the Dispensary here. 8. In conclusion, I may mention that the result of the past season's operations has been that, with the exception of a few villages to the west of Sohela in the Dukhinteer and of a small number bordering on the Zemindaree of Kolabeara in the Ooturteer, the whole of the Khalsa part of the district has now been protected. It remains now to extend the operation to the Khalsa Zemindaries which surround the district, and if the same establishment be sanctioned for another season, I would hope to do this throughout the Zemindaries which are nearest to the Station. There will, however, be some difficulty in superintending the work- ing of the establishment when they have to take the field in the remote Zemindaries of Phooljhur and Borasambur, or even in the more distant parts of Chunderpore, and I think therefore that if vaccination is to be systematically extended through these Zemindaries to the neighbouring Gurjat States, it should now be a subject for consideration how the agency which should be employed to superintend the work could best be provided.
19 Annual Return showing the monthly results of vaccinations performed by the Vaccine Department, Central Provinces, during the year 1869-70. Month. Number of Vaccinators. Total vacci- nated. Successful. Unsuc- cessful. Doubt- ful. Un- known. Re-vacci- nated. Percentage of success. REMARKS. May 1869 1 Native Superintendent, 9 Vaccinators 3,051 2,836 215 ... ... 215 92.95 June do. Ditto. 464 461 3 ... ... 3 99.35 October do. Ditto. 238 215 23 ... ... 23 90. 3 November do. Ditto. 2,482 2,311 167 4 ... 167 93.11 December do. Ditto. 4,885 4,086 786 13 ... 786 83.64 January 1870 Ditto. 6,999 6,528 424 47 ... 416 93.29 February do. Ditto. 7,738 7,507 210 1 ... 210 97.26 March do. Ditto. 11,874 11,762 112 ... ... 112 99.05 37,711 35,706 1,940 65 .. 1,932 94.68
20 Return of Vaccine operations in the Sumbulpore District, during the year ending 31st March 1870. Population. Name of Vaccinators. Successful. Unsuc- cessful. Doubt- ful. Total. Cost of operations during the year. Total number of successful operations re- corded to date. REMARKS, Mohamed Morad, Native Superintendent .. 11,077 307 .. 11,384 Kashee Vaccinator ... 3,373 380 30 3,783 Pershone Do. ... 3,117 134 .. 3,251 Ramchunder Do. ... 2,554 155 .. 2,709 452,348 Mayaram Do. ... 3,110 134 .. 3,250 863 11 1 35,706 Geerdharee Do. ... 3,468 380 35 3,783 Setharam Do. ... 2,8J0 145 .. 2,955 Saddasewo Do. ... 2,555 153 .. 2,708 Korpasindo Do. ... 2,810 145 .. 2,955 Sreckissen Do. ... 926 7 .. 933
21 Annual Return of Vaccine operations performed by Civil Surgeons and Muni- cipal Vaccinators, in the Central Provinces, exclusive of those by the Vaccine Department, Central Provinces, season 1869-70. DISTRICT. PERIOD. Population of District. Number of Vac- cinators. By whom paid. Total number vaccinated. RESULTS. Percentage of success. COST. Successful. Failed. Doubtful or unknown. Rupees. Annas. Pies. Sumbulpore. From 1st October to 31st March 1870. 452,348 1 Native Superin- tendent. 9 Vaccinators, Paid from Govern- ment. 37,711 35,706 1,940 65 94.68 863 11 1 863 11 1 Religion and Caste of persons operated on in the Sumbulpore District, Central Provinces, during the season 1869-70. HINDOOS. Christians ... ... ... ... Brought forward ... 26,093 Mahomedans ... ... ... 18 ABORIGINAL TRIBES. Brahmins ... 3,584 Gonds ... 2,466 Rajpoots ... 133 Sooras ... 5,894 Mahantees ... 257 Khonds ... 374 Koltahs ... 8,127 Coles ... 627 Agarias ... 245 Binjhwals ... 27 Gwalas ... 1,427 Kaurs ... 6 Burhais ... 1 Pales ... 400 Kusaris ... 516 Other hill tribes ... 611 Kewutas ... 1,213 Bunneahs ... 195 Total aboriginal tribes ... 1,213 Bholcas ... 1,000 Dhobees ... 333 Durzees ... 2 Mahlees ... 106 Soods ... 110 Soondees ... 208 Sonars ... 105 Tellees ... 796 Tassahs ... 428 Koshtas ... 57 Toories ... 928 Lohars ... 167 Goosains ... 13 Dossees ... 5 Bhundaris ... 214 Maharas ... 231 Jharras ... 21 Koras ... 1,255 Khundras ... 98 Khurras ... 499 Koormees ... 192 Gandas ... 3,460 Ghassias ... 21 Chumars ... 111 Tellingas ... 17 Total Hindoos ... 26,075 Carried forward ... 26,093 Grand Total 37711
22 Sex and Age of persons vaccinated in the Sumbulpore District, during the season 1869-70. I.B. Statement No. V.
B. Statement No. V. Showing particulars of vaccination in the Sumbulpore Circle of Medical superintendence, in the Central Provinces, during the year 1868 and 1869 and 1870, endnig 31 March 1870. 3 4 5 7 9 10 11 12 Months No. of Native Superin- dents of vaccination attached to the Dispen- sary. No. of Vaccinators at- tached to the Dispen- sary Total No. of persons vaccinated. Population Primary vaccination. Revaccination. Percentage of successful cases excluding those unknown from Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vac- cinator. Cost of operations during season. A B C. D. A. B C. D. Rupees. Annas Pie. Sex. Caste Age. Results. Total. Successful Unsuccessful inclu- ding those doubtful Unknown. Total In primary vac- cination. In secondary vac- cination. Males. Females. Christians. Hindoo. Mussulman. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. 1869. 1868. 1869. 1868. 1869. 1868. 1868 September ... ... ... 2 ... 5 850,955 2 3 .. 1 .. 4 1 4 2 3 .. 5 ... ... ... ... .40 ... 2.5 8 0 0 October ... 1 ... 9 ... 96 44 52 .. 84 8 4 17 79 73 23 .. 96 ... ... ... ... 87.494 ... 9.6 60 13 4 November ... 1 ... 9 ... 2,387 1,380 1,007 .. 195 25 2,167 366 2,021 2,193 194 .. 2,387 143 17 ... 160 97.893 89.37 238.7 144 9 0 December ... 1 ... 9 ... 3,217 1,913 1,304 .. 2,737 13 467 807 2,410 3,026 191 .. 3,217 152 21 ... 173 94.180 87.86 321.7 131 0 0 1869 3,503 12 549 685 3,379 3,895 169 .. 4,064 144 11 ... 155 95.856 95.48 406.4 124 0 0 January 1 ... 9 ... 4,064 ... 2,256 1,808 .. 3,857 February 1 ... 9 ... 3,857 ... 2,119 1,738 .. 3,458 3 369 501 3,356 3,653 206 .. 174 20 ... 194 94.685 89.69 385.7 131 0 0 March 1 ... 9 ... 4,589 ... 2,433 2,156 .. 4,179 6 404 210 4,379 4,188 401 .. 4,589 346 20 ... 366 91.262 94.53 458.9 131 0 0 April 1 ... 9 ... 5,201 ... 2,712 2,469 1 4,851 6 343 45 5,156 4,952 299 .. 5,201 99 33 ... 132 95.212 75. 521.1 131 0 0 Total . . 4 3 36 29 17,711 5,705 12,859 10,557 1 19,035 73 4,307 2,632 20,784 21,982 1,434 0 23,416 1,058 122 0 1,180 93.87 89.66 325.22 861 6 4 1869 1870 1869 1870 1869 1870 1869 May ... 1 ... 9 ... 3,051 1,569 1,482 .. 2,701 .. 350 143 2,908 2,836 215 ... 3,051 196 19 ... 215 92.95 91.16 305.1 79 11 1 June ... 1 ... ... ... 464 222 242 .. 362 .. 102 36 428 461 3 ... 464 3 ... ... 3 99.35 100.0 464. ... 0 0 October ... 1 ... 9 ... 238 118 120 .. 223 .. 15 21 217 215 23 ... 238 23 ... ... 23 90.3 100.0 23.8 131 0 0 November ... 1 ... 9 ... 2,482 1,304 1,178 .. 2,213 15 254 227 2,255 2,311 171 ... 2,482 177 ... ... 177 93.11 100.0 248.2 131 0 0 December 1870 ... 1 ... 9 ... 4,885 2,643 2,242 .. 4,122 .. 763 305 4,580 4,086 799 ... 4,885 786 ... ... 786 83.64 100.0 488.5 131 0 0 January 1 ... 9 ... 6,999 ... 3,612 3,387 .. 6,323 .. 676 381 6,618 6,528 471 ... 6,999 416 ... ... 416 93.29 100.0 699.9 131 0 0 February 1 ... 9 ... 7,718 ... 4,167 3,551 .. 6,861 .. 857 406 7,312 7,507 211 ... 7,718 210 ... ... 210 97.26 100.0 771.8 131 0 0 March 1 ... 9 ... 11,874 ... 5,998 5,876 .. 10,704 3 1,167 769 11,105 11,762 112 ... 11,874 112 ... ... 112 99.5 100.0 1187.4 131 0 0 Total... 3 5 27 36 26,591 11,120 19,633 18,078 0 33,509 18 4,184 2,288 35,423 35,706 2,005 0 37,711 1,913 19 0 1,923 94.68 99.47 531.14 863 11 1 GrandTotal. 7 8 63 65 44,302 16,825 32,492 28,635 1 52,544 91 8,491 4,920 56,207 57,688 3,439 0 61,127 2,971 141 0 3,103 94.38 95.75 427.46 1,725 1 5 * Where the Province or Presidency is not divided into Circles, the column would be left blank. REPORT ON THE Vaccine Operations IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES FOR THE YEAR 1870 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: Printed at the Chief Commissioner's Office Press. 1871.
No. 2507/199 FROM THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 18th November 1871. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter No. 254, dated 15th August, submitting the Vaccination returns for the year 1870-71, and the reports of the Civil Surgeons of Seoni, Betul, and Chhindwara, under whose direction the special staff of Vaccinators worked. 2. The actual work of the year commenced somewhat later than usual, owing, as you explain in the seventh paragraph of your letter, to unfavourable atmospheric conditions; but during the season 125,337 persons were vaccinated, a number almost as large as in the preceding year, when a special establishment was at work in the Sambalpur district and vaccinated more than 37,000 persons. But for this circumstance the number of operations per- formed in the year would greatly exceed what had ever before been accomplished. 3. The plan of placing the special vaccination establishment under the Civil Surgeons of Betul, Chhindwara, and Seoni appears to have proved a success. More work was done, and at a smaller cost than in any previous year. 4. The number of operations performed in these three districts was 43,751, of which 37,234, or 85.1 per cent, were successful. This percentage of successful cases is slightly lower than in the preceding year, when it was 88.5, but the Civil Surgeons appear to have done their utmost to secure accuracy in their returns, and have excluded from them all entries which they had reason to doubt. 5. The reports of the Civil Surgeons, Appendices 1, 2, and 3 of your letter, are interesting, and show that they have set to work with much earnestness of purpose. The Officiating Chief Commissioner consi-
2 ders that Dr. Barter, Dr. Edis, and Mr. Price are entitled to great credit for the manner in which they have ordered the proceedings of their Vaccinators, and the zealous supervision which they have exercised. The Officiating Chief Commissioner regrets, however, to notice that the Deputy Commissioner of Chhindwara did not meet the wishes of the Administration by placing tents at the disposal of the Medical Officer in charge, and that the inspection work of Mr. Price was therefore less thorough than he wished. 6. There seems to be no question that the system of arm to arm vaccination is preferable to any other, and the practice of Mr. Price, of assembling all children from surrounding villages at one point and vaccinating them, and then having them brought to some other point a little way off on the eighth day following for the purpose of securing an inspection of the results, has much to recommend it from a vacci- nator's point of view. But it is necessary to bear in mind that vaccination is not a popular thing. It is sometimes with diffi- culty that parents are induced to allow their children to be ope- rated upon, and if obliged to take their children to any dis- tance in order to have the operation performed or the result inspected, they would have good excuse for refusing to have their children vaccinated at all. Children should therefore only be brought the most moderate distances, and no attempt should be made to introduce the system except where the villages lie close together. In other cases the vaccinator must submit to necessity and do less work, 7. In addition to the persons vaccinated by the special estab- lishment in Betul, Chhindwara, and Seoni, 76,133 were vaccinated at the various charitable dispensaries or by vaccinators employed by Local Funds or Municipal Committees. The percentage of successful cases was 80, the same as in the previous year. 8. In several districts very considerable numbers of people are shown as having been vaccinated, but in some cases it is very clear that more has again been attempted than could really be carried out. In the Sagar district effective supervision of the vaccinators could only have been possible had a qualified Superintendent been appointed. In Nimar more might be attempted if the people are, as is said by the Civil Surgeon, &quot;alive to the importance of the operation.&quot; In a wild and sparsely inhabited district like Balaghat, in which careful professional supervision cannot be secured, the only good that can come from sending out a few vaccinators among the people is to accustom them to the operation and dispel the unreason- able fear of it they are said to entertain.
3 Bhandara shows such favourable results that the returns are open to some suspicion. In Nagpur the arrangements which you concerted with Mr. Bernard, the Commissioner, were not fully carried out during the past year. The Officiating Chief Commissioner would be glad to see systematic arrangements of the same nature made in all districts in which funds are available for the purpose. A few vaccination circles, comprising not too large an area, might be first formed, and opera- tions extended when circumstances permitted. 9. The Officiating Chief Commissioner would direct the atten- tion of all Deputy Commissioners and Civil Surgeons to the remarks made in paragraphs 12 and 33 of your report, and also to the corres- pondence printed as Appendix 4. On the whole, the Officiating Chief Commissioner thinks that the results of the year have been very satisfactory, and he desires me to convey to you his thanks for the careful interest you have taken in the diffusion of the benefits of vaccination.. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. NEILL, Offg. Secretary.
No. 254 FROM THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nágpúr, the 15 th August 1871. SIR, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Com- missioner the Vaccination Returns of the Central Provinces for the season 1870-71. 2. In consequence of the appointment of Superintendent General of Vac- cination in these Provinces having been abolished, the establishment of vaccina- tors which had hitherto been concentrated under that officer was (according to instructions conveyed in para. 8 of your letter No. 1536-150, dated 13th June 1870) at the commencement of the season divided into three parties, one of which was attached to the Seoni district, a second to Chhindwara, and a third to Betul; each party consisted of one Native Superintendent and 10 Vaccinators, and was placed under the superintendence of the Civil Surgeon of the district to which it was attached. At the same time arrangements were made in Nagpur district for carrying on operations with an establishment paid for from Local funds, and by Circular No. 66, dated 17th October 1870, the attention of all District officers was called to the plan proposed for extending vaccination in the Nagpur Division. 3. My own duties with reference to vaccination have consisted in the general superintendence of the department, in selecting Native Superintendents and Vaccinators for the different districts, and in supplying lymph to the Me- dical officers of districts. In the course of my tour in the cold weather I in- spected the work of district vaccination in the northern districts, and I also visited the districts of Seoni, Chhindwara, and Betul. Supplies of lymph. 4. With the view of having a good supply of lymph wherewith to start operations at the commencement of the season, I had kept up vacci- nation in the city of Nagpur through the whole year. No difficulty was found in doing this; as long as the hot weather continued there was no diminution in the proportion of successful cases or indeed for some time after the rains set in. It was in the end of July and through August and September that the proportion of failures was greatest; not more than 15 children were vaccinated weekly, but by carefully selecting the vaccinfers a supply of lymph was kept up until the season came round when more extended operations could be commenced.
2 5. In September, 50 capillary tubes of lymph filled in England were re- ceived through the Principal Medical Store-keeper. These were distributed in October to the Medical officers of the 19 districts of these Provinces, and to the Resident Medical Officer at Bhopal. In the hands of 12 officers this lymph proved successful; in five instances it was unsuccessful, and with regard to the remaining three information is wanting. 6. In the following week supplies of lymph collected at Nagpur were dis- tributed to the same officers; and this lymph proved successful in 14 instances, in three it was unsuccessful; and with regard to three information was not given. Supplies of lymph were also received in the early part of November from the Superintendent General of Vaccination, North-Western Provinces, and these supplies were reported to have proved successful in those districts from which reports were received. 7. But although operations were thus successfully commenced early in the season in the majority of districts, in some the work was not thoroughly satisfac- tory until much later. In Seoni satisfactory vesicles were not obtained till the 11th November. In Jabalpur Dr. Rise considered the work of doubtful character during November, and attributed the number of failures to the unusual continuance of damp close weather. In Raipur, good vesicles were not established till the 28th November, Dr. Trimnell attributes the want of success in the early part of the month (which he has also observed to occur in former years) to the general prevalence of malaria at that season. In Mandla the results of operations were not thoroughly satisfactory until the beginning of January. 8. I have given these details to show that it is not advisable to commence vaccination before the season favourable for it has fairly set in. The arrival of this period varies from year to year, in 1870 it was apparently delayed by rainy and damp weather, which is unusual in November. I may remark too that in 1870-71 small-pox, which after reaching its minimum of prevalence in September and October usually commences to spread again in November, did not increase in prevalence till January, indeed the slight prevalence of small-pox throughout the season was very remarkable. 9. The total number of persons vaccinated in the year over the whole Province amounted to 125,337, against 127,690 operations in the previous year; but in the season of 1869-70, 37,711 operations were performed by the special establishment for Sambalpur, for which sanction was not again obtained. If then the operations by the Sambalpur establishment be excluded from the total number for 1869-70, the returns for 1870-71 show an increase of 35,448 on the operations of the previous year. 10. The number of operations performed by the establishment paid from Imperial funds during the year amounts to 49,204,3 The numbers vaccinated in each of these districts were as follows:4 For the Civil Surgeon of Seoni new tents were provided from the Local funds, and for the Civil Surgeon of Betul tents were also provided; the same provision was not made for Mr. Price in Chhindwara, and he was therefore not able to inspect the work so thoroughly as he wished; but even in Seoni the total cost of the new tents added only one anna to the cost of each operation perform- ed in the first season, and taking all the three districts the total cost, including carriage of tents and travelling allowance, amounted to 2 annas and 8 pies; where- as the average cost of each operation performed by the establishment for the four previous years was 7 annas and one pie. By providing the Civil Surgeons with the means of supervising vaccination a larger number of operations have been performed at a less cost. 14. But besides the work of superintendence of vaccination the Civil Sur- geons are able to effect much good in their districts by inspecting the sanitary condition of the towns and villages, and urging on the people the necessity of greater cleanliness in their villages and of greater care in preserving their water- supply from pollution. Dr. Barter's report shows how much this is needed in Seoni, and although Dr. Edis does not refer to the subject in his report, I am well aware that he took every opportunity of becoming acquainted with the state of the towns and villages that he visited when inspecting the work of the vaccinators. I believe I may say that there are very few Civil Surgeons who would not be glad to undertake district work in the cold weather if they were provided with the means of doing so, and there can be little doubt that they would effect more good in camp than by remaining in the Sadar station, where they are often for weeks together the only European present. 15. With regard to Mr. Price's report on the work in Chhindwara, I would draw particular attention to paras. 8, 9 and 10, in which he describes his system of working, and it seems to me by far the best for effecting arm to arm vaccination, as well as for inspecting the children vaccinated. 16. Mr. Price mentions with commendation the Tahsildar of Chhindwara, Imrit Rao, who appears to have taken very great interest in the work and to have rendered great assistance. In the Chhindwara district a peon or chaprasi was attached to each vaccinator, and I observe in a paper lately forwarded to me by the Superintendent General of Vaccination in Bombay, that one peon is allowed for each Vaccinator and Native Superintendent. Without assistance of this kind it is almost impossible to collect the children so as to carry on &quot; arm to arm&quot; vaccination. Two peons also should be allowed to each Civil Surgeon during the working season. Vaccination in other Districts. 17. In the Sagar district two vaccinators were employed, and by these men and by the Native Doctors in charge of the Dispensaries, 8,325 operations were performed; of which 5,134 or 67 per cent were returned as successful. These numbers are very large, but there is no guarantee that the returns are correct. The Civil Medical duties of Sagar are performed by an Officer holding a Military charge in the Cantonment, and he is unable to leave the station for the work of superintending vaccination in the district; while the above arrangement for the discharge of the Civil Medical duties of Sagar continues, it will be better to con- fine vaccination to the population of the town and cantonment. In the epidemic of 1868-69 the mortality from small-pox in the town and cantonment of Sagar amounted to nearly 7 per 1,000 of the population. 18. In the district of Damoh two vaccinators were employed, and 1,481 opera- tions were performed, of which 990 or 70 per cent were successful. The people
5 of Damoh are said to be very much averse to vaccination, but last season the Deputy Commissioner, Captain Grace, took an interest in the matter, and the Civil Medical Officer, Mr. King, was able to do more than had been done in previous years. Mr. King inspected a large proportion of the operations re- turned, and he believes the returns -to be correct. 19. In the Jabalpur district an attempt was made to enlist the Native Hakims and Baids in the work of vaccination, and seven were induced to take service. Dr. Rice, however, does not report satisfactorily of the experiment, and I do not recommend its being continued. The men were inefficient and it does not appear that the people were generally more willing to submit their children to them for vaccination, than to the regular vaccinators. 11,010 operations were performed by 12 vaccinators, and of this number 9,534 or 87 per cent were re- turned as successful. Dr. Rice reports very favourably of the work done in the town and cantonment of Jabalpur, and in the town of Murwara. In the Sadar circle much assistance was rendered by Mr. Rae Suk Lal, Extra-Assistant Commis- sioner, and in the Murwara sub-division by the Tahsildar, Banwari Lal. In the Sehora sub-division the work was not so good. It is proposed that for the current year a Native Superintendent of Vaccination shall be entertained on a salary of Rs. 80 per mensem. 20. NARSINGHPUR.6 24. In the Nagpur Division, the Commissioner, Mr. Bernard, before the com- mencement of the season urged on the Deputy Commissioners of his Division the importance of exerting their influence in spreading vaccination and in providing funds for the work wherever available, and some correspondence on the subject, with the Chief Commissioner's remarks thereupon, is appended to this report. It was decided to provide an establishment of one Native Superintendent and 11 vaccinators, 9 for the district and 2 for the city; but there was great difficulty in obtaining good men for the work, and it was not until the middle of December that a Native Superintendent was appointed. There was not therefore as much work done as was hoped for. I inspected the work myself in the different circles early in the season, that I might see that it was fairly started, and the Native Superintendent, Parthasarthy, subsequently made a circuit of the district inspecting all the circles and visiting nearly two hundred villages in which operations had been performed. The Tahsildars of the different sub-divisions rendered assistance in the work; but considerable difficulty was experienced in collecting the children for arm to arm vaccination. The castes found most averse to vaccination are the Ragoosees Kirads, Marwaris and Lodis. Altogether in the town and rural circles 9,387 operations were performed, and of these, 6,597 or 84 per cent were returned as successful. 25. For Balaghat, one Native Superintendent on Rs. 25 a month and 3 vac- cinators were entertained. No very great results could be expected from a tract of country so sparsely populated. Altogether 1,284 children were vaccinated, and of these only 771 or 60 per cent were successful. The Deputy Commissioner, Captain Bloomfield, was of opinion that the establishment ought to have shown more results, but at the same time he remarks:7 on Rupees 25 a month, were employed; 5,241 operations performed, of which 4,413 are returned as successful. The Civil Surgeon inspected the work in a few of the villages, and he believes the returns have been correctly rendered. The vaccina- tors met with much opposition from the inhabitants, and the Native Superinten- dent had not sufficient influence with the people to overcome their prejudices. Efforts should be made to keep up the work commenced in the same circle, but two good vaccinators should be sufficient. 31. In the Bilaspur district two vaccinators were employed; 1,066 opera- tions were performed, of which 1,006 are returned as successful. The Civil Me- dical Officer states that he visited nearly all the villages in which vaccination was conducted, and that he is perfectly satisfied that the cases marked as successful were really so. 32. In Sambalpur during the three previous seasons a special establishment of one Native Superintendent and nine vaccinators had been provided, and very good work had been done under Mr. Harrison's supervision. This establishment was discontinued at the close of the season of 1869-70, and for the following working season two vaccinators were entertained, their pay being provided from Local funds. These two vaccinators carried on operations in the part of the district which had not been brought under vaccination in the previous years. 12,883 operations, of which 94 per cent were successful, appear in the returns; this is a very large number for two vaccinators but as the people of Sambulpur have of their own accord given up the practice of inoculation and readily bring their chil- dren for vaccination, the returns may be correct. Operations were performed in 147 villages, of which 116 were inspected by Mr. Harrison. If no more than two vac- cinators can be provided for Sambalpur, I think it will be advisable to assign to each a defined circle containing from 80 to 100 villages within a moderate dis- tance of the Sadar station, a list being kept of the villages of each circle and a return made annually of the number of operations performed in each village. 33. From the above review of the work of the season of 1870-71, it is apparent that the efforts to extend vaccination in the different districts have achieved a fair amount of success ; but in some districts it has been attempted to carry on operations over a wider area than could be properly superintended by the Civil Surgeon. What is required is, that there shall be in every district a certain defined area so far protected against small-pox that when an epidemic accession of the scourge supervenes the immunity of the protected circle com- pared with rest of the district shall be plainly evident; but to ensure success the work must be carried on under competent supervision, and the area to be brought under vaccination should not be wider than the Civil Surgeon is able to supervise; but as I have said before, I believe that with the assistance of relia- ble Native Superintendents the Civil Surgeons of the majority of the districts in these Provinces are able and willing to undertake the superintendence of vacci- nation over a wide circle of their districts, provided that suitable provision is made for their moving about in camp, and as I have shown with reference to Seoni, Betul and Chhindwara, the Civil Surgeon moving about in the district in the cold weather in the work of superintending vaccination and enquiring into sanitary condition of the people, can effect a great amount of good at a very little cost. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, S. C. TOWNSEND, Sanitary Commissioner.
APPENDIX No. I. Report on the Vaccine operations in the Seoni district, Central Provinces, during the season 1870-71. The Chief Commissioner having decided that a part of the Vaccine Establishment of the Central Provinces should commence operations in the Seoni district during the last cold season under the superintendence of the Civil Surgeon, a Native Superintendent and 10 Vaccinators arrived on the 19th of October 1870. The plan sketched for the season's operations was as follows ,10 The first day's examination of this man's work convinced me that all was not right, cases that should have been entered as unsuccessful were reported successful, whilst many children had escaped being vaccinated altogether. I soon arrived at a village in the heart of the jungle called Lamajotí, in which a number of children were returned as vaccinated ; I found, however that this was false, the man had not been in the village, nor had the children been vaccinated on enquiry the vaccinator assured me that a tolá of another village bearing the same name was that he worked in. I was obliged to accept this at the time, pending further enquiries, and I subsequently ascertained that a second village of this name did not exist. The matter has been reported to the Sanitary Commissioner, who has directed the man to be dismissed; his returns have all been carefully examined, and all false entries discovered have been expunged The next circle examined was Ashtá, under the sole charge of Imdád Alí,11 been ignored altogether, 2 had been Visited, but nothing was done, and in 4 only did I see any results this has been reported to your office, and in accordance with your orders the man has been fined and dismissed. His cases have been, as a matter of course, struck out of the returns. I intended to have examined still more closely both his and Nabbú Khàn's circle, but I hurried back on April 20th to send off the returns only to find that few of the vaccinators had sent in their returns; they were all, however, received by the 25th of April, with the exception of Nabbú Khan's, whose returns were delayed till the end of the month, and those of Abdulsa- lám Khán, who failed altogether to forward his. I sent four parwánas ordering him in with his books, of these he took no notice, I at length sent out a man for them, who did not return till the 17th of May. My plan of inspection was as follows Avoiding altogether the main lines of communication, where probably the work was well done, 1 went backwards and forwards through each man's circle, examining about 6 to 10 villages a day, or as many as I could accomplish In each village, after having examined the children and compared the numbers vaccinated with the returns, and having collected as many listeners as could be procured, I explained the objects of vacci- nation, the diffeience between, or rather its similarity to small-pox, and impressed on the people the value of the operation, and although the vaccinators had done a good deal in the same direction, still 1 found the ideas of many very hazy on the subject, while others again said all they knew was that it was the Sarkâr's huk n. In some villages again, I found that the people were disposed to view the matter in a religious light, and from the fact of small-pox and vac- cination being in some way connected in their minds, they resolved to worship their god Delí after the vesicles had healed, in the same manner that they are accustomed to do after leco- veiy from small-pox, with a cocoanut, a kid, rice, pan, &c. This new feature I considered rather a fortunate one, and did not discourage the idea But it must not be supposed that the vaccinators had an easy task, or that people who had never heard of vaccination befoie would willingly bring their children to be scored by a strange man simply because they were asked to do so , they had never heard of vaccnation in then lives, not had their fathers before them, and they not unnatulally were very unwilling to submit to the operation ; the same tale was told me in about 9 out of every 10 villages that I visited, directly the people heard that the vaccinator was coming to their village, the ma- joiu.y of the poorer and more lgnorant classes tied to some adjoining villages, staying away two or three days, meanwhile the vaccmator had prevailed on the Málguzár probably, or some other influential person, to consent to submit their children, when therefore the poorer people heard or saw what their betters had done, and that no harm resulted, they returned, the re- sult being that after much loud talk on both sides,12 not have been less than 472 in Tálukas Ghansor and1 Gondí I based my calculations on the following ascertained facts:13 Before setting out on my first tour I proposed, in addition to vaccination duties, to direct my attention to two or three other subjects, viz:14 do not appear to be necessary factors in their production, they are found on high, dry, open plateaux as well as in low and moist localities. I would close this report with the remark that I feel convinced vast numbers of the fevers common in this part of the country are not due solely to malaria, and that we must look for the causes elsewhere. The usual returns are appended to this report, which is long overdue, owing to the negli- gence of the vaccinator, Abdulsalam Khan, before alluded to. They are as follows:15 The vaccinators attached to those circles marked with an asterisk, having completed their work before the end of the season, were transferred to the following circles, viz:16 10. I think, therefore, the plan already indicated of vaccinating children at a large village and then inspecting the results of vaccination at another village not far distant on the eighth day, and so on in a defined circle round each Registration Circle, superior to any other. The vaccinator is thus able to vaccinate at least a hundred children every week, as well as to see the results of the previous week's operations, no necessity ever arising of using crusts or points. The work of inspection is also rendered easier, both to the inspector and inspected ; while the parents are put to little or no inconvenience, and are only required to attend for a few hours on the first and eighth day of the operation. 11. If this plan be adopted in future years, I am confident that it will be found practi- cable to greatly reduce the staff of vaccinators. It only requires for its success the hearty co- operation of the district authorities, for by such help I was enabled in less than six weeks to personally superintend the vaccination and inspection of more than 900 children &quot; arm to arm.&quot; 12. As a rule each child had three punctures on each arm. This number might be considered too many, as producing an unnecessary amount of constitutional disturbance and suffering; but when the habits of the people are considered, and their extreme indifference to their children playing in mud and dust, I think that if the number of punctures were reduced, many of the cases would prove unsuccessful or give doubtful results. I have not myself observed any injurious consequences, nor were the constitutional symptoms more severe in those who had six vesicles than in those who had less. 13. Vaccine operations were brought to a close on the 30th April, but they could well have been continued up to the end of May in those circles above the ghats, for up to date of writing this report (28th May) I have vaccinated 28 children at the Charitable Dispensary and have not yet observed any loss of vigour in the virus, and every case vaccinated has hitherto proved successful. 14. Owing to the close of operations, as above stated, the work in five circles where vacci- nators were posted remains still to completed, and will have to be resumed next season. 15. It will be seen from Return No. 1 or the General Statement, that 17,224 children have been vaccinated, giving an average of 1,722 2/5 operations to each vaccinator. Of the total number vaccinated the results are as follows:17 18. If, therefore, the percentage of successful cases to total number vaccinated be considered small, it also proves that the vaccinators were careful to note the exact results of their operations, and were not influenced by any desire to show favourable results where they did not exist, and I can certify that, so far as my inspection of their work went, the results noted in their registers were accurate. 19. During my inspections the question of the almost absolute immunity from small- pox which vaccination is believed to confer was frequently a subject of discussion with the Malguzars and other influential people of the villages, and was of course doubted by the majority, although in no instance were they able to produce a child who had good marks of vaccination, in whom the natural disease had subsequently appeared. I always however, explained to them that if vaccination did not entirely prevent small-pox, still it was quite certain that at least ninety out of every hundred would escape from an attack of the disease if well vaccinated, whereas in an outbreak of small-pox half the number die. 20. The proof of the efficacy of vaccination against small-pox can, however, be only firmly established when the whole of the juvenile population of the district have been thorough- ly vaccinated for a series of not less than five years, and any reduction to this limit to the employment of the vaccine establishment, will, I fear, be attended with the same results as have been noticed in former years by the premature withdrawal of the establishment just at the very time when the effects of vaccination were beginning to be appreciated. 21. In addition to Return No 1, I also append Statements showing the work of each vaccinator in every village of his circle, as well as the number inspected by me. I have been enabled by making rapid journeys to the more distant posts to inspect the children of 261 villages, amounting in number to over 4,000, as well as personally to superintend the vaccination of 1,260 fresh cases. The results of these inspections have been forwarded to you from time to time during the season, and do not need repetition here. 22. The cost of the establishment during the season has been as follows :18 3rd Class Vaccinator Amir Khán has done good work. He is very intelligent and is deserving of promotion. I have also to report favourably of Guláb Singh and Bhawání Prasád 2nd, both of whom deserve promotion. The other vaccinators have also done very well. In conclusion I beg to offer my sincere thanks to the Deputy Commissioner, Major Playfair, for the active help he ever gave me and for his hearty co-operation in endeavouring to carry out the work as thoroughly as possible. Without his assistance I feel sure that but a very small share of success would have attended my efforts. The Tahsíldár of Chhindwárá, Amrit Ráo, is deserving of all the praise I can give him. He took an active interest in the work, and by attaching a chapráhí to each vaccinator in, his tahsil, rendered the work of the vaccinator very easy, and I specially bring him to your notice. APPENDIX No. 3. Copy of a letter from the Civil Assistant Surgeon, Betúl, to the Sanitary Commissioner Nágpúr,19 1,000, his totals for even the most populous circles would fall under 1,000, and in some not exceed two or three hundred. The total number vaccinated during the season 1870-71 amounts to 14,112, of these the successes in primary vaccination are said to amount to 11,446, and in secondary to 560, giving a total of 12,006 successful cases, or nearly 60 per 1,000 of population of circles where vacci- nators have been working. These returns must, however, be taken as rather exaggerating the number of successes, my inspections not leading me to expect such a proportionate number to vaccinated. In the Chicholí circle, where I saw all the work done up to 31st of January, the average of successes was about 93; the vaccinator makes his average for the whole season come to 98.2. His returns for January I know to be incorrect,20 Of the three first class vaccinators, Saiyad Núr is the best, but his returns are not accurate, his work as far as I saw was very good, but until I receive a report from the Superintendent I cannot say how many of the cases vaccinated in February and March are correctly entered. Praiáb) Singh I do not consider fit for further employ, he is old and past his work, he constantly neglects to leave the proper papers in the villages, his manner has led me to sup- pose that his brain is affected. He has never got on well with the villagers. Sheo Prasád is hardly fit to be a first class vaccinator, he seems to work when it pleases him and to rest when so disposed, in January for eighteen days he did nothing, and could offer no explanation. He is careless in recording results, taking the parent's word, and not seeing the child. A good deal of his work has been done with crusts. Amir Singh has done good work, he has a tendency to be lazy and take holidays; his returns are reliable. Ganpat Singh has done very little during the season, with a very large proportion of failures. He certainly had to encounter some opposition in the Sháhpúr circle, and could do but very little arm to arm vaccination. Amír Ud-din, while working with fresh lymph the results were extremely good, latterly he has been working with crusts and the results are less favourable. His returns are reliable. Azím Ud-dín, As far as my inspection permits me to judge, this man's work is also very good. I only saw 568 in his circle, but of these 545 were successful. He is careless in pre- paring and leaving the village forms, and the Police have sent a long written report of an al- leged case in which he accepted bribes not to vaccinate. It is, however, by no means clear that he did so, the man who accuses him could not name the men who gave the money, and it is more than probable that the charge would not bear investigation. Bihárí Lál. Of the 1,018 vaccinated by this man, or rather entered in his register, only 716 were done by him, this seems to me to be very little work for five months. He is a man of no energy, has but little tact, and makes difficulties when none ought to exist. Raghunáth Prasád has done very well indeed, I saw 660 cases vaccinated by him, 638 were successful, all with three or four vesicles. His returns are reliable, he is careful and in- telligent. Abdul Rahmán Khán was one of those men who bring vaccination into discredit, his returns were utterly unreliable and his work very bad, he seldom attempted to raise more than one vesicle, with your sanction he was dismissed at the end of February. APPENDIX No. 4. Copy of a letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, Cto the Commissioner, Nagpur Division,21 the population may be ascertained with some degree of accuracy, and I beg to recommend the following for your consideration. 3. Each vaccinator employed should be appointed to a certain defined circle and be held responsible for the vaccination within that circle. The amount of population which it would be advisable to place under one vaccinator would depend very much on its density. In a fairly populous tract of country, one vaccinator to from 50,000 to 60,000 people would be a fair proportion. No vaccination circle should comprise an area of more than 300 or 350 square miles. 4. Taking the district of Nágpúr, I would sub-divide it as follows:22 The cost of the establishment I have proposed for the Nágpúr district would be as fol- lows :23 and to be the special charge of one vaccinator, who will reside in his circle, and carry on vaccination therein every year, 2. Now that the Imperial Vaccination Department is not to work at all in this Division, it is absolutely necessary that some permanent vaccine establishment should be organised from Local Funds. On this point all the Deputy Some of the Deputy Commissioners have for a year or Commissioners* of this Division are in en- two past managed to get a great deal of vaccination done tire accord with yourself and me. The sta- tistics of deaths from small-pox in the north- ern districts during 1869 are terrible enough to make us feel the necessity for protecting the people in this Division before the next epidemic attacks us. Some of the Deputy Commissioners have for a year or two past managed to get a great deal of vaccination done in their districts. 2. Now that the Imperial Vaccination Department is not to work at all in this Division, it is absolutely necessary that some permanent vaccine establishment should be organised from Local Funds. On this point all the Deputy Commissioners* of this Division are in en- tire accord with yourself and me. The sta- tistics of deaths from small-pox in the north- ern districts during 1869 are terrible enough to make us feel the necessity for protecting the people in this Division before the next epidemic attacks us. 3. I think that the second of your points (summarised in para. 2 above) is extremely reassuring. You show (and it seems to me your calculations are quite correct) that by vacci- nating 30 per mille of the population year by year, we shall, after a few years' time, have the population thoroughly protected. Thus we must make effort to vaccinate4 than if they were mere wandering vaccinators. I think it might be well to provide each vaccinator with a small house at some central town or village of his circle. Such house could in time be a dispensing place for simple drugs, such as quinine, cholera medicines, ammonia for snake bites, and such like things. 7. Your proposals contemplate giving the vaccinators full salary all through the year, whereas it has been hitherto the custom to put these people on half salary during the recess. I fully agree in your view, that if we want men to work well and honestly during the season, we must not leave them with insufficient means of support during the recess. The men cannot make their livelihood in any other way during the short recess; while they can, if they reside in their circles, be useful in dispensing fever medicines during the rainy and sickly seasons. I think, however, that your proposals as to the vaccinators' salaries might be to some extent modified, so as to admit of payment by results for successful vaccinations. I would put the salaries of the vaccinators at Rs. 7, Rs. 9. and Rs. 11 per mensem, and an allowance of 1 rupee for every 20 successful operations might be granted to each vaccinator at the end of the season. The grant of the allowance would depend on the reports of the Superintendent and the Civil Surgeon as to the state of things in each circle at the time of their visits, and on the report of the Tahsildar as to the general conduct of the vaccinator. The men could live on their salaries (as now suggested,) and the capitation allowance would help to make them active and attentive. Effective supervision would, it is hoped, reduce the risk of fudging returns for the sake of the allowance to a minimum. A vaccinator who worked well might manage 1,500 suc- cessful operations in the year. If so, he would earn Rs. 75 over and above his salary . The yearly earnings of a 1st class vaccinator who effected 1,500 successful operations, would be:11 25 Copy of a letter from the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, to the Sanitay Commis- sioner, Central Provinces, No. 2715-259, dated Nágpúr, 17th October 1870. I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter No. 460, of 13th September with enclosures, and to communicate the following instructions regarding the proposals there made. 2 The scheme which has been drawn up for introducing a permanent localised system of vaccination in the Nagpúr district, and partially in the other districts of the Nagpúr Division, has Colonel Keatinge's warm approval. Your proposals that each vaccinator should be restrict- ed to a certain defined circle, and should be held responsible for vaccination within that circle, appears to the Officiating Chief Commissioner to be the only plan calculated to secure steady and substantial progress in vaccination, and he therefore regards this as the cardinal point in your scheme. Your further suggestion that vaccinators should not be moved from the circles to which they are appointed, except under urgent necessity, follows as a corollary to your first proposition. 3. The Officiating Chief Commissioner also concurs in the expediency of making vaccina- tion circles conterminous with those which have been fixed for Registration purposes, and the modus operandi suggested for vaccinators in the 7th para, of your letter No. 450 to the Com- missioner, Nagpur, recommends itselt to him as likely to prove popular and successful. 26 * Letter from Commissioner, Nagpur, to Sanitary Com- missioner , para 7.A. Statement No. I. Showing particulars of Vaccination in each Circle of superintendence in the Central Provinces during the year 1870-71. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Circle. Name and rank of Superintendent. Number of Native Superinten- dents Number of Vaccinators. Total number of persons vacci- nated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State in which vaccinations were per- formed during the year. Pepulation of area included in last column. Name of portion of Dis- trict or Town. Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. Percentage of successful cases, excluding &quot;those unknown&quot; fromthe total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. A. B C. D. A. B. C. D. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Total Successful. Unsuccessful, including those &quot;doubtful&quot;. Unknown. Total. Male. Female. Christians Hindus. Mohammadans Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those &quot;doubtful&quot;. Unknown. In primary vaccina- tion. In secondary vaccina- tion. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. A. G. Price, Apo- thecary. 1 3 Native Superintendents 10 30 Vaccinators 18,005 35,332 Chhindwara .. 260,913 Chhindwara Tahsil.. 6,353 6,964 4 11,527 267 1,519 2,823 10,494 12,225 876 216 13,317 320 20 5 345 93.3 94.1 1664.6 Chhindwara Town... 202 227 3 300 75 51 155 274 391 32 6 429 25 1 ... 26 92.4 96.1 429.0 Lodhikhera Town ... 200 152 ... 286 19 47 153 199 267 85 ... 352 34 4 ... 38 75.8 89.4 352.0 Sausar Tahsil A. Statement No. II. Showing the monthly number and results of vaccinations performed in each Circle of superintendence in the Central Provinces during the year1870-71. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of superintendenced. Months. Districts in which operations Were chiefly conducted in each month. Total number vaccinated. Results. Total Average percentage of successful cases excluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown. April 1870... Chanda 5,322 3,020 2,069 233 5,322 59.3 May A Statement No III. Showing the expenditure of Vaccine Department in each Circle of superintendence in the Central Provinces during the year 1870-71. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vacci- nated. Percentage of success- ful cases, excluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the total. Cost of each successful case. A.A Statement No. IV. Showing results of the year 1870-71, as compared with those of each of the previous five years in the Central Provinces. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Years. Total number of persons vacci- nated. Successful. Ratio per cent successful, exclu- ding those unknown from the total. Number of Vaccinators. Cost of whole Vaccine Establishment. Cost of travelling allowances and contingencies. Total cost. Cost of each suc- cessful case. A. B. C. D. Paid by State. Paid from other sour- ces. Total. Number previously employed as inocu- lators or Native practitioners. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 1865-66 ... ... 4,757 2,666 63.0 20 ... 20 .. 9,349 I 1 1,223 5 1 10,572 6 2 3 15 5½ 1866-67... ... ... 22,367 19,584 89.2 20 ... 20 ... 10,150 6 2 895 14 7 11,046 4 9 0 8 9 1867-68... ... 34,100 28,318 833 30 ... 30 ... 11,745 5 0 930 6 9 12,675 11 9 0 7 1¾ 1868-69... ... 43,484 34,593 81.1 30 ... 30 ... 13,442 4 8 841 6 3 14,283 10 11 0 6 7¼ 1869-70 ..... 35,332 30,384 88.5 30 ... 30 ... 10,913 13 4 676 0 2 11,592 13 6 0 6 ¼ 1870-71 ..... 49,204 40,394 84.5 30 ... 30 ... 4,312 4 5 ... ... ... 4,312 4 5 0 1 8½
B. STATEMENT Showing particulars of vaccination in each Circle of Med 1 2. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 No. DISTRICT. Name and rank of Superin- tendent of Dispensary. Number of Native Super- intendents of Vaccina- tion attached to the Dispensary. Number of Vaccinators attached to the Dispen- sary. Total number of persons vaccin- ated. Collectoratc, Political Agency, or Native State, for the population of which the Dispensary is provided. Population of area included in last column. Name of Dispensary. A Sex. Males. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71 1869-70. 1 Sagar... ... W. Williamson, Surgeon Major... ... ... 1 1 3,889 3,867 Sagar... ... 479,645 Sagar Tahsil.. 2,784 2 ... ... ... ... 25 2 Sadar Bazar.. 17 3 ... .. 1 1 3,642 3,455 Kurai.. 2,224 4 ... ... ... ... 359 360 Malthon.. 163 5 ... .. ... ... 95 120 Shahgarh .. 55 6 ... ... ... ... 145 150 Banda .. 117 7 ... ... ... ... 59 38 Rehii.. 45 8 ... ... ... ... 108 135 Deori.. 101 9 ... ... ... ... 3 ... Garhakota ... 2 Total..... ... ... 2 2 8,325 8,133 479,645 5,508 2 30 Damoh... .. T. King, Hony. Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 2 2 1,481 390 Damoh .. 283,625 Damoh... 819 ... 11 Jabalpur... W. R Rice, M. D., Civil Surgeon... ... ... ... 7 3 5,196 3,215 Jabalpur.. 573,494 City & Cantt... 3,567 1 12 ... ... 1 ... 262 ... Patan 198 13 ... ... 1 1 2,165 1,783 Murwara 1,452 14 ... ... 1 1 1,845 1,011 Bijeraghogarh l,305 15 ... ... 2 1 1,542 590 Sihora 1,057 Total.... ... ... 12 6 11,010 6,599 573,494 7,579 3 16 Narsinghpur... T. P. Wright, Surgeon... ... ... 3 1 780 49 Narsinghpur. . 336,796 Narsinghpur. , 409 17 ... ... Gadarwara ... ... ... 18 Hoshangabad. P.Cullen,M.D.,Surgeon ... ... 1 1 1,281 783 Hoshangabad. 399,430 Hoshangabad.. 744 29 ... ... 1 1 1,385 1,103 Haida... ... 980 20 ... ... 1 ... 1,254 395 Seoni 645 21 ... ... ... ... 242 15 Sohagpur ... 146 Total... ... ... 3 2 4,162 2,296 399,430 2,515 1 2? Nimar ... J. M. Fleming, M. D Surgeon ... ... ... 1 1 870 313 Nimar... ... 190,507 Khandwa .. 390 23 ... ... 1 1 237 136 Burhanpur .. 108 TotalNo V. superintendence in the Central Provinces during the year 1870-71. 10 11 12 13 PRIMARY VACCINATION. REVACCINATION. Percentage of suc- cessful cases exclud- ing those''unknown&quot; from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. B C D A B C D Caste. Age. Results. Christian. Hindu. Mohammadan. Other castes. Under 1 year Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in - cluding those &quot;doubtful.&quot; Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, in - cluding those &quot;doubtful.&quot; Unknown. Total. In primary vacci- nation. In secondary vac- cination. 3 3,326 560 ... 1,513 2,376 2,585 1,186 118 3,889 52 27 11 90 68.5 65.8 3889 ... 23 2 ... 6 19 8 17 .. 25 ... ... ... ... 32.0 ... .. ... 3,019 623 ... 1,361 2,281 2,092 1,049 501 3,642 419 73 22 514 66.6 85.1 3642 ... 359 ... ... 36 323 236 123 ... 359 ... ... ... ... 65.7 .. ... ... 93 2 ... 2 93 66 21 8 95 6 ... 15 21 75.8 100.0 ... ... 96 27 22 12 133 74 71 ... 145 ... ... ... ... 51.0 ... ... ... 57 2 ... 4 55 39 14 6 59 ... ... ... ... 73.5 ... ... ... 104 4 ... 100 8 33 68 7 108 ... ... ... ... 32.6 ... ... ... 2 1 ... 1 2 1 2 ... 3 ... ... ... ... 33.3 ... ... 3 7,079 1,221 22 3,035 5,290 5,134 2,551 640 8,325 477 100 48 625 66.8 82.6 4162.5 3 555 74 849 132 1,349 990 424 67 1,481 77 37 ... 114 70.0 67.5 740.5 96 3,545 1,555 ... 628 4,568 4,363 833 ... 5,196 ... ... ... ... 83.9 ... 742.2 ... 181 81 ... 56 206 227 35 ... 262 ... ... ... ... 86.6 ... 262.0 ... 1,929 236 ... 278 1,887 2,119 46 ... 2,165 ... ... ... ... 97.8 ... 2165.0 ... 1,592 253 ... 238 1,607 1,710 135 ... 1,845 ... ... ... ... 92.6 ... 1845.0 ... 1,350 192 ... 276 1,266 1,152 390 ... 1,542 ... ... ... ... 74.7 ... 771.0 96 8,597 2,317 ... 1,476 9,534 9,571 1,439 ... 11,010 ... ... ... ... 86.9 ... 917.5 5 699 76 ... 85 695 456 219 105 780 ... ... ... ... 67.5 ... 260.0 3 904 107 267 909 372 1,131 149 1 1,281 4 ... ... 4 88.3 100.0 1281.0 7 806 326 246 478 907 1,223 162 ... 1,385 162 ... ... 162 88.3 100.0 1385.0 ... 822 102 330 723 531 974 197 83 1,254 ... ... . ... 83.1 ... 1254.0 ... 146 46 50 43 199 129 56 57 242 ... ... ... ... 69.7 ... ... 10 2,678 581 893 2,153 2,009 3,457 564 141 4,162 166 ... ... 166 85.9 100.0 1387.3 12 654 203 1 259 611 841 29 ... 870 5 1 ... 6 96.6 83.3 870.0 1 191 43 2 93 144 147 90 ... 237 ... ... ... ... 62.0 ... 237.0 13 845 246 3 352 755 988 119 ... 1,107 5 1 ... 6 89.2 83.3 553.5 6 2,492 23 11 172 2,360 1,974 452 106 2,532 74 ... ... 74 81.3 100.0 2532.0 ... 966 76 242 105 1,179 886 329 69 1,284 44 15 ... 59 72.9 74.5 428.0 3 4,558 142 1,495 1,831 4,367 5,954 240 4 6,198 ... ... ... ... 96.2 ... 1239.6
B. STATEMENT 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 No District. Name and rank of Superin- tendent of Dispensary. Number of native super- intendents of vaccina- tion attached to the- Dispensary. Number of vaccinators attached to the dispen- sary. Total number of persons vaccin- ated. Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State for the population of which the Dispensary is provided. Population of area included in last column. Name of Dispensary. A Sex. Males. Females. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1970-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 28 Nagpur... ... S. C. Townsend, Supdt of Vaccination... ... 1 ... 11 10 9,159 16,878 Nagpur... 584,742 Nagpur ... 4,755 4,404 29 ... ... ... ... 228 ... Mowar... ... ... 1 ... 11 10 9,387 16,878 ... 584,742 ... 4,755 4,404 30 Wardha... C. Thipthorpe, 1st Class Asst. Apothecary ... 1 ... 26 3 4,546 3,461 Wardha... 343,269 Wardha... 2,643 1903 31 Hinganghat... 32 Arvi... 33 Sindi 34 Deoli 35 Chanda... M. Craggs, 2nd Class Apothecary... ... ... 3 4 5,241 4,350 Chanda... 414,951 Chanda... 3,103 2,138 36 U. Godavari... J. B. Gaffney, Assistant Surgeon ... ... ... 1 196 810 U. Godavari... 54,684 Sironcha... 109 87 37 Raipur... D. W. Trimnell,Surgeon l ... 4 4 5,299 2,311 Raipur... 835,622 Raipur 2,993 2,306 38 ... ... ... ... 81 38 Atang ... 25 56 39 ... ... ... ... 116 119 Drug ... 107 39 40 ... ... ... ... 409 312 Dhamtari ... 294 115 1 ... 4 4 5,935 2,789 ... 835,622 3,419 2,516 41 Bilaspur.. J. B. Ferdinands, N. D. ... ... 2 1 1,066 47 Bilaspur... 478,056 Bilaspur... 553 513 42 Sambalpur... .. J. E. Harrison, Honorary Assistant Surgeon ... ... ... 2 .. 12,883 ... Sambalpur ... 208,296 Sambalpur .. 6,358 6,525 Central... ... Provinces' Total... ... 4 ... 61 14 76,133 49,227 6210,260 43,513 32,392
No. VREPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1871 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1872. Y.No. 4193/143 FROM THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To DR. J. BRAKE, OFFICIATING SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 18th November 1872. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your report on the operations of the Vaccine Department in the districts of Betul, .Chhindwara and Seoni during the year 1871-72, and of the vaccina- tion work accomplished in the other districts of the Province during the same period. 2. The number of persons vaccinated in the three districts in which the regular staff of Vaccinators is employed was 33,380, and this represents all the work done by the department during the year, In the year 1870-71, 42,651 persons were vaccinated in those dis- tricts, and the Vaccination department performed in all 49,204 ope- rations. In the other districts of the Province, where under the superin- tendence of Civil Surgeons Vaccinators are employed and paid from funds locally raised, 75,500 persons were vaccinated, compared with 76,133 in 1870-71. Taking all the vaccination work together 108,880 operations in 1871-72 are shown, against 125,337 in 1870-71. 3. The falling off in the number of operations has been almost entirely confined to the work of the special department, and is confined to the districts of Chhindwara and Betul. In Seoni the number of vaccinated was larger than in the previous year. In Betul the Vaccinators appear to have worked less diligently than they should have done, and to their want of energy and dili- gence the smaller out-turn of work is to be in part attributed. But partly also the fact that for some years past now vaccine operations have been going on in that district will account for fewer children vaccinated. The children who are unprotected by the operation are not found in such large numbers together in the same place. If this ac- counts partially for the smaller amount of work performed in Betul it explains much more completely the apparently less favourable results, Qj-262 of the year's work in Chhindwara, less favourable as compared with the year preceding. Mr. Price, the officer in medical charge of that district, reports that the Vaccinators worked well and that the people offered no opposition to them, and he attributes the decrease in the number of operations performed solely to the large number performed in former years, when Chhindwara was the centre of the operations of the Vaccination Department. 4. The Chief Commissioner is satisfied that in all these districts the Civil Surgeons have worked zealously, and though in Betul and Seoni their Vaccinators did not exert themselves to the full extent that their duty demanded of them, Mr. Morris is satisfied with the work that has been done, although it is less than was. performed in some other years. 5. The percentage of successful operations on all operations per- formed also shows favourably, 90.65 against 84.5 in 1870-71. Seoni especially shows improvement in this respect. In 1870-71 the per- centage of successful operations was 85.9, in 1871-72 it was 92.9. 6. Mr. Price in Chhindwara appears to have been successful in. carrying out his plan of collecting children at certain centrally situ- ated villages and vaccinating them there, but in parts of that dis- trict even he experienced difficulty in inducing people to bring their children to him, and in such cases each separate village may be visited by a Vaccinator. In Seoni Dr. Barter did not attempt to collect children at any point away from their homes, but sent his Vaccinators from village to village. He believed that the plan of collecting children would be unpopular, and that erroneous notions concerning Vaccination would find their way to the villages and homes of the children, and would more particularly be entertained by their mothers. Dr. Barter attaches importance to the children being vaccinated in the presence of their mothers, so that these may see exactly what is done and learn from the Vaccinator the object and effect of the operation. Dr. Barter's anxiety in this respect seems to be justified by what is stated in your remarks on vaccination in Damoh. 7. The Chief Commissioner considers that so much can be said both for and against.these two different modes of proceeding that no de- finite orders can be given for the guidance of officers entrusted with the duty of directing vaccination establishments, and as it is very evident that both the Civil Surgeons of Chhindwara and Seoni have the success of their work at heart, he will leave it to their judgment and experience to pursue the plan which they find most easy to follow and most productive of results. The experience of different indi- viduals may be at variance, and the circumstances of districts differ, prejudice may be overcome in many different ways, and men are not all satisfied or convinced by the same methods or arguments. Where people too may take their children to a distance to be operated on by a European officer they may not be willing, to go out of their way to meet the Native Vaccinator.
3 8. You refer (page 6 of the Report) to Dr. Barter's making the peo- ple believe that vaccine disease is small-pox, only differing in degree,for which puja to &quot;Mata Devi&quot; is called for, and would have Vaccinators impress on the people that puja is quite unnecessary after successful vaccination. The Chief Commissioner thinks it quite supererogatory to do anything more than assure people that vaccination will protect their children from small-pox, and leave them to their own devices in the matter of performing puja or not. With such things we can have no concern. The people may draw their own deductions and follow their own fancies; any attempt to explain thoroughly the nature of vaccination and how it acts on the human body must fail to reach the comprehension of simple villagers. 9. In Seoni, as well as in Betul, several influential men set their faces against vaccination. In Seoni the opposition was overcome and the original opponents became allies. In Betul the Civil Surgeon failed in his endeavour to remove the prejudices of the influential Malguzar, Teji Patel; but he is sanguine of ultimate success, and the Chief Commissioner hopes to hear that his expectation has been fulfilled. 10. The attention of the Deputy Commissioner of Betul will be asked to Dr. Hall's remarks on the insanitary condition of several of the villages in that district. 11. Passing on to the remaining districts of the Central Pro- vinces in which a few Vaccinators are locally entertained, the number of persons vaccinated is shown to be 75,500,4 But the Chief Commissioner would remark that the negligence or apathy of Tahsildars can have had nothing to do with bad working and carelessness in the actual performance of operations, or with the apathy with which Hospital Assistants in the interior are themselves charged ; and secondly, though Tahsildars are expected to afford as- sistance in overcoming determined opposition on the part of any influential individual, and to support Vaccinators generally when they encounter difficulties, they cannot be expected to gather together children for Vaccinators to operate upon or to accompany Vacci- nators in their itinerations. 13. The Chief Commissioner is glad to learn that in Hoshanga bad arrangements are being matured for increasing the staff of Vacci- nators. As yet the numbers annually vaccinated are small, and a, decrease is shown, compared with the preceding year. Considering that Hoshangabad is a large and thriving district with several towns of importance, better results should be shown. Nimar shows progress and gives promise of still further advance. It seems as if vaccination could be carried further into the interior of the district. In Balaghat the success obtained is not commensurate with the efforts made, and the difficulty appears to be in supervising the Vac- cinators. Bhandara shows very favourable returns, and vaccination appears to have gained a footing there. And the same may be said of Nag- pur. Wardha does not present such favourable results, and at Hingan- ghat and Sindi at any rate the work of the Vaccinators was indiffe- rent. In Chanda and Raipur vaccination work was carried on with some vigour. In your remarks on Raipur you mention that a man practising inoculation was punished by the Tahsildar of Khairagarh. This case will be inquired into, as inoculation has not been rendered penal; and unless vaccination replaces inoculation, the latter practice should not be suppressed. Your own personal testimony to the readiness with which vac- cination is accepted in Chhattisgarh, including Sambalpur, has been perused with satisfaction by the Chief Commissioner. 14. The expenditure on account of the special vaccination esta- blishment during the year was Rs. 3,959, and the cost of each suc- cessful operation is shown at 2 annas 2¼ pie. Municipalities spent in addition to this Rs. 2,161, and the cost of each operation performed by Municipal Vaccinators was rather less than 2 annas. Local Funds spent Rs. 3,901 on vaccination, and the cost of each operation per- formed by Vaccinators paid from this sum was 1 anna 4½ pie. Altogether Rs. 12,248 were spent on vaccination; 108,880 persons were vaccinated, of whom 87 per cent successfully, and the cost of each successful case of vaccination was 2 annas 1¾ pie.
5 15. The Chief Commissioner regards these results as extremely satisfactory, and he is glad to find that Municipalities are gradually coming to appreciate vaccination and to provide funds for its extension. The Local Funds Committees also contribute liberally, considering the means at their disposal. Dr. Townsend did very much for vaccination, chiefly in the Nagpur Division, and the Chief Commissioner desires to record his sense of the services rendered by him. The general direction and superintendence of vaccination, now devolved upon you, are, Mr. Morris feels convinced, in safe hands, and your former connec- tion with the department will doubtless cause you to feel a special interest in its success. To Drs. Barter and Hall and to Mr. Price the Chief Commissioner requests that you will communicate his appreciation of their labours, and he has also been gratified by the attention that the Medical officers in many other districts have bestowed on vaccination, more especially in Chanda, Raipur, Bilaspur, Bhandara, Sambalpur, and Nimar. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. NEILL, Offg. Secretary. Qj-6-17-375
No. 138 FROM THE OFFICIATING SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, Dated Nagpur, the 23rd July 1872. SIR, I have the honor to forward for the information of the Chief Com- missioner the Vaccination Returns of the year ending March 31st 1872. Having assumed charge of the Office of Sanitary Commissioner and Superintendent General of Vaccination after the close of the vaccinating season, most of my remarks are founded upon the reports received from the Superin- tendents and the several Medical Officers of districts. The last of these reports only reached me on June 27th. As in the preceding year, operations have been carried on by the special Vaccination Department in the three Satpura districts of Chhindwara, Seoni, and Betul; ten Vaccinators with a Native Superintendent working in each, under the direct supervision of the Medical Officers, who have marched about in their respective districts as much as their other duties would permit, inspecting the work of their subordinates and removing difficulties where these have presented themselves. In addition to this special Provincial Establishment, 4 Native Superin- tendents and 61 Vaccinators have been employed in other districts in the Provinces, and (with one exception) these have been paid from Local and Muni- cipal Funds. The exception is at Nagpur, where the Native Superintendent receives the pay of a 2nd class Hospital Assistant from Government and a similar sum from Local Funds to make up his salary. Besides the one at Nagpur, Superin- tendents paid for from Local Funds have been employed in the Balaghat, Chanda, and Raipur districts, and Vaccinators in all districts but the Upper Godavari. The total cost for the year has been Rs. 12,248, or Rs. 38 more than in 1870-71. Of this sum, Rs. 3,959 have been paid from Provincial revenues, being Rs. 353 less than in preceding year, the difference in total expenditure being met from Local Funds. With the object of keeping up a supply of fresh lymph, vaccination has been performed week by week and from arm to arm at the dispensaries of Nagpur and Chhindwara throughout the year, and at Bhandara during July, August, and September. The results have been favourable. L & Qj2 At Nagpur the number successfully vaccinated during the hot and rainy- months varied from 57 in September to 103 in June, the ratio per cent of success being 76.69 in July to 95.06 in May, the average for the whole year being 83.66. In Chindwara the successful cases varied from 6 in June to 31 in Sep- tember, with percentage from 54.5 to complete success, the average for the year being 93.41. In Bhandara the successful cases varied from 11 in August to 21 in July, with a percentage of success of from 72.2 to 84, the average for the year being 94.35. The climate of Chhindwara is more favourable than that of most Sadar towns in the Provinces, but the same cannot be said of the city of Nagpur, and as it has been demonstrated that fresh and active lymph can be obtained there throughout the year, there is no reason why, with care, attention, and interest in the work, a few cases may not be successfully vaccinated from week to week at the head-quarter towns of other districts. From the fresh lymph so kept up at Nagpur, Chhindwara, and Bhandara, supplemented by supplies received from England, the North-West Provinces, Calcutta, and Poona, vaccination was spread throughout the Provinces, the first distribution for the season being made from Nagpur on 21st October, follow- ed by others in the same and succeeding months. Tubes filled in and received from England were forwarded to all stations in the Provinces and to the Medical Officer in charge of the Bhopal Agency at Sehore. There was complete failure from its use at Sagar, Narsinghpur, Ho- shangabad, Nimar, Mandla, Balaghat, Wardha, Sironcha, and Bilaspur. The Civil Surgeons of Narsinghpur and Hoshangabad attributing this to the unusual heat during the month. At the eleven other stations (including Sehore) there was more or less success. The lymph from 39 tubes was used upon 79 persons, and with success in 43 cases. The Civil Surgeon of Jabalpur reports that at first the English lymph appeared very sluggish, vesicles not reaching maturity till the thirteenth day, but lymph having been taken from these on the tenth day, the vesicles obtained from its use rose in the usual time and the virus from them was good. The Civil Surgeon of Bhandara notes that the first vesicles were small and irregular, but after a few transfers the vaccination succeeded well. Vaccination had been fairly started throughout the Provinces by the mid- dle of November, but in some districts, especially those of the Narbada Division, the extreme heat seemed to militate against success, and not much good work was done till December. At Mandla the Medical Officer on examination on January 3rd found the work bad, and had to stop it for fresh supplies of lymph, and in the Upper Godavari district the Civil Surgeon was not successful till January, and very few persons were vaccinated in this district. Throughout the year there have been 33,380 operated upon by the De- partment in the three districts of Chhindwara, Seoni, and Betul, being less by 15,824 than in 1870-71, but in the season under review no work was done by them in Chanda and Nagpur. The number of successful cases was 28,775, against 40,394 in former year. The numbers operated upon by the local Vaccinators in the other dis- tricts are also less, but only by 633; but the successful cases were more numerous, as 62,413 to 61,641.
3 The grand total of operations was 108,880, against 125,337 in 1870-71 ; those under one year of age numbered 33,341, against 24,738. The recorded percentage of success was greater both with the departmental and local Vaccinators. 1871-72. 1870-71. Vaccine Department ... ... 90.65 84.5 Local Vaccination ... ... 85.47 83.1 The cost of each successful operation has increased from 1 anna 11 pies to 2 annas 1¾ pie. 1871-72. 1870-71. A. P. A. P. By Department ... ... 2 2¼ 1 8½ Municipal Vaccinators ... ... 1 1½ 0 10½ Paid from Local Funds ... ... 1 4½ 3 1½ 2 1¾ 1 11 I have annexed (overleaf) a return of deaths from small-pox reported from the several districts throughout the year, from which it will be seen that there was considerable mortality in Raipur, Nimar, Bilaspur, Mandla, Wardha, and Nagpur, where the deaths exceeded 100. These returns, however, cannot be received as perfectly correct, since most diseases accompanied by eruptions of any kind are re- turned as small-pox and measles. Chicken-pox and common skin diseases, especially when associated with any elevation of temperature, are almost always con- founded in the reports received. This has been alluded to in paras. 40 and 41 of the Seoni report and by the Civil Surgeons of Jabalpur and Damoh. The reports from the Medical Officers of Betul, Chhindwara, and Seoni are given in extenso, and I have made abstracts of those received from other Civil Surgeons showing the results of vaccine operations in their respective districts. I quite agree with Dr. Townsend's remark in para. 12 of his report for 1870-71, that vaccination cannot be (successfully) carried on without the aid of the Medical Officers of districts; and, except under emergency, I should restrict the operations to circles or sub-divisions which can be visited by the Civil Surgeons or by tried and trustworthy Superintendents. Portions of every Vaccinator's work should be personally inspected by the Civil Surgeon, the man's registers and returns carefully checked and compared with the results seen. Every village of course cannot be visited by the inspecting officer, but the examination of a few taken at random will be generally sufficient to determine the reliability of the Vaccinator's returns and the character of his work. In Betul Dr. Hall did not take charge till late in January, and on pro- ceeding on tour during the following month found that little had been done up to that time. By personal explanation and persuasion he was generally able to overcome the objections of the people, the most notable failure being at the town of Betul, where the head Malguzar, Taji Patel, could not be induced to use his influence in favour of the operation, although he had seen its success in former years. Dr. Hall calculates that 37.55 per mille of the entire population of the circles where the work was carried on were successfully vaccinated during the year.
4 Return of deaths from Small-pox in each district from April 1871 to March 1872. DISTRICTS April 1871. May. June. July. August. Sept. October. Nov. Decr. January 1872 February. March. Total. Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total Male Female Total 1 Sagar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Damoh ... 1 2 3 1 2 3 ... 2 2 5 3 8 7 13 20 4 2 6 3 3 6 5 8 13 3 3 6 3 4 7 3 4 7 10 6 16 45 52 97 3 Murwara ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 2 2 4 5 2 7 4 Jabalpur .. 4 ... 4 ... ... ... 1 1 2 1 2 3 ... 5 5 1 1 2 3 3 .. .. ... .. 3 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 15 22 5 Narsinghpur 3 5 8 14 9 23 8 12 20 2 3 5 2 13 15 1 ... 1 ... 2 2 3 3 6 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 34 50 84 6 Hoshangabad .. 1 1 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 .. ... ... ... ... 1 3 4 ... 1 1 .. .. ... ... ... ... 1 4 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 9 13 7 Nimar 7 9 16 9 5 14 ... ... ... 2 ... 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 ... 3 3 1 ... 1 2 4 6 17 18 35 30 27 57 47 52 99 117 122 239 8 Burhanpur.. ... ... ... 22 26 48 10 1 11 ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 1 1 6 3 9 17 7 24 44 39 83 64 33 97 38 47 85 201 157 358 9 Mandla .. 31 7 38 18 14 32 20 15 35 10 7 17 13 5 18 .. ... ... 2 6 8 1 2 3 1 .. 1 2 1 3 2 5 7 15 6 21 115 68 183 10 Betul ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 Chhindwara 3 11 14 3 5 8 1 ... 1 2 4 6 ... 5 5 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 6 8 14 4 2 6 2 ... 2 22 37 59 12 Seoni .. .. ... ... 4 4 8 ... 1 1 ... 4 4 1 ... 1 .. .. ... 3 ... 3 .. 1 1 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 2 1 1 2 10 13 23 13 Balagbat ... 1 3 4 1 2 3 3 3 6 3 2 5 2 1 3 1 .. 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 .. 2 2 ... ... ... 1 2 3 3 ... 3 15 16 31 14 Bhandara .. ... 5 5 1 6 7 ... 13 13 .. 1 1 1 8 9 ... ... ... 1 2 3 1 .. 1 .. ... ... ... 1 1 2 1 3 11 7 18 17 44 61 15 Nagpur 2 1 3 ... 7 7 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 3 5 ... 2 2 ... .. ... 2 1 3 1 3 4 3 4 7 10 7 17 22 31 53 46 61 107 16 Wardha .. 3 5 8 ... 1 1 2 1 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 4 2 3 5 8 8 16 17 16 33 29 30 59 62 67 129 17 Chanda .. ... .. ... .. 3 3 1 ... 1 .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 4 3 1 4 6 4 10 12 11 23 18 Sironcha .. ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... 1 2 1 3 19 Raipur . 22 27 49 25 18 43 45 30 75 32 23 55 22 12 34 12 7 19 11 13 24 16 4 20 27 80 57 29 34 63 61 31 92 103 76 179 405 305 710 20 Bilaspur .. 15 11 26 10 15 25 33 29 62 15 19 34 12 14 26 1 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 ... .. ... 1 2 3 4 15 19 7 15 22 100 125 225 21 Sambalpur.. ... 2 2 4 2 6 1 ... 1 ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 4 9 Total ... 92 90 182 113 119 232 129 109 238 74 69 143 63 81 144 23 18 41 22 37 59 37 28 65 55 57 112 116 126 242 203 146 349 297 279 576 1,224 1,159 2,383
5 Taking the number of births registered for a year as 8,067 and the number of deaths under a year as 994, an approximation to the number under 1 year available for vaccination would be 7,073 ; the number vaccinated of that age was 2,619, leaving a balance of 4,454, or 62.9 under 1 year still unvaccinated in the district. I have little doubt that had Dr. Hall been able to visit the district earlier the amount of good work done would have been much greater. The Vaccinators as a body did not work as well as they should have done. Two left their circles without permission, and one attached to Multai was lazy and inattentive, leaving as many as 632 without enquiry as to result of operations. There was a good deal of sickness amongst the men. One Vaccinator, Behari Lall, accompanied the Civil Sugeon on his tour and did little work in his own Circle. In Chhindwara Mr. Price pursued the plan of collecting children in cer- tain central villages, taking care that the parents should not have any considera- ble distances to travel when bringing them; by this means he was able to vac- cinate large numbers directly from arm to arm with the highest ratio of success, a matter of considerable importance amongst people who do not recognise the difference between a true vaccine vesicle and a sore following the introduction of bad or imperfect lymph. Little objection appears to have been made to travel- ling short distances above the ghats, but much in the parganas below the ghats, I believe as much from apathy as any other reason, as there is little objection to the operation itself. The Jagirdar of Harrai in former years gave every assistance to myself when operating in his jaghir, and I am pleased to see that he has done the same in the the year under review. I would notice the large proportion of children under one year of age vacci- nated in the district, calculated to represent about 73 per cent of those living. The figures in my office differ from those of Mr. Price, but the result is about the same :6 been given ; and then, with the consent of the parents, one or two having been operated upon in the presence of the crowd, fear seemed to pass away, and example to have its influence, so that, as noticed in some of my published reports, I have often been mobbed by parents with their children, candidates for the operation, and few days passed without children being brought from distances in the afternoon, their parents or friends having been witnesses of the perform- ances of the morning. Dr. Hall's experiences in Betul seem to tally with my own. I found little opposition on the score of religion, the apathy of the people being the most difficult to overcome, and where this was not present there were ,dread of a new thing and objection to the shedding of even a drop or two of blood from the use of the lancet. With tact and energy European officers can generally succeed in persuad- ing the large bulk of the people, and even overcome strong opposition as Dr. Barter himself experienced; but it is very difficult to find a native who, unsupported by evidences of authority, is able to set aside the sinister counsels of any ignorant old woman where these seem to run with the fears and super- stitions of the hearers. Dr. Barter states that, except by old and experienced vaccinators, little was done before he himself had visited the neighbourhood. The Civil Surgeon cannot possibly go to every town or village, but by collecting the people from not too distant points, he may come into direct com- munication with the chief men of very many. The Native vaccinators, on subsequently visiting the villages to examine the results of any operations per- formed in the Superintendent's camp, are expected to vaccinate at their homes or at the Malguzar's house any children who may not have been brought to the rendezvous. I cannot agree with Dr. Barter that it is desirable to make the people believe that the vaccine disease is small-pox only differing in degree, for which puja to ' Mata Devi' is called for or desirable. Indeed this is quite opposed to my own directions to Vaccinators as given in paragraph 12, Chief Commissioner's Circular No. 43 of 1868, which was to the effect that they should impress upon all, sepecially the mothers of children, that puja involving trouble and expense was quite unnecessary after successful vaccination. Dr. Barter has zealously supervised the work in his district and in his report has entered into detail of his various tours and inspections. I would call attention to his remarks upon assistance received from Rama Lodi, of Kardi, Paragraphs 40 and 41 have been alluded to above, and the case of the Teli Patel of Rorni is a fair example of one of the difficulties to be overcome by Vaccinators in India. Taking the number of births reported in Seoni as, 10,890, and the number of deaths under 1 year as 1,708, the number available for vaccination may be computed as 9,182. The actual number operated upon was 2,641, leav- ing a balance of 6,541, or 71 per cent under 1 year still unvaccinated. Some of the Vaccinators appear to have failed from idleness or want of care. One left early in the season and one was dismissed as untrustworthy. Four suffered from sickness. One Abdul Wahab, an old Vaccinator, is reported to have done very well. SAGAR.7 lymph, and their first operations were successful. From the successful cases at Sagar vaccine crusts were supplied to Hospital Assistants at Banda, Shah- garh, and Malthon. At the last named branch nothing appears to have been attempted; at all the other branches a few were operated upon, but without the success that might have been expected to follow arm to arm vacci- nation properly carried out. The number vaccinated in the city and within a radius of 5 miles, exceeds that of last year, but there is a great falling off at Kurai. The old vaccinator resigned at an inopportune time, and subsequently his successor was removed to the neighbourhood of Sagar, as it was found practi- cally impossible for the Regimental Surgeon, who has also charge of the Civil Medical duties, to inspect the work at some distance from head-quarters. The percentage of successful cases, 81, shows an improvement on last year, but is still much below what it should be. It would seem undesirable to increase the number of Vaccinators in this district without arrangements being made for efficient supervision. DAMOH.8 Dr. Rice reports that the Municipality of Jabalpur cannot afford to pay for a Superintendent, and therefore vaccination is restricted to localities where the work can be inspected by himself or the Hospital Assistants. Only two cases of small-pox are known by the Civil Surgeon to have occurred; both were children of Eurasians of humble circumstances who had been visited by friends from Kamthi and Nagpur recently recovered from the disease. There was a great deal of chicken-pox in the district which was errone- ously reported as small-pox; though thousands of cases occurred only four people were said to have died. Dr. Rice had an opportunity of personally watching several cases in adults as well as children; and as I believe that many cases of varicella are returned as small-pox, even by educated Hospital Assistants, I give the symp- toms in detail as described by him, a careful observer, to show how closely the the milder form of disease resembles, in. its more striking features, the much more serious one. Dr. Rice notes that the chicken-pox as seen by him was chiefly of the vesicular character, attended with smart fever for the first two days; the eruption commencing in the face and back, extending next day to the chest, and finally reaching the extremities on the third day, fever coming on the. second day, when the eruption was fully established. On the morning of the third day the vesicles begin to dry up on the face, and in two days more they become shrivelled crusts, leaving no scar or depression on falling off. The vesicles were all accuminated and the contents generally clear, though some small ones contained pus. These symptoms to the inexperienced or careless might well be mistaken for those of small-pox, and indeed on the second day of eruption an experienced practitioner may be deceived. The zeal of Hospital Assistant Chuni Lall and of Sub-Assistant Surgeon Hurry Mohun Bose is commended. NARSINGHPUR.9 A proposal has been made to increase the staff of vaccinators during the next year, Municipal vaccinators being retained at Hoshangabad, Seoni, and Harda, an extra man appointed to Sohagpur and three vaccinators with a Superin- tendent, paid for from Local Funds, to be entertained in addition for the Hoshangabad Tahsil, the salaries of all to be raised and paid throughout the year. The vaccine circles have been reduced to 249 square miles with 34,000 inhabitants, more or less, and Dr. Cullen has given lists of the villages in the three Circles in which operations have been performed. In the Hoshangabad Circle 31 09 per mille were vaccinated, in Harda 64.77, and in Seoni 45.28. From these lists can be learnt in what villages assistance was given by the Malguzars and headmen, and others in which this was evidently withheld. Thus, in Niharea, a small village in the Harda Circle, 168.40 per mille were operated upon, and in Sadulpur, a village of 1,500 inhabitants in the same Circle, only one was vaccina- ted or .66 per mille. Dr. Cullen appears to have shown his usual zeal in carrying out the work. NIMAR.10 BHANDARA.11 16,904 births were reported during the year. 1,802 deaths of children under one year, or there abouts. leaving 15,102. Of these, 2,289 were operated upon, giving a balance of 12,813 children under 1 year untouched. WARDHA.12 preceding year vaccination was continued during months of the April, May, and June, 2,357 being operated upon with 1,890 successes. After working at and near Raipur men were sent to out-stations on 13th December, opera- tions were carried on in the Dhamda Pargana to the north of last year's area, 325 villages were included and 211 visited, in these 8,761 were vaccinated, the successes being 7,684, or 87.7 per cent. There was difficulty in carrying on arm to arm vaccination, owing to the objections of the people, but the Superin- tendent reports greater success than in former years. The Civil Surgeon did not inspect owing to the distance of the working ground from head-quarters. The Hospital Assistant at Raipur operated with success, and from him supplies of lymph were obtained at the commencement of the season. The 2nd Class Hospital Assistant, Mulchand, at Dhamtari, was very active, visiting a large number of the neighbouring villages, and when his dispensary was inspected in March upwards of 200 children whom he had successfully vaccinated were brought up for examination. Nothing was done at Arang and Simgah and very little at Drug, Throughout the district the number operated upon was 11,433, and the percen- tage of success 87.68. The Civil Surgeon reports that chicken-pox was very prevalent through- out the district, at the close of the last and beginning of present year (1872). This was followed by an out-break of small-pox, which usually occurs annually at this time. Small-pox occurred in the town of Raipur, the first case having been imported, no deaths reported. Inoculation is still carried on in some villages but less so than in former years. One Panda was punished by the Tahsildar of Khairagarh for this practice. BILASPUR.13 The operation was carried out from arm to arm in 197 villages, of which the Civil Surgeon visited 129. The number vaccinated by two men was 12,941, with a percentage of success of 93.72, numbers which appear exceptionally high, but which I believe are quite correct, as the Vaccinators are respected and welcome wherever they go and have no difficulty in collecting children. Great credit is due to the Civil Surgeon and his subordinates. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, JOHN BRAKE, Offg. Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces. L Qj-18-139-376
APPENDIX No. I. From Assistant Surgeon H. J Hall, Officiating Civil Surgeon, Betul District, to the Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces. REPORT OF THE VACCINE OPERATIONS CARRIED ON IN BETUL DISTRICT, CENTRAL PROVINCES, DURING THE SEASON OF 1871-72. Lymph received. I have the honor to forward the Vaccination Report of this district, together with Tabular Statements from I. to IV, for the season ending March 31st 1872. Lymph was received from Nagpur at the commencement of the season ; some of it was English and some Native. Vaccinations. On October 24th, 1871, 8 children were vaccinated at the Sadar Dispensary, Badnur, with this lymph. Of these, 4 were successful and 4 unsuccessful. These latter were re-vaccinated. On October 30th, 12 more children were operated on, 3 with English lymph and 9 with Nagpur lymph. Those done with the English lymph failed, and 5 out of the other 9 cases were successful. 6 out of the 7 unsuccessful cases were re-vaccinated on the 6th November. On November 1st seven children were vaccinated from the 4 cases done on the 24th ultimo; of these 6 were successful. On the 6th, 3 more were vaccinated from arm to arm, all of whom were successful. On the 8th and 14th, 6 and 3 children respectively were operated on from arm to arm from the cases done on the 1st and 6th. On the 14th, 10 fresh cases were vaccinated; 5 were successful and 5 doubtful. On the 20th, 5 more children were done from arm to arm successfully. From all these cases sufficient lymph was obtained, both in tubes and on points, to supply the Vaccinators. Arrival of Vaccinators. On November 1st, 1871, 8 Vaccinators arrived from Nagpur. One came on the 14th, and one on the 17th of same month. The Native Superintendent arrived on the 2nd December 1871. Vaccinators joining their Circles. See Statement I., columns 5, 6, and 7.16 From thence I moved on to the Circle of Masode. There were very few cases done here. Much intemittent fever prevailed in this part of the country during the year. I stopped only one day in the place, and in that short time, several of my camp people, including the only camel driver I had, one policeman, and a writer, were quite prostrated with a low form of intermittent fever. This, I think, proceeded from want of proper drainage, assisted in a great measure by the miserable state in which the wretched inhabitants live. During the few hours I remained I had 33 children vaccinated. On the 20th of February I proceeded to Atnair, where I found only 250 children vaccinated. This Circle of Atnair, together with the Circle of Masode, were in charge of Ummersing, who at the commencement of the season got fever, and, having gone home without permission, he was dismissed by the Sanitary Commissioner late in December ; consequently very little was done in these Circles during the season, and it was very late before I had a man at my disposal to send there. On February 22nd I encamped at the town of Betul, and regret to say that no exertion on my part would induce the head Malguzar, Tajee Patel, to lend the slightest assistance in bringing forward the children for inspection. Ultimately I was obliged to leave without seeing them. On reference to Statement I., column 8, it will be seen that the popula- tion of this Circle is 34,052, and there were only 167 children vaccinated during the year. This I entirely attribute to the opposition of the Malguzar, but next season I hope this Circle will show quite a different result. I arrived on the 24 th at Shahpur, a considerable village, situated 23 miles north of Betul, on the road to Etarsee. In this place I received every assistance from Ram Deen, the Malguzar, and his son, Sham Lall. They brought forward the children of 35 villages, and consequently 1 succeeded in getting 500 children vaccinated on the spot. There was nothing done here previous to my visit. From here I was obliged to return to the Sadar station on Dispensary duty. On March 23rd I proceeded to the Circle of Amla, where the Malguzar succeeded in collecting the children of 16 surrounding villages, and consequently I was enabled to have 352 fresh cases operated on in one day, I was particularly struck with the mortality which prevailed among the cattle of this place. The people stated that it was the result of small-pox. I suggested that they should vaccinate them all. I caused the carcasses of 25 to be either burned or buried before I left, and the entire village, which was in a most filthy state, to be thoroughly cleaned up. On the 26th I proceeded to Bordhar, where I was afforded every aid by the Malguzar, who collected the children of 56 villages. For two days my camp was crowded with people, and still they came. I succeeded in getting 1,045 children vaccinated at my tent during the two days I was encamped there. I proceeded from thence, on the 29th of March, to Salaya, where I found 202 operations performed, and I caused 507 fresh cases to be vaccinated before I left. The weather by this time having become very hot, and in consequence of several of the the Vaccinators reporting that their operations for some weeks back were very unsuccessful, I decided to call them in for the season, and proceeded to Betul, where I arrived on the 2nd of April. On looking over Statement No. 2 I was struck with the difference in the amount of work done in February and March, as compared with that of the preceding four months. Conduct of Vaccinators. The time that I have been in Medical charge of the district is so very short, that I have not had sufficient opportunity of becoming fully acquainted with the relative merits of the Vaccinators ; but, judging from the amount of work done by each man, and the number of unvaccinated children which I found and had done at my inspection, I feel obliged to state, that none of them did near as much as they should or could have done. I therefore think it better to forward the report of the Native Superintendent in original as I have received it from him.
17 Before bringing this report to a close I would state that most of the villages visited by me were filthy, but I would particularly draw your attention to the state of the towns of Multai, Betul, Amla, and Bordhai, all of which were in an extreme state of filth, particularly Betul and Multai, the Malguzars of which seemed perfectly indifferent about it. The total number vaccinated this season will be seen on reference to Statement I. to amount.to 11,444. Of these, 11,251 were primary cases, and 193 secondary. Of the primary, 8,708 were successful, being 37.55 per 1,000 of the entire population of the Circles where the work was carried on. The number of deaths under one year, were 984 ; between one and six, 923; and between six and twelve, 388. The births amounted to 3,800. This would leave about 7,316 under one year to be operated on. Of these, 2,619 have been done, still leaving near 4,700 for future operations. This calculation is made only for the Circles in which work has been carried on, and does not include children above one year, as I cannot procure the exact numbers for them. I have taken every care to ensure the correctness of these returns, and in some in- stances, as in the Circles of Multai, Morkha, and Bordhai, where I had reason to believe them inaccurate, I caused them to be thoroughly checked, and made as trustworthy as possible. Bearing in mind the number of children who have been operated on during the last few years, although the results of the present season are not so much as last, yet I consider it fair. We may expect the number to decrease in each successive year, until none but those born during the year remain. For expenditure of vaccination see Statement No. IV. There was no map of the district in my possession, the want of which is much felt. APPENDIX No. 2. From Mr. Apothecary A. G. Price, in Civil Medical charge, Chhindwara, to the Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces. ANNUAL REPORT ON VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CHHINDWARA DISTRICT, DURING THE YEAR 1871-72. I have the honor to submit the Anual Report on Vaccination in this district for the season 1871-72. In para. 13 of my report for last year I said that the regular work of the Vaccinators ceased on the 30th April, but that 28 children had been vaccinated up to end of May without any loss of vigour in the virus having been observed, as every case had proved successful. From these cases a few children from the town were vaccinated week by week under my immediate supervision from June to end of October, and a supply of fresh reliable lymph was thus kept up throughout the year. The following Tabular Statement shows the number of operations performed in each of these months and their results :18 I also received a supply of English lymph from you in October, and of 7 cases vac- cinated only 1 proved successful. From these sources of supply I was enabled to provide the Vaccinators with a few tubes each, and to send them to the same Circles in which they worked last year, between the 11th and 15th November. The results of &quot; arm to arm&quot; vaccination was so encouraging last year that I deter- mined even at the risk of doing less work, to direct that no other source of supply should be used unless circumstances prevented the Vaccinators from obtaining fresh lymph, and each man was supplied with spare tubes in which to keep up a supply in case of need. From the operations of last year it was expected that the people were fairly acquainted with the benefits of vaccination and that much unwillingness to bring up their children would not be shown by them this year, and the Vaccinators were directed to collect the children from a few villages at a time only, and from very short distances. In the Chhindwara Circle I worked at two opposite directions. In this way the fresh cases were brought from some distance on the first day, but on the eighth day had a very short distance to go. In many instances where the villages were far apart and the distance too great for chil- dren to be brought up for inspection, the Vaccinator after vaccinating a few children at a cen- tral village proceeded on the eighth day to these villages and there vaccinated all the others. This plan succeeded very well in the Chhindwara Circle, for although only a few opera- tions were performed each time the people had very short distances to go. It was also very gene- rally carried out in all the circles above the Ghats. Below the Ghats, however, much difficulty was experienced in collecting the children in the manner above described, and the Vaccinators received but little assistance of any kind from the Tahsildar ; the little that was given was un- productive of results. There can be no doubt that &quot; arm to arm&quot; vaccination is superior to that from any other method, either from crusts or points, and a glance at the village Statements, showing the work of each Vaccinator in every village, will show that in nearly all success was obtained in the first instance, and that only in a few (comparatively) were the results doubtful or unsuc- cessful ; and this point ought always to be borne in mind, viz, success with the first operation, for any one who does not know the difference between successful and unsuccessful vaccination, loses confidence in the operation if his child be subsequently attacked by small-pox after having been vaccinated unsuccessfully. During my inspections I had many opportunities of proving this point in several villages where, although the children had been vaccinated (unsuccessfully), for no mark of vaccination was perceptible on the arm, they suffered from small-pox and were brought forward as a proof of the inefficacy of vaccination to confer immunity from the disease. It is better therefore to endeavour to vaccinate well &quot; arm to arm&quot; and a few only, than to look for numbers, and this end has been steadily pointed out to the Vaccinators. Again I have used my utmost endeavours to impress on the Malgozars and village notables to have every child vaccinated in their villages if possible, for it is well known that vaccination will not confer entire immunity from small-pox if one-half of the inhabitants are unprotected. These do suffer from small-pox and a quantity of infecting matter during the disquamatory process is thrown off the patients, quite sufficient to create an epidemic when favouring circumstances arise, and it is perhaps in this way more than from any other that small pox is propagated. The amount of accumulated filth and excreta of all kinds in and around every village is well known, and in these are also the germs of small-pox. Owing to the large number of children vaccinated last year, there were not so many to operate upon this year, and the number vaccinated comprises only those born during the year and those who from sickness or other causes were not vaccinated lastyear ; and the work having been completed in many circles some time before the season for closing operations, I, in communication with yourself and the concurrence of the Deputy Commissioner, proposed
19 that two Vaccinators should be deputed to the Jaghir of Hurrai, on the north-west bor- der of the district, and for this purpose two men were selected for their skill in operating, and their kind and conciliating manner, and sent to the Jaghirdar, who was requested to give them all needful help, which was very readily granted. In two months they vaccinated 1,271 children. I purpose next year to send these men to the Pagara Jaghir, which borders on the Omret parganna. In this way it will be possible to extend vaccination to all the Jaghirs, without any addition to the strength of the establishment now working in the district, as the work will year by year become less heavy, when it comprises only the children born during the year. In General Statement No. I.,10,991 children are shown to have been vaccinated during the season. Of these, 1,271 are from the Hurrai Jaghir, leaving 9,720 for the district. The statistics of births and deaths during the year, as furnished by the Police, are as follows :20 The cost, therefore, of each case amounts to 1 anna and 10 pies, and of each successful case to 2 annas and 1 pie. The conduct of the establishment during the season has been very good generally. Native Superintendent Chito Ram has visited every post frequently, and supervised the work of the vaccinators very creditably, and I again bring him to your notice. 1st Class Vaccinator Mohamed Talib, Umret and Harrai Circles, worked very well. Most of his operations are from fresh lymph obtained from the arm. He is very conciliating with the people, and managed to overcome difficulties in his way without much trouble. I consider he is highly deserving of promotion. 1st Class Vaccinator Bhuwani Pershad, 1st Chourai Circle. This vaccinator is also very successful, he has had some difficulties to contend against, but overcame them without much trouble. My inspection of his work was very satisfactory. Most of his cases were arm to arm. 2nd Class Vaccinator Bhuvani Rershad, 2nd Chhindwara and Jhilmilee Circles.21 APPENDIX No. III. From Dr. J. Barter, Civil Surgeon, Seoni, to the Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces. REPORT ON VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE SEONI DISTRICT, CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE SEASON 1871-72 The plan of operations adopted during the previous season, as given in the report for that period, it may be remembered was to work from village to village, or rather from door to door, to spare neither time nor trouble in explaining to the people the benefits and objects of vaccination, and to rely on this system for results rather than on coercive measures by means of chupprassies. 2. My reasons for adopting this system being briefly as follow, I felt confident that were I to collect children at central points from groups of villages much indignation would be anoused, and as the mothers would not in a large number of cases accompany them the objects and benefits of the operation would probably never reach them ; and even supposing their friends took the trouble to explain what they had heard regarding vaccination, the information would reach unwilling ears, and in so distorted a shape as to render it absolutely valueless, the result would doubtless be that both fathers and mothers, not having heard a very clear account of the operation, and indignant at having their children taken to a dis- tance nolens volens to be operated on, would doubless concoct measures to escape the inflic- tion and baffle the Vaccinators in future years; this state of things would probably go on year after year, a never ending but increasing hostility. 3. On the other hand, by adopting the system of vaccinating the children at their homes under their mothers' eyes, and at the same time taking the trouble to explain its objects and reasons, familiarity with the operation would be induced, hostility and fear would diminish year by year, and though at first results may be low. still [ felt sure that the labour of explaining and coaxing would gradually diminish, and the total number of children vaccinated would increase instead of decline. It I may judge from the results of the year under report compared with the previous one I think I am justified in saying that my views are correct. 4. I knew that what I may call it the collective system had been tried elsewhere, and moreover, whilst I was not tied to any particular mode by the Sanitary Commissioner, I was aware his views tended so far in this direction, that to protect the greatest number of children possible within a given area should be the end aimed at, it was not without much thought therefore that I adopted a mode which, as regards totals, contrasted eventually unfavourably with other districts, but having consulted the Deputy Commissioner, Captain Saurm Brooke, whose knowledge of native views and thought was far superior to mine, and his ideas com- ciding exactly with mine, I adopted the system without hesitation as reported during the pre- vious year. 5. Though satisfied that my system was that most suitable to this district, still, before commencing operations during the present season, I again talked the matter over with Captain Brooke, the question to decide being whether it would be advisable to continue operations as conducted during the previous year; or, on the supposition that the people had become sufficiently familiarised with the operation to admit of the collective system being introduced, to adopt it in preference. Captain Brooke advised me not to change, stating that we had handled a matter most distasteful to the people so as to secure a maximum measure of good at a minimum amount of discontent, that as far as his information extended there were no complaints against the operation, that the dislike which naturally existed at first had given way to a considerable extent, and that the people had nothing at all events to complain of on the score of trouble, Vaccination it should be remembered was a subject the people both hated and feared, the former because it was foreign to their ideas, their manners and customs, and the latter because of their dread of offending the goddess Debi; to allay their fears and dispose of their harted was by no means an easy task, and Captain Brooke was of opinion, as the result of direct enquiry, that this end had been partially accomplished, and his advise therefore was to persevere in the same course. 6. There are in this district certain classes, as for instance Ponwars, originally of Rajput stock, they inhabit the rice-growing pergannas, the majority of them are respectable and well-to-do, their women seldom leave their houses and are indeed very little outside their own houses, they in common with other classes disliked vaccination, and from their domestic
22 habits would very naturally decline to take their children to a distance from their homes to be vaccinated, nor would they be more disposed to send them, especially those of tender age, in charge of their male relations; to hunt these people or their children out with chupprasies would raise a storm of indignation and hatred not easily allayed, and as we could not without coercion bring their children to us we adopted the other alternative and went to them, vaccin- ating the children under their mothers' eyes at their own doors. This system Captain Brooke and I determined to continue, and although the out-turn of work may perhaps be small, as much time is lost going from village to village, yet a few thousand children added by coercion to the total would be but a poor equivalent for the angry feelings and discontent that such a course would be certain to ensure ; on these gronnds therefore 1 decided to leave well alone and work during the present season from village to village as during the previous year. The Chief Commissioner's views, as expressed the latter part of paragraph 6 of his review on vaccination for 1870-71, received afterwards, decided the question definitely. 7. The establishment consisted of a Superintendent and ten men ; of these, six were ready to commenced work directly the season opened, and four arrived later. 8. On the 24th of October 1871 the first cases were operated on in the town of Seoni with lymph received from the Sanitary Commissioner. The vesicles resulting were at first unsuccessful; a second supply was received shortly after wards, which was successful; the opera- tions were continued and on the 8th of November tubes were filled with good lymph and and the first two men despatched, the remainder of the men were despatched soon afterwards, and by the 26th of November all bad left for their respective Circles. 9. I am also indebted to the Superintendent General of Vaccination, North-West Pro- vinces for several supplies of lymph which were of much use for distribution. 10. I decided to commence operations in the Katangi Tahsil first, leaving the Seoni Tahsil for the latter part of the season, because being above the ghats, and consequently somewhat cooler, successful vesicles could be produced later in April than in the low country. 11. Each man was allotted a Circle, as during the previous year; and his orders were to be very patient with the people in case opposition should be met with, to spare neither time nor trouble in endeavouring to bring the people round by gentle means, and if these failed to report to me. 12. I anticipate d little opposition in those parts of the district where operations were conducted last year but a large strip of the south-east portion of Katangi, all Durrasi, and Dongertal were left untouched last year, and here some difficulty may have been expected. 13. Towards the middle of December I made a rapid tour thought each man's Circle for the purpose of seeing how they were working, ascertaining the quality of the vesicles, enquiring into some difficulties reported, with a view to smoothing them over, and generally to push on work vigorously. 14. At Korai I found the Vaccinator, Sadat Allie, by no means inclined to exert himself, he had vaccinated 24 children only in exactly the same number of days, and with admitting that a large number of children there had either small-pox or had been previously vaccinated yet this result was so miserable that I recommended his removal; he was a low class of of man and not quite fit for the post; he however a few days after struck work, and returned to Nagpur. I was thus left for the remainder of the season with nine men only as the Sanitary Commissioner was unable to fill his place with an efficient man ; this Vaccinator's work was not only bad in quantity, but in quality, in fact it may be said he did nothing, and his returns have been altogether struck out. 15. A long strip of country east of Korai under charge of Shaikh Munnoo was next examined ; this man was a new hand, and not very expert at talking the people over, and as; nothing had been done there during the previous year, and the people unacquainted with the operation some opposition was experienced ; this, however, I was able to some extent to remedy, he was unfortunately laid up with fever for a month during the first part of the year. 16. Near Katangi, Abdul Wahab's work was excellent in every way; he is a good steady Vaccinator Qj&h -30-213- 375
23 17. North-east of Katangi, Appaji's work was fair, but the total was low, his reason being that he had been laid up with fever; he should have done better, as he is a Mahratta Brahmin and speaks the language of the people. 18. Towards the south-east of Katangi the work had been begun well by Behari Lall towards the Bhandara border, however, where nothing was attempted during the previous year; the Vaccinator reported his inability to obtain a single child, a few influential Patels in some large villages there set their faces against vaccination and would have nothing to do with it, the smaller men following their example. My time did not admit of a visit to each village, I therefore chose that belonging to the most influential amongst them and there encamped. To the owner I explained that I expected he would not only use his personal influence with the recusant Malguzars, but set an example himself by having all the children in his village vaccinated before them, that I relied on his influence, position, and sense to effect this. He promised to do all I wished, and as I knew the man's character I felt sure I should have no more trouble ; two months afterwards when inspecting the work I learned how well be kept his word, collecting his friends he had over 100 children in his own village vaccinated before them, and insisted on their acting in a similar manner in theirs ; after this the Vaccinator's task was light, no one opposed him. 19. I brought the name of this Malguzar, Rama Lodi of Kaidi, whose services were such assistance to me, to the notice of the Commissioner in my monthly report, and here again bring it to notice for such recognition as the Chief Commissioner may think he deserves. 20. This plan of working with the people will, I think, be considered superior to coercive measures. 21. What I saw of Fyzood Deen's work was good, but the total up to date was very low. 22. North of Lalburra both Vaccinators were laid up for more than a month with fever, and little or nothing was done up to the end of December ; a few Patels, moreover, offered passive resistance, these I singled out and visiting their villages vaccinated all the children in them with very little trouble. 23. The results then of this tour were as follow. The vesicles produced were for the most part good, the total vaccinated was below what I had a right to expect, three Vaccinators were laid up fever, one was useless, another required watching, and five or half the establish- ment were working well, the number of Patels who offered either active or passive resistance was small, but were, without an exception, open to reason. 24. I expected that the greater portion of the work in Katangi should be done by the end of February, and therefore decided to make one tour through the tahsil during that month, and left Seoni early for the purpose of testing and inspecting its character and quality. 25. Appaji's work was just finished on my arrival; the total number vaccinated was not as high as it should have been, but the vesicles were for the most part good and the people seemed contented; a few children registered as successful should have been the reverse, but as in some cases the results may be open to dispute in better hands than those of a native Vaccinator, I conclude that for the most part the man exercised his judgment and recorded what he considered correct. 26. What I was as able to see of Abdul Wahab's work was very good, his total was high, vesicles good, and work altogether good. 27. The out-turn exhibited by Behari Lall on the south-eastern border was by no means as high as I expected ; the reason I ascertained to be his habit of working for a few hours in the morning and never in the afternoon. 28. I next inspected the work of Shaikh Kareem Bux and Ramsaroop, north of Lalburra. The former was not as good as should be expected from so experienced a Vaccinator, there was a large percentage of unsuccessful cases and the general out-turn was low. 29. Ramsaroop's work was excellent in every respect. 30. The next man's work, Fyzood Deen's, was very bad, the results were poor, a blank of 12 days existed in his register, and some large villages were passed over altogether, as I have been informed, for a consideration. I have recommended his dismissal, which has been carried out.
24 31. Circumstanees rendered it necessary that I should return to Head-quarters to- wards the close of February, I had not therefore an opportunity of seeing the remainder of the work, and as I was unable to go out during March for more than three or four days at a time I saw no more of it below the ghats. 32. I made a few hurried trips through the Seoni tahsil in March, the first being through Ghondi and Ashta taluqas; work had only commenced there, it looked well, but both men were slow. 33. I next visited Ghansor. Here Abdul Wahad was again doing good work, but Kareem Bux was as usual slow, he took on an average three days to vaccinate each village, whilst he should have done 3 each day, his average number of children was 7 daily , but nothing less than 20 could be considered good in one small village that he reported complete I picked up and vaccinated 27 children, and in another, where he vaccinated 9 and reported the village complete the Superintendent picked up 25 more; this was nothing but pure laziness as the people there are not averse to vaccination. Notice has been taken of his conduct. 34. In April I was able to make somewhat longer tours and more minute inspections. The first seen was the work under Fyzood Deen ; he had been working better latterly, but as no trust can be placed in him he has been dismissed. 35. South-west of Seoni, Ramsaroop's work was not as in Karola, and in consequence- of his being laid up with fever the total vaccinated is low. 36. I next examined the strip of country between Korai and Kawasa, under Kadir Bux. This was as well done as I could wish, vesicles were good, few children escaped, the number of unsuccessful cases were few, and the man had succeeded in making the people contented; in one village only had he any trouble, the Patel ont only baffled his efforts but mine also, till the Deputy Commissioner's influence was brought to bear on him ; he is a troublesome man by nature, but I succeeded eventually in getting all the children in his village vaccinated. 37. I could not spare time to see the work east of Kori, but the Superintendent re- ported that it was good so far as it was done; many children, however, escaped, as the Vaccinator was young and inexperienced, the greater number of those unvaccinated were picked up by the Superintendent while on his tour subsequently. 38. I made another trip through Ashta and Ghondi towards the end of April. Maho- med Ally, a young Vaccinator, was working well, the results were good though the total was small. The other man, Behari Lall, through an old hand, showed miserable results,25 42. During my tour I satisfied myself that the hostility and fear that existed during previous year had almost disappeared : some people hid their children, many brought them up with a bad grace, but the majority brought them freely; this was a contrast to the state of things that existed during the previous year, when the entrance of the Vaccinators at the end of the village was a signal to the people to bolt with their children at the other; but as in countries more civilised than India mothers hate Vaccinators, it is not to be wondered at if it continues to exist to a certain extent here, even after the operation will have become well known. I feel confident, however, that hostility will lessen by degrees if trouble be only taken, the people spoken to freely, and the benefits explained in a popular style. One of the most influential men on the Bhandara border, who stoutly resisted the Vaccinator till brought over by Rama, said to me afterwards, &quot;I suppose,Sir, you will give me credit for having some brains and sense, and if I feared vaccination and diove the Vaccinator out of my village, what could you except from a Gond-gowar. This man I believe could never be reconciled to vaccination by harsh means or driving, whereas the diplomacy of his friend Rama worked him over in a few hours, and when I visited the village he was most energetic in bringing up all the children for my inspection. 43. On these occasions I never lost an opportunity of explaining vaccination to the people, I usually chose the Malguzar's verandah or bari, and having collected as many as I could, harangued them touching the matter in hand. I believe the chief objection to the operation is the fear of offending Debi, and thereby causing some dreadful calamity. The antidote I mentioned in last season's report had, however, spread pretty widely, namely doing puja to the goddess, as they are accustomed to do after small-pox, under the impression that both diseases are the same in kind, though differing in degree; this idea materially favoured a successful issue. 44. Appended are the usual returns, those for April 1871 and those for the cold season of 1871-72, or from October to March inclusive separate. 45. Compared with last year's operations, the returns exhibit the following results:26 51. The percentage of successful cases is returned at 92, this I know to be above the truth; I think about 85 or 88 would represent the correct percentage. I do not, however, mean to say that the returns were wilfully falsified. 1 have seen several children entered as successful who should have been returned the reserve, but in doubtful cases the Vaccinators no doubt gave themselves the credit of having performed successful operations, and so entered them. 52. The cost of the establishment for the whole year amounts to Rs. 1,197-6-8, thus :STATEMENT. O. & S. A.MENT 1. in the Central Provinces during the year 1871-72. 9 10 11 12 Primary Vaccination Re-vaccination Percentage of suc- cessful cases ex- cluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the total Average number of persons vac- cinated by each Vaccinator B C D A B C D Caste Age Result Total Successful Unsuccessful including those &quot; doubtful&quot; Unknown Total In primary vac- cination In secondary vac- cination Christians Hindus Mohammadans Other casts Under 1 year Above 1 year Successful Unsuccessful, including those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown ... 5,456 127 702 3,866 2,419 5,742 420 123 6,285 83 ... 13 96 93.18 100.00 897.86 4 90 17 7 92 26 98 14 6 118 5 ... 3 8 87.50 100.00 118.00 ... 119 3 11 103 30 96 37 ... 133 8 ... ... 8 72.18 100.00 133.00 ... 2,337 62 337 1,482 1,254 2,498 191 47 2,736 2 ... ... 2 92.89 100.00 912.00 ... 955 9 151 163 952 1,103 10 2 1,115 ... ... ... ... 99.10 0.0 557.50 4 8,957 218 1,208 5,706 4,681 9,537 672 178 10,387 98 ... 16 114 93.41 100.0 1038.70 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 1,600 198 1,857 1,010 2,658 3,350 236 82 3,668 ... ... ... ... 93.41 ... 366.60 ... 5,320 169 2,585 1,631 6,443 7,180 565 329 8,074 13 ... ... 13 92.70 100.0 807.40 13 6,920 367 4,442 2,641 9,101 10,530 801 411 11,742 13 ... ... 13 92.93 100.0 1774.20 ... 5,221 27 779 1,219 4,808 4,958 808 261 6,027 157 28 ... 185 85.98 84.87 602.70 ... 4,066 76 1,082 1,400 3,824 3,750 686 788 5,224 5 3 ... 8 84.53 62.50 522.40 ... 9,287 103 1,861 2,619 8,632 8,708 1,494 1,049 11,251 163 31 ... 193 85.35 83.94 1125.20 ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 25,164 688 7,511 10,966 22,414 28,775 2,967 1,638 33,380 273 31 16 320 90.65 89.80 1112.66
A.A.A STATE Showing results of the year 1871-72, as compared with 1 2 3 4 5 Tears Total number of persons vaccinated Successful Ratio per cent successful, excluding those &quot; Unknown &quot; from the total Number of Vaccinators A B C D Paid by State Paid from other sources Total Number previously employ- ed as inoculators or Native practitioners 1366-67 ... ... 22,367 19,584 89.2 20 ... 20 .. 1867-68 ... ... 34,100 28,318 83.3 30 ... 30 .. 1868-69 ... ... 43,484 34,593 81.1 30 ... 30 .. 1869-70 .. ... 35,332 30,384 88.5 30 ... 30 ... 1870-71 ... ... 49,204 40,394 84.5 30 ... 30 ... 1871-72 ... ... 3,338 28,775 90.6 30 .. 30 ...
MENT No IV. those of each of the previous five years in the Central Provinces. 6 7 8 9 Cost of Vaccine Establishment Cost of Travelling allowance and contin- gencies Total Cost Cost of each successful case Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 10,150 6 2 895 14 7 11,046 4 9 0 8 9 11,745 5 0 930 6 9 12,675 11 9 0 7 1¾ 13,442 4 8 841 6 3 14,283 10 11 0 6 7¼ 10,913 13 4 676 0 2 11,592 13 6 0 6 ¼ 4,312 4 5 ... ... ... 4,312 4 5 0 1 8½ 3,959 5 11 ... ... ... 3,959 5 4 0 2 2¼
B.-STATE Showing particulars of Vaccination in each circle of Medical 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 No. District Name and rank of Superintendent of Dispensary Number of Native Superinten- dents of Vaccination attached to the Dispensary Number of Vaccinators attached to the Dispensary Total number of persons vac- cinated Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native State for the population of which the Dispensary is provided Population of area included in last column Name of Dispensary 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1 Sagar .. W. Williamson, Surgeon Major. ... ... 1 1 5,784 3,889 Sagar ... 130,340 Sagar Tahsil .. 2 ... ... ... ... 39 25 18,997 Sadar Bazar ... 3 ... ... 1 1 894 3,642 101,964 Kurai .. 4 ... .. ... .. ... 359 72,056 Malthone ... 5 ... ... ... ... 98 95 Shagarh .. 6 ... ... .. ... 150 145 Banda .. 7 ... ... ... ... 82 59 135,672 Rehli .. 8 ... ... ... .. 38 108 Deori ... 9 .. ... ... .. 108 3 9,316 Garhakota ... Total .. ... ... 2 2 7,193 8,325 ... 468,345 ... 10 Damoh .. T. King, Honorary Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 2 2 1,131 1,481 Damoh ... 283,525 Damoh ... 11 Jabalpur .. W. R. Rice M. D. Civil Surgeon. ... ... .. 2 211 1,272 Jabalpur. .. 22,211 Main Dispensary ... 12 . ... 1 5 1,487 3,881 28,564 City Do. ... 13 ... ... ... ... 276 ... 15,656 Cantt. Do. ... 14 ... ... ... ... 246 43 2,000 Thuggee Do. ... 15 ... ... ... ... 26 ... 600 Central Jail Do. ... 16 ... .. 1 1 1,031 262 202,092 Patun Do. ... 17 ... ... 1 2 1,714 1,542 176,108 Sehora Do. ... 18 ... .. 1 1 1,287 2,165 12,369 Murwara Do. ... 19 ... ... 1 1 882 1,845 9,256 Bijiragogarh Do. ... Total ... ... ... 5 12 7,160 11,010 ... 468,856 ... 20 21 Narsinghpur. T. P. Wright, Surgeon ... ... ... 3 3 1,219 780 Narsinghpur .. 336,000 Narsinghpur and Gadarwara 22 Hoshangabad. P. Cullen M. D. Civil Surgeon ... ... ... 1 1 1,321 1,281 Hoshangabad... 136,178 Hoshangabad ... 23 ... ... 1 1 1,070 1,385 120,546 Harda ... 24 ... .. 1 1 793 1,254 55,347 Seoni ... 25 ... ... ... ... 58 242 115,347 Sohagpur ... Nimar .. Total .. .. ... 3 3 3,212 4,162 ... 427,418 ... .. 26 J. M. Fleming, M.D. Surgeon .. ... 1 1 1,109 870 Nimar ... 124,832 Khandwa .. 27 ... ... 1 1 1,389 237 65,675 Burbanpur ... Total ... ... 9 2 2,498 1,107 ... 190,507 ......
MENT No. V. superintendence in the Central Provinces during the year 1871-72. 10 11 12 13 Primary Vaccination Re-vaccination Percentage of successful cases excluding these &quot; Unknown &quot;from total Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator A B C D A B C D Sex Caste Age Result Total Successful Unsuccessful, including those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown Total Male Female Christian Hindu Mohammadan Other caste Under 1 year Above 1 year Successful Unsuccessful, including those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown In primary vaccination In secondary vaccination 4,733 1,051 9 4,638 1,137 .. 2,735 3,049 4,581 955 248 5,784 77 45 28 150 82.74 63.11 5784 27 12 ... 29 10 .. 17 22 19 20 ... 39 ... ... ... ... 48.72 ... ... 642 252 ... 741 153 .. 275 619 548 124 222 894 ... .. ... ... 81.54 ... 894 ... ... ... ... .. .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74 24 ... 98 ... .. 25 73 75 16 7 98 ... ... ... ... 82.41 ... ... 92 58 ... 104 12 34 39 111 99 51 ... 150 ... ... ... ... 66.00 ... ... 45 37 ... 73 9 ... 19 63 52 30 ... 82 ... ... ... ... 63.41 ... ... 35 3 ... 35 3 ... ... 38 10 24 4 38 4 ... ... 4 29.41 100. ... 60 48 ... 68 40 ... 4 104 69 39 ... 108 ... ... ... ... 63.89 ... ... 5,708 1,485 9 5,786 1,364 34 3,114 4,079 5,453 1,259 481 7,19 81 45 28 154 81.24 64.28 3596.50 540 591 ... 362 104 665 237 894 736 285 110 1,131 65 29 9 103 72.08 69.14 565.50 109 102 5 169 37 ... 98 113 152 59 ... 211 ... ... ... ... 72.03 ... ... 782 705 ... 1,005 482 ... 681 806 1,159 310 18 1,487 .. ... ... ... 79.00 ... 1487 141 135 15 206 55 ... 187 89 239 35 2 276 ... ... ... ... 89.22 ... . . . 115 131 9 211 26 ... 95 151 162 67 17 246 ... ... ... ... 70.74 ... ... 16 10 5 3 18 ... 22 4 21 5 ... 26 274 153 ... 427 80.76 64.16 ... 692 339 ... 963 68 ... 205 826 797 232 2 1,031 ... ... ... ... 77.42 ... 1031 921 793 .. 1,518 196 ... 367 1,347 1,025 673 16 1,714 ... ... ... ... 60.36 .. 1714 737 550 .. 1,203 84 ... 420 867 1,039 248 ... 1,287 ... ... .. ... 80.73 ... 128.7 590 292 ... 875 7 ... 259 623 718 164 ... 882 ... ... ... ... 81.40 .. 88.2 4,103 3,057 34 6,153 973 ... 2,334 4,826 5,312 1,793 55 7,160 274 153 ... 427 74.76 64.15 1432 642 577 1 1,151 67 ... 146 1,073 528 528 163 1,219 .. ... .. ... 50.0 ... 406.33 662 659 6 1,183 89 43 511 810 1,079 184 58 1,321 ... ... ... ... 85.43 ... 1321 698 372 ... 928 142 ... 40 1,030 912 158 ... 1,070 ... ... ... ... 85.23 ... 1070 357 436 ... 761 32 ... 534 259 684 85 24 793 .. ... ... ... 88.94 . .. 793 33 25 ... 56 2 ... 5 53 37 21 ... 58 .. .. ... ... 63.79 ... 58 1,750 1,492 6 2,928 265 43 1,090 2,152 2,712 448 82 3,242 ... ... .. .. 85.82 ... 1080.66 558 551 6 674 121 308 413 696 849 56 204 1,109 ... ... ... ... 93.81 ... 1109 747 642 3 897 67 422 513 876 1,255 134 ... 1,389 ... ... ... .. 90.035 ... 1389 1,305 1,193 9 1,571 188 730 926 1,572 2,104 190 204 2,498 ... ... ... ... 91.71 ... 1249 R SB.No. V.REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1872-73. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1873. F-18-133No. 3037/131 FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE; OFFG. ASST. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 17th September 1873. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of the Vaccination Returns for the year ending March 31st 1873, and of your report thereon. 2. Paragraphs 22 5. In the present report you have included the Nagpur operations in those performed by what may be called the Special Department, and in order to admit of comparison have made the corresponding necessary additions to the figures of 1871-72. 6. The mortality from small-pox in 1872 was more than double that of 1871, the figures being 5,237 and 2,383 respectively. Sagar was the only dis- trict which had complete immunity from the disease. Jabalpur, Narsinghpur, Chhindwara, Seoni and the Upper Godavari District suffered but little, the deaths in each district being less than twenty. In Raipur and Nimar the mortality was very great, and in all the remaining districts, with the exception of Mandla, deaths were very much more numerous than in the previous year. In Betul, where no deaths were registered in 1871, 111 were recorded in 1872. 7. It is satisfactory to find that there has been an increase as compared with 1871, in the number of vaccinations performed and also in the ratio of success. Paragraphs 27 and 28 of your report give the following Tables, viz. for the four districts, Chhindwara, Seoni, Betul and Nagpur.: 3 Seoni being specially great. In Nagpur there was a decrease, which in paragraph 18 you seem to attribute to want of support on the part of the Civil authorities. There were fewer operations in Sagar, Mandla, Bhandara, Chanda and the Upper Godavari district. The decrease in Chanda is very great, the operations this year being only slightly in excess of half of those of 1871 ; but the causes of this falling off are fully accounted for in paragraph 85. In the districts of Damoh, Wardha and Bilaspur, the numbers are nearly the same as for 1871, and in all the other districts, viz. in Jabalpur, Narsinghpur, Hoshangabad, Nimar, Balaghat, Raipur and Sambalpur there was an increase. On the whole then there was increased activity and more children have been protected. The Table given in your paragraph 24 is interesting, in so far that it serves to indicate in which district operations should be vigorously pushed on. The figures given in it, however, only show the population actually under registration, not the whole population of the Province, and the Table establishes in the most con- clusive manner how little trust can even now after much trouble and labour expended on them, be placed in the Returns. 8. Thus the total of Column 3 is 146,429, and this figure is said to repre- sent for the whole Province (except the Feudatories) the number of children under one year of age available for vaccination. Now the late Census showed the number of children under one year of age to be 455,853, and though some deduction would have to be made on account of the Feudatory States, yet enough has been said to-show how erroneous any deductions drawn from the Table would be. To take another instance, that of Chhindwara, the first district in the list. You give the available children as 5,844, whereas the Census papers exhibit a total of 16,781 children, of whom 8,345 were males and 8,436 females. The Chief Commissioner does not consider it necessary to say more on this point. 9. It is satisfactory to learn that the objections to vaccination are year by year growing fainter. In fact it would seem that what has now to be overcome is apathy and indifference and not deep rooted prejudice. In Betul and Chhind- wara men of position who had formerly either actively or passively opposed the measure lent their support to it, and the same cheering signs have no doubt ap- peared also elsewhere. The apathy and indifference, however, of the masses give way in the presence of the disease, and they are then eager that their children shall be vaccinated. 10. This is really what the practical meaning of your paragraphs 154 simple. He was anxious to find them while his subordinates were not. The people, knowing that he was anxious to vaccinate their children, brought them to him, which they did not consider it of any use to do to his subordinates. It must be borne in mind that all the reports which you receive and which you submit to the Chief Commissioner are written by Medical Officers who very readily ac- cept the first plausible excuse which their subordinates advance for want of suc- cess. Mr. Morris believes that if District Officers were asked to report, they would in not a few instances comment on the indolence of the Vaccinators, and attribute the apathy of the people to want of confidence in them. 12. Turning to individual districts, I am to observe that the report of Chhindwara shows the interest and care,which Mr. Price takes in his work. The Chief Commissioner is glad to learn that vaccination has been continued in the Harrai Jaghirdari and also extended to Sonepur and Partabgarh. 13. Seoni.5 19. Upper Godavari District No. 244. FROM SURGEON MAJOR JOHN BRAKE, OFFICIATING SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 7th August 1873. SIR, I have the honour to forward for the information of the Chief Com- missioner the Vaccination Returns for the year ending March 1873. 2. When reviewing my report for 1871-72, the Secretary to the Govern- ment of India suggested the entering more fully into the subject of births and deaths in each mortuary registration circle, and their relation to the number of persons annually vaccinated in each, and also questioned whether it might not be better to place all the Native Superintendents and their subordinate Vaccinators more directly under the Vaccine Department as in the North West Provinces. 3. The letter of the Secretary to Government of India only reached me on May 1st last, a month after the regular vaccinating season had closed. As the Vaccinators had not been generally restricted to defined limits, it has been found impossible in this report to give the population of the ground covered with sufficient accuracy for the comparison to be of much value, but further on will be found a Table relating to whole districts. I have, however, issued a Circular to the Civil Medical Officers in the terms of the Secretary's letter, and have requested them to send Vaccinators during the ensuing season to work in certain fixed Registration Circles, and there should be no difficulty therefore in giving the proportion of cases operated upon to the number of births or approximate number of available infants in each sub-division of a district. 4. On the question of bringing the Native Superintendents and their sub- ordinate Vaccinators directly under the Vaccine Department as in the North West Provinces, there are difficulties, 1st, as to payment ; 2nd (and more specially) as to superintendence. 5. As I understand, there are in the North West Provinces large establish- ments of Vaccinators working under European Superintendents, whose sole duty it is to supervise the work in certain divisions. From my own experience I can speak of the advantage of such an arrangement, but there is the drawback of expense. In these Provinces the duties of Superintendent General of Vaccination have been superadded to those of Sanitary Commissioner and Meteorological Registrar, and however zealous he may be, he can do little more in the way of inspection than examine cases and compare them with the village lists and Vaccinators' registers along the lines of his periodical routes. 6. At present the division in the Central Provinces is into a small regular Establishmant of 3 Native Superintendents and 30 Vaccinators paid from Pro- vincial revenues, and into strictly local establishments supported from Local and Municipal Funds. 7. The Provincial Establishment is specially under the supervision of the Medical Officers of Seoni, Chhindwara and Betul, the districts in which it has been working for some years. F N2 The Medical Officers mentioned are expected to make repeated and minute inspections in their respective districts, and are to a great extent responsible for the character of the work done and the general accuracy of the returns. Their reports are given in extenso. 8. The local establishments, as the designation would indicate, are entertain- ed by the Local District authorities, and are of varying strength according to the local means of payment, and the importance attached to the operation by persons voting or apportioning the Local and Municipal funds. These are under the Civil Surgeons of the districts, and their work is chiefly confined as a rule to small areas in the neighbourhood of Sadar and branch dis- pensaries, where the operators are supposed to be overlooked by the Medical Officer and the several Hospital Assistants. 9. The establishment at Nagpur is intermediate in character. There is a 2nd Class Hospital Assistant as Native Superintendent, half of whose salary (being the pay of his rank) is paid by Government, the remainder being dis- bursed from Local Funds. The Vaccinators are paid entirely from Local and Municipal funds. These work all over the district, but the Civil Surgeon's time is too fully occupied to admit of his making inspection tours, and he can only see the work carried on in the City and Station and that brought before him on his periodical visits to outlying dispensaries. The reports and returns are for- warded by the Native Superintendent direct to this Office, and the establishment is under my control. During the time that I am at head-quarters I make weekly inspections of the work done, and when on my tours examine the villages en route. The work is very fairly examined by the Native Superintendent, and this year I have incorporated the returns with those of the regular establishment working at Seoni, Chhindwara and Betul. 10. There are two or more Vaccinators employed for certain months of the year in every district of the Province but that of the Upper Godavari, but the services of Superintendents have been dispensed with at Balaghat and Chanda. These Local Vaccinators work under the direction of the Civil Medical Officers who, however, have only limited powers as to their employment. This was shown in the Sagar district, where at the suggestion of my predecessor, Dr. Townsend, a Vaccinator was temporarily removed from Kurai to the Sadar Station, but the Municipality of the former place refused (and I think with some justice) to pay for his services during the time that he was away from their immediate neighbourhood. 11. All the Vaccinators in the Province are attached during the non-work- ing season to one or other of the Civil Dispensaries in order that they may become familiar with the more ordinary forms of disease and injury, and their appropriate treatment, and so in a position to give advice and assistance in remote villages far away from regular professional aid. 12. In numerous instances individual Vaccinators have called my attention or that of their immediate superiors to the insanitary state of certain towns, villages or dwellings and I have directed that all when submitting their periodical returns should note against each town or village in which they have been working, the more striking sanitary or insanitary conditions and prevalence of any form of disease. They are to be encouraged to point out to Malguzars and Patels any glaring defects, but are not to give orders of any kind. It will rest with the Civil burgeon to either visit the spot himself or bring to the notice of the District authorities any reports that may appear to call for attention.
3 13. I am not inclined to trust implicitly to the District returns of Vaccination unless well assured that the Medical Officers make many and careful test examinations of cases and registers. The value of the several returns as well as the character of the work done, vary I consider in proportion to the interest taken in the operation by the Civil Medical Officers, and in former reports I have expressed my opinion that the Civil Surgeon's duties should not be confined to the Sadar station and outlying dispensaries, but that he should be considered the health officer of his district, making himself familiar with its physical and hygienic features, and endeavouring to study the peculiarities, and to counteract the ravages of epidemics on other spots than the Civil station. In a large pro- portion of the other districts in these Provinces the services of the Civil Surgeons can at times be spared from the Sadar stations quite as well as those of the Medical Officers from Betul and Chhindwara. 14. There are few epidemics that can be more directly controlled than one of small-pox. Instances do occur in which small-pox follows good vaccination, in the same way that the disease occassionaly visits the same person a second time, but these cases are quite exceptional and rarely occur save in the course of severe epidemics and amongst a community to a great extent unprotected. A child well vaccinated may be considered as protected from small-pox up to the age of puberty, and successful re-vaccination after that age usually confers immunity for the remainder of a life. As small-pox is undoubtedly propagated by contagion or infection, every unprotected person is a source of danger to the community of which he is an unit, and a corollary to this is that with a fixed number of individuals, the more they are protected the less is the danger of the disease attacking the others. 15. Compulsory vaccination has been again and again strongly recom- mended by different officers, but is considered unsuitable for India in its present condition. In these Provinces another plan has been adopted and where properly carried out, has been very successful. Over and over again it has been shown that there is little or no real objection to the operation on the score of religion, that it only requires some tact on the part of the operator, the influence of some leading man or even the gift of one or two annas to the parent of a child to overcome the strongest opposition. This would not be the case if religious prejudices were involved. 16. The principle upon which the plan alluded to is founded is, that when gratuitous vaccination has been offered and brought to the very doors of an in- dividual or a community is still available, but has been and is refused, then this individual or community, is to be prevented as much as possible from becoming a source of danger to others. With this view such an individual if attacked by small-pox is to be removed from the interior of a town or village, placed with his attendants in a chapar outside the abadi (the best position for his recovery) and prevented holding intercourse with the inhabitants of the neighbourhood generally until quite well. In the case of a bazar, town or village in which several cases have appeared, the periodical bazar or market is temporarily closed to guard as much as possible against the disease being carried by visitors to neighbouring villages. At the same time a Vaccinator is sent to the spot prepared to vaccinate all comers. 17. One of the results is that instead of the Vaccinator having to go from house to house getting single patients with extreme difficulty, individuals come forward or bring their children in crowds to escape the inconvenience of removal from their houses, and the village officials or headmen use their enormous influence to get all protected in order that the bazar may be re opened with the least delay or the small-pox encampment rendered no longer necessary.
4 18. By adopting this plan, as mentioned in one of my early reports, I myself vaccinated in one day 594 men, women and children in one large town in the Nagpur district, after having been told that there was not a single unprotected person in the place. During the past season it has been carried out with very good results in two large towns,5 23. At Damoh, Hoshangabad, Wardha and Betul, old crusts kept from the preceding season were tried, but with only partial success at Betul. As long as arm to arm vaccination can be carried on throughout the year in any station it is undesirable to try doubtful lymph or crusts, as the parents of children very naturally object to experimental operations and it is desirable to guard as much as possible against any possible failure, especially at the com- mencement of the season. 24. According to the returns received the following Table gives the number of children under one year of age operated upon during the season, and an approximate proportion to the number under one year available I have taken the difference between the number of births and the deaths under one year to represent the number of children under one year available for vaccination; this formula of course is not quite accurate, but I think is sufficiently so for comparison. Corrections have been made in the Chhindwara and Sambalpur returns, where the number of infants operated upon at first sight appear to have exceeded the number living ; but in the first named district 456 operations in the Jaghirs of Harrai, Sonepur and Partabgarh have been deducted, since the birth and death rates are not excluded in the District returns. In Sambalpur 2,167 operations performed in the Zamindari State of Chandapur have been deducted, but those in Singabaga, Rampur and Bharun, not having been particularized, have been allowed to remain, and so slightly increased the percentage. No. DISTRICTS. Number of births from April 1872 to March 31st 1873. Number of deaths of child- ren under one year of age from April 1872 to March 1873. Difference, being an approximation to the num- ber available for vaccina- tion. Actual number under one year operated upon. Ratio per mille of children un- der one year operated upon to approximated number under one year available. 1 Chhindwara .. 8,128 2,284 5,844 5,788 990 2 Sambalpur .. 7,255 1,644 5,611 *5,548 *989 3 Betul .. 7,606 1,763 5,843 4,024 689 4 Nimar .. 6,160 2,424 3,736 1,695 454 5 Seoni 9,903 2,801 7,102 3,000 422 6 Jabalpur .. 16,023 3,265 12,758 3,580 281 7 Bhandara ... 10,588 2,219 8,369 1,942 232 8 Wardha .. 6,062 1,637 4,425 924 209 9 Hoshangabad ... 13,520 3,200 10,326 1,933 187 10 Nagpur ... 14,881 3,268 11,613 1,761 152 11 Sagar .. 15,628 3,748 11,880 1,726 145 12 Raipur .. 22,824 4,896 17,928 2,582 144 13 Bilaspur .. 12,244 2,931 9,313 1,173 126 14 Balaghat .. 3,668 830 2,838 187 66 15 Damoh .. 9,708 2,114 7,594 448 59 16 Upper Godavari .. 1,152 150 1,002 26 26 17 Mandla ... 4,053 622 3,431 62 25 18 Chanda .. 11,086 2,649 8,437 206 25 19 Narsinghpur .. 11,654 3,275 8,379 198 24 * The number operated upon in the Chandapur Zamindari are deducted, but an unknown number of cases in the Singabaga, Rampur and Bharun Zamindaris are included which would reduce the percentage. D F6 25. The returns for Chhindwara and Sambalpur are as favourable as they well can be, and the numbers high enough to excite suspicion in persons who have not inspected the work, but I accept them without hesitation from my own observation. The reasons will be best given with my remarks upon the work in the several districts. 26. Small-pox has raged as an epidemic in several districts of the Pro- vince and has been present more or less in all but Sagar It has shown itself in the best protected districts of Chhindwara, Betul, Seoni, Sambalpur and Jabalpur; in each there were found some special circumstances favouring its presence; but I don't think that it is asking too much to ascribe some of the immunity from the disease in those particular districts to the vaccine operations carried on in this and preceding years. This may be said more especially of the Satpura districts, as the hill tribes have hitherto as a rule suffered so exceptionally from the ravages of small-pox. DISTRICTS. April 1872 May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. January 1873. February. March. Total. Sagar .. .. ... .. .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Damoh . . 36 36 32 13 16 1 3 2 ... ... ... 1 140 Murwara ... 1 2 .. 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 Jabalpur ... ... 2 7 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 12 Narsinghpur ... 1 2 6 1 6 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 1 20 Hoshangabad ... 5 6 3 2 3 9 3 9 22 52 61 111 286 Nimar ... 164 183 123 42 62 8 2 12 21 13 8 29 672 Burhaupur 45 25 30 11 3 6 3 2 ... ... ... 1 126 Mandla ... 14 5 5 12 8 1 7 4 5 2 8 6 77 Betul ... ... 2 12 12 19 5 2 7 12 10 10 20 111 Chhindwara ... 1 ... ... 2 1 1 ... ... ... ... 3 5 13 Seoni ... 6 7 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 17 Balaghat ... 9 16 9 13 7 14 1 7 4 2 19 13 114 Bhaudara ... 39 24 36 16 3 3 1 1 8 22 56 106 315 Nagpur ... 70 51 10 15 2 ... ... 1 2 16 44 172 383 Wardha ... 56 45 71 24 13 19 3 ... 12 58 62 66 429 Chanda ... 9 ... 7 10 3 ... 14 1 12 23 55 103 237 Sironcha ... ... .. 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 2 1 4 Raipur ... 196 177 177 115 92 68 26 70 75 192 259 487 1,934 Bilaspur ... 26 37 26 46 15 23 4 15 2 24 23 78 319 Sambalpur ... 1 2 1 1 3 4 1 3 3 2 1 2 24 Grand Total ... 679 622 562 338 258 162 71 134 179 417 612 1,203 5,237 27. There has been an increase over the preceding year, both in the number of vaccinations performed and the ratio of success. Taking in the first place the four districts of Betul, Chhindwara, Seoni and Nagpur, the numbers are7 In the remaining districts, the numbers are,8 an Honorary Magistrate of great local influence. In that season only 167 were vaccinated in the Betul town and circle. Small-pox appeared in the town in May, continued throughout the hot weather, and spread towards the south and south-east to Bordye and the Mailghat district of Berar. It was found necessary to resort to energetic measures. Children suffering from small-pox were segre- gated and their dwellings cleaned and fumigated, one of the results being that 1,906 were submitted to the operation during the season under review. Dr. Hall visited the neighbourhood where the epidemic was present, exam- ined a large number of children who had been recently vaccinated, and had 1,540 more operated upon in his camp. 32. The plan of having children collected at convenient centres is that which I have always recommended and carried out. It is one that I have found the simplest and best. The villagers are accustomed to travel long distances to the weekly bazars and seldom object to take their children two or three miles. On their journey to and fro they encounter persons on the same errand from neighbouring villages, are able to compare notes, and mutually support one another. It is a journey that does not recur frequently and I have when inspect- ing generally found the parents pleased to have the countenance and congratula- tion of the Sahib. 33. Chhindwara.9 measles or other eruptive disease, or else true small-pox attacking persons who have been operated upon by vaccinators but unsuccessfully. The value of the list of successful cases left in the several villages is particulary great in meeting such statements, for the village officials themselves can at once see and inform others as to whether a successful result has been recorded. 36. It is satisfactory to note that vaccination has been continued in the Jaghir territory of Harrai, and has been extended to those of Sonpur and Partabgarh. As many as 2,387 have been protected in these generally wild tracts. I can endorse Mr. Price's remarks as to the improved and more cleanly appearance of many of the children brought up for examination. 37. Mr. Price has prepared a Circular letter for distribution throughout the district. It is simple, and the strong evidence of numbers contained in it should be convincing, particularly on the spot where it can be canvassed and appreciated. I think the Medical Officer is to be commended for his efforts and the Deputy Commissioner for the assistance given. 38. Seoni10 rant and recusant natives. It has been alluded to before as a reason for refus- ing to give up or even to preserve vaccine crusts which it was said were offered to the god. 42. In my Circular published as far back as 1868, and in my reports, the use of the lancet has been deprecated, owing mainly to the difficulty of operating with it without drawing blood,11 didates available to take their places, but as soon as their services could be spared four good vaccinators were sent from Chhindwara to assist their fellows at Nagpur. Up to March 31st 1,784 had been vaccinated in the city and suburbs, with a percentage of 94.8 of success ; and operations were actively carried on after that date, the result of which will be shown in the next season's returns. 47. The Superintendent saw some persons who had been vaccinated suffer- ing from small-pox, but also others with the same disease who had on their persons undoubted marks of a previous attack. He gives no particulars as to numbers, ages or other conditions. 48. The assistance given by Sivraj Singh, Tahsildar of Katol, and Gan- put Rao, Tahsildar of Umrer, has been favourably brought to notice. During the year there was somewhat troublesome opposition exhibited at Bela, and the vaccinators' instruments were lost, and a single case in the Nagpur Tahsil has been mentioned. 49. Sagar. 12 He also acknowledges the assistance received from Mr Nicholls, the Offi- ciating Deputy Commissioner, and from the Tahsildars of Damoh and Hatta. Still the out-turn of work cannot be considered very satisfactory. 52. Jabalpur.13 The vaccine operations in the district cannot be considered very satisfactory, and only about 24 per mille of children under 1 year have been operated upon. 58. Hoshangabad.14 One case of assault was tried in Court, proved and the accused fined, but such proceedings are very rightly looked upon as quite exceptional. 63. The Commissioner of the Division has recommended &quot; that the more &quot; important men of position, such as the Honorary Magistrates, should be spoken &quot; to on the subject by the Deputy Commissioner, and that in future years, before &quot; commencing operations in any locality, the more influential Malguzars of the &quot; neighbourhood be called in by the Deputy Commissioner, addressed personally &quot; on the aim and object of vaccination, and informed that while Government will &quot; not actually force vaccination on any one, yet that they will be held responsible &quot; that the Vaccinators shall be free from molestation and shall be allowed a fair &quot; and free field to do what they can.&quot; 64. If in addition to this the plan of segregation alluded to above in para. 16 be strictly carried out in a few instances, 1 am quite sure from my own expe- rience elsewhere that active opposition will cease. Small-pox has been epidemic throughout the district and the immunity of those that have been successfully vaccinated during the past season will be a powerful argument in favour of the operation. In Seoni it was objected that persons vaccinated had not been protected, but on enquiry it was found that only 17 unsuccessfully operated upon had con- tracted small-pox, and at Hoshangabad 22 similarly operated upon without suc- cess and not re-vaccinated had suffered from the disease. Dr. Cullen did not find any small-pox following successful vaccination. 65. The idea of sacrifice of vaccine crusts to the Railway god alluded to in my remarks on vaccination at Seoni, is again brought to notice as found in the Hoshangabad district ; and at Harda there is a doggrel chyme current which may be translated as follows :15 68. The number of operations was 1,869 more than in 1871-72, and the ratio of success had increased from 85 82 to 86.42 per cent. About 187 children under 1 year were operated upon out of every 1,000 living. 69. Nimar.16 75. Balaghat.17 82. Mr. Thipthorpe, the Medical Officer, reports that there was a good deal of opposition offered to the Vaccinators and to the Hospital Assistants when attempting to operate. He states that the men at Wardha and Hinganghat worked well, but the Vaccinator at Arvi was dilatory and irregular, as well as impertinent and disobedient to the Hospital Assistant. The ratio of success, however, I do not consider creditable. 83. Beyond that exercised by the Hospital Assistants there appears to have been little or no supervision in this district, and I cannot agree to Mr. Thip-- thorpe's proposition that the staff of Vaccinators be increased, until assured that their work will be minutely and carefully inspected at frequent intervals. The Medical Officer thus writes:18 Mr. Craggs, the Medical Officer, examined the work of the Tallodi man and found it good ; his visit was unexpected, but he found the Vaccinator carefully working from village to village with good lymph. On his visiting Warora the Medical Officer found the Vaccinator ill in hospi- tal ; only a few cases of vaccination were brought before him, and there had been a failure in the supply of fresh lymph. On a subsequent visit, however, a fair show of children were brought for examination and the lymph was good. 87. Sironcha.19 At the end of October vaccination was recommenced with success at the Sadar town under the Hospital Assistant of the Sadar branch dispensary. One Vaccinator was kept to work in and about Raipur, and four others sent into the district at the end of December. 92. It had been arranged that these should work in a circumscribed area north-east of Raipur, and to the east of the tract visited last year,20 98. The people as a rule eagerly seek the services of the Vaccinator, who has no difficulty whatever in getting children brought to him. As I halted at villages for the purpose, children recently vaccinated were brought to me for inspection literally by scores; it was not unusual for me to see 70 or 80 in one good-sized village, and on one occasion the parent of a child felt himself aggrieved because the latter had been operated upon twice without success, and was clam- orous that it should be vaccinated by myself, mine being the third operation within two or three weeks. Since the preceding year a Native Doctor employed by the Zamindar of Patna had been vaccinating in that feudatory State, but as a still greater proof of the estimation in which vaccination is held by the people of the neighbourhood, Hurria Sing, Zamindar of Chandarpur, applied for and obtained the services of two Vaccinators for his own state, meeting all expenses from his own revenues. These men worked in 44 villages and successfully vaccinated 1,947 persons. 99. The total number of villages in which operations were performed was 244 ; of these 127 were visited and inspected by Mr. Harrison, the Civil Surgeon, who reports very favourably of the Vaccinators under him, of the Hospital As- sistant at Sambalpur, and Native Doctor at Bargarh. The Hospital Assistant vaccinated 537 persons and kept up the supply of lymph at Sambalpur. 100. Good as the results have been they would probably have been still better but for the out-break of cholera following the march of a Native Infantry Regiment through a portion of the district in February. The villagers were anxious to have their children vaccinated, but were afraid to admit the vaccina- tion for the time the disease was in the neighbourhood. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, JOHN BRAKE, Offg. Sanitary Commissioner, Central Prvoinces.
APPENDIX I. From Mr. A. G. Price, Civil Medical Officer, Chhindwara, to the Sanitary Com- missioner, Central Provinces,2 ing on their work. Even below the ghats, where a good deal of tacit opposi- tion was shown in former years, much of it has now given way, and the majority of the people brought up their children very readily. One of the greatest ob- jections I have had to contend against, was the fear of the operation cutting some supposed formidable &quot; rug &quot; or vein in the arm, by which the child was sure to die ; but the operation as now performed is so slight and all but painless, that it was easy to show the mothers on their own arms how little pain the children actually suffered, and their fears in this respect were soon quieted. Another objection, and perhaps it is a more general one, is that the parents fear to show a too ready belief in vaccination, thinking that if they do, their ready acceptance of the prophylactic may only be another excuse for an extra turn of the financial screw. This I have heard frequently from the villagers themselves. There are very few parts of the district which I have not now visited, and the people have brought up their children willingly for inspection, their mothers invariably accompanying them, and it is gratifying to be able to say that whatever fears they might have had before of the operation, or of its inefficacy to prevent small-pox, very little now exists and in hundreds of villages where vaccination has been carried on continuously for years, small-pox has not been heard off. The advantages of arm to arm vaccination as compared with the other and more convenient methods were constantly pointed out to the people in my camp, and I have reason to hope that year by year it will become more and more in favour, as ensuring better and more permanent results, and practically giving the parents less trouble than that of vaccinating from lymph in tubes or glasses, or using crusts, for in all these methods the percentage of successful cases can never be so high, nor what is of greater importance, is the work so good, for it is easy to understand that in arm to arm vaccination the lymph has no time to lose its vitality, but is transferred in a so-to-speak &quot; living&quot; state, and is at once taken up by the circulation. In the other methods, even under the most careful supervi- sion, there frequently results a local pustule instead of a typical vaccine vesicle, having perhaps some of the physical appearances of a true vaccine vesicle, and consequently noted as a successful vaccination. In a year or two, or longer still, such children may be attacked with small-pox, and thus disbelief in vaccination is at once inculcated, and perhaps it is partly to this cause that the general pre- valence of small-pox now in some parts of the Province is due. I have pointed out these facts to the Vaccinators under my orders, and have frequently impressed upon them that their reputation as Vaccinators must always depend on the permanency of their work and not merely on numbers. The work in some of the circles having been completed before the close of the season, three Vaccinators were sent to the Jaghirdars of Hurrai, Sonpur and Partabgarh, who were requested by the Deputy Commissioner to give them all necessary assistance, and they were thus enabled to operate on 2,480 persons with successful results in 2,387. These were all vaccinated arm to arm, and fresh lymph first obtained from the Umret and Amarwara circles, which border the Jaghirs. In Harrai last year, of 1,115 operations, 952 were on children over 1 year of age, and only 163 on children under 1 year. This year of 262 children, 196 were under 1 year, and only 66 above 1 year. At Sonpur and Partabgarh the same results are noticeable this year as were noticed last year in Hurrai, viz the great preponderance of children over I year to those under 1 year. Thus of 2,218 cases in Sonpur and Partabgarh, no less than 1,958 were in children over 1 year, many of these being from 12 to 16 years old who had escaped small-pox or at least showed no marks of the disease.
3 The total number of children vaccinated during the year amounts to 11,640, showing an increase of 1,253 over last year, and this is entirely due to the increase of operations in the Jaghirs. In the district itself there is a decrease from. 9,272 to 9,160, owing to the fewer number of births during the year, and the greater number of deaths of chil- dren under 1 year, as shown in the following table :4 But although a decided check seems to have been given to small-pox, cases still occur, and very recently in the present year a number of children have been attacked with the disease at Pandurna, and some have died. The first case was imported into the town from Multai, the disease showing itself 2 or 3 days after the child with its parents had come to Pandurna. This case was said to have been vaccinated at Multai, in the Betul district, last year, probably unsuccessfully. After this case several other children were attacked, and to prevent any further spread of the disease, and at the recommendation of the Sanitary Com- missioner, the sick were removed into chapars, the weekly market stopped, and all the unprotected children were at once vaccinated, or at least as many as could be got. I myself proceeded to Pandurna in the latter end of March and examined about 15 children who had recently suffered from the disease; they were all children from 6 to 14 years of age, and had never been vaccinated. The following Table shows the number attacked and the number of deaths, from January to end of April 1873, as received from the Police Office :5 Believing this, I addressed a letter to the Deputy Commissioner recommend- ing that in every village where small-pox had occurred the infected children be removed out into huts, the house thoroughly swept, and the sweepings burnt out- side the village; and if at the same time the whole village could be similarly swept and the sweepings burnt, a further check to the spread of the disease would perhaps be given. This has been done in many villages. Taking into consideration the foregoing facts of the great diminution of small-pox, consequent on vaccination, as a result of the past three years' labours, I have had a small report printed in the vernaculars of the district, showing the numbers vaccinated, the numbers of reported cases of small-pox, and the number of deaths during the last three years; and have recommended to the people what is required of them to assist the Government in checking the disease. The Deputy Commissioner has kindly undertaken to have these circulated to every Malguzar in the district for the information of the ryots. I send a copy * for your perusal, and perhaps other Medical officers may find some such report of their labours circulated amongst the people of their district equally as successful as I am hopeful this will be to those of this. The cost of the season's operations has been as follows:6 clean in their persons as well as in their apparel, and that the mothers were begin- ing to be more careful in nursing them during the process, and few children were brought up with broken vesicles from rude handling. I inspected 151 children from 25 villages in his Circle and was thoroughly satisfied with what I saw. Vaccinator Bhowany Pershad 1st has also done excellent work, and generally has succeeded in vaccinating arm to arm. Of his work I saw 128 children from 17 villages. Vaccinator Mohiuddeen Khan.7 APPENDIX I A. It is now three years since vaccination has been regularly carried on in the district, and its result can very fairly be estimated. The Vaccine establishment commenced their operations in November 1870; in the early part of that year small-pox was present in an epidemic form throughout the district, and many children died ; but although there were a large number of children who had had small-pox, still during the season the Vaccinators were enabled to vaccinate no less than 18,000 children. The following table shows the number of cases of small-pox, the number of deaths from the same cause, and the number of children vaccinated during the last there years:8 Sometimes it has happened that the people have not brought their children for vaccination and the vaccinator has had to go to their villages, taking vaccine matter (dawai) with him. Children vaccinated in this way do not show as much success as when vaccinated arm to arm, and every parent should endeavour to obtain arm to arm vaccination for his child. Again when a child is attacked by small-pox and recovers, hundreds and thousands of crusts (danas khiplees) fall from their bodies ; these seldom if ever are swept away entirely from the houses but lie in the ground and in course of time become dust, and then little children playing about inhale this dust and so get the disease. The people ought therefore when a case of small-pox occurs in their village, to insist on every part of the house and compound being thoroughly swept and the whole of the sweepings burnt outside of the village. If every house in the village be swept up in this manner and the sweepings burnt the disease would never spread from house to house. I have for the last three years seen a great many of the people as well as their children, and I am very glad to find that year after year the objections against vaccination are becoming less and less, for whereas in former years many persons ran away from their homes when a vaccinator was coming, these now after seeing the good effects of vaccination are the first to come when called and bring others with them too.
9 APEENDIX II Report, by Dr. Evers, Civil Surgeon, Seoni District, on Vaccine operations in the Seoni district, Central Provinces, for the season 1872-73. In order to ensure a supply of fresh lymph for the working season vaccination was kept up in the Sadar town all through the interval, a few children being vaccinated from month to month, as the following Table shows :10 the Vaccinator placed himself in communication with the Patel and Kotwal, and accompanied by them he went vaccinating from house to house. I am convinced that very few children, if any, escape when door to door vaccination is practised; the Patel and Kotwal know pretty accurately the number of children in every house, and if disposed therefore, as they generally are, to aid in the matter, the work cannot be otherwise than thoroughly done. After completion of the work in one circle, the Vaccinator was moved on to another beat to work alone, or sent to assist one of his fellows. The objections, however, in my opinion to this plan of working in circles are, that the Vaccinators are often placed at a distance from the Native Superintendent; that much of this officers time is wasted therefore in travelling to and fro, and that his inspections must neces- sarily also be short and hurried. I purpose therefore next season, instead of allotting circles to the Vaccinators, to mass the whole staff, so that the Native Superintendent could take them all together from taluq to taluq in succession ; the men would thus be constantly under supervision, the Superintendent would have shorter journeys to make, and more time therefore to thoroughly inspect the villages in which work is reported to have been done, and he would also be able to at once ensure the delivery of village forms to Patel or Kotwal. 5. Unfortunately I was not able to inspect the work of the Vaccinators more than twice. On the first occasion I left Seoni on the 7th January 1873, and on the morning of the 8th inspected Vaccinator Beharee Lal's work in the vil- lages of Saduk Seoni, Deori, Chota Chapara, Kuch Chapara, and Chapara. In Saduk Seoni, Behari Laul appears to have done very well, but in the other villages he had very little to show; and in a large native city like Chapara, his work was almost nil, the few children vaccinated being the children of Chamars. It is said that the more respectable inhabitants of Chapara objected to have their children vaccinated. Since January, however, no less than 140 children were vaccinated here by the Native Superintendent and Vaccinator Mahomed Ali. I also inspected Mahomed Ali's work in the villages of Tinsa and Chandani; the work was well done. On the 9th I inspected Kadir Bux's work in Ganesh- gunj, Syhat Puri and Jogi Koppa ; and then went on to the village of Samurthal to enquire into a report made by Kadir Bux, that the Patel (a Gond) of that village had obstructed him in his work : the Patel denied all the charges brought against him, and brought counter charges against Kadir Bux. Bassudeo Misser, the Native Superintendent, had only that morning vaccinated the 6 children belonging to the village. I returned to Seoni on the 10th January. Urgent work in the station detained me so long that my next tour of inspection did not commence till the 14th of March; on the 15th my camp moved from Bandole to Chapara, and the same morning I inspected Kadir Bux's work in the village of Kursepar; the total number of children vaccinated in the village was 25, and among these I noted 24 successful operations. In the after- noon I visited Chapara, and noted 87 successful operations out of a total of 100. The Sonars in this place appear to have been the principal objectors to vaccina- tion ; this time, however, I succeeded in gaining their consent, and 42 children more were vaccinated here this day. On the 16th I visited the villages of Pin- dryee, Katghur, Sagar, Lurghu, and Andheari; the work was well done in these places On the 17th I moved across from Chapara to Bhimgarh, and en route visited the villages of Arundea, Karoli, Anjineea, Gandi and Kappa. Kadir Bux and Mohamed Ali have done good work here. At Bhimgarh I noted 45 successful operations out of a total of 50. On the 18th, leaving Bhimgarh inspected the villages of Hurduli and- Madongri and encamped at Murwara. Beharee Lal's work here was very satisfactory. On the 19th, left Murwara, visited the villages of Thegra, Kuakhera, Dhunowra and Sukwa and encamped at Cheri. Abdul Wahab has done remarkably well in all these places; he was
11 greatly assisted in his work by Shaikh Kodrut Ali, the Malguzar of Cheri. On the 20th, left Cheri, inspected the villages of Komdari, Deori, and Thaori, and encamped at Kharsara; Syed Hossein has worked very successfully here. 21st, left Kharsara, visited Ramkheri, Baragor and Patun and encamped at Tali. Shaikh Munnoo's work in these villages is very satisfactory. 22nd, left Tali, visited Kalupatha, Koorsepar, and Sujahwulpar and encamped at Nidhani; here again I had an opportunity of inspecting Shaikh Munnoo's work. 23rd, left Nidhani, visited Sahajpuri, Kappa, Ghutkhera, Kuropar, Mohagaon, Manegaon, Amhakho, Chingaon and Undia, and encamped at Kiddarpore. Abdul Wahab and Syed Hossein were the workers in these places ; the work seen was very satisfactory. 24th, halted at Kiddarpore and visited the villages of Umarwarra and Jamunpani. 25th, left Kiddarpore, visited Bareli, Gokul Than, Binori and Bundum and encamped at Pahari. Abdul Wahab and Shaikh Munnoo have done good work here. 26th, left Paharee, visited Keolari, Ghunsore. Balpur, Thunsawur, Maitha, Darot Kalam and Deoree, and encamped at Kahanee. The Vaccinators who laboured here, viz. Kurreem Bux, Kadir Bux, Jaikrishna Pant and Ramsaroof, have done good work. 27th left Kahanee, visited Ka- mareea, Mulkhera, Sesna, Chuga, Sehora, Budwani and Konsepar and encamped at Lakhnadon. Kadir Bux, Jaikrishni Punt, Abajia, and Native Superintendent Bapudeo Misser have worked very well in these villages. 28th, left Lakhnadon, visited Sumnapur, Bameri and Goongwara, and encamped at Ganeshgunj. Maho- med Ali and Abaji were the workers in these places. 29th, left Ganeshgunj, visited Kuhia, Goonyee and Deogaon and encamped at Chapara. Kadir Bux, and Mahomed Ali have as usual done well in these villages also. I returned to Seoni on the 30 th March. The only taluqs I could not find time to visit were those of Doomah, Dhuryadu and Patun. Native Superintendent Bassudeo Misser, however, reports that the work has been well done in these places. The plan I adopted to verify the amount of work done, was to compare the number and names of the children brought for inspection with the entries in the village forms. 6. The attitude of the people is simply passive; the Sirkar they say is their Ma-Bap and what the Sirkar does must therefore be right. Of course in some villages the people required more persuasion than in others ; but on no occasion was there anything like decided hostility, while at Undia, in the Kiddar- pur taluq, I fell in with an intelligent old man, the&quot; religious ceremony master,&quot; if I may call him so, of the village. He informed me that the reason why many villages feared or suspected vaccination was , that they had heard from &quot;some- where&quot; and from &quot; somebody&quot; that the Sirkar collected the blood of the children vaccinated as a propitiatory offering for the &quot;railway god.&quot; He explained to such of the villagers as were present the absurdity of the story, and concluded with the following rather personal remark :12 not prove an effectual protection against small-pox, I explained that it modified the original disease and lessened its severity, thus preventing disfigurement, and in most instances saving life. At Maitha, in the Kahanee taluq, the old story about the &quot;railway god&quot; again cropped up, and I am sorry to say we had no &quot;Poojah master&quot; to stand-by us here. I think I succeeded, however, in disabus- ing their minds of such an idea, by telling the Vaccinator to wash his instruments thoroughly and not to take any of the children's blood away with him ; the crowd around me appeared to relish this as rather a good joke at the expense of the person who began the &quot;railway god&quot; story. 7. The amount of work done during the past year may be thus tabulated:13 APPENDIX III. Report, by Dr. H. G. Hall, Civil Surgeon, Betul, of the Vaccine operations carried on in the district of Betul, Central Provinces, during the year 1872-73. I have the honor to forward to you the Vaccination Report of this District for the year 1872-73, together with Tabular Statements I., II., III., and IV. Lymph received. On October 1st 20 children were vaccinated at the Sadar Dispensary with crusts which were kept at the Dispensary from the pre- vious season ; of these only 2 were successful and I doubtful, all the others were unsuccessful. On the 2nd 3 more were operated on with the same lymph, 1 of which was successful and 2 unsuccessful. On the 3rd 12 children were vaccinated with 3 tubes of lymph received from Chhindwara; of these 8 were successful and 4 were unsuccessful. On the 4th 12 were operated on by native crusts which were in the hospi- tal; there were 3 successful, 7 doubtful, and 2 unsuccessful. On the 9th 8 more children were inoculated from arm to arm, with lymph obtained from the 2 successful cases of the 1st; of these 3 were successful, 3 doubtful, and 2 unsuccessful. On the 10th, the 17 unsuccessful cases that were operated on on the 1st were re-vaccinated, and 2 fresh cases ; of these 15 were successful, 1 doubtful, and 3 unsuccessful. On the 11th 8 were inoculated from arm to arm with lymph procured from the 3 successful cases of the 4th; of these 5 were successful, 2 doubtful and 1 un- successful ; and also 13 unsuccessful cases were re-vaccinated; there were 9 suc- cessful and 4 unsuccessful. On the 12th 6 new cases were vaccinated by crusts which were in the hos- pital; of these 1 was successful, 4 doubtful, and 1 was unsuccessful. On 15th 4 new cases were inoculated by the same crusts ; there were 2 successful, and 2 unsuccessful. On the 16th 9 more new cases were operated on by station crusts ; there were 5 successful and 4 unsuccessful. On the 18th some tubes of English lymph were received from Nagpur. On the same day 13 new cases were vaccinated with this lymph, and 6 with station crusts; of those done by the English lymph 2 only were successful, and 11 un- successful ; of those done by the native lymph there were 4 successful and 2 unsuccessful. On the 24th 1 child was successfully vaccinated from arm to arm. On the 26th 2 were successfully operated on from arm to arm from the suc- cessful English cases. On the 29th 20 fresh cases were operated on, 8 from arm to arm, and 12 from points. There were 17 successful, 2 doubtful, and 1 unsuccessful. B. O. k.14 On the 30th 5 were successfully operated on from arm to arm, and on the 31st 3 more were inoculated with lymph from points; 2 were successful and 1 bad. Arrival of Vaccinators. First Class Vaccinator Goolab Sing arrived on the 15th October 1872 ; Per- tab Sing-, 2nd Class Vaccinator, came on the 30th October; Mahommad Moord, Native Superintendent, and 5 Vacci- nators, came on the 31st. One man named Abdool Gafoor did not report his arrival until the 5th De- cember, and was dismissed by order of the Sanitary Commissioner for being absent without leave. His successor Mohioudeen Khan reported himself for duty on the 8th of December. By reference to Statement No. I, Column 6, it will be seen the date on which each Vaccinator joined his Circle. In consequence of difficulty in procuring tentage and camels I was not able to go into camp until the 6th of December. I first went to the town of Betul, where there was an epidemic of small-pox; I had the affected children isolated and their houses cleaned and disinfected. In 1871-72 I experienced much oppo- sition to vaccination in this place, and now found the people alarmed at the pre- sence of small-pox and willing to have their children secured against it. I embrac- ed the opportunity by sending a number of Vaccinators to the place and had 1,906 children vaccinated during the season. This compares very favourably with the number secured in this circle last year, viz. 167. I am glad to say that if I have not fully succeeded in securing the assistance of Taijee Sing, the Malguzar of this place, he has not given any opposition to the work this year, but seems inclined to do what he can to assist me, as the result of the work shows. I left Betul on the 14th December and proceeded to Khairi. I found 43 children unvaccinated here, and had them done at my camp. There were 315 secured by the Vaccinator. On the 16th I went to Chicholi, a large village about 20 miles to the north-east of the Sadar station, and which I had not seen before. I had 367 fresh cases of vaccination performed in my camp while in this place. Beharee Lall, the Vaccinator. who had charge of the Circle, seemed to have done no work from the time he joined up to the time of my visit. Be stated that he was ill. 1 found only 185 cases operated on. From Chicholi I proceeded to Cherapatla. I found no work done and had 161 children vaccinated while in the place. Pertab Sing had charge of this Circle. 1 proceeded through the north-east part of the district, which is very jungly; and the villages are few and at a distance from each other. This part of the coun- try had not been visited at all by Beharee Lall, in whose charge this Circle was. I had about two dozen children vaccinated in the few small and scattered villages I met On December 21st I arrived in Bordha, a large village in the north of the district. The Vaccinator did not visit this place previous to my arrival. There were 126 children vaccinated here in my camp. From Bovdha I proceeded via Kesla and Dhar, to Shapur, between Bor- dha and Shapur. At various small villages I caused 108 fresh cases to be vacci-
15 nated. In Shapur there was very little work done at the time of my arrival. I had the children from the surrounding villages collected and had 419 fresh cases operated on at my tents. Sham Lall, the eldest son of Ramdeen, the Malguzar, afforded me every assistance in inducing the people to bring forward their children. From Shapur I was obliged to return to the Sadar station on the 27th, and had 60 children vaccinated during a two hours' halt at Nimpani, which is about half way. This Circle, as well as those of Bordha and Cherapatla, were in charge of 3rd Class Vaccinator Beharee Lall, and I found very little work indeed done by him. On the 31st I went to Sasundra on my way to the west. There was no work done at this place by the Vaccinator in charge up to the time of my visit. I halted one day and had 209 children from surrounding villages collected and vaccinated in my camp. I arrived atMultaion January 3rd. On considering the population of the place and the number of large villages which are in the vicinity, I found very little work done. I had the children collected for about 2 miles all round and had 925 fresh cases done. On the 4th and 5th I became ill from too much exposure to sun and was obliged to return to the station on the 7th. I was not able to go into camp again until the 17th February, when I proceeded down the Taptee valley, which I had not previously seen. I found all the children, about 380, vaccinated at Jullar. There were only 10 left to be operated on at my camp. On 20th I visited Bheisdye, a large village in the south-east. I had all the children collected from the surrounding villages, and found 200 vaccinated, and 34 more operated on at my camp ; there were some cases of small-pox in this and the adjoining circles about 30 in all. I caused the affected place to be purified, and gave directions for the treatment of the sick. The disease did not spread. From Bheisdye I proceeded along the south-east of the district visiting the villages of Goodgaon, Saithnair, Dabba, Dahka, Masode, Atner, Badowra, and arrived in the Sadar station about the latter end of March. In those villages I found a total of 1,330 children vaccinated, and I had 1,540 fresh cases operated on in my camp. In carrying out my inspections this year I adopted the plan of encamping in the centre of a number of villages and caused the Kotwars to bring the children of their villages to my tents for examination. I found this plan to work very well. In most parts of the district many of the people brought forward their children without much hesitation, although I must say that in some places, even where the people come forward freely, many children were kept back as their parents did not fully comprehend the nature or object of the operation and rested under the impression that their children would die after it. I adopted every means in my power to dispel their fears, and to explain to them, as far as possible, the benefits to be derived from the work, and have reason to believe that my efforts were in a great measure successful ; but in some places the Vaccinators met determined opposition, and in such cases I directed them to use all the gentle persuasive measures in their power to induce the people to let their children be vaccinated, but under no circumstances were they to resort to violence in order to carry out their work.
16 The accompanying Statements show a total of 13,636 operations per- formed this year, of which 12,289 were successful or 92.25 per cent. Last year there were 11,252 vaccinations, of which.8,708 were successful or 85.35 per cent, This gives an increase of 3,581 successful cases for this year over last, also there is a greater percentage of successful cases by about 6.90. Conduct of Vaccinators. I regret to say that none of the Vaccinators were as, diligent as they might have been, Beharee Lal, 3rd Class Vaccinator, did very little work indeed. He stated that he was sick, but at the time of my inspection he was in perfect health. Pandoba, 1st Class Vaccinator, did only 680 vaccinations during the whole season, but the country was new to him and he may do better next year. I have particularly to bring before your notice the conduct of 3rd Class Vaccinator Shaikh Mahbub. He was sent to one of the most populous parts of the district, the circle of Multai. I received a petition signed by 7 of the Vaccinators stating this man had made between 500 and 600 false entries in his registry. I carefully examined his books and was obliged to exclude more than 500 names for which he could not account. I also found several villages entered twice. When all these false entries were taken out, it left the number done in his circles at only 1,206 during the whole season ; of this number 1,025 were done in my camp at the time of my visit, and this will leave him a total number of vaccinations for the season of only 181. No reliance can be placed in any of his returns, and I think that the work of vaccination would be benefited by his dismissal, which I strongly recommend. Mahomed Murad, Native Superintendent, has not afforded me any reason, to be satisfied with him this year. He was not at all as diligent as he might have been, and you will see by the enclosed petition which I forward for your perusal that he appears to have countenanced Shaikh Mahbub, who was his &quot;disciple,&quot; in sending in incorrect or rather false returns. I have had many op- portunities of observing him while at work, and I remarked a perfect absence of energy in all his movements, and a carelessness in supervising and keeping the Vaccinators to their work, which was very detrimental to the work. The conduct of the rest of the Vaccinators was good. Goolab Sing, Faiz- audden, Anajee and Mohioudeen Khan were all strangers in the district this year, but next season they will be better acquainted with it, and I anticipate better results. The population of the circles in which vaccination was carried on is 249,133, there were 13,636 vaccinations performed during the season or 54.73 per 1,000 of the population ; still there remains a large percentage under 12 years of age to be secured, and very many will not at all allow their children to be operated on, unless it is made compulsory for them to do so, and until this is the case I fear that any amount of persuasion will not succeed in perfectly securing the entire district. I have spared no trouble to ensure the correctness of the accompanying returns, and were it not for the exclusion of some which were not trustworthy, they might have been over 14,000 for the season. But I prefer the smaller number as being quite correct.
17 On receiving your Circular No. 180 of the 7th June 1873 I made a careful enquiry, and found that a number of cases that were returned as re- vaccinations, were cases that had been unsuccessfuly done only a week or two before for the first time, consequently I had them entered as primary vaccinations in the returns. There were no re-vaccinated cases during the year. Sanitation. There is a marked improvement in the cleanliness of many of the villages which I visited as compared with last year, but there are not a few which require the careful attention of the Local authorities, for if they are not compelled to keep their places clean they will never do so. The towns of Bordha, Shahpur, Nimpani, Amla and Betul are seldom clean. OSTATEMENTS. B. k. F.A. STATEMEN Showing particulars of Vaccination in each Circle of superintenden 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 CIRCLE. Name and rank of Superintendant. Number of Native Superintendents. Number of Vaccinators. Total number of persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Ageney or Native State in which vaccinations were performed dur- ing the year. Population of area included in last column. Name of portion of District or of Town. A. Sex. Male. Female. 1872-78 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 1872-73 1871-72 A. G. Price, Apo- thecary ... 1 1 10 10 11,640 10,387 Chhindwara 260,913 Chhindwara Tahsil... 3,012 3,02 Chhindwara Town ... 132 12 Lodikhera Town ... 56 4 Sausar Tahsil ... 1,377 1,35 Jaghirs ... ... ... 1,156 l,32 Total ... 5,733 5,96 B. Evers, Assistant Surgeon,. 1 1 10 10 19,822 11,742 Seoni.... 421,650 Seoni Tahsil I. The Central Provinces during the year 1872-73. 9 10 11 12 Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including these &quot; doubtful.'' Unknown. Total. In primary vaccination. In secondary vaccination. Hindus. Mohammadans. Other Castes. Age under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those &quot; doubtful.&quot; Unknown. 5,028 95 938 3,733 2,328 5,662 341 58 6,061 ... ... ... ... 94.31 ... 865.85 189 52 13 187 68 2,03 39 13 255 ... ... ... ... 83.88 ... 25.5 92 1 11 91 13 84 16 4 104 ... ... ... ... 84.00 ... 10.4 2,344 54 343 1,777 963 2,515 157 68 2,710 ... ... ... ... 94.12 ... 913.33 2,317 22 141 456 2,024 2,387 68 25 2,480 ... ... ... ... 97.23 ... 826.66 9,961 224 1,446 6,244 5,396 10,851 621 168 11,640 ... ... ... ... 94.58 ... 116.4 2,429 300 958 1,163 2,525 2,977 568 143 3,688 ... ... ... ... 83.97 ... 1844.00 119 4 101 34 190 196 26 2 224 ... ... ... ... 88.28 ... 224.00 4,781 415 10,714 1,849 14,061 14,421 1,048 441 15,910 ... ... ... ... 93.22 ... 1591.00 7,329 719 11,773 3,046 16,776 17,594 1,642 586 19,822 ... ... ... ... 91.46 ... 1982.20 10,328 198 11,177 2,815 8,888 10,595 836 272 11,763 ... ... ... ... 92.68 ... 1300.33 1,582 27 324 1,209 724 1,694 196 43 1,933 ... ... ... ... 89.63 ... 644.33 11,910 225 1,501 4,024 9,612 12,289 1,032 315 13,636 ... ... ... ... 92.25 ... 1363.60 6,457 549 767 1,761 6,012 6,523 973 277 7,773 ... ... ... ... 87.01 ... 777.30 35,657 1,717 15,487 15,075 37,796 47,257 4,268 1,346 52,871 ... ... ... ... 91.71 ... 1321.77
A.AA.MENT No. IV. each of the previous five years in the Central Provinces. 6 7 8 9 Cost of Vaccine Establishment. Cost of travelling allowances and contin- gencies. Total cost. Cost of each successful case, Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 11,745 5 0 930 6 9 12,675 11 9 0 7 1¾ 13,442 4 8 841 6 3 14,283 10 11 0 6 7¼ 10,913 13 4 676 0 2 11,592 13 6 0 6 ¼ 4,312 4 5 ... ... ... 4,312 4 5 0 1 8½ 3,959 5 11 ... ... ... 3,959 5 11 0 2 2¼ 6,147 15 0 ... ... .. 6,147 15 0 0 2 1
B.MENT No. V. superintendence in the Central Provinces during the year 1872-73. 10 11 12 13 Primary Vaccination. Re-vaccination Percentage of successful cases excluding those &quot; unknown&quot; from the total Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. A B C D A B C D Sex, Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those &quot; doubtful.&quot; Unknown. Total Male Female. Christian. Hindu. Mohammadan. Other caste. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful including those doubtful. Unknown. In primary vaccina- ton. In secondary vaccina- tion. 785 1,051 9 1,187 640 ... 795 1,041 1,517 207 112 1,836 81 40 24 145 87.99 66.94 2578.00 22 11 ... 30 3 ... 26 7 19 14 ... 33 ... ... ... ... 57.57 ... 2,354 297 ... 1,572 269 810 554 2,097 1,520 840 291 2,651 8 6 ... 14 64.40 57.14 2 1 ... 3 ... ... 2 1 2 1 ... 3 ... ... ... .. 66.66 ... 31 16 .. 47 ... ... 14 33 35 7 5 47 ... ... ... ... 83.33 ... 130 81 ... 205 6 ... 208 3 98 113 ... 211 ... ... ... ... 46.44 ... 11 13 ... 21 3 ... 16 8 20 4 ... 24 ... ... ... ... 83.33 ... 26 6 2 20 10 ... 27 5 11 20 1 32 1 1 ... 2 35.48 50.00 64 65 ... 120 9 ... 84 45 66 63 ... 129 22 7 ... 29 51.16 75.86 3,425 1,541 11 3,205 940 810 1,726 3,240 3,288 1,269 409 4,966 112 54 24 190 72.15 67.47 2578.00 605 582 2 597 95 493 448 739 805 302 80 1,187 ... ... ... ... 72.71 ... 593.50 161 56 4 187 26 ... 30 187 193 24 ... 217 ... ... ... ... 88.94 ... 2422.50 2,718 1,462 ... 3,372 808 ... 1,199 2,981 3,899 281 ... 4,180 ... ... ... ... 93.27 ... 161 116 38 141 98 ... 91 186 215 52 10 277 11 2 47 60 80.52 84.61 205 176 12 273 96 ... 295 86 344 37 ... 381 ... ... ... ... 90.28 ... 4 4 .. 7 1 ... 3 5 8 ... ... 8 271 195 ... 466 100.00 58.15 720 553 ... 981 292 ... 407 866 1,187 86 ... 1,273 ... ... ... ... 93.24 ... 907 739 ... 1,606 40 ... 1,439 207 1,400 246 ... 1,646 ... ... ... ... 85.05 ... 402 198 ... 564 36 ... 41 559 528 72 ... 600 ... ... ... ... 88.00 ... 325 257 ... 568 14 ... 75 507 524 58 ... 582 ... ... ... ... 90.03 ... 5,603 3,561 54 7,699 1,411 ... 3,580 5,584 8,298 856 10 9,164 282 197 47 526 90.64 58.87 2422.50 764 816 1 1,335 99 145 198 1,382 979 397 204 1,580 ... ... ... ... 71.14 ... 526.66 584 710 7 1,207 78 2 389 905 973 233 88 1,294 .. ... ... ... 80.67 ... 1294 654 525 8 1,040 131 . .. 232 947 1,002 77 100 1,179 ... ... ... ... 92.86 ... 1179 136 196 ... 249 8 75 93 239 240 89 3 332 ... ... ... ... 72.94 ... 332 196 133 ... 280 43 6 74 255 300 25 4 329 ... .. ... ... 92.30 ... 329 265 489 ... 686 14 54 341 413 510 144 100 754 ... ... ... ... 77.98 ... 754 443 780 . . 1,088 40 95 804 419 1,025 68 130 1,223 ... ... ... ... 9378 ... 1223 2,278 2,833 15 4,550 314 232 1,933 3,178 4,050 636 425 5,111 ... ... ... ... 86.42 ... 851.83 958 1,134 28 1,258 129 677 932 1,160 1,723 369 . . . 2,092 ... ... ... .. 82.36 1046.00 1,200 1,159 1 1,525 402 431 763 1,596 2,031 328 ... 2,359 ... ... ... ... 86.09 ... 2359.00 2,158 2,293 29 2,783 631 1,108 1,695 2,756 3,754 697 ... 4,451 ... ... ... ... 84. 34 ... 1483.66 E.B.V.REPORT ON VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES. FOR THE YEAR 1873-74. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS: 1874 5No. 3073 A./147 FROM J. W. CHISHOLM, ESQUIRE, OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 29th August 1874. SIR, I am directed to convey the following remarks and orders of the Chief Commissioner on your Report showing the result of Vaccine operations in the districts of the Central Provinces during the year 1873-74. 2. A special Government Establishment, with three Native Superintendents subordinate to the Civil Surgeons, has now for four years being carrying on vacci- nation in the Satpura districts of Betul, Chindwara and Seoni. Here the at- tempt is made to vaccinate the whole of the infant population, and it would seem from the table given in your 6th paragraph that in Chhindwara about two- thirds, in Betul about one-half, and in Seoni one-third of the infants born in the past year were protected from small-pox by vaccination. This is on the assump- tion that the birth rate is 36 per 1,000 of population, but as this is the English rate it is doubtless too low an estimate, and it is probable that the real birth rate is between 50 and 60 per mille. The proportion of infants vaccinated therefore in each district out of the aggregate infant population is doubtless somewhat smaller than the figures which you present. 3. The total number of operations in these districts amounted to 41,265, being in Betul and Chhindwara an increase on the previous year, and in Seoni a falling off, owing to the transfer of one Tahsil to the Balaghat district. Each Vaccinator got through on the average from 12 to 1,500 operations during the season, and you accept this as a fair amount of work, though it is much less than local Vaccinators have performed in some districts. Of vaccinations carried out, 93.5 per cent were successful, and if the returns are accurate this result may be regarded as fairly satisfactory. The work generally seems to have been carefully supervised by the Civil Surgeons, and in Chhindwara especially the subordinate Establishment appears to have attained a high standard of effi- ciency. 4. The comparison which you have made of the results in the Satpura districts with the best vaccinated tracts in other Provinces proves that the experiment of entrusting Civil Medical Officers with the charge of vaccine operations in their disticts, wherever this can be done, has been attended with a large measure of success, Your conclusion is probably correct that to protect 6 10 Y E 34 290
2 any locality completely from the inroads of small-pox in this country, the numbers annually vaccinated must approach 50 per 1,000 of the population. In Kamaon, where Government Establishments have been working for a long series of years, the number reaches this standard; and as after four years' ex- perience 41 per 1,000 have come to be vaccinated in the Satpura districts, the results must be considered in every way encouraging. 5. In the majority of districts in the Province no complete vaccin- ation arrangements have been made, there being no funds available to cover so large an area with a qualified agency. In every district, however, some local Establishments have been employed, and these have worked under the immediate orders of the Civil Surgeon. The numbers and work of these local Establishments are supplied by you in table at page 22 of your report. The districts of Nagpur and Bhandara have each maintained ten Vaccinators. In other dis- tricts they have ranged from two to six. The amount of protection which it has been possible to afford the population against the ravages of small-pox in dffer- -ent districts thus depends very much on the strength and efficiency of the Establishments supported by the Local Funds. In Sambalpur alone has a small local Establishment been able to compass the vaccination requirements of the whole district, and here the work has been going on successfully for a series of years. The results as they now stand are practically the same as in the Satpura districts, where special Government Establishments have been enter- tained, and exhibit 41 successful cases in the year per 1,000 of the population. There are only three Vaccinators employed, and they have turned out 13,326 successful cases. Each Vaccinator has vaccinated on an average 4,664 persons, and 95 per cent. of the cases have been successful. It would seem therefore, if these figures really represent facts, that the Sambalpur Vaccinators have been able to get through more than three times the work of those employed in the Satpura districts, and that they have done it exceptionally well. 6. You have not entered into the causes which may have occasioned this marked difference in the out-turn of work on the part of Establish- ments which may be supposed to be equally efficient. Something may be due to an unexplained difference of system, but as in many districts the opposition of the people is advanced as an element materially retarding oper- ations, it is possible that the great results in Sambalpur may be largely due to the ready facility with which the people greet the advent of the Vaccin- ators. This has resulted from the strenuous efforts in the cause of vaccination on the part of Civil Officers, and the unremitting exertions of an energetic Civil Surgeon. The Chief Commissioner hopes that with similar co-operation and effort, equally good results may be attained everywhere. 7. It is no doubt true that in some places there is a feeling against vacci- nation, but, so far as the Chief Commissioner is informed, there is nowhere in these Provinces any strong religious prejudice against having children vaccinated. The ill-feeling and opposition usually arise from the unpalatable manner in which vaccination is conducted, and from a grounded disbelief in its efficacy as a prophylactic. There are enthusiastic Medical Officers who fail to see that some tangible grounds may exist for the resistance of the people to their Vaccinators, which can only be effectually overcome by tact and sympathy. They would disarm all opposition by compulsory vaccination under an order from the Magistrate, and when the absence of co-operation by Civil Officers is mentioned, the aid expected is too often of a kind which it is impossible to render. With Vaccinators of good caste, working in the same area from year to year, well-trained, and thoroughly controlled, both as to their work and their demeanour towards the people, Mr. Morris is confident that all opposition
3 will disappear, while if the work is being smoothly and effectively done your department may rely on the cordial support of the District authorities, who must be unanimous in their desire to push forward a scheme which is expected to rescue the masses from the ravages of a loathsome disease. 8. Looking at the work in the different districts as commented on by you in paragraphs 22 to 40, and excluding Sambalpur, where, as already noted, the arrangements are exceptionally complete, the Chief Commissioner would have been glad of more information as to what actual area in each district has been brought under vaccination. You mention that ''the principle of working in certain defined areas has not perhaps been sufficiently adhered to.&quot; This, how- ever, is what should have been systematically aimed at. Some good no doubt results from a Vaccine staff working in scattered villages, but in effectiveness an arrangement of this kind cannot compare with devoting the energies of the Establishment to a compact area and endeavouring therein to carry vaccination into every house. An area protected in this way is believed to be fairly free from the outbreak of an epidemic, and this fact once proved to the people, they will be found eager enough for their villages to be enclosed in a Vaccine circle. 9. It would have been possible with existing Establishments in almost every district to have an area with the head-quarters Station as a centre, within which vaccination might by degrees have been made so nearly universal as to prevent small-pox within certain limits ever again raging as an epidemic. This does not seem to have been generally done, and therefore it cannot be said that local Establishments have everywhere been utilized in the most effective manner. In the past year the operations in Jabalpur, Bhandara and Nimar show good pro- gress considering the agency available; in other districts, and markedly in Nagpur, Raipur, Hoshangabad and Narsinghpur, the Chief Commissioner considers that more might have been done ; while in-Sagar, Mandla, and Damoh the resutls are altogether unsatisfactory. 10. The Chief Commissioner has before him separately your scheme for placing Vaccine operations in each district on a proper footing, and as a further Provincial grant will be made for Establishments, some real progress in the next few years may be confidently expected. Three or four more districts will be com- pletely protected by having a staff of Vaccinators sufficient to undertake their whole area, and in the others a defined area will be taken up and vaccination all through it systematically carried on. 11. There has been some progress in the amount of vaccination which alto- gether has been got through by the local Establishments. There were 89,734 operations, compared with 77,074 in the previous year ; and taking Government and local Establishments together the results were as follows :4 Government Resolution No. 112, dated 7th November 1873, passed on the Vacci- nation Report of 1872-73. It is not necessary in this place to follow you through all the details which you have supplied, but the table you give is quoted as showing in a concise shape the actual statistical results. DISTRICT. Population. Deaths fom Small-pox Total persons vac- cinated in the 4 years. Ratio per 1,000 1871 1872 1873. 1874. Total. Deaths from small -pox. Successful vac- cinations. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Districts south of the Satpuras. 1 Wardha ... 354,720 26 351 618 595 1,590 10,827 4.48 23.32 2 Nagpur ... 631,109 30 228 625 535 1,418 32,102 2.24 39.59 3 Bhandara ... 564,813 44 153 1,298 2,047 3,542 28,217 6.25 46.43 4 Chanda ... 406,016 8 74 959 1,797 2,838 24,745 6.98 41.45 5 Sironcha ... 52,120 3 3 21 36 63 2,138 1.20 31.06 Mahanadi Districts. 6 Raipur ... 917,312 442 1,330 4,142 2,244 8,158 39,859 8.90 37.30 7 Bilaspur ... 499,548 203 238 550 381 1,372 12,220 2.75 21.90 8 Sarabalpur ... 319,962 9 19 9 24 61 53,766 0.19 157.13 Satpura Districts. 9 Burhanpur Tahsil, Nimar District... 63,832 96 390 11 25 522 6,251 8.17 82.79 10 Betul ... 284,055 ... 71 129 76 276 52,822 0. 97 159.48 11 Chhindwara ... 264,610 65 27 36 85 213 52,272 0.80 180.38 12 Seoni ... 321,623 24 20 38 33 115 58,300 0.36 160.87 13 Balaghat ... 280,715 34 86 485 418 1,023 5,572 3.64 15.42 14 Mandla ... 213,018 181 92 157 238 668 6,976 3.13 23.90 Districts north of the Satpuras. 15 Nimar ... 147,344 68 813 125 102 1,108 7,004 7.52 41.12 16 Hoshangabad ... 440,186 8 67 678 386 1,139 16,412 2.59 30.25 17 Narsinghpur ... 339,395 97 20 29 283 429 5,726 1.26 9.96 18 Jabalpur ... 346,660 22 11 8 1,234 1,325 34,624 3.82 90.19 19 Murwara Tahsil, Jabalpur District. 182,199 1 10 4 70 85 8,589 0.46 32.92 20 Damoh ... 269,642 74 169 5 271 519 4,608 1.92 11.40 21 Sagar ... 527,725 ... ... 9 180 189 25,708 0.36 32.79 Total ... 7,426,604 1,435 4,172 9,936 11,110 26,652 4,88,738 3.58 55.65 13. It is observed that in contrasting the death rate from small-pox in the, protected districts of Betul, Chhindwara, Seoni and Sambalpur, it is much smaller than in the adjoining districts which may be accepted as possessing similar climatic conditions, and as you have arranged the districts geographically a comparison of this kind can be readily made. It would be satisfactory if the. statistics could be carried, further back, and the average death rate in these dis- tricts could be given for any period of years before vaccination operations were commenced. But although such statistics do not exist the Chief Commissioner thinks it may be safely affirmed that these districts do owe their comparative im- munity from the ravages of small pox to the vaccine operations of the last few years. This confidence in the effectiveness of the vaccine arrangements adopt
5 ed is not shaken by the exceptional instance of Sagar, where the death rate was ac- tually lower than in either Betul or Chhindwara, because you explain that as a fact small-pox has not within the period treated visited the Sagar district as an epidemic, though it has appeared there this year, and may be expected to run its course as an epidemic after the rains have ceased. The conclusion at which you arrive is, that the statistics of another year will prove yet more conclusively the protection which has been afforded by vaccination in special districts where Establishments systematically labour among the whole population. In this opinion the Chief Commissioner concurs, and he fears from the facts which you adduce in your Sanitary Report, that in some of the districts north of the Satpuras an epidemic out-break of small-pox may occur during the dry months of 1875. 14 The future work of vaccination in these Provinces will, as you remark, &quot; be best carried on by an Establishment in each district under the control and direction of the Civil Medical Officer,&quot; and, as already stated, whatever area is taken up, should be thoroughly done. Spasmodic attempts to spread vacci- nation when small-pox has broken out as an epidemic are not of much benefit, and they are calculated to shake the faith of the people, who find that operations hastily conducted during a crisis of the kind too often fail to afford the desired protection. 15. The Chief Commissioner desires me to convey to you his thanks for the careful attention which the whole subject of vaccination is receiving at your hands, and to express his confidence that the arrangements now being matured for the future will be attended with satisfactory results. The acknowledgments of the Administration are due to Drs. Rice, Hall and Evers, and to Messrs. Price and Harrison, for the efforts they have made in the cause of Vaccination. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. CHISHOLM, Offg. Secretary. 6-10-E-35-290.
INDEX PARA. Tour of inspection. ... ... ... 1No. 440. FROM SURGEON MAJOR S. C. TOWNSEND, SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, Dated Nagpur, 25th September 1874. Sir, I have the honor to submit for the information of the Chief Commissioner the Vaccination Returns of the Central Provinces for the year 1873-74. 2. In the commencement of the season I first made a short tour in the Nagpur district to see the work fairly started under the Native Superintendent, and then left for Seoni and Jabalpur, inspecting the work that had been com- menced in the Sadar towns of those districts. I was then called to Calcutta on duty, but during my absence Dr. Barter, who first officiated for me, inspected the work of the Establishment in the Betul, Chhindwara and Seoni districts ; and subsequently in April Dr. Law made an inspection of the work in the Nagpur District. 3. Vaccination was kept up throughout the year at Nagpur, Seoni, Chhindwara and Khandwa; there was, therefore, no lack of fresh lymph to com- mence the season with. The first general distribution of lymph was made on the 3rd November. To some districts tubes of English lymph which had been received from Bombay were distributed, to the remainder lymph collected at Nagpur. With two or three Medical Officers the English lymph proved inactive, but as repeated supplies of fresh lymph were distributed during the first month of the season, there was no delay on this account, and vaccination was every- where started early in November. 4. One or two Medical Officers anxious to begin the work of the season had obtained lymph from the Himalayas and other sources but there is really nothing to be gained by commencing the work before November. I have shown in former reports (1870 and 1871) that the season favourable for vaccination does not usually set in in these Provinces till November, and that it is inexpedient to commence operations before the 1st or 2nd week of that month. In a very dry season, as it was last year, operations many prove successful in October, but there is always a risk in sending out the Vaccinators before the prevalence of the autumnal fever has subsided. Last season Dr. Hall commenced operations with lymph obtained from Nagpur in September, and distributed his Vaccinators to their different Circles with good supplies of lymph early in October, but two of his Vaccinators were laid up with fever for several weeks. It is better to begin a little later, when there is little or no risk from fever, and prolong opera- tions in the hot weather, for, as far as my experience goes, operations in this part of the country are quite as successful in April and May as in January. 5. Vaccination in these Provinces is carried on by a small Provincial Establishment paid from Provincial Funds, and by local Establishments paid from Municipal and District Funds. The Provincial Establishment, consisting of 3 Native Superintendents and 30 Vaccinators, has been employed, as in the three previous years, in the districts of Seoni, Betul and Chhindwara, under the immediate superintendence of the Civil Surgeons of those districts. S.10.2 6. The following table shows the cost and main results of the working of the Establishment in the three districts, more minute details of which are given in Tables I. and III. appended. TABLE I. DISTRICTS. Total exponded. Rs. Number of operations. Number of Vaccinators employed Number of operations by each Vaccinator. Successful per cent of opciations. Cost of each operation, in annas. Infants vaccinated per cent of estimated births Persons vaccinated per 1,000 of population. 1. Chhinchwara. 2,000 12,240 10 1,224 95.40 2.9 *64.3 36.0 2. Betul ... 2,164 13,823 10 1,382 93.00 2.8 47.3 53.1 3. Seoni ... 1,941 15,202 10 1,520 92.36 2.2½ 33 48.9 Total .. 6,105 41,265 30 1,376 93.56 2.6 57.66 41.43 * Births estimated at 36 per 1,000 of population. The total cost is greater by 1,000 rupees than the amount expended last year ; this is due to the Medical Officers having been for longer periods on tours of inspection and drawn a larger amount of travelling allowance, more especially the Medical Officers of Betul and Seoni; the average cost of each successful case was, however, only 2½ annas. 7. The number of operations, 41,265, is less by nearly 4,000 than the num- ber vaccinated by the Establishment in the previous year, but the deficiency occurred in the Seoni district only, and was due to a large portion of the district, containing a third of the population, having been transferred to Balaghat. The number vaccinated in the Chhindwara and Betul districts in 1873-74 rather exceeded the number of the previous season. The number vaccinated by each Vaccinator is not small when compared with the work obtained from Vaccinators in other Provinces, especially when the sparseness of the population of these dis- tricts is considered. The percentage of success, 93.5, is also good, and is rather higher than in the previous season. 8. The reports of the Civil Surgeons are submitted in original. That of Mr Price contains much useful information concerning the feelings of the peo- ple with regard to vaccination, and the amount of protection afforded by the work done. Dr. Hall's report also shows a large amount of inspection work. He was in camp for 49 days, and from time to time made short trips in the neighbour- hood of the Sadar Station In this way he was able to inspect the work of each of his Vaccinators. Altogether he inspected 13,444 children belonging to 431 villages; of these, 8,431 had been successfully vaccinated, and 5,013 were operated on while he was present. He reports that although people are not so opposed to vaccination as they were two or three years ago, and in many places even acknow-
3 ledge the protective powers of the operation, it is not as popular as could be wished. He is, however, of opinion that the dislike to the operation is fast disap- pearing, and that the results of the season's work were very satisfactory. 9. Dr. Evers also gives a good account of the working of the system in the Seoni district. During the season he made five tours, and thus was able to inspect the work of each Vaccinator more than once, and he considers that the work was generally well and honestly performed. In the course of his tours Dr. Evers visited upwards of two hundred villages. He gives several instances in which the protective power of vaccination was plainly exhibited to, and acknowledged by the people. Dr. Barter also, who, while officiating as Sanitary Commissioner inspected the vaccination in these districts, bears testi- mony to the changed feeling of the people of Seoni in respect of vaccination. 10. Dr. Evers is certainly heterodox in his opinion with regard to opera- tions with points and crusts ; as, however, he acknowledges that working from &quot;arm to arm&quot; is preferable where it can be done, I trust he will in future seasons see his way to adopting the system more generally. The only obstacle to it is the assembling the children of several villages together at one central place, but it has been found very easy to overcome this difficulty in the districts of Chhind- wara and Betul. He will also by this method be able to confer protection against small-pox on a larger number of infants, for in this respect the work of the Seoni district is not so good as that of the districts of Chhindwara and Betul. 11. Dr. Barter after inspecting the work in these districts reported very favourably of all. Mr. Price's work he considers as good as can be done. He inspected 683 children belonging to 39 villages, and found that the operations had been uusuccessful in 30 cases only. In Betul he happened to light on the work of a Vaccinator who had been reduced for bad work, and finding it again unsatisfactory, the man was dismissed. The work of three other Vaccinators inspected by Dr. Barter, yielded a percentage of 93.3 successful cases. In Seoni district Dr. Barter inspected some of the work of three Vaccina- tors, which yielded 88 per cent of successful cases. 12. The amount of protection conferred on the people of these districts by the year's work may be estimated by the number of infants vaccinated under one year of age, or by the number of persons vaccinated per mille of the population. 13. In countries as in England, where it is compulsory for all infants to be vaccinated within 3 months after birth, the number of vaccinations per cent of births affords the best estimate of the extent to which the population is pro- tected. In England for some years prior to 1871, the number of vaccinations did not exceed 65 per cent of the number of births, and in that year a violent epidemic of small-pox carried off nearly 23,000 persons. Measures were then taken to ensure better enforcement of the law, and the rate of vaccination has since risen considerably. 14. In this country we cannot as yet adopt this mode of estimating the effi- ciency of vaccination work, for in the first place our registration of births is still very imperfect, and secondly parents are generally much averse to having very young children operated on, and everywhere a large proportion of those vaccina- ted are above 1 year old. As however young children are more readily brought for operation in proportion as the protection it confers becomes known and ap- preciated by the people, the proportion of children under 1 year operated on becomes a good test of the progress that has been made in overcoming the prejudices of the people.
4 15. The number of births registered in the Province in 1873 yielded a birth rate of a little over 30 per 1,000 of the population ; this is undoubtedly much below the truth, and we must have some other standard whereby we may estimate the relative value of the work of vaccination. According to the Census of 1872 the number of children living under 1 year of age amounted to 51 per 1,000 of the total population. As about 15 per cent of the children die before they reach the age of 1 year, if we took the Census for our guide in estimat- ing the annual birth rate, we should have to put it at about 60 per 1,000 of the population, or nearly double the average birth rate of European countries. One hesitates to accept this enormous birth rate as correct, more especially as it would show our efforts to make vaccination keep pace with the births to be more inadequate even than we imagined them to be, but I have shown elsewhere that our vital statistics to a considerable extent support the figures of the Census, and even the statistics of vaccination in Sambalpur and the hill districts ap- parently indicate that the birth rate is very high. For the present, however, and until we can get more accurate statistics, it will be better to use the birth rate of England, 36 per 1,000, as a standard for comparison. 16. Taking 36 per 1,000 as the birth rate, the proportion of children under 1 year old vaccinated per cent of estimated births in the districts given in Table I, compares very favourably with the rates obtained in other Provinces, as will be shown presently. 17. As, however, a large proportion of the children vaccinated in this country are above 1 year old, the number of infants vaccinated is not a correct measure of the efficiency of vaccination, and we must take the proportion of suc- cessful operations per 1,000 of the population for the purpose of estimating the extent to which protection has been conferred by the annual work. Assuming the birth rate to be 36 per 1,000, and reducing this by a sixth to meet the mortality among young children, 30 operations per 1,000 of the population would be the rate which it would be necessary to keep up annually in order to exclude small- pox from a district. 18. The following table shows the rates obtained in 1873-74 in the three Satpura districts occupied by the Provincial Establishment of these Provinces, compared with the rates obtained in 1872-73 in the best vaccinated districts of Bombay and of the North West Provinces :5 19. It will be observed that the vaccination rates actually obtained in these districts with the exception of Rohilkund are greatly in excess of what (on the assumption that the birth rate of this country is no higher than the English rate) could be kept up for a series of years. In Kumaon, however, vaccination has been carried on for a long series of years, to the extent of completely protecting the people from small-pox, yet in the season of 1872-73 there were found a number of children available for vaccination to the extent of 52 per 1,000 of the population, and the average number of children successfully vaccinated in the three years 1870-71 to 1872-73 was 49 per 1,000 of the population. These vac- cination rates then corroborate the figures of the Census, and the statistics obtained from several of our towns, and we are almost compelled to accept the conclusion that the birth rate of India, is much above that of England, and that to keep small-pox out of any Province or district, the number of persons vac- cinated annually must be equal to nearly 50 per 1,000 of the population, 20. I have carefully analysed the work in the Satpura districts, and com- pared the results with those obtained in other Provinces, because the system of making over the vaccination of those districts to the Civil Medical Officers was adopted as an experiment. I think it will be acknowledged that the system has so far answered, and that the reports afford good evidence that when a Civil Medical Officer is able to undertake the superintendence of the vaccination of his district he is the best person to do it. LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT 21. In 1870, when the Provincial Establishment was assigned to the 3 districts of the Satpuras, efforts for the extension of vaccination were initiated in many other districts, to the extent of the means at the disposal of the Local and Municipal authorities, the principle laid down for guidance being that no more work was to be attempted than could be efficiently overlooked by the Civil Surgeon or other trustworthy officer. A good deal of work has been ac- complished by the District Establishment during the last 4 years, which has been very efficiently supervised, but the principle of working in certain defined areas has not perhaps been sufficiently adhered to. 22. Table III. shows the means employed and the results obtained in dif- ferent districts in the season of 1873-74. The districts are placed in the table in order according to the rates of successful cases per 1,000 of population. TABLE III. No. Districts Total amount expended Coat of each successful case. Number of vaccinators. Number of persons vaccina- ted by each vaccinator Number of successful cases. Successful percent of opera- tions. Infants vaccinated per cent of estimated births. Successful cases per 1,000 of population. Rs. A. P. R. A. P. 1 Sambalpur ... 613 8 9 0 0 8¾ 3 4,664 13,326 95.54 67.58 41.64 2 Jabalpur .. 411 0 0 0 0 ½ 6 2,645 14,090 90.79 25.63 26.64 3 Nimar ... 412 0 0 0 1 ½ 3 974 4,499 86.53 45.80 21.30 4 Bhandara ... 922 0 0 0 1 7 10 1,006 9,312 92.77 19.82 16.48 5 Sironcha ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 778 72.98 3.51 14.92 6 Raipur 773 3 2 0 1 5 6 1,692 8,881 90.66 7.88 9.68 7 Nagpur ... 1,946 10 0 0 6 1 10 645 5,111 82.97 10.79 8.09 A. U. O. k. 28 230 290
6 TABLE III.7 25. Nimar comes next in the proportion of numbers vaccinated per 1,000 of the population. The proportion of infants vaccinated was also good. Vac- cination was kept up in the Sadar Station by Dr. Fleming throughout the year. Operations were carried on in the district by three vaccinators appointed to three separate Circles. The number of operations exceeded that of the pre- vious year by 15 per cent. Dr. Fleming was able to inspect thoroughlythe work in the Khandwa and Piplod Circles, and in all that part of the Dhangaon Circle lying along the line of the Indore road and Holkar State Railway. At the same time he furnished to the Deputy Commissioner notes of the sanitary condition of all the villages that he was able to visit during the season. 26. Sironcha.8 having received assistance from several Patels and Malguzars, particularly Go- vind Sing, Honorary Magistrate, and his brother Seeta Ram Sing. Malguzar of Dhapewara. Dr. Law also brings to notice the good work that was done owing to the support given by these landowners. 29. Raipur.9 by the Tahsildar. The Haveli Circle was inspected by the Sub-Assistant Sur- geon in charge of the Civil Dispensary ; the number vaccinated was large, but the proportion of successful cases was not good. The percentage of success in the Chanda district is scarcely 75 per cent, which is decidedly low ; and in many in- stances the failure was attributed to the parents washing away the lymph imme- diately after an operation or applying poultices, with a view of destroying the effects of the lymph; but it is probable that in more instances the failure was the result of inexperience or want of care on the part of the vaccinators. In every village inspected by Dr. Craggs he found the prescribed list of children vaccinated in the possession of the Malguzar. 31. Hoshangabad.10 reformed in 171 villages, with a percentage of 87 successful cases. It would be well to ascertain the number of deaths from small-pox that have occurred in those villages where the epidemic now prevailing has passed by. Mr. Bailey, who acts in the capacity of Medical Officer, inspected the work of each vaccinator twice during the season, and found the work of three good. The fourth worked badly, always complaining of not being able to procure sub- jects for operation. As this man only performed 144 operations during the sea- son, I think his services had better be dispensed with. Mr. Bailey reports that the people generally are still much opposed to vaccination. 34. Mandla.11 37. Bilaspur.12 TABLE IV. Province. Expended on vacci- nation. Number of success- ful vaccinations. Success per cent of total operations. Infants vaccinated per cent of esti- mated births.* Successful cases per 1,000 of popula- tion. Average cost of each successful case. Successful cases by each vaccinator. Rs. Bombay .. 2,10,795 5,04,762 94.8 26.0 23.8 6.8 1,330 Punjab .. 58,873 3,29,590 93.00 15.6 17.9 2.10 1,478 13 even the largest Provincial Establishment now in operation, and the cost of a department organized on a plan sufficiently comprehensive to include the whole of these Provinces would be more than the finances could bear. For instance, the Bombay Establishment, which includes the Native States under the Presidency within the sphere of its operations, and is spread over an area of 205,000 square miles, containing a population of twenty-one millions, consists of a Superintendent General, 10 Medical Officers as Superintendents, 27 Native Superintendents, 373 Vaccinators, and some 400 Peons ; the whole costing upwards of two lakhs of rupees. To place this Province, which com- prises 114,000 square miles, and contains a population of nine millions, on an equal footing with Bombay, we should require an establishment consisting of at least 5 Medical Officers as Superintendents, 19 Native Superintendents (or one for each district), 200 Vaccinators, and an equal number of Peons. Nor with this establish- ment (supposing the Bombay establishment to be now producing its maximum of results) could we count upon bringing up the vaccination of the Provinces to much more than half the rate that is required for the protection of the people. For these Provinces, where the populous circles are separated by wide tracts of waste, a large Vaccination Establishment, with a number of Medical Officers em- ployed specially as Superintendents, is not suitable even if funds were available. Much of the time of the Superintendents would be lost in travelling from dis- trict to district. 49. The great obstacle to the extension of vaccination everywhere is the difficulty of providing for supervision by trustworthy Officers, and as this difficulty is increased in these Provinces, where the population is more sparse than elsewhere, it is all the more necessary to utilize existing agencies as far as practicable, and the work will I believe be best carried on by an Establishment in each district under the control and direction of the Civil Medical officers. The experience of this system which has been gained in the districts of Chhindwara, Seoni and Betul, has so far answered well, and there is no reason why the system should not be extended to at least 16 of the 19 districts into which the Province is divided. It may not be possible to bring whole districts under operation at once, in fact we have neither the funds nor (and this perhaps is the greater difficulty) the men, but in every district a portion might be taken up in which the vaccinators might be trained to the work, and the people enlightened as to its benefits ; and when this portion has been thoroughly protected, and as means become available, the circle might be extended. The chief point to be insisted on is, that whatever portion of a district may be selected as the field for operation, the work shall be continued year after year in that field, so that when an epidemic spreads over the country the immunity of the vaccinated circle may be evident. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, S. C. TOWNSEND, Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces. P y-29 -239-290
Appendix I. From Mr. A. G. Price, Civil Medical Officer, Chhindwara, to the Sanitary Com- missioner, Central Provinces, Nagpur,16 The same plan of collecting children at a central village and vaccinating fresh cases &quot; arm to arm &quot; week by week, in a defined circle round each Regis- tration circle, was continued this year as in former years, and I think I may fairly say, with even better results than before. The people now come very readily, and few, if any, objections to the operations are made. During my inspections I have frequently met with families of 2, 3 and 4 children being vaccinated at the same time, who were not brought up in past years, owing to fear on the part of the parents of the amount of suffering borne by children during the process, and this appears to me now the greatest ob- jection to the operation the people have. I do not think that the payment of money would have much influence in inducing the people to bring up their children for vaccination to a neighbouring village more readily than they do now, except perhaps to the very poorest, such as Gonds and Mahras, but these people as a rule make no objection whatever. The principal body of objectors are well-to-do ryots or Kashtkars, Hindu Banias, and a few Malguzars, principally Hindus and Brahmins, the latter of whom object to vaccination, not so much on the score of suffering to the children, but to the loss of their own influence over the people as well as of the customary offerings to the deity which they appropriate on the outbreak of small-pox in a village. My experience goes to show that more can be done in this way by District Officers who, are constantly moving about the district, and who, by their own en- quries at the villages through which they pass or encamp at, can easily discover how far vaccination has been carried out, and have in many instances removed difficulties for the Vaccinators which no mere money payments could ever have done. If, however, it be ultimately decided to make small money payments, it would have to be made under the immediate supervision of the Medical Officer, as other- wise the probabilities are that much of it would not find its way to those for whom it was intended. The advantages of arm to arm vaccination is, I think, beginning to be under- stood by the people more generally than heretofore, and the Vaccinators have also learnt to appreciate its superiority over the more convenient methods by crusts and points, in the greater number of successful cases they can command from their work. A glance at the village lists will show this more clearly, as in hundreds of villages the operation thus performed has proved successful at the first attempt, and no further trouble incurred in re-vaccinating the unsuccessful cases, which happens so frequently in other methods of vaccination. Added to this, I was enabled personally to collect a large supply of fresh lymph for the use of the Sanitary Commissioner and for use in the district. Last year a supply of fresh lymph was forwarded to Nagpur, but its employment proved a failure; this fact led me to employ a solution of thick gum as a varnish over the tubes, by which I was hopeful that the lymph would remain a longer time in a perfectly fluid and trans- parent condition without losing any of its virtues. In the district this measure answered very well, and no failures were reported. If the expreience of other Medical Officers to whom Chhindwara lymph was. supplied coincides with mine, perhaps it would be a good plan to get the capillary tubes from England coated with either gum or a quickly drying spirit varnish, as I baheve that from the extreme tenuity of the ordinary tubes, the lymph soon deteriorates or dries up.
17 For the past few months reports have been received from time to time from the Police of the outbreak of small-pox in one or more villages, chiefly below the ghats, in the Sausar, Mohgaon and Rajnah Circles, and during the year 36 deaths have been reported. In November the Native Superintendent was deputed to visit these Circles and to send in a report. He reported as follows:18 All these cases had been vaccinated from crusts or points. The case I saw had no marks whatever. Compare this with the following :19 others, but he could not, strange to say, get one child brought to him. I col- lected the village folk at my tent, and told them that I believed they rather liked the idea of an outbreak of small-pox amongst their children, and would no doubt be quite happy if a good many of them were to die from the disease, as they would then be free from all the troubles and difficulties incidental to rearing up children, and would be relieved of all marriage expenses, &c. when they grew up. Of course they denied any such wish on their part; and to prove that they did believe in vaccination, no less than 82 were brought up during the course of the day, and vaccinated in my presence &quot; arm to arm.&quot; There is no doubt that this step prevented a severe outbreak of small-pox at Mokher, for shortly afterwards I heard that some grown up children who had not been pre- viously vaccinated, had caught the disease, and one or two died ; but those vac- cinated on the day above mentioned escaped entirely. On the 29th March I inspected the children at Teykapar and surrounding villages on the borders of the Bhutoria Circle, and while there saw 35 cases from Bindrai recently vaccinated, having splendid vesicles and crusts on their arms. In this village, as at Mokher, the Vaccinator at first could get no children to operate upon, until small-pox had broken out among them, when he again proceeded there and vaccinated 40 cases varying in age from 4 to 16 years, with the effect of entirely checking the disease, not however until some 5 or 6 grown up boys and girls had died. Here too the effect of vaccination in checking small-pox has been vividly, although painfully, brought before the eyes of the people, and I feel sure that here, as at Mokher, the Vaccinators will have little difficulty in future years. I also saw a child from another village who was successfully vaccinated during the time that its mother was suffering from severe small-pox, and who remained perfectly secure from the disease. The foregoing cases show nearly all the places where true small-pox has appeared during the year. In most of the other villages the outbreak has been chiefly of chicken-pox of a very mild type indeed, and causing the sufferer little or no inconvenience. At Chhindwara I saw two such cases, one a native child, and the other the child of the European Inspector of Police ; in both the attack was of the mildest. It would, 1 think, be a good plan if such cases were reported in their vernacular names, for the difference between the two diseases is as well under- stood by natives as by Europeans, but in the returns they all appear as small- pox, and thus cause needless alarm and much unnecessary confusion. I have myself no doubt that the efficacy of vaccination against small-pox is really believed in by the people generally, rich and poor, and more especially by the Gonds, who now are the first to bring up their children, whereas in former years they usually ran away on the approach of the Vaccinators. There are of course a few who object on interested motives, such as Brahmins, and others, as Malguzars and Banias, who, while believing in the virtues of vaccination, put off vaccinating their children from day to day on the plea of their being too young and likely to suffer more severely than older children. It is not improbable that many cases of small-pox have their origin from cow-pox in cattle, more especially when it is known that these are stalled under the same roof as their owners. Almost every year an epizootic of cow-pox occurs, and immense numbers die, but no segregation of the sick from the healthy oxen is ever made, and the disease therefore spreads from house to house and village to village very rapidly.
20 The efficacy of vaccinating oxen to prevent cow-pox, and its proved efficacy in England, has been constantly told to the people, who seemed ready enough to accept of the prophylactic if any one could be got to vaccinate for them. In two villages I inoculated two calves on their udders from human lymph ; in one the operation proved a failure, in the other some febrile action was reported as well as some special local effects, but as I did not see the animal afterwards, I doubt if any specific or reliable result was obtained. I purpose next season to make a few more extended trials at Chhindwara where the results can be daily watched and noted, both with variolous matter (if procurable) and with vaccine lymph. I was again enabled to send three Vaccinators to the Jaghirs of Harrai, Partabgarh (Pagara), and Sonpur, owing to the work in some of the Circles having been completed before the end of the season ; but as they went later than last year, and no new ground having been broken, there is a decrease in the number of operations over last year. I would now recommend that three men be specially posted to the Jaghirs in future, who could then carry on their operations from the beginning of the season, and thus do a large amount of good work. Seven men are now quite sufficient for the district, four above and three below the ghats. The total number vaccinated during the year, compared with last year, has been as follows.21 There is an increase of over 2 per cent in the successful cases, as compared with last year, owing I believe to greater diligence on the part of the Vac- cinators in searching out those who did not come up to show the results of the operation, as well as to vaccinating again cases of failure until success was obtained. In former years such cases were noted as &quot; unsuccessful&quot; and if re- operated upon, were placed under the head of &quot; secondary&quot; vaccination. The secondary vaccinations performed during the year are all cases of former successful operations in children from 4 to 14 years, who had one or more permanent marks. And the results compare very favourably with those given in the General Annual Report for 1872-73, showing as they do a great number of well protected children from primary vaccination. Most of these cases were selected by me in the Chhindwara, Jhilmillee, and Umreth Circles, during my tour through those Circles, and the results were carefully noted. The following table shows the ages of those vaccinated during the year in the district:22 As compared with the number of children under one year given in the Census Report for 1872, viz. 16,781, the number of registered births for the past year, viz. 9,031, seems small. It may be that in the Census Returns the Jaghirs are included, in which case the great difference in the numbers will be somewhat explained. But apart from this, I have frequently had brought up for vaccination in Chhindwara, children whose births are not noted in the Register of births kept up at the Dispensary; and if at Chhindwara births are not fully registered, it is equally certain that the same thing happens in other large towns of the district, more especially among the wealthier class of Sahocars and land- owners. In small villages I have seldom found any discrepancy in the numbers vaccinated and the numbers proved to have been born during the year. Assuming that the Census figures are correct, they give 53 births per 1,000 of population. while the district number of births is only 28 per 1,000 ; that is, dividing the number of births registered (exclusive of Jaghirs) by the total population of the district inclusive of Jaghirs. If, however, the number of births in the Jaghirs could be ascertained, there would, I think, be an increase of about 8 per 1,000, making the total birth rate to about 36 per 1,000 of population. In the Annual Report of the Sanitary Commissioner for 1870, the birth rate in England is stated to be 35.85 per 1,000, while in Durham it reached as high as 41.81 per 1,000 living, so that registration in this district may be consi- dered very fair, although still rather below the average of what might reasonably be expected. The total number vaccinated (primary) in reference to Caste Statement No. I. shows the following results : 23 The conduct of the establishment during the season has, on the whole, been very good. Native Superintendent Chhitoo Ram has continued active and diligent. He was constantly moving about from circle to circle, supervising the work from village to village. I consider him well deserving of promotion. Vaccinator Bhowany Pershad, 2nd (Chhindwara Circle), has vaccinated during the year 2,004 cases. He is a very successful Vaccinator, and has worked throughout the year very diligently. All his work has been &quot; arm to arm.&quot; Vaccinator Mahomed Abbas (Mokher, Bichhowa, Khamarpani, and Sonpur Circles) has done very good work indeed ; all his cases are &quot; arm to arm,&quot; and I am much pleased with his zeal and diligence. He has vaccinated during the season 1,405 cases. Vaccinator Noor Alli (Chand Circle). This man was appointed at the beginning of the season in room of Nadir Khan, promoted to another district. Generally his work was very good, and principally &quot; arm to arm.&quot; In some few instances of failure, I found that he had chosen imperfect vesicles, and that the abrasions were not deep enough to ensure a complete inoculation. The Native Superintendent was directed to stay in his Circle and to teach him how to select his vesicles, and when to use the lymph. I have no doubt that he will make a successful Vaccinator. He has vaccinated during the season 864 cases. Vaccinator Bhowany Pershad, 1st. (Ghaurie Circle). This Vaccinator vaccinates very well indeed &quot; arm to arm,&quot; and his registers and village lists were always found correct. But he is not as energetic and diligent as he might be, and has only vaccinated 973 cases in his Circles (Chauraie and Sankh). Vaccinator Golam Hosain (Singori and Bhutoria Circles). This man's work in the Singori Circle was good, but it could have been better. In the Bhutoria Circle it could not have been better. It was all &quot; arm to arm&quot;, and his promptness in proceeding to the village of Bindrai on the outbreak of small-pox, and vaccinating over 40 children, thus checking the spread of the disease, is worthy of commendation. Your letter No. 425, dated 24th November 1873. Vaccinator Roshun Lall (Pandurna and Rajnah Circles). This man has done even better work than formerly, and he has vacci- nated &quot; arm to arm&quot; more frequently. Where this was not done, unsuccessful and doubtful cases occurred. I would recommend that his fine be remitted. He has vaccinated during the season 1,112 cases. Vaccinator Amir Khan (Tehgaon, Mohgaon and Tekari Circles). This Vaccinator has not done so well as he might and could have done, I think, in the way of &quot; arm to arm&quot; vaccination, and the desire to vaccinate large numbers instead of vaccinating well, seems to be his great aim. He has vaccinated during the season 1,013 cases. Few of his cases had more than 4 marks or vesicles, most of them not more than 2, and some few only 1. I noticed this when he was in the Khamarpani Circle, and the excuse given was that the villages were far apart, and he was obliged to vaccinate from crusts and points; but another Vaccinator found no difficulty in vaccinating &quot;arm to arm&quot; in this Circle (Mahomed Abbas), and has done it well too.
24 Vaccinator Mohyddin Khan (Amarwara Circle). This man can vacci- nate very well if he likes, but his work this year did not compare favourably with that of other Vaccinators, and in one instance he noted the results of his work from the statements of the village Kotwar, instead of making the enquiry himself, and from what I saw of his work, he has resorted more frequently to the use of crusts and points than was desirable or necessary. He has vaccinated 868 cases during the season. Vaccinator Gunpat Singh (Umret and Jarnbye Circles). Much im- provement has taken place in Gunpat Singh's work. Most of it has been &quot; arm to arm&quot; instead of from crusts and points, and he has vaccinated 997 cases during the season. In several villages I noticed that vaccination was only performed on one arm in two or three places, he stated that it was because the children were too young but I am inclined to think that it was because he had not sufficient lymph to vaccinate on both arms. My experience goes to show that the amount of suffering is not much more increased by the number of vesicles, while the pro- tection afforded is far greater and more permanent where there are 6 vesicles or marks than in only 2 or 1, more especially with native children, and the children having been once brought up, it is always wiser to vaccinate in six places than in four or less, for the chances of failure are then much fewer. Your letetr No. 425, dated 24th Nov. 1873. Vaccinator Sita Ram (Sausar, Ramakona, Lodhikhera and Harrai Circles) has vaccinated 1,326 cases during the season. His- work generally was very good indeed, and most of it &quot; arm to arm&quot;, and I would recommend that the fine imposed upon him by you be remitted. Particular attention was paid to his work, owing to the outbreak of small pox in his Circles, but I was unable to detect one case in which small-pox occurred after vaccination. I send for perusal extracts from the Vaccination Diary kept up by me, in which I have grouped together the inspections made of each man's work. The inspections were carried out by writing down on a rough piece of paper the child's name and father's name, noting the number and state of the vesicles or marks on each arm, and then comparing them with the results in the Vaccinator's Register or Village lists. In this way it was always easy to ascertain from the parents whether vaccination was&quot; arm to arm&quot; or otherwise, as well as to discover any other points of interest connected with the sanitary condition of the village, the supply of water, presence of any particular disease. &c , with a view to either alleviating the evil or bringing it to the notice of the District authorities.
Appendix II. Report by Surgeon B. Evers, Civil Surgeon, on Vaccine operations in the Seoni district, Central Provinces, for the season 1873-74. As in the previous year, vaccination was kept up in the Sadar town and in some parts of the district, all through the hot months and the rains, so as to secure a supply of fresh lymph for the working season. The results for these months may be thus tabulated :26 4. During the season I made five tours, and visited upwards of 200 villages in various parts of the district. I had more than one opportunity there- fore of examining the work of the Vaccinators, and I consider that the work generally, was well and honestly performed. Early in the season, however, the Vaccinators in the Korai, Cheri, and Laknadon Circles, were inclined to be idle, and I was obliged to rouse them to diligence by threatening to suspend them. The Native Superintendent was directed to look these men up as fre- quently as possible, and to report to me the progress, or otherwise, of their work The amount of work done, was verified by comparing the entries in the village forms with the names of the children brought for inspection. This was always done in the presence of the Malguzar and Kotwal; and particular en- quiries were made to ascertain that none of those successfully vaccinated in pre- vious years, were again borne on the list for the present season. 5. Prejudice is fast wearing away, and the people are now more reconciled to vaccination. This year I heared nothing about the &quot;Railway god.'' It is seldom that the Vaccinator meets with any hostility or obstruction. The only instance of something like serious opposition, occurred in the village of Hathnapur in the Seoni Tahsil, In this village, a Baniah not only objected to have his children vaccinated, but assaulted the Vaccinator. The Police after investigating the matter, brought the case before the Extra Assistant Commissioner, and the assault being proved, the Baniah was sentenced to pay a fine of Rs. 50, or in default, to suffer 6 months' rigorous imprisonment. It is gratifying on the other hand to note such an instance as the following. Fyaz Mahomed Khan, Mal- guzar of Anjunia, in the Lakhnadon Tahsil, insisted upon having his child re- vccinated this year; he was told that it was an unnecessary precaution, as the child had been successfully vaccinated last year, but this did not satisfy him. This is not the only instance in which I have seen a Malguzar come forward to set an example to the people of his village. The people generally are now fully alive to the benefits conferred by vaccination ; they are also aware that although vaccination does not procure absolute exemption from small-pox in every case, it yet provides against marked disfigurement, loss in impairment of sight, and danger to life. Occasionally parents state that their children have already had small-pox, and that vaccination therefore is unnecessary ; when pressed, however, to describe the character of the eruption and to point out &quot;scars&quot; they qualify their statements by saying that it was &quot; Chota Matha.&quot; This with them, means either measles or chicken-pox. I have never, however, found much difficulty in convincing them that the protection afforded by &quot; Chota Matha&quot; was insufficient, and that vaccination was therefore necessary. A very good plan for collecting the inhabitants of villages near one's camp for the purpose of explaining to them the benefits of vaccination, is to let the people know that you have a supply of &quot; fever medicine.&quot; I always take into camp a small drug chest and a stock of quinine and bark. By dispensing medi- cines to such as need them I believe I secure a good many allies in my vac- cination work. A fever-broken villager places more faith in quinine than in &quot; Sri Krishna&quot; himself, and is extremely grateful to you for the smallest modi- cum of the drug. 6. In the month of June 1873 an out-break of small-pox was reported in the villages of Turia and Amajhiri, near Kamasa. The disease was imported from the Chhindwara district. A lad suffering from small-pox was brought from one of the Chhindwara villages to Turia, and to this one case succeeded the 40 subsequently reported. Only one death occurred. It is worth noting that of the 75 children who had been successfully vac- cinated here during the season of 1871-72, not one was attacked by the disease.
27 This fact was an argument in favour of vaccination, that none of the villagers (chiefly cowherds) could set aside or deny ; the Vaccinator therefore who was deputed to Turia on the occasion of the outbreak, was allowed to do his work without the slightest opposition. From Turia the disease spread to the neighbouring village of Amajbiri ; there were eleven cases of small-pox here. The Patel pointed out to me a child, who, notwithstanding that he was vaccinated, it is said, was attacked by the disease. I carefully examined the child's arms, but could not detect any trace of a vaccine cicatrice. The Patel had lost the village form, so it was impossible to ascertain the truth or otherwise of his statement. I pointed out to him, how- ever, that none of the children with marks of successful vaccination were sufferers. This immunity from the disease by &quot; protected &quot; persons, I again noticed in the slight outbreaks of small-pox in the villages of Pipurwani and Goruck- pur. In both these villages I learned that the disease was introduced from Turia. In the north of the district, small-pox appeared in Lakhnadon in the month of June. Only 7 cases were reported ; and they all made good recoveries. Three or four of these children had been vaccinated, it is said, during the season of 1872-73. The disease was mild in typo. In March this year (1874) 4 cases of small-pox occurred in Chapara. I learnt on enquiry that none of these children had been vaccinated. The Patel of Chapara is an active supporter of vaccination. 7. The Sanitary Commissioner's Circular No. 186 of 1st May 1874, raises the question of payment to mothers &quot; as a recompense for the trouble of taking their children to a neighbouring village .&quot; the object of the measure is to pro- mote arm-to-arm vaccination. The work is more satisfactorily done, and the payment system, in my opinion, is therefore unnecessary. At present the people believe that they are under obligations to the &quot; Sirkar&quot; as their &quot; Ma-Bap,&quot; for instituting vaccination,28 answered in the affirmative. Vaccine matter, it is well known, retains its ' activity' for a considerable time ; in fact it is a special and beneficent design of nature that this should be so. Points charged with lymph may be safely kept for four or five days ; crusts retain their activity for nearly a month ; and lymph in tubes may be kept in a live state for upwards of two months in the hottest time of the year. On the 22nd April 1873 I set aside, by way of experiment, two tubes of vaccine lymph ; the hollow bamboo in which they were contained was placed in a saucer of water, care was taken to keep up a supply of water sufficient to float the bamboo ; on the 15th July 1873 (perhaps the worst month for vaccine operations,) I vaccinated 5 children with the lymph from these tubes, and the re- sults were, 2 successful (typical vesicles), 2 doubtful (small and imperfect vesi- cles), and 1 unsuccessful. From the successful cases other children were vaccinated successfully,29 8. The amount of work done during the year may be thus tabulated :Appendix No. III. Report by Surgeon H. G. Hall, Civil Surgeon, Betul, of the Vaccine operations carried on in the District of Betut, Central Provinces, during the year 1873-74. I have the honor to forward to you the Vaccination Report of this district for the working season just ended, together with the usual tabular State- ments. On the 3rd of September 1873, 3 tubes of Native lymph were received from Lymph received. your office. On the 5th 2 children were vaccinated with this lymph; both cases were successful. On the 11th 6 more children were successfully operated on with this fresh lymph taken from the arms of those two successful cases On the 17th, 14 children were inoculated from arm to arm, from the 6 cases done on the 11th ; of these, 10 were successful, 1 unsuccessful, and 3 unknown. On the 23rd 15 children were secured from arm to arm inoculation, of whom 13 were successful, and 2 unknown. On the 29th 4, and on the 3rd October, 2 children were vac- cinated from arm to arm, all were successful. On October 5th 8 children were inoculated from arm to arm, 7 were successful, and 1 unsuccessful. Up to this date; October 5th, 51' children were vaccinated at the Sadar Dispensary, of whom 44 were successful, and from these I obtained a sufficient quantity of lymph.to enable me to send the Vaccinators to their allotted localities. On January 15th, two tubes of English lymph were received from the Offi- ciating Sanitary Commissioner ; 7 children were vaccinated with this lymph, 6 of whom were successful, and I was unsuccessful. The Native Superintendent reported his arrival on the 30th September. On the 7th October, each Vaccinator was supplied.with 30 freshly armed points and 10 tubes, and was sent off to work. The Establishment consists of 1. Native Superintendent at Rs. 25 2 1st Class Vaccinators 32 Division of the District for vaccination purposes. The district is divided into 26 Circles for vaccination purposes, corres- ponding to the Police Circles, and each man is put in charge of 2 or 3 Circles,33 pective villages on a certain day. In some cases, as was to be expected, some people did not attend to this Parwana, and as far as possible when such cases were brought to my notice, I went myself to the villages thus holding back, and always succeeded with a little persuasion in inducing them to have their children secured. In some places I have found that even after using every means in my power, the people would not come forward, but those cases, I am happy to say, were isolated, and very few indeed. From Multai I went to Putton. The Vaccinator, Ameerouddeen, had not been in that Circle up to the time of my arrival, as he was working in Multai. I had the children of 23 villages, numbering 767, collected, and found that 472 of them were successfully vaccinated last year, and 295 were not vaccinated. These latter I had secured on the spot. From Putton I passed on to Masode on the 13th. Very little work had been done here by the Vaccinator. He is a very dilatory man, and requires close looking after. I examined 707 children collected from 19 villages, and found 332 had been vaccinated during last or previous year. 175 had been secured this season by the Vaccinator, and 200 were found unvaccinated, and were secured at my camp. On the 15th, I went to Atnair, where I had the children of 47 villages col- lected, numbering in all 909 ; of these, 531 were done during last or pre- vious years. No work was done by the Vaccinator up to the time of my arrival, and 378 were found unvaccinated and were operated on at my camp 1st Class Vaccinator Seyed Meer had charge of this part of the district, and from the small quantity of work found done by him, and his negligence in not leaving village forms in the villages, and not sending in his returns regularly, I found it necessary to reprimand him severely. I sent the Native Superintendent to his work some time after, and he reported a considerable improvement. On the 18th of November I went to Satnair, visiting a number of villages en route. The children of 25 villages, numbering 995, were collected. Each Kot- war produced his village form. In some cases where the Vaccinator neglected to leave the form, the omission was rectified, and the names properly registered in my camp. Of the 995 children seen here, 630 were found to have been vaccinat- ed before this season, and 365, who were found unvaccinated, were operated or in my camp. From Satnair I went to Bhaisdhye, a large village in the south-west The children of 18 villages, numbering 674, were collected for inspection. Of these, 423 had been vaccinated before this season, and 251 were operated on in my camp. The Vaccinator, Dabee Deen, who afterwards was put in charge of this Cir- cle, was employed for the first time at the commencement of the season, and it was necessary to teach him his work before giving him an independent charge, consequently there were no children found vaccinated this year in Bhaisdhye when I arrived. On the 22nd November I proceeded to Jullar, where the children of 27 villages were collected, numbering in all 425 ; of these, 282 had been secured during last or previous years, and I found 143 unvaccinated, and had them operated on and their 6 10 e I 39 2 0
34 names properly registered before I left. This Circle was without a Vaccinator up to this time, and as Dabee Deen, who was under instruction, appeared to have obtained a pretty good knowledge of the work, I put him in charge of Jullar, Gudgaon and Bhaisdhye. I went to Khairee on the 24th ; the childern of 20 villages, numbering 584 in all, came in for inspection; of these, 352 were vaccinated before this season, and 232 were operated on in my camp. I encamped at Badora on the 26th, where I examined the children of 7 villages, numbering 272 ; of these, 144 had been vaccinated last year, and 128 whom I found unvaccinated, were operated on in my camp, and I arrived in the Sadar Station on the 29th of November. During the greater part of Decem- ber and January I was engaged at the Sadar Station, but occasionally found time to visit the villages within 8 or 10 miles all round, numbering about 24. I examined in those villages 668 children, of whom 364 been had vaccinated before this season, 40 had been done this year by the Vaccinator, and I secured 234. On January 6th I again went out and proceeded to Ranipur, about 18 miles to the north-east of Betul. The children of 20 villages came in for inspec- tion, numbering in all 505 ; of these, 300 were done previous to this season, and 205 were found unvaccinated, and were operated on in camp. On January 8th I went to Sullaya. I saw here 390 children from 14 vil- lages ; there were 301 of them secured before, and 89 who were unvaccinated were done in camp. On January 9th I went to Bhayawaree, 14 miles north-west from last camp. The children from 16 villages, numbering 292, came up for in- spection. 181 of them had been previously vaccinated, and I had 111 secured in camp. From Bhayawaree I went on to Shahpur. Ramdeen, the Patel of this vil- lage, and his sons Sham Lall and Ram Lall afforded me much assistance, and by their aid the children of 48 villages, numbering 1,009. came forward for inspection. There were 581 of them secured before this season, 30 were done this year by the Vaccinator, Anajee Persram. I found 398 unvaccinated, and had them operated on at my tents. From Shahpur I went to Neempanee, where I inspected 268 children col- lected from 13 villages. 131 of these where vaccinated last year. There were 137 unvaccinated, which I had operated on before leaving. From Neempanee I was obliged to return to the Sadar Station on the 12th of January. On January 29th I proceeded to the north of the district, accompanied by Surgeon-Major Barter, Officiating Sanitary Commissioner and Inspector Gen- eral of Jails; we went to Rampur, where the childern of 9 villages-, numbering 98, were brought forward for inspection. Goolabsing, 1st Class. was the Vaccinator of this Circle, and his work was extremely bad. Out the of 98 children seen, there were as many as 38 unsuccessful, or 38.77 per cent. There were no village forms in the villages. He was fined half a month's pay. I found it necessary to have all his work carefully gone over, and checked, and the village forms properly filled in, and left with the Malguzars. As Surgeon-Major Barter wished to see as much of the work as possible in a few days, our movements were rapid. We visited Shah- pur, Bhayawaree, Ghoradongree, Ranipur, and Kherla, in quick succession, and
35 saw 411 children. Vaccinator Anajee Persram's work was so very bad, and some false entries having been detected in his book, he was dismissed by order of the acting Sanitary Commissioner. I told the Native Superintendent to take possession of his papers, and I sent two men to his Circles to check all his work : we spent 6 days inspecting the work on this occasion, and arrived in Badnur on February 3rd. The population of this district in 1870 was about 285,000 people; from April 1st 1870 to March 13th 1874 there have been 33,807 births and 24,871 deaths. This would leave the population last month at about 293,936. At the rate of 5 people to every house, there would be about 58,787 families, the adults or married portion of whom would be about two-fifths of the population, or about 117,574 ; leaving three-fifths, or about 176,361 juveniles available for vaccination. Of these, 45,301 children have been successfully vaccinated during the last 4 years, leaving a juvenile population, including 6,500 births for the present year, of, in round numbers, about 136,500 still unvaccinated. I spent about 10 weeks in camp this season, superintending this work, during which time I examined nearly 13,000 children, from about 450 villages, and found that nearly 8,000 of them had been vaccinated before this season. 737 had been done this year by the Vaccinators up to the end of November, and 4,047 were vaccinated in my camp, of whom 3,652 or 95.87 per cent were successful. Conduct of Vaccinators. 1st Class Vaccinator Seyed Meer has vaccinated 1,343 children, of whom 1,239 or 92 24 per cent were successful. Taking into account his class, and the populous part of the country in which he worked, I consider this return much below what it should be, and had be been ordinarily diligent, he could have vaccinated 2,500 children during the season. I spent three days examining his work, and during that time I had 760 children vaccinated in camp, who were never done before. He omitted to leave village forms with the Malguzars, and was reported to me frequently for neglect in carrying out the instructions given him. 1st Class Vaccinator Goolabsing performed 1,443 successful vaccinations during the season. This number might have been much higher. He neglected to leave village forms with the Malguzars, for which he was fined half a month's pay, see your office letter No. 47, dated 31st January 1874, which appears to have had the desired effect, as his work is more carefully done lately than it was at the commencement of the season. He requires to be strictly looked after, and his returns carefully checked, as they cannot otherwise be depended on. 2nd Class Vaccinator Ameerouddeen did well this season. He vaccinated during the season 1,653 children, of whom 1,608 or 97.27 per cent, excluding un- known from the total, were successful. His work is carefully done, the vaccina- tion cicatrices were typical and well marked. His village forms were left in every village and found correct. 2nd Class Vaccinator Pertab Sing did a total of only 532, of which 456 were successful, or excluding 23 unknown from the total, the result is 89.58 per cent successful. He states that the children are not in the villages, but this is not cor- rect, as I found and vaccinated 600 during 3 days while inspecting his Circle. The reason of so small an out-turn for the season by this man can only be attri- buted to the greatest idleness. He admits having spent two months in one locality ; his percentage of successful cases, as well as his total, is the lowest of the Vacci- nators, and, under such circumstances, I consider that vaccination would be bene- fited by his removal.
36 2nd Class Vaccinator Pandoba has performed about 950 operations during the season. He could have easily doubled this result had be worked with energy ; but then his cases appear to have been done with care, and the cicatrices are well marked. His work has shown a percentage of 91.95 successful cases. 2nd Class Vaccinator Faizouddeen did tolorably well; his cases were not as numerous as they could have been, but he was in hospital for more than a month, which may in a measure account for this. However, he appears to have exercised considerable care, as his work shows a percentage of 97.34 of successful cases. 3rd Class Vaccinator Mohiouddeen Khan was unfortunately in hospital for a considerable portion of the working season ; but notwithstanding this, he did a fair amount of work, and shows the highest percentage of successful cases, being 99.20. His returns have been found correct, and he has been well con- ducted. 3rd Class Vaccinator Dabee Deen was employed by me at the commence-, ment of this season with the sanction of the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, and for the first 5 or 6 weeks he remained with the Native Superintendent in, order to learn his work ; he got on so well, that I put him in charge of 3 Circles about the latter end of November. He has vaccinated 1,000 children during the season, and he appears to have done his work very carefully, as his percentage of successful cases is 98.55. I was unable to inspect his work, but I sent the Native Superintendent, who reports his returns correct, and the cicatrices well marked. He has been very steady, and well conducted, and seems to have got on well with the people,37 Small-pox has broken out in Chicholee, Ainkhera Barvee, Kheree, Sainkhera, Jambara and Amla. I visited all these places myself with the ex- ception of Chicholee, and found them in a very unsanitary condition ; the as- certained number of sick ranged from 15 in Barvee up to 40 in Sainkhera. I personally examined the affected children, and found only 3 who had been successfully vaccinated, and these children had the disease in a very mild form, only a few spots to be seen on them ; there were about 7 children attacked, who had been unsuccessfully vaccinated. Although the people are not so back- ward as they were some two or three years ago, and in many places have drawn my attention to the fact that children who have not been vaccinated have been attacked with small-pox, while others who lived in the same house with the dis- eased children and who have been successfully vaccinated, had completely es- caped, yet they show a reluctance to have their children operated on, whether from fear of the operation, or from religious superstition, I cannot say, but the work of vaccination is not as popular as could be wished; however, this fear is gradu- ally disappearing, and I think the season's work just concluded is very satisfactory, On reference to Statement No. IV. it will be seen that the number of opera- tions performed this year is considerably more than last season. Last year the percentage of successful cases was 92.25, while it is 96.82 this year. The cost per case last year was 2 annas 3 pies, while it is only 1 anna 11 pies this season On receipt of your Circular No. 186, dated Nagpur, May 1st, and indeed all through the season, I have been making frequent enquiries and closely observing the extent to which vaccination has tended to check the spread of small-pox, and this is well marked in many places. In several villages the disease some years ago was almost endemic, whereas in those places it is now seldom met with, and then in isolated cases. The people themselves remarked this, and brought it to my notice. I have taken every means to ascertain the opinion of the principal land- owners with regard to the benefits of vaccination, and they appear to think it a very good thing, and seem to appreciate it much more than was the case some years ago. If any child in the district is attacked with small pox and the parents be asked if it has ever been vaccinated, they invariably say yes, whether it is the case or not; this they do in order that the child may escape the operation ; but in some instances people have voluntarily brought forward their children to have the operation performed a second time. I am decidedly of opinion that arm-to-arm vaccination would be much facilitated by payment to mothers as a recompense for the trouble of taking their children to a neighbouring village ; hitherto I have vaccinated from arm to arm as much as possible, as I consider that a greater percentage of successful cases is procured by this method than when tubes, points, or crusts are used, and I have not experienced much difficulty in inducing the mothers to bring their children a mile or two for this purpose. On the subject of tentage and carriage for the use of the Civil Surgeon. I will address you in a separate communication. 6 10 I, 38 290
STATEMENTS.
A.MENT No. I. in the Central Provides during the year 1873-74. 9 10 11 12 Primary-Vaccination. Revaccination. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the total. Average number of persons Vaccinated by each Vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Sucesssful. Unsuccessful including Those Unknown. Total. In primary vaccination. In secondary vaccination. Christian. Hindu. Mohammadas Other Casts. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful Unsuccessful including those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown 5 4,382 390 5,821 2,571 8,099 9,770 524 310 10,604 5 5 ... 10 94.90 50.00 1628.33 ... 3,510 219 2,854 1,445 3,333 4,258 213 112 4,583 4 1 ... 5 95.23 80.00 1145.75 5 5,802 609 8,631 3,316 15,371 14,028 732 429 15,187 9 6 ... 15 95.00 60.00 1520. AAA.MENT No. IV. of the previous 5 years in the Central Provinces. 6 7 8 9 Cost of Vaccine Establishment. Cost of Travelling allowances and Contingencies. Total cost. Cost of each successful case. REMARKS. Rs. A. P. Rs; A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 13,442 4 8 841 6 3 14,283 10 11 0 6 7¼ 10,913 13 4 676 0 2 11,592 13 6 0 6 ¼ 4,312 4 5 1,474 0 7 5,786 5 0 0 2 3½ 3,959 5 11 1,642 14 3 5,602 4 2 0 3 1½ 4,029 0 8 980 2 6 5,009 3 2 0 1 11½ 4,173 15 9 1,930 14 11 6,104 14 8 0 2 6¾
B1 2 3 District. Name and rank of Superintendent of Dispensary. No. 27 Mandla ENT No. V. nce in the Central Provinces during the year 1873-74. 10 11 12 13 Primary vaccination. Revaccination. Percentage of successful cases excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Sex. Caste. Age. Result. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful including those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown. Total. Male. Female. Christian. Hindu. Mohammadan. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful including those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown. In primary vaccination. In secondary vaccination. 397 678 6 1,739 330 ... 1,448 627 1,569 272 234 2,075 74 55 27 156 85.22 57.36 2612.00 13 9 ... 19 3 ... 20 2 10 12 ... 22 ... ... ... ... 45.45 ... 23 21 ... 32 12 ... 38 6 37 7 ... 44 ... ... ... ... 84.09 ... 63 18 1 58 22 ... 62 19 54 21 6 81 ... 2 ... 2 72.00 ... 365 303 ... 598 70 ... 428 240 376 292 ... 668 35 11 ... 46 56.28 76.08 68 50 ... 111 7 ... 62 56 98 20 ... 118 ... ... ... ... 83.05 ... 98 53 ... 140 11 ... 133 18 49 92 10 151 ... ... ... ... 34.75 ... 124 498 ... 992 115 515 725 897 1,077 331 214 1,622 ... ... ... ... 76.49 ... 125 114 ... 225 14 ... 149 90 164 57 18 239 ... ... ... ... 74.20 ... 1,276 1,744 7 3,914 584 515 3,065 1,955 3,434 1,104 482 5,020 109 68 27 204 75.67 61.58 401 408 4 408 53 344 447 362 543 219 47 809 ... ... ... ... 71.26 ... 404.50 222 136 ... 335 23 ... 125 233 299 59 ... 358 ... ... ... ... 83.52 ... 2645.33 293 2,856 4 5,972 804 369 1,210 5,939 6,601 548 ... 7,149 ... ... ... ... 92.33 ... 304 252 23 325 208 ... 148 408 408 93 55 556 70 63 70 203 75.39 100.00 2 12 9 4 1 ... 8 6 14 ... ... 14 375 219 ... 594 100.00 63.13 324 277 20 431 149 1 526 75 573 28 ... 601 ... ... ... ... 95.34 ... 339 979 ... 2,158 69 91 611 1,707 2,150 168 ... 2,318 ... ... ... ... 92.75 ... 929 717 ... 1,591 55 ... 291 1,355 1,440 206 ... 1,646 ... ... ... ... 87.48 ... 1,307 854 ... 2,029 5 127 278 1,883 1,916 245 ... 2,161 ... ... ... ... 88.68 ... 161 111 ... 260 12 ... 37 235 237 35 ... 272 ... ... ... ... 87.13 ... 8,881 6,194 56 13,105 1,326 588 3,234 11,841 13,638 1,382 55 15,075 445 282 70 797 90.79 61.21 1,005 1,142 2 1,778 126 241 698 1,449 1,418 552 177 2,147 ... ... ... ... 71.97 ... 536.75 340 404 2 539 43 160 433 311 564 77 103 744 ... ... ... ... 87.99 ... 744 829 630 ... 1,332 127 ... 1,130 329 1,183 276 ... 1,459 52 100 ... 152 81.08 34.21 1,611 189 262 ... 440 11 ... 195 256 329 58 64 451 ... ... ... ... 85.01 ... 451 650 441 ... 893 43 155 935 156 1,023 50 18 1,091 ... ... ... ... 95.34 ... 1,091 2,008 1,737 2 3,204 224 315 2,693 1,052 3,099 461 185 3,745 52 100 ... 152 87.89 34.20 974.25 698 580 12 818 70 378 770 508 1,131 147 ... 1,278 ... ... ... ... 88.49 ... 1,278 1,205 1,061 ... 1,426 460 380 980 1,286 1,852 414 ... 2,266 ... ... ... ... 81.73 ... 2,266 857 798 3 1,022 69 561 1,151 504 1,516 139 ... 1,655 ... ... ... ... 91.60 ... 1,655 2,766 2,439 15 3,266 599 1,319 2,901 2,298 4,499 700 ... 5,199 ... ... ... ... 86.53 ... ...
BBNo. V.V.REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1878-79. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1879. 19-7-79 1-C. 310 292
No. 2994/165 FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 21st July 1879. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge your report with the prescribed State- ments on Vaccination operations in the Central Provinces during the year 1878-79. You explain that the returns have in the present year been made up to the 31st March only, whereas in previous years they included vaccinations performed during the hot weather months. 2. Before examining the statements of work done, &c, I am to say that there seems to be some want of system and uniformity in recording results. Thus from paragraphs 2 and 3 of your report, the Chief Commissioner observes that the operations performed in Zamindari estates attached to the Bilaspur district, and in Feudatory States (one under British management) of the Raipur district, have been omitted from the returns, whereas the work done in Native States attached to the Sambalpur district is shown. On this point it seems necessary to observe that if the population statistics in columns 3 and 4 of Statement I. refer only to the Government territory (khalsa), then the further statistics should also only refer to it. But there is a further discrepancy in regard to the Sambalpur district, for while the returns show the operations in the five Native States of Pandurpur, Raigarh, Sarangarh, Sonpur and Bamra, they exclude 11,994 operations in the Patna State, because (paragraph 43) the work done there was shown in a lump without details. Further, at the end of paragraph 4 you say that 2 districts of Betul, Chhindwara, Bhandara and Nagpur, and regretted that but little progress in vaccination had been made in the districts of Balaghat, Nimar and Mandla, the last two having suffered severely from epidemic small-pox in 1877. In the present year Balaghat, Nimar and Mandla show improvement, while the others show retrogression. The average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator was 1,708. but this high average is obtained owing to specially high figures being reported from Sambalpur, Betul, Chanda, Seoni and Chhindwara. It is difficult and perhaps impossible to lay down with even approximate accuracy the num- ber of vaccinations, which each operator might be expected to perform, for density of population, distances, the number of towns, and the greater or less state of education and enlightenment among the people, have all to be taken into account. Some comparison may, however, be ventured. If in a backward, remote and sparsely peopled district like Mandla, each vaccinator could perform, 1,820 operations, 1,212 and 1,278 seem low averages in more forward districts like Saugor and Jubbulpore. If 1,369 operations were possible in the rude dis- trict of Balaghat, 1,243 is low for a compact and populous district like Wardha; and no satisfactory explanation seems possible, why in Chanda, each vaccinator should be able to perform 2,211 operations, while a vaccinator in Nagpur can only perform little above one-half that number (1,109). It is noticeable too that the Nagpur vaccinators cannot complain that they are not properly assisted, for there are 13 chaprasies attached to the Vaccinating staff, which is moreover supervised by a Superintendent, as the Civil Surgeon has not the requisite leisure for controlling it. Of the total persons (295,741) vaccinated, 288,217 were primary vaccinations, and of these primary vaccinations 271,631 or 96.031 per cent are returned as successful; while of the 7,524 re-vaccinations, 5,551 or 76.71 per cent are retained as successful. The highest percentage of successful vaccinations (pri- mary) is returned from Chhindwara, 99.41; and the districts of Narsinghpur, Sam- balpur, Betul, Bilaspur, Raipur, Mandla, Damoh, Jubbulpore and Seoni, all show over 95 per cent. These returns, however, seem to exceed the truth, for on refer- ring to the statement appended to paragraph 7 showing the examinations made by Civil Surgeons, their Assistants and Native Superintendents, it appears that the percentages of successful cases returned by vaccinators, are, with the sole excep- tions of Mandla and Balaghat, considerably in excess of the percentages certified to on inspection. The ratio per mille of persons protected is shown as 37.41, the districts in which most has been done, being Sambalpur in the east, Chanda in the south, and the hill districts of Mandla, Betul, Chhindwara and Seoni. Vaccination has now become firmly established in the Province, and the, people have become familiarised with it. Opposition, however, still lingers, and apathy will continue to exist, which can only be overcome by patient firmness. It has, however, been possible to spread a knowledge of the benefits of vaccina- tion in the remote Feudatory States attached to the Sambalpur district, and such success should be an encouragement to renewed efforts in our own territory. 4. Statement II. shows the strength and cost of the department. In 17 districts the Civil Surgeon or Civil Medical Officer is the Superintendent of vaccination ; while in Nagpur there is a Deputy Superintendent. There are 17 Native Superintendents, and 170 subordinate Vaccinators, who are grouped thus : 38 in Class I, 44 in Class II, and 88 in Class III. Attached to this staff are 58 chaprasies and other servants. The strength of the menial staff varies greatly in different districts, and it is not apparent why Nagpur, Narsingh- pur, and Raipur should require respectively 13, 9 and 7 servants, when in most districts 2 suffice. The total expenditure of all kinds amounted to Rs. 35,809, and the average cost of each successful operation was 2 annas. 5. At dispensaries 19,740 persons were vaccinated, and of these 19,097 were primary vaccinations. Successful primary vaccinations were 17,114 or 91.50 per cent ; while successful re-vaccinations were 449 or 70.93. It may be noticed that these percentages are considerably lower than those returned by vaccinators, but a doubt has already been expressed as to the correctness of these latter.
3 The dispensaries at which most vaccination operations were performed were those in the Jubbulpore, Hoshangabad and Chanda districts. 6. The review of the years operations seems to show that in Sambalpur vaccination has been to some extent accepted by the people, and has progressed in a satisfactory manner. In Raipur there seems to be an absence of proper system and too weak a staff, but your inspections assured you of the general correctness of the Vaccinators' returns. In Bilaspur the Officiating Civil Surgeon showed a want of administrative capacity, and the work suffered in consequence. In Jubbulpore the inspection was thorough, and good work was done at dispensaries. In Saugor the work done was insufficient in quantity, and inspection was feeble. Damoh shows better results than Saugor, but the results cannot be said to be good. In Seoni good work was done, and in Mandla both the work and inspection were good, but little vaccination was done at dispensaries. In the Nerbudda Division, the work of Nimar improved in quantity ; at Narsinghpur it was good, though the inspection was not close ; in Hoshangabad the staff of vaccinators worked well, and much was done in vaccinating at dispen- saries ; the districts of Betul and Chhindwara both maintain their good position, but in the former district the vaccinators seem to have returned an excessive per- centage of successful cases, and in the latter the Deputy Commissioner seems to have allowed a Tahsildar to be passively obstructive to vaccination. Lastly, in the Nagpur Division, the work in the Balaghat district improved, while that in Bhandara deteriorated. Chanda stands very well. The work done by Vaccinators and Hospital Assistants was good, and the Medical Officer's inspections were thorough. The districts which show the worst results are Nagpur and Wardha. 7. In conclusion, I am to express a hope that next year's returns may be more satisfactory. It is perhaps not unnatural, though it is a subject for regret, that the energies of some of those entrusted with supervising the vaccination in districts should flag as year after year goes on, and the same work repeats itself in the same form. There are traces of such apathy in some districts, and, in reviewing next year's returns, the Chief Commissioner will particularly note the results attained in these quarters. On the other hand, in Seoni, Mandla, Chhindwara, Chanda and Sambalpur, the Medical officers in charge and their Assistants are entitled to commendation. The Chief Commissioner trusts that you will yourself carefully watch all shortcomings, and will see that the subor dinate staff is weeded of all inefficient and indolent men. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, LINDSAY NEILL, offg. Secretary. 22-7-79-1C-335-292
INDEX. PARA. April's work will be included in next year's returns... ... 1 Vaccine operations in the Zamindaries of the Bilaspur district ... 2 Vaccination in the Feudatory States of Raipur and Sambalpur districts ... ... ... ... ... 3 and 4 Primary and re-vaccination ... ... ... 5 Percentage of success over total compared with that of the pre- vious year ... ... ... ... 6 Civil Surgeons were asked to submit inspection returns ... 7 Ratio of successful operations ... ... ... ... ... 8 Cost of Establishment ... ... ... ... ... 9 Travelling allowance and contingencies ... ... 10 and 11 Cost of each successful case ... ... ... ... 12 Supervision of work ... ... ... ... 13 Work done in each district of the Central Provinces ... 14Report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the Season 1878-79. The returns made up to the 31st of March show fewer operations per- formed both by the Vaccine establishment and by Hospital Assistants than are exhibited in the returns for the previous year. Formerly it was the custom to continue vaccination during April and in some places during a part of May, or as long as good vesicles were produced ; and these operations were included in the returns for the season just closed. With a view, however, to carry out orders regarding the early submission of the Sanitary report, in which vaccination returns are exhibited, Civil Surgeons were asked to make up their returns to the 31st of March this year, submit them at once, and reserve any operations performed subsequent to that date for the following year's statements. This partly accounts for fewer numbers : it does not, however, fully do so. 2. The Deputy Commissioner of Bilaspur, with a view to set vaccination going in Zamindaris in that district, requested the Civil Surgeon to entertain and instruct three men for this duty, keeping them under his own eye for a time, until proficient in the work, and in order to save a season, detailing tem- porarily to the Zamindaris three experienced men from the establishment. Major Brooke has reported that the Officiating Civil Surgeon not only failed to teach the new men, but despatched them to distant circles, where they did but little, most probably from ignorance of how to set to work. The result was that their combined work only reached 1,720 or less than the average outturn per man in the district. The Deputy Commissioner characterises this action on the part of the Assistant Surgeon as a &quot; scarcely excusable administrative blunder,&quot; but I am rather inclined to regard it as a case of inexcusable neglect. The work of two men was thus lost to the district, whilst the work of the men temporarily detached is not shown in the returns. 3. In the Khairagarh and Nandgaon States in Raipur also a beginning was made ; vaccinators were entertained late in the season ; the results of their work have not been reported ; the returns for the ensuing season will be exhi- bited. 4. Against the reduced numbers caused by closing the returns on the 31st of March, and the action of the Officiating Civil Surgeon in Bilaspur, must be placed the fact that four additional men were entertained in Native States in Sambalpur, the results of whose work appear in the returns. The general result is that the statements show a falling off in numbers of 7,611 as regards the vac- cination establishment, and of 836 on the work done by Hospital Assistants, or a total of 8,447. The average number of operations performed by each vaccinator is given at 1,718. The Sambalpur district gives the highest average 2,639, and Nagpur the lowest or 1,109. The operations performed by Civil Surgeons and Native Superintendents are excluded from these calculations. 5. The total number of primary operations was only 471 less than during the previous year. Primary operations on children under six years of age were 2,661 in excess of the number for the previous year, whilst operations on persons above that age were fewer; and re-vaccination which was chiefly confined to the Chhindwara and Betul districts fell from 11,805 to 5,551 : those districts have not shown a corresponding increase under primary vaccination Re-vaccination is not attempted in some districts ; and so long as the establishment is unable to vaccinate all the children born, it is better that their entire time should be engaged in protecting as many of them as possible in preference to re-vaccinat- ing those who are already fairly protected. 6. The number of successful operations per cent of total vaccinated is given at 96 or a little in excess of that for the previous year. Instances of wilfully recording operations as successful which were known to the vaccinators as the reverse are rare ; I think as a rule they are faithfully recorded, although there may be a difference of opinion as to the quality of the operation. Vaccina-
2 tors are perhaps inclined to adopt the view most favorable to themselves in doubtful cases ; hence it happens that inspecting officers' results are sometimes less favourable than those returned by vaccinators. Owing to the work of two men in the Nagpur district being very bad, I found the general result of my inspection in that district gave only 77 per cent of successful cases, the vacci- nator's returns showing 94. In Bhandara it corresponded almost exactly with the vaccinator's returns, and in Raipur and Bilaspur was a little less. 7. Civil Surgeons were asked to submit a return after each inspection this season, designed to exhibit among other points the percentage of success as recorded by each vaccinator, with the results of their own inspections. The two last columns in the following Statement contrast the percentages found on inspection by Civil Surgeons and Native Superintendents with those returned by vaccinators. This return also shows the work done by those officers. This return shows that the Civil Surgeon of the Mandla district saw a larger number of children within a given time than any officer in the Provinces ; his native assistant has also done good work. Indeed Dr. Kidd saw more children during the thirty-two days he was out than the Assistant Surgeon at Betul saw in seventy. In the Chhindwara district also Mr. Price, the Civil Surgeon, as usual inspected thoroughly a large number of children within a short space of time. The following is a return of the examinations made by Civil Surgeons or their Assistants and Native Superintendents :3 Narsinghpur and 7 in Raipur during the working season, whilst in adjoining districts only one or two are entertained. These men are employed to collect children for operation, but the district where the largest number is employed has shown the poorest results, and as the advantages which were anticipated to result from their employment have not been attained, I propose to reduce the number during the next working season to that allowed for other districts. 10. The amount paid in travelling allowance is less by Rs. 1,051, than during the previous year ; this must not be accepted as indicating lessened expenditure under this head. Some officers are in the habit of delaying the sub- mission of their bills until they accumulate and then submitting all at once. This renders it impossible to exhibit the exact amount, spent each season. I pro- pose to remedy this by directing their submission regularly as they become due. Travelling allowance is estimated according to the requirements of districts, and in future shall be confined strictly to those requirements. 11. Contingencies do not form a heavy item ; they are on account of sta- tionery and small sums paid to mothers who take their children to distant villages with a view to lymph being secured. I have discouraged this, as with good management the people need not be taken long distances, nor need they be kept more than a few hours from their homes ; considering the advantages they receive themselves gratis the cases are rare where the remuneration becomes necessary, indeed it is confined to a few districts. 12. The cost of each successful case including dispensary vaccination was exactly the same as during the previous year, two annas. The Nagpur district has returned the highest cost per case, viz. three annas and one pie. To a more expensive establishment and smaller out-turn of work this is due ; whilst with the exception of Sambalpur, where the circumstances are exceptional, the Chanda district expenditure is the lowest, viz. one anna and two pies each successful case. 13. No changes have been made in supervision, which remains in, my hands as Superintendent, whilst Civil Surgeons supervise the district work. A special Native Superintendent inspects the work in the Nagpur district. The assistant to the officer in civil medical charge at Saugor inspects operations there, and the A ssistant Surgeon attached to the Jubbulpore hospital inspected the work in that district last season. No inconvenience arose owing to the Assistant Surgeon's short temporary absence from head-quarters, and Dr. Browne has reported that he &quot; made his inspections in a careful and searching manner.&quot; I shall now com- ment on the work done in each district. 14. Saugor.4 work, which shall be enquired into and dealt with departmentally. Vaccinators have returned their percentage of success at 90; the results of the medical officer's inspections are not very clear and are contradictory. Dispensary vaccination was not good in this district; ten Hospital Assistants vaccinated only 1,783 children. With the exception of the Hospital Assistants at Korai, Garhakota and Rehli they did badly. The cost per successful case was under two annas. 15. The Deputy Commissioner writes thus :5 vaccinated on an average 1,278 persons each, the highest number vaccinated by a vaccinator being 2,064 and the lowest 1,003 ; they have returned a successful per- centage of 95 ; the Assistant Surgeon who inspected the work, gave the percent- age of success at 86, with some it exceeded 90. From a perusal of the Assistant Surgeon's report I feel satisfied that he performed his inspection work with energy and success : he has brought to light shortcomings on the part of the men where he found them to exist, and has shown up the work of those who did well: these are matters of detail which need not be given here. Hitherto inspection duty in this district was performed with difficulty, owing to calls on the Civil Surgeon's time at head-quarters, and as the Assistant Surgeon was sent out only when his services could be spared, and this at the healthy season, and has acquitted himself well, there is no reason why the arrangement should not be continued, provided his services can be spared. Dr. Browne has submitted the following table regarding prisoners admitted to the Jubbulpore Jail :6 district, a fair estimate of the entire work could hardly have been made; the Native Superintendent's inspections also might have been more extended. 24. Two Hospital -Assistants did good work, one man performed only 40 operations and a fourth man none ; he explains that he was apprehensive that vaccination would have an injurious effect on the dispensary attendance ; he has been informed that his duty was to carry out orders and he has been warned to do so in future. Altogether 14,240 persons were vaccinated in this district, and these results are fair. 25. Hoshangabad.7 30. Chhindwara.8 explanation is not satisfactory ; thus it is said that the Hospital Assistant attached to the main dispensary merely vaccinated a sufficient number of children to keep up the supply of lymph. The percentage of success given by vaccinators is 96. The Civil Surgeon found it to be 97. 34. Nagpur.9 season opened each vaccinator was at his post with an ample supply. In this district the number of infants vaccinated exceeded 7,000. In Wardha it was only 2,811. The Civil Surgeon and Native Superintendent have done a large amount of inspection work and report very favourably on what they saw. The Hospital Assist- ants with the exception of those at Sironcha and Allapili have done well; the general result is very creditable to Mr. Craggs the Civil Surgeon, and his establishment. The cost per case was only one anna and two pies. The vaccinator attached to the Sironcha sub-division has shown only 709 successful vaccinations. 39. Balaghat.10 Two Hospital Assistants did well, the others did badly. Small-pox was severe in Raipur town during the year; this should have induced the Hospital Assistants there to bestir themselves; they however did least of any. The Super- intendent seems to have worked fairly well here. 42. Bilaspur.A.A.B.Comparative Statement No. IV., showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those pers Establishment. P Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Year ending 30th April 1866. Yeare 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. Government ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 36,927 31,435 55,348 46,816 86,669 77,166 49,204 40,394 33,380 20 Municipal ... ... ... ... ... 43,259 34,417 64,827 52,033 12,299 10,037 48,764 44,606 21,127 10 Local Funds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,258 32,473 27,173 17,035 54,373 4 Native States. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Army ... No Statistics. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... European Natives Total ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 80,186 65,852 120,175 98,849 141,226 119,676 125,141 102,035 108,880 9 3 7 79.were successfully vaccinated in the Central Provinces in each of the undermentioned official years. arily vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number sucessfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. March. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1877. 1878. 1879. 45,098 40,734 128,590 112,435 176,893 158,704 201,636 188,384 245,224 229,930 260,408 241,633 245,105 230,864 25,090 20,455 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53,327 45,971 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 123,515 107,160 123,590 112,435 176,893 158,740 211,402 196,958 255,408 238,918 288,688 267,341 288,217 271,631 8 7 79Dispensary Vaccination 1878-79. Districts. Name of Dispensary. Number of vac- cinations at each dispensary. Total. Remarks. Saugor ... Sadar Bazar ... 89 1,694 Jail and Police Hospital 89 Khurai ... 283 Malthone ... 202 Banda ... 191 Shahgarh ... 205 Garhakota ... 268 Rehli ... 248 Deori ... 208 Damch ... Damoh Town ... 251 1,232 Hatta ... 372 Jabera ... 370 Pathuria ... 239 Jubbulpore ... Jubbulpore Main ... 120 2,875 Jail and Police Hospital 484 Cantonment Branch Dis- pensary ... 1,249 Sehora ... 578 Murwara ... 575 Bijeragogarh 353 Karsinghpur ... Narsinghpur ... 394 898 Jail and Police Hospital 40 Gadarwara ... 504 Chhindwara ... ... Hoshangabad... Hoshangabad ... 562 2,479 Koti Bazar ... 5 Harda ... 421 Seoni ... 1,008 Sohagpur ... 483 Nimar ... Khandwa ... 85 377 Burhanpur... 137 Pandhana ... 110 Mandhatta ... 45 Mandla ... Mandla ... 70 188 Ramgarh ... 86 Mangalpuri ... 32 ... Main Dispensary ... ... 616 Badnur ... 365 Branch Dispensary ... ... Multai ... 251 Chhindwara ... Chhindwara ... 847 1,284 Lodhikera. ... 437 Seoni ... Seoni ... 566 777 Lakhnadon ... 211 Balaghat ... Balaghat ... 64 261 Hatta ... 73 Behir ... 68 Waraseoni ... 56 Bhandara ... Bhandara ... 144 273 Kamtha ... 129 Nagpur ... Itwari ... 84 585 Nagpur City ... 180 Heude ... 38 Umrer ... 76 Khapa ... 44 Mowar ... 163
Dispensary Vaccination.REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1879-80. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1880. 22 7 80 3C 343 200
No. 2924/158 FROM J. W. CHISHOLM, ESQUIRE, OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 6th August 1880. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge your letter No. 49-C., dated 23rd July last, submitting Surgeon-Major Barter's report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during 1879-80, and in reply to make the following remarks on the general results of the year. 2. The numbers vaccinated by the Vaccine department are returned at 276,657 as against 242,301 in the previous year, or an increase of 34,356 in the number of persons vaccinated. In addition Hospital Assistants at dispensaries vaccinated 20,912 persons compared with 19,740 in 1878-79, or an increase of 1,172 persons vaccinated ; altogether therefore 35,528 more persons were vacci- nated during the past as compared with the previous year. 3. The Chief Commissioner trusts that the returns have been properly scrutinized, and that the statistics finally furnished may be accepted as fairly reliable. This was clearly not the case as regards the figures submitted for 1878-79, and accordingly a corrected statement is furnished with the present report. Dr. Barter explains that &quot; by an oversight the operations performed by &quot; Hospital Assistants in charge of dispensaries, also those performed in Native &quot; States, were included in this statement : again, the work returned by eight &quot; vaccinators in the Saugor district, who, later on in the year, were proved to &quot; have systematically falsified their returns, was also shown.&quot; It was necessary to eliminate &quot; these two sources of error&quot; to admit of a correct comparison between the two years. The Chief Commissioner has had the original and the amended statements compared, and finds that the errors extend far beyond the &quot;two sources&quot; noted by Dr. Barter. In the original return the num- bers vaccinated stood at 295,741, and in the amended return these have been reduced to 242,301, being a difference of 53,440. Of this difference 25,202 are persons vaccinated in Native States, and 11,042 are persons wrongly shown as vaccinated in the Saugor returns. Thus &quot; the &quot;two sources of error&quot; indicated by Dr. Barter account for only 36,244 out of the difference of 53,440 persons shown in excess of the proper figures, and the remaining 17,196 persons represent the excess entries relating to other dis- tricts. As a fact the entries relating to every district appear to have been wrong in the original statement, at least in no single instance do the figures recording the simple fact of the actual number of persons vaccinated remain the same in the two statements, and in some districts the difference is considerable, thus:2 The figures quoted are illustrative of the general nature of the errors now disclosed, and exhibit a degree of carelessness in dealing with statistics far from creditable to the officers concerned. 4. All the statistics now submitted may be fairly accurate, but after proof of such serious error in the previous year's returns, the Chief Commissioner hesitates to place implicit reliance on the statistics now furnished. Taking the figures as they stand there seem to have been 33,751 more primary operations performed by vaccinators, and 605 more re-vaccinations, confined in the main to the Chhindwara district. The vaccinators as a body did more work, and returned as successful 96 per cent, which was reduced by Civil Surgeons and Superintendents to 90 per cent. The cost of each successful case was 2-1¾ pies compared with 2-6¼ pie in the previous year. The total cost of operations amounted to Rs. 34,575-8-3, distributed as follows:3 your special attention and control during the current year. With improved supervision in districts where the work is now inefficiently performed the num- bers vaccinated should show a considerable increase. The average number of vaccinations by each vaccinator was last year apparently 1,697, not 1,644 as entered in column 7, Statement I., while other entries in this statement seem wrongly calculated and require revision. 7. It is unnecessary to enter further into the details of work in each dis- trict commented on by Dr. Barter in paragraphs 12 to 43 of his report. These details deserve the careful consideration of the several Medical officers who con- trol vaccine operations in districts, and it is hoped that at least one fertile source of delay will not be allowed anywhere to recur, viz. the failure on the part of Civil Surgeons to keep up their own supply of lymph. In some districts it is stated that Hospital Assistants &quot; have systematically and deliberately &quot; disobeyed standing orders &quot; in regard to vaccination. As a rule, it may be said that when Civil Surgeons insist on Hospital Assistants taking up the work of vaccination, so far as this can properly be done in connection with their other duties, the work is done. Thus in Jubbulpore under Dr. Rice the Hospital Assist- ants vaccinated 5,619 children, whereas in Nagpur, where somewhat similar results might have been expected under Dr. Brake, who formerly controlled vaccine operations in the Province, Hospital Assistants only vaccinated 871 cases altogether. The Chief Commissioner does not share your apprehension that the popularity of dispensaries might suffer if Hospital Assistants did much in the way of vaccination, and in most cases they can well undertake the vaccination work of the town in which they are located, and in large cities of one or more mohullas or divisions. The influence they possess as resident professionals should facilitate their work in vaccination, and it seems to the Chief Commissioner that Civil Surgeons who fail to utilize their Hospital Assistants in this special duty neglect an opportunity of permanently benefiting the community. Of Jubbul- pore it is stated &quot; that the immunity from small-pox of the head-quarter city &quot; and cantonment, as well as the towns in the interior, is evidence of the &quot; thoroughness of work done in previous years.&quot; This has apparently largely resulted from the judicious employment of Hospital Assistants, and from the care taken in supervising their work. Other districts might well follow this example, and where Hospital Assistants failed to carry out the vaccination duties entrusted to them the punishment of suspension or reduction should be inflicted, after warning, in order to convince the subordinate staff of the importance which the Administration attaches to this particular work. There is no insuperable difficulty, under proper arrangements, in protecting the towns where medical subordinates are stationed from the scourge of small-pox, as in such towns a permanent trained agency exists to perform vaccination, and this agency can by careful supervision be made to do thoroughly good work. The Chief Com- missioner expects therefore to see real progress made in vaccination work in towns. 8. The real cause which retards the progress of vaccination is doubtless the fact that the work is often badly done. In parts of Sambalpur it would seem that the faith of the people has been shaken because vaccination offered no apparent protection against small-pox on its recent appearance in an epidemic form, but such protection would doubtless have been afforded if vaccination had everywhere been properly carried out. This had been done in the adjoin- ing Patna State under direct management, and as a result the people enjoyed complete immunity from the disease. The Commissioner writes:4 tions generally can be placed on a satisfactory footing. Looking at the record of years contained in Section IV. the progress achieved in actual work done is considerable, viz. from 17,466 vaccinated in 1867 to 307,212 vaccinated in the past year. Experience has now been gained, and with continued progress it remains to ensure that the vaccination undertaken is carried out with care and efficiency. 9. I am to note that the report omits to mention the extent to which the Vaccination department assisted in general sanitary work. The point should not have been overlooked, as the subject was required to be specially dealt with by paragraph 15 of letter from Home Department, dated 21st August last, for- warded to you for compliance with this office No. 3668-195, dated 4th Septem- ber. The Chief Commissioner believes that much good sanitary work is done by the Vaccination department, especially by Civil Surgeons in the course of their vaccination inspections. The Sanitary report for 1879, paragraph 86, shows that a set of men are now being specially trained in sanitary matters, so that they may advise and instruct the people, among whom their vaccination work throws them for several months in the year, and, at the same time, it is stated that &quot; the admission to the department of uneducated men has ceased.&quot; Clearly then, persistent efforts are being made to improve the standard of quali- fication of the vaccination staff so as to utilize them more fully in the general purposes of sanitation ; but, in future reports, I am to request that, in accordance with the orders above referred to, the aid rendered by the Vaccination depart- ment in sanitary matters may be distinctly recorded. 10. The Chief Commissioner's acknowledgments are due to several Civil Surgeons who have ably pressed on the work of vaccination, and to Dr. Barter for his zealous and careful control. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, J. W. CHISHOLM, Offg. Secretary.
No.49/C. FROM J. A. C. HUTCHINSON, M. D., DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces, To THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Mortakka, Nimar, the 23rd July 1880. SIR, In forwarding the report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the season 1879-80, drawn up by Surgeon Major J. F. Barter, for the consideration of the Chief Com- missioner, I have the honor to make a few observations, the brevity of which I beg to be excused for, as I have, as yet, had no practical experience of Vaccination work in these Provinces. 2. It is satisfactory to know that vaccination was prosecuted with energy during the above period by the majority of the agents employed. The published results testify to this:INDEX. PARA. Inefficient men got rid of ... ... ... 1 Comparison of results of 18,78-79 and 1879-80 arranged for ... 2 Primary and re-vaccination ... ... ... 3 Causes of reduced expenditure ... ... ... 4 Cost of Establishment ... ... ... 5 Remarks on the season's work ... ... ... 6&7 Remarks on the inspections performed by Civil Surgeons and Native Superintendents of Vaccination ... ... 8Report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the Season 1879-80. In the concluding paragraph of his review on the Vaccination Report for 1878-79, the Chief Commissioner was pleased to express a hope that &quot; the next year's returns may be found more satisfacrory,&quot; the matter was therefore specially commended to the notice of all Civil Surgeons before the next season had commenced. Useless men were weeded out; the work of those who had done well was suitably acknowledged, whilst those who had done badly were punished, and the result has been that seven districts only show a decrease during the season under report; the remainder have returned increased opera- tions. 2. In order, however, to compare fairly the results of both years, some alterations in the figures for 1878-79, as set forth in &quot; Statement I, Vaccination Department&quot; for that year, become necessary. By an oversight the operations performed by Hospital Assistants in charge of dispensaries, also those performed in Native states, were included in that statement. Again the work returned by eight vaccinators in the Saugor district, who, later on in the year, were proved to have systematically falsified their returns, was also shown therein. Eliminating these two sources of error a corrected return has been prepared and is attached to this report for comparison with that for the year under remark. The follow- ing table then, prepared from these statements, shows the increase and decrease in districts in 1879-80, as compared with the corrected results of the previous year :2 returned a successful percentage of 96 or the same as during the previous year. Civil Surgeons and Native Superintendents have returned it at 90; and the cost per successful case has fallen from annas 2-6¼ pies to annas 2-l¾ pies. Such is a general sketch of the operations of the establishment. 4. The causes which led to an increased out-turn of work are stated gener- ally in the commencement of this report. The causes of reduced expenditure both in the aggregate and per successful case were these :3 the people of that district have from the first been in the habit of collecting at central points in view to inspection; Dr. Townsend approved of the system there, and it was believed that little or no hardship resulted. In the Mandla, Jubbulpore and Balaghat districts, however, it is not so, and in these districts sixteen and eleven villages a day respectively are reported to have been examined. To visit and carefully inspect the children in eleven villages on an average daily is rather more than should be attempted, as such rapid movements are apt to result in imperfect inspection. Again inspecting officers are expected to converse with the people in regard to the matter in hand, to explain its object, to exert their influence with those who object to vaccination, as well as to see generally to the sanitarv condition of the villages visited, and make some useful observa- tions in regard thereto; but this is out of the question when an officer rushes about from village to village, the people no sooner see him than he is gone, and much of the good that would otherwise attach to his visit is lost. Dr. Kidd spent only 20 days in the interior of his district, and in that time examined 6,173 persons; Dr. Kidd's energy is beyond question, but I think his visits would have been productive of mora good if he had travelled less rapidly, indeed he visited 79 villages in one circle in four days. Districts. Number of days out on tour. Number of villa- ges inspected. Number of vaccina- ted persons inspected. Number of successful cases seen. Percentage of success as seen on inspection by Civil Surgeon. Percentage of success as returned by Vaccinators. Percentage of success on inspection by Native Superintendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. Saugor... ... 50 99 322 439 3,909 3,356 3,444 2,612 88.10 94.29 77.83 Damoh... ... 41 124 277 320 4,417 4,470 4,228 4,219 95.72 96.38 94.39 Jubbulpore... ... 52 166 598 867 3,951 6,874 3,498 6,051 88.53 95.71 88.03 Narsinghpur... ... ... 26 148 102 348 1,924 5,776 1,725 5,525 89.65 99.13 95.66 Hoshangabad... ... 31 144 193 520 2,792 8,704 2,264 7,058 81.09 97.77 81.09 Nimar... ... 40 129 280 318 3,559 4,925 3,366 4,744 94.58 97.41 96.32 Mandla... ... 20 129 325 402 6,173 7,453 5,711 7,097 92.51 96.32 95.22 Betul... ... 64 151 443 615 6,167 7,973 5,656 7,502 91.71 97.72 94.09 Chhindwara... ... ... 44 176 698 551 6,623 5,767 5,395 5,240 81.46 99.94 90.86 Seoni... ... 11 140 102 728 842 9,483 663 8,106 78.74 95.51 85.48 Balaghat... ... 25 94 281 351 3,474 4,869 3,178 4,420 91.48 95.44 90.77 Bhandara... ... 37 131 196 625 1,767 6,258 1,627 5,992 92.07 96.46 95.74 Nagpur... ... ... 145 ... 472 ... 6,839 ... 6,303 ... 96.37 92.16 Wardha... ... 30 138 167 547 1,058 4,015 952 3,806 89.99 91.49 94.80 Chanda... ... 16 167 135 580 2,198 8,280 1,681 7,618 76.48 94.01 92.00 Raipur... ... 2 121 14 469 210 6,414 164 5,689 78.10 95.71 88.69 Bilaspur... ... 27 171 207 1,163 6,769 22,675 6,253 19,544 92.38 94.73 86.19 Sambalpur... ... 47 141 277 403 8,934 14,274 8,852 14,154 99.10 99.38 99.15 Total ... 563 2,514 4,617 9,718 64,767 1,38,405 58,657 1,25,680 90.57 96.10 90.80 9. The Assistant Surgeon who inspected in the Jubbulpore district visited 78 villages in five days in one circle, and the Civil Medical officer in Balaghat, 71 villages in four ; this could only be done by worrying the people with journeys to other villages in view to inspection or by hastily slurring over the inspection work without touching the other matters 1 have alluded to; this action should certainly not recur. 10. On the other hand the time spent by the Civil Surgeon of Narsingh- pur in the interior, 26 days, was hardly sufficient, especially as he was only able to spend 16 days on inspection work in 1878; the number of children seen in both years reached only 2,472, and the number of villages inspected 124; it is a pity Doctor Mayne could not have arranged to see a little more of the work.
4 Owing to the illness of the Civil Surgeon of Seoni but little inspection work was done; urgent demands on his time at head.quarters, prevented the Civil Surgeon of Wardha from seeing as much as he desired, and my own inspection of the work in Chanda rendered, in the opinion of the Civil Surgeon, a more extensive inspection unnecessary. In Raipur it may almost be said that nothing was done, the duties of the Civil Surgeon at head-quarters interfered with inspec- tion there. 11. On the whole a fair amount of inspection has been done ; the average number of days spent by each Civil medical officer in the interior was 35, omit- ting Nagpur and Raipur, and they saw over 13,000 children and 400 villages in excess of the number reported in 1878. Well laid out trips of from six to teu days each, and embracing a period of from thirty to forty days in all, should, I think, be ample to enable Civil Surgeons to form a fair estimate of the work of each vaccinator; it is unnecessary to spend over two months on this duty, as was the case in Betul, or fifty-two days as in Jubbulpore ; duties at head-quar- ters do not admit of this without detriment. The case of the Saugor district this year was exceptional, and a more extended inspection than 50 days would, if it were possible, have been advisable; the Assistant Surgeon, however, did as much as he could. 12. Saugor.5 his inspections ; the inspections by the Civil Surgeon and Superintendent show that the percentage of success returned by the vaccinators was in the main cor- rect ; work of good quality seems therefore to have been done in Damoh, but the average out-turn is not yet good. Doctor Skipton states that vaccinated children are rarely attacked by small-pox, and that chicken-pock and measles which are occasionally prevalent are shown in the vital statistic returns as small-pox. Two Hospital Assistants have done fairly ; one man at a branch dispensary might have vaccinated more children than 131 in one year. 14. Jubbulpore.6 The Civil Surgeon's inspections were again limited, he does not explain the rea- son ; this is unfortunate as his Superintendent is slow and not very efficient. The Hospital Assistants attached to the Main and Gadarwara dispen- saries worked fairly well. There is now no opposition to vaccination in this district as reported by the district officers ; apathy and dislike is all that is met with. 16. Hoshangabad7 formed over 2,000 on an average, one man having operated on 3,468 children. The Superintendent's inspections confirm the results stated by the vaccinators, the Civil Surgeon's inspections are also confirmatory of their correctness, but Dr. Kidd's tours were conducted rather too rapidly. 23. Balaghat.8 in this district has hitherto been badly conducted, villages were never visited, results were poor, and no real efforts were made to overcome the objections of the people, this is now changed. Dr. Evers has made a good beginning and will be able during the recess to fill up vacancies caused by dismissal of useless vac- cinators with suitable men, and will doubtless see that the work next season is efficiently performed. A good deal of obstruction was met with owing to the independent attitude assumed by some Malguzars and the apathy of others. On the other hand the Civil Surgeon has brought to notice the aid rendered by the follow- ing gentlemen : Sri Newas Ganesh, Honorary Magistrate of Scindi, Govind Jey ram, Honorary Magistrate of Palusgaon, Bapuji, Deshmuk of &quot;Wanaira, Vittoba, Malguzar of Dhunora, and Narain Vasadeo, Malguzar of Digdoh. Dr. Evers was only able to spend one month in camp. I am aware of his inability to do more ; his inspections were however thorough, and he was able to form a fair estimate of each man's work. The Superintendent has not only done a fair amount of inspection but has managed to vaccinate 2,314 children in addition. I was well satisfied with his work. &quot;With two exceptions Hospital Assistants have done badly; one has ignored orders altogether. 27. Chanda.9 merit was unable to visit many villages oftener than once in two years, and some were not visited at all, a large number of children must therefore have been available, mortality from small-pox notwithstanding; as a matter of fact three men reported having performed 4,907 operations and the correctness of their returns has not been questioned by the Superintendent; again vaccinators should learn to rely on themselves instead of on Tahsildars who have other duties to perform, and it is the duty of vaccinators to conciliate Malguzars. I think there- fore that the excuses put. forward should not be accepted; six of these men have proved themselves utterly useless and should have been dismissed, four have grossly neglected their work showing returns varying from 814 to 970, five have shown a bad season's work or between 1,016 and 1,279, whilst three only have done well. One Hospital Assistant only did well, the remainder ignored their instruc- tions ; it is absurd for these men to suppose that adequate punishment cannot reach them for such deliberate disobedience. 31, Bilaspur.10 vaccinated, and 20 among unprotected persons: 11.91 per cent was the mortality In the small-pox hospital London in 20 years among cases showing one indiffer- ent vaccine cicatrix and 3.83 among those showing one good mark, the mortality decreasing to 0.55 per cent among those showing four cicatrices : making every allowance for the difficulty of obtaining correct data in Sambalpur and the circumstances of a London hospital as compared with an Indian hut, the conclusion forced on one is that the quality of the work in Sambalpur is not as good as it might be. If Mr. Harrison and Civil Surgeons generally would carry out the system insisted on by Dr. Browne in Hoshangabad, that is to insist on four distinct points of insertion of lymph, they would find mortality among vaccinated persons reduced to a minimum when an epidemic of small-pox occurs. The prevalance of small-pox hindered the vaccinators and a lower out- -turn is reported,A.A.A.DISPENSARY VACCINATION. Statement No. III., showing Dispensary Vaccination in the Central Provinces, during the year 1879-80. Districts. Number of Dispensaries in each district to which a vaccinator is attached. Average number of vaccinators attached to dispensaries during the season. Total number of persons vaccinated. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. Primary Vaccinations. Re-vaccinations. Percentage of successful cases. Total. Successful. Total. Successful. Primary. Re-vaccination. Under one year. One and under six. Total of all ages. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Saugor... ... ... ... ... ... 1,547 ... 1,534 844 448 1,317 13 7 88.87 58.33 Damoh... ... ... ... ... 944 ... 944 415 410 878 ... ... 94.10 ... Jubbulpore... ... ... ... ... ... 5,619 ... 5,478 1,761 2,960 5,080 141 99 93.83 83.90 Narsinghpur... ... ... ... ... ... 1,480 ... 1,476 709 576 1,338 4 3 94.09 75.00 Hoshangabad... ... ... ... ... ... 2,839 ... 2,813 1,795 646 2,570 26 4 92.34 15.39 Nimar... ... ... ... ... ... 381 ... 375 294 59 354 6 ... 94.44 ... Mandla... ... ... ... ... ... 239 ... 239 80 107 215 ... ... 92.67 ... Betul... ... ... ... ... ... 488 ... 484 233 183 424 4 2 87.78 50.00 Chhindwara... ... ... ... ... ... 902 ... 614 535 57 603 288 200 98.21 69.69 Seoni... ... ... ... ... ... 987 ... 974 232 439 910 13 13 93.72 100.00 Balaghat... ... ... ... ... ... 444 ... 444 92 252 394 ... ... 89.33 ... Bhandara... ... ... ... ... ... 453 ... 453 224 143 368 ... ... 84.02 ... Nagpur... ... ... ... ... ... 871 ... 871 609 217 830 ... ... 95.62 ... Wardha... ... ... ... ... ... 633 ... 633 195 173 432 ... ... 72.85 ... Chanda... ... ... ... ... ... 1,759 ... 1,737 998 539 1,594 22 20 92.30 90.90 Baipur... ... ... ... ... ... 620 ... 620 379 171 590 ... ... 96.41 ... Bilaspur... ... ... ... ... ... 367 ... 364 86 153 258 3 3 79.88 100.00 Sambalpur... ... ... ... ... ... 339 ... 333 20 291 325 6 6 97.60 100.00 Total... ... ... 20,912 ... 20,386 9,501 7,824 18,480 526 357 92.19 71.26 NOTECompartive Statement No. IV., showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number of those persons who Were successfully vaccinated in the Central Provinces in each of the undermentioned official years. Establishment. Persons primarily Vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Year ending 30th April 1866. Year ending 31st March 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1877. 1878. 1879. 1880. Government... ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 36,927 31,435 55,348 46,816 86,669 77,166 49,204 40,394 33,380 28,775 45,098 40,734 128,590 112,435 176,893 158,704 201,636 188,384 245,224 229,930 260,408 241,633 235,846 223,036 254,824 239,497 Municipal... ... ... ... ... ... 43,259 34,417 64,827 52,033 12,299 10,037 48,764 44,606 21,127 16,440 25,090 20,455 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,238 5,023 Local Funds... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,258 32,473 27,173 17,035 54,373 45,973 53,327 45,971 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,535 8,788 Native States... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 17,229 16,579 Dispensaries... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 20,386 18,480 ArmyDispensary Vaccination 1879-80. Districts. Name of Dispensary. Number of vac- cinations at each dispensary. Total. Remarks. Saugor ... Sadar Bazar... ... ... 150 1,547 Rehli... ... ... ... 250 Deori... ... ... 250 Garhakota... ... ... 261 Kurai... ... ... 294 Shahgarh... ... ... 219 Banda... ... ... 81 Jail... ... ... 26 Police... ... ... 16 Damoh... ... ... Damoh Town... ... ... 158 944 Hatta... ... ... 417 Jabera... ... ... 131 Pathuria... ... ... 238 Jubbulpore... ... ... Jubbulpore Main... ... ... 324 5,619 Cantonment Branch Dis- pensary... ... ... 1,856 Sehora... ... ... 1,104 Murwara... ... ... 1,087 Bijeragogarh... ... ... 651 Thaggi and Police... ... ... 597 Narsinghpur... ... Gadarwara... ... ... 614 1,480 Narsinghpur... ... 463 Chhindwara... ... ... 214 Jail and Police... ... ... 189 Hoshangabad ... ... Hoshangabad... ... ... 603 2,839 Kothi Bazar... ... 113 Harda... ... 680 Seoni... ... 923 Sohagpur... ... 520 Nimar... ... ... Khandwa... ... ... 81 381 Burhanpur... ... ... 124 Pandhana... ... ... 150 Mandhatta... ... ... 26 Mandla... ... ... Mandla... ... ... 120 239 Ramgarh... ... ... 104 Police... ... ... 15 Betul... ... ... Budnur... ... ... 319 488 Multai... ... ... 169 Chhindwara... ... ... Chhindwara... ... ... 720 902 Lodhikera... ... ... 182 Seoni... ... ... Seoni... ... 736 987 Lakhnadon... ... ... 237 Police and Jail... ... ... 14 Balaghat... ... ... Balaghat... ... ... 91 444 Waraseoni... ... ... 73 Hatta... ... ... 86 Behir... ... ... 194 Bhandara... ... ... Bhandara... ... 337 453 Tirrora... ... ... 93 Sakoli... ... ... 23 Nagpur... ... Itwari... ... ... 361 871 Heude... ... ... 56 Rai Bahadur... ... ... 170 Mowar... ... ... 104 Khapa... ... 150 Umrer... ... 30
Districts. Name of Dispensary. Number of vac- cinations at each dispensary. Total. Remarks. Wardha ... Wardha Main ... 52 633 Hinganghat ... 150 Sindi ... 78 Deoli ... 32 Arvi ... 214 Jail and Police ... 107 Chanda ... Warora ... 88 1,759 Brahmapuri ... 817 Armori ... 470 Allapilli ... 10 Sironcha ... 279 Jail ... 95 Raipur ... Sadar Branch ... 76 620 Drug ... 4 Dhamteri ... 501 Arung ... 6 Police ... 33 Bilaspur ... Sadar Dispensary ... 158 367 Mungeli ... 95 Seorinarain ... 114 Sambalpur ... Sambalpur ... 315 339 Bargarh ... 24 Total ... 20,912 21 7 80 2C 335 260
REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1880-81. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1881.
No.3204/174. FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, C. S., OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 30th August 1881. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge your report on Vaccine operations in the Central Provinces during the year 1880-81, which reached the Chief Commis- sioner in print on the 19th August. 2. The Chief Commissioner observes with satisfaction that the out-turn of work was larger than in any previous year. In all 325,021 vaccine operations were performed, 317,838 of which were primary and 7,183 secondary. Of the primary operations 2,944,755 were done by the Vaccine establish- ment in British and Feudatory territory, and 23,083 by hospital assistants at dispensaries. Of the 317,838 cases 301,140 or 94 per cent were successful, viz. :2 The average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator was 1,511, which is a lower average than that of the preceding two years, when the figures were 1,644 and 1,718 respectively. The Chief Commissioner thinks it must be difficult if not impossible to lay down with even approximate accuracy the number of vaccinations which each operator may be expected to perform, for density of population, distances, the number of towns, and the degree of educa- tion and enlightenment among the population have all to be taken into account. You yourself consider that every vaccinator should with ease accomplish 2,000 operations in a year. This figure does not seem too high, seeing that each of 5 vaccinators in the Mandla district with an average population of 45 to the square mile did 2,407 operations. The next best places are taken by the Bala- ghat and Chanda districts, where population is also sparse ; while the worst figures are returned from the districts of Nimar, Betul, and Raipur, where the averages for each vaccinator are respectively 1,300, 1,225 and 552. 6. The districts which show the worst results are Nimar, Seoni, Bilaspur, Betul, and Raipur. The 4 first named show large decreases in the number of operations performed, and, as just noticed, Nimar, Betul and Raipur stand at the foot of the list showing the average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. In the Nimar district the bad results are ascribed to several circumstances,3 such check cannot solely be entrusted to the Native Superintendents, many of whom are no better than the vaccinators, and some of whom have been punished during the year for neglect of their duties. Indeed several Civil Surgeons asked that they might be allowed to try the experiment of working their vaccination staff without the aid of a Native Superintendent, and in districts where this plan has been tried the absence of a Native Superintendent does not seem to have caused trouble or embarrassment. Native Superintendents, even allowing for their smaller numbers, were on tour for fewer days, visited fewer villages and inspected fewer persons vaccinated, but certified to a higher percentage of successful cases, viz. 91.33 in 1880-81 against 90.80 in the preceding year. The percentage of successful cases returned by vaccinators was 96.55, that certified to by Native Superintendents 91.33, and that certified to by Civil Surgeons 93.01. The higher percentage certified to by Civil Surgeons seems explained by the circumstance that one of the duties of the Native Superin- tendent is to re-vaccinate all unsuccessful and doubtful cases; and if a Civil Sur- geon's tour follows on that of a Native Superintendent a higher percentage might necessarily be expected. It is not primâ facie probable that a Native Superintendent would re-inspect villages seen by the Civil Surgeon. It is how- ever evident that vaccinators still take credit for a higher percentage of success than they are entitled to. This would seem to be specially the case in Hoshan- gabad, where a percentage of 96.49 claimed by the vaccinators was reduced by the Civil Surgeon to 80.26; in Bilaspur, where a percentage of 92.59 was reduced to 75.76 ; in Chhindwara, where a percentage of 99.61 was reduced to 86.87; and in Jubbulpore, where a percentage of 96.59 was reduced to 85.76. The quotations given by you in paragraph 50 show that the percentages of success receive considerable scrutiny from Civil Surgeons, though the Chief Commis- sioner finds some difficulty in following the remarks of the Civil Surgeons of Betul and Chhindwara, which do not seem borne out by the tabular Statements. 8. More vaccination work was done at dispensaries during 1880-81 than in the preceding year, and this is again satisfactory. Primary vaccinations numbered 23,083, of which 20,989 were successful; secondary vaccinations 488, of which 311 were successful. The percentage of successful primary vaccinations was 90, that of secondary vaccinations 63. The districts which show best in regard to dispensary vaccination are Jubbulpore, Nagpur, Hoshangabad, Raipur, Chanda and Saugor. Compared with the previous year the number of operations at dispensaries in Nagpur and Raipur has largely risen ; operations in the other districts named have somewhat fallen off. 9. Statement No. II. shows the strength and cost of the department. In 17 districts the Civil Surgeon or Civil Medical Officer is the Superintendent of vaccination, while in Nagpur there is a Deputy Superintendent. There are 16 Native Superintendents and 196 subordinate vaccinators, who are grouped thus : 43 in Class I., 52 in Class II., and 101 in Class III. Attached to this staff are 34 chaprassies and menial servants. The total expenditure of all kinds amounted to Rs. 37,515-2-10, and the average cost of each successful case was 2 annas 1¼ pies. 10. On the whole, the Chief Commissioner is inclined to think that your report sets forth a creditable amount of work done. Census operations interfered to a considerable extent with vaccine work, and lazy vaccinators were not slow to take advantage of this and perform very few operations, and their indolence was detected too late. Apathy and repugnance to vaccination still continue, but if the people do not welcome vaccination as a protection against small-pox they seem to submit to it as a disagreeable necessity. Patience and tact must con- tinue to be exercised, and with these further progress should only be a matter of time. You seem inclined to think that more work might be got from a smaller staff, which is rather a novel proposition. But as one vaccinator managed to perform over 5,000 operations, an average of 2,000 per vaccinator does not seem too high a standard.
4 In conclusion I am to thank you for your report, which gives a clear account of the work done during the year. Your explanation of the supposed inaccu- racies in the figures of 1879-80 seems satisfactory. You also appear to have drawn the attention of Civil Surgeons to several points, such as the desirability of re-vaccination, which seem to merit their attention. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, LINDSAY NEILL, Offg. Secretary.
INDEX. PARA Remarks explanatory of the supposed errors in the statistics of 1879-80 ... ... ... 1Report on Vaccination in the Central Pro- vinces during the Season 1880-81. Before entering on the proper subjects of this report, it will be advisable to make a few remarks explanatory of the supposed errors in the statistics of 1879-80. This is all the more necessary as not only the administration of these Provinces, but the Government of India, and the Sanitary Commissioner shared in the belief that serious errors had crept in which did not reflect creditably on ,the Officers concerned in the preparation of the returns. 2. Surgeon Major Barter's desire was to present a statement which would exhibit only the work of the paid agents of vaccination in these Provinces ; with this view he had amended Statement No. I prepared. In comparing the figures in this with those of the ordinary statement, the difference is found to amount to 53,440. This decrease is thus accounted for : 2 districts, more especially Jubbulpore and Nagpur, the figures of the past season would not have borne a favorable comparison with those of the previous one. The causes of the decrease will be taken into consideration further on, but it may- be here said that the only serious hindrance to the work is in the indolence and apathy of the agents employed. This must be overcome, so that every infant born in these Provinces is efficiently vaccinated. If every vaccinator employed did as much as 2,000 cases, this desirable result would soon be gained. 7. On this subject the remarks of Surgeon Major Barter are given. He writes :3 Vaccination practised from the tubes of English lymph proved successful. Every thing being in readiness, the vaccinators were sent to their respective circles in the middle of October. These had been re-arranged, and maps had been prepared which proved very useful. At Damoh the supply of lymph had been kept up, and the men were des- patched to their circles in the middle of October. At Hoshangabad the Civil Surgeon writes :4 Vaccination in Districts. 16. Saugor.5 The staff of vaccinators is eight, and if each of these men did a proper amount of work, 16,000 should be the figures secured ; and these will be secured next year, as there will be no calls on the men, except the prosecution of their own work. The Civil Surgeon reports very favourably of Mahomed Newaz, who finished his Census work in six days and vaccinated 1,828 children ; the percentage of success being as much as 99. Two men grossly neglected their work, doing only 865 and 703 respectively; and two others performed it in a perfunctory manner. Chhindwara also exhibits a decrease in its work, amounting to 1,664. The explanation of the Civil Surgeon as to this is given in another place. Notwithstanding the reduced figures this district stands 8th on the list as to the average work of vaccinators, which comes to 1,818 for each of the seven vaccinators. The percentage as ascertained by the Civil Surgeon is 86.87. The highest figures reached by one vaccinator during the season was 2,462, and the lowest 1,413. Chhindwara should show at least 14,000 annually. The Civil Surgeon reports favourably on the whole of his establishment, although he found careless work occasionally on the part of those from whom he expected better things. 19 Seoni.6 Chanda shows an increase of 2,435. The highest number, vaccinated by one person, came to the remarkably high figure of 4,166. This was gained by the industry and zeal of 1st class vaccinator Ram Chundra. The lowest figure is 1,075; but the majority of the 9 vaccinators gained high figures. The average being 2,242, which gives this district the third place on the list. The percentage of success is 90.69. The Civil Surgeon reports favourably on the vaccinators, who worked actively and maintained friendly relations with the people. 21. Raipur.7 24. The Civil Surgeon of Betul explains the falling off in his district thus :8 At Hoshangabad 2,757 cases were done, all being primary; and the percen- tage of success 90.81. The work here is good, but does not come near that done at Jubbulpore. The greatest numbers were done at Harda (951). The Civil Surgeon attributes the decrease (from 2,839 to 2,757) chiefly to the death of Hospital Assistant Pyar Ali Khan at Seoni, who was particularly successful and energetic in the work. The work at Nimar is poor, only 362 cases vaccinated by 5 men. The numbers for Khandwa (114) and Burhanpur (72), are very low. But the Civil Surgeon offers the following explanation :9 33. At Raipur there has been a considerable increase from 620 to 1,665. With the exception of 62 all the cases were primary and. the percentage of success for the latter was 94.79 and of the former 71.70. The increase at Raipur was due to the praiseworthy exertions of Hospital Assistant Mulchand of Dhamtari, who vaccinated 1,113 children. His work is in favourable contrast to that done by the Hospital Assistants of Drug and A rang, who only did .85 and 83 each. The Civil Surgeon will, next season, it is to be trusted, see that, these men exert themselves so as to merit approval. Mulchand must be warned, however, not to interfere with the work of the district vaccinators as the Civil Surgeon writes that in his zeal he visited villages 9 miles distant. At Bilaspur, the work has decreased most seriously. From 367 it has actu- ally gone down to 91. This figure is the result of the work of three Hospital Assistants who accomplished 42, 20 and 29 respectively. This state of things is explained thus by the Civil Surgeon. &quot; The Hospital &quot; Assistant of the main Dispensary would have done much more, being a willing &quot; man,&quot; but the work had been taken out of his hands by the Civil Surgeon him- self and by the staff of vaccinators who, in order to keep up the supply of lymph, worked from April to October. The Civil Surgeon reports very unfavourably of the Hospital Assistant of the Seorinarain Dispensary who ignored the orders issued to him. The Mun- geli Dispensary was in charge of an inexperienced passed Medical Pupil who hardly did any vaccination. Having failed so much during the past season, it will be necessary for the Civil Surgeon to see that the work done next season will be satisfactory. At Sambalpur the work has improved. The numbers having risen from 339 to 516. This work was done by five Hospital Assistants. 94 out of the 516 were cases of re-vaccination, and the percentage of these was only 60.64, whereas for the primary it was 94-30. Vaccination in Native States. 34. Vaccination in the Native States is of comparatively recent introduc- tion, the first record of cases being in the official year 1877-78. This then is the fourth year and the numbers have risen from 8,976 to 20,026. The successful cases in the former being 8,744, and in the latter 18,922. It cannot be said that vaccination is yet satisfactorily established, as with the staff employed the results are not good. Better work may be confidently looked for next season, useless men will be replaced by those who are more com- petent, work will be commenced earlier in the year, and the men will be employed exclusively on their own peculiar duties. The vaccine staff is strongest in the Native State connected with Raipur, but the best work was accomplished in the Sambalpur ones. 35. At Raipur there are as many as eighteen vaccinators ; ten in the employ of the Khairagarh State, three at Nandgaon, and one in each of the following : Sahaspur Lohara Gaddai, Thakur Tola, Silheti Burgurpur, Purpri and Khuji. The total work done by the eighteen men came to 6,748, corresponding to the work of only two of the best men in the Central Provinces proper. The ten men in the pay of the Khairagarh State did only 2,640 or 264 per man; one of these seems to have done only 15 operations, others did 45, 46, 73, 75, only one (Moti Ram) accomplished 1,432. It is reported, in his favour, that he was not hindered by Census duty, whereas all the others were so employed. Still they could not have been so entirely tied by the extraneous duty imposed upon them as to be unable to do more of their proper work than they did. They should be replaced by men who will be more active and understand more clearly what is expected from them. The vaccinators of Nandgaon, 3, did better work, the average being 772, and the remaining 5 in the pay of the small zamindaris did on an average 360. It may be inferred from these poor figures that vaccination has not been favoured by the people generally in the Feudatory States.
10 36. As regards the workin Bilaspur, in the State of Kawardha, it was thought best not to press vaccination, as the opposition against it was most decided ; it was only carried on in Sakti and Pandaria. 1,151 cases were operated on by 2 men. 37. In connection with Sambalpur, work is carried on in the Native States of Patna, Sonepur, Sarangarh, Padampur and Chunder. In Patna 10 vaccinators are employed permanently. The work done was as follows:11 It does not appear clear, from these remarks, that re-vaccination was prac- tised in every instance, but rather that a large number were cases of primary vaccination in adults. Inspections made by Civil Surgeons. 39. At Saugor the inspections were made by the Assistant to the Civil Sur- geon (Durga Das Sen). This officer &quot; spent 58 days in camp, visited 319 villages &quot; and inspected 4,414 children, of which 4,089 were found successfully vaccinated. &quot; He himseslf vaccinated 103 children.&quot; The Civil Surgeon Damoh reports, that he was in the district 48 days, and examined 5,550 children, 5,314 of whom were successfully vaccinated. The Civil Surgeon of Jubbulpore writes thus of Assistant Surgeon Radha Nath Bose, who did the inspection work. &quot; He was on tour during the &quot; whole of the cold season, and inspected work in all the circles, including those &quot; worked by the Hospital Assistants of Dispensaries.&quot; He inspected 151 villages and 1,714 vaccinated children; the successful cases amounted to 1,470. 40. The Civil Surgeon of Narsinghpur writes, &quot; I was on tour altogether for 27 days, during which time I visited 161 villages and saw 3,970 cases. Out of the total seen I found 3,760 successful.&quot; The Civil Surgeon of Hoshangabad, spent 40 days in camp and was enabled to see some of the work of each vaccinator. He visited 159 villages and inspected 2,786 children. Nimar.12 The Civil Surgeon of Chanda made very careful inspections and saw the work of all his staff except one. He was out in camp for 51 days and saw 4,804 vaccinated children, out of which 4,357 were well protected. 44. The Civil Surgeon of Raipur writes :13 suggestion, the Native Superintendent and one vaccinator were transferred to other districts leaving only 7 vaccinators. The result of the year's work shows that no. bad effects have occurred, although the operations are fewer.&quot; The explanation of the decrease is given in another place. The Civil Surgeon, Seoni, does not write very favorably of the Native Super- intendent Abdool Wahab. He did not accomplish much in the way of inspec- tion, but illness is the excuse for this shortcoming. The Civil Surgeon, Bhandara, reports favourably of the Native Superintend- ent Abdul Gani; he writes :14 With reference to Balaghat it is rather surprising that the Civil Surgeon claims a larger percentage of successful cases than either the Native Superinten- dent or Vaccinators. Every case he saw in his tour was found successful. The Deputy Commissioner records the following observation : 15 Deputy Superintendent, Nagpur, writes :16 In Nimar small-pox was introduced in different directions, but it did not show a tendency to spread :17 The results gained by those who attended the course have been mentioned in the Sanitary Report. Cost of Vaccination. 59. The total cost incurred for the furtherance of vaccination amounted to Rs. 37,515-2-10. This is an advance of Rs. 2,939-10-7 upon the expenditure of 1879-80. The enhanced expense is in the item of establishment, Rs. 33,955-11-0 having been expended against Rs. 30,945-3-7 or a difference of Rs. 3,010-7-5. The districts in which the cost of establishment has increased are 12 in number, and those with a diminished expenditure under this head are Narsingh- pur, Nimar, Chhindwara, Nagpur, Wardha and Chanda. The item &quot;Travelling allowance&quot; came to Rs. 3,334-1-8, which is a decrease on the figures of 1879-80 (Rs. 148-2-0) ; but under contingencies the expendi- ture has increased by Rs. 225-6-2 which is higher than the figures of 1879-80 by Rs. 77-5-2. The average cost for each successful case came to Rs. 0-2-1¼, which is certainly higher than it should be. Were it not for the drones in the depart- ment the cost would be materially lessened. The cheapest vaccination was done in Jubbulpore and Mandla (Rs. 0-1-4¾ each), and the most costly in Betul and Raipur (Rs. 0-2-11) and Rs. 0-2-10½ respectively. NAGPUR: J. A. C. HUTCHINSON, M. D., Deputy Surgeon General, Sanitary Commissioner, and Superintendent of Vaccination, C. P. 28th July 1881.
Comparative Statement of Vaccine operations performed during 1879-80 and 1880-81. Districts. Number vacci- nated 1879-80. Number vacci- nated 1880-81. Increase. Decrease. Saugor ... ... 17,476 16,893 ... 583 Damoh ... ... 9,743 10,930 1,187 ... Jabbulpore ... ... 16,862 19,823 2,961 ... Narsinghpur ... ... 11,617 12,540 923 ... Hoshangabad ... ... 14,667 19,216 4,549 ... Nimar ... ... 8,784 7,803 ... 981 Mandla ... ... 10,365 12,034 1,669 ... Betul ... ... 15,530 10,018 ... 5,512 Chhindwara ... ... 14,387 12,723 ... 1,664 Seoni ... ... 17,352 12,973 ... 4,379 Balaghat ... ... 8,773 9,274 501 ... Bhandara ... ... 16,541 19,276 2,735 ... Nagpur ... ... 22,305 27,269 4,964 ... Wardha ... ... 12,766 15,759 2,993 ... Chanda ... ... 18,232 20,667 2,435 ... Raipur ... ... 19,789 20,188 399 ... Bilaspur ... ... 30,663 25,115 ... 5,548 Sambalpur ... ... 28,340 28,949 609 ... Total ... 294,192 301,450 7,258 ...
Statement showing inspections performed by Civil Surgeons and Native Superintendents during the year 1880-81. Districts. Number of days out on tour Number of villages inspected. Number of vaccinated persons inspected. Number of successful cases seen. Percentage of success as seen on inspection by Civil Surgeon. Percentage of success as returned by Vaccinators. Percentage of success on inspection by Native Superintendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. Saugor ... ... ... 58 94 319 508 4,414 7,043 4,089 6,434 92.63 96.70 91.35 Damoh ... ... ... 48 141 344 478 5,550 8,137 5,314 7,781 95.75 97.40 95.62 Jubbulpore ... ... 31 151 151 665 1,714 6,403 1,470 5,503 85.76 96.59 85.94 Narsinghpur ... ... 27 111 161 319 3,970 3,693 3,760 3,517 94.70 99.30 95.27 Hoshangabad ... ... 40 139 159 641 2,786 9,786 2,236 8,041 80.26 96.49 82.16 Nimar ... ... 31 ... 193 ... 2,659 ... 2,498 ... 93.95 98.03 ... Mandla ... ... 25 59 354 386 9,386 9,904 9,067 9,437 96.60 95.14 95.28 Betul ... ... 67 127 325 389 2,976 3,461 2,740 3,137 92.07 97.00 90.64 Chhindwara ... ... 55 ... 261 ... 2,378 ... 2,066 ... 86.87 99.61 ... Seoni ... ... 19 55 81 271 1,003 2,260 893 1,777 89.03 96.19 78.62 Balaghat ... ... 7 159 77 444 1,428 8,483 1,428 7,588 100.00 97.12 89.44 Bhandara ... ... 38 135 138 635 1,936 9,063 1,810 8,849 93.49 97.50 97.63 Nagpur ... ... ... 163 ... 474 ... 6,567 ... 5,680 ... 97.76 86.63 Wardha ... ... 55 122 270 460 2,226 8,056 2,015 7,710 90.52 95.43 95.78 Chanda ... ... 51 169 344 539 4,804 6,629 4,357 5,901 90.69 93.58 89.01 Raipur ... ... ... 53 ... 381 ... 8,338 ... 7,438 ... 95.42 89.20 Bilaspur ... ... 31 140 135 641 2,690 12,516 2,038 10,818 75.76 92.59 86.43 Sambalpur ... ... 35 144 278 401 9,691 14,055 9,662 13,978 99.70 98.97 99.45 Total 618 1,962 3,590 7,632 59,611 1,24,394 55,443 1,13,604 93.01 96.55 91.33
Dispensary Vaccination 1880-81. District. Name of Dispensari. Number of vaccinations at each Dispen- sary. Total. Saugor ... Garhakota ... ... 216 1,405 Rehli ... ... 246 Deori ... ... 261 Khurai ... ... 325 Banda ... ... 178 Shahgarh ... ... 126 Sadar Bazar ... ... 36 Police ... ... 17 Damoh ... Damoh ... ... 329 1,057 Hatta ... ... 287 Pathuria ... ... 252 Jabera ... ... 189 Jubbulpore ... Jubbulpore ... ... 235 5,222 City Branch ... ... 1,846 Thaggi ... ... 421 Sehora ... ... 1,008 Murwara ... ... 970 Bijeragogarh ... ... 742 Narsinghpur ... Gadarwara ... ... 296 1,134 Narsinghpur ... ... 548 Chhindwara ... ... 229 Jail and Police ... ... 61 Hoshangabad ... Hoshangabad ... ... 546 2,757 Kothi Bazar ... ... 128 Harda ... ... 951 Seoni ... ... 654 Sohagpur ... ... 421 Pachmarhi ... ... 57 Nimar ... Khandwa ... ... 114 362 Burhanpur ... ... 72 Pandhana ... ... 73 Mandhatta ... ... 66 Civil Station ... ... 37 Mandla Mandla ... ... 126 126 Betul ... Budnur ... ... 266 365 Multai ... ... 99 Chhindwara ... Chhindwara ... ... 459 631 Lodhikhera ... ... 172 Seoni ... Seoni ... ... 543 581 Laknadon ... ... 38 Balaghat ... Balaghat ... ... 74 217 Hatta ... ... 49 Waraseoni ... ... 94 Bhandara ... Bhandara ... ... 316 739 Tirora ... ... 255 Sakoli ... ... 168 Nagpur ... Itwari ... ... 560 3,759 Rai Bahadur ... ... 700 Heude ... ... 85 Umrer ... ... 342 Khapa ... ... 605 Mowar ... ... 517 Katol ... ... 581 Remtek ... ... 369
District. Name of Dispensary. Number of vacci- nations at each Dis- pensary. Total. Wardha ... Wardha ... ... 225 1,349 Hinganghat ... ... 248 Deoli ... ... 94 Sindi ... ... 190 Arvi ... ... 424 Jail and Police ... ... 168 Chanda ... Chanda ... ... 77 1,595 Sironcha ... ... 249 Brahmapuri ... ... 636 Armori ... ... 244 Mul ... ... 229 Warora ... ... 160 Raipur ... Raipur ... ... 278 1,665 Dhamtari ... ... 1,113 Drug ... ... 85 Arang ... ... 83 Sadar Branch. ... ... 106 Bilaspur ... Sadar ... ... 42 91 Mungeli ... ... 20 Seorinarain ... ... 29 Sambalpur ... Sambalpur ... ... 205 516 Bargarh ... ... 49 Jail ... ... 93 Sonepur State ... ... 87 Sarangarh State ... ... 82 Total 23,571
ANNUAL FORMS.
A.A.B.Comparative Statement No. IV., showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and of the undermentioned Establishment. Persons primary Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Year end- ing30th- April 1866. Year ending 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. Government ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 36,927 31,435 55,348 46,816 86,669 77,166 49,204 40,394 33,380 28,775 45,098 40,734 Municipal ... ... ... ... ... 43,259 34,417 64,827 52,032 12,299 10,037 48,764 44,606 21,127 16,440 25,090 20,455 Local Funds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,258 32,473 27,173 17,035 54,373 45,973 53,327 45,971 Native States ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Armythe number of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Central Provinces in each official years. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. . Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. 31st March 1881. 1874. 1875. 1876. 1877. 1878. 1879. 1880. 1881. 1,28,590 1,12,435 1,76,893 1,58,704 2,01,636 1,88,384 2,45,224 2,29,930 2,60,408 2,41,633 2,35,846 2,23,036 2,54,824 2,39,497 2,61,959 2,48,924 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 5,238 5,023 9,456 9,247 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,535 8,788 3,314 3,059 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 17,229 16,579 20,026 18,922 ... ... ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 20,386 18,480 23,083 20,989 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,28,590 1,12,435 1,76,893 1,58,704 2,11,402 1,96,958 2,55,408 2,38,918 2,88,688 2,67,341 2,78,958 2,63,803 3,07,212 2,88,367 3,17,838 3,01,140
REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1881-82. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1882.
No. 3015/137 FROM C. W. IMRIE, ESQUIRE, C. S, OFFG. ASST. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 8th August 1882. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of your report on vaccination in the Central Provinces during the year ending on the 31st March 1882. The report was received in print by the Chief Commissioner on the 13th ultimo only : the delay in its preparation having been, as you state, caused by the dilatoriness of certain Superintendents in submitting their returns. Year's operations and returns. 2. The total number of vaccinations was higher than in any previous year, the figures (including those for re-vaccination) being 369,651 as compared with 301,450 in 1880-81. These figures however do not include the vaccinations at dispensaries : and the Chief Commis- sioner finds that altogether there were 387,498 primary vaccinations, and 9,284 re-vaccinations or 396,782 persons in all operated upon. The number of successful operations was : 2 Vaccination work and circles. 3. The average number of persons vaccinated by the members of the regular staff was 1,824 ; the highest district average was 2,531, (Sambalpur), and the lowest was 1,286 (Betul). As to the returns for Sambalpur it seems that in the khalsa five men performed 19,492 operations, and you remark that &quot; the Civil Surgeon apparently thinks the figures genuine.&quot; On the other hand, one of the best vaccinators in Betul was ill for two months of the season, another was a new hand, and a third had to be dismissed. The average number of operations performed by vaccinators is also low in Nimar, Raipur and Bilaspur. As to Raipur you remark on the practice there of doing vaccination work in part only of the district each year. One point in favour of this procedure is that the supervision must be much more effective. Indeed it seems to the Chief Commissioner a somewhat doubtful policy to expect each vaccinator to visit an area so large that, on the returns now under review, only half of it can be inspected each year. Still the Chief Commissioner observes that in some districts there was comparatively much more inspection work done by Superintendents than in others. In Damoh and Seoni the Superintendents saw a very large proportion of the persons vaccinated, and in Nimar, Mandla, Balaghat, Narsinghpur, Wardha and Bilaspur, they saw more than half the vaccinators' work. In Raipur the Superintendent saw less than half the children operated on : but at the same time he saw more such children than any other Superintendent. You point out the difference there is in the extent and population of vaccination circles ; and probably you may be able to re-arrange the circles and re-distribute the men so as to allow a fairer comparison between the work of different Superintendents, and also different Civil Surgeons. District details. 4. The Chief Commissioner has read your report of the vaccination work in each district with interest. With regard to the work done by Hospital Assistants he notes that those attached to the Sehora, Murwara, and Bijeragogarh dispensaries did all the vaccination in their circles, the Civil Surgeon of Jubbulpore stating that during the spring they can leave their proper work three days a week for this purpose. The Chief Commissioner, however, concurs in your opinion that, if the dispensaries are closed on these days the practice is objectionable, but pro- bably this will not be found to be the case. At Narsinghpur again the Civil Surgeon found it necessary to order the Hospital Assistants to attend to their dispensary work only. Mr. Morris is of opinion that the proper course is between these extremes, and that Hospital Assistants might do much vaccination work in seasons when there are few hospital patients. The total out-turn of work has considerably increased over that of last year in all districts except Hoshangabad, Mandla, and all the districts in the Nagpur Division, except Balaghat, which shows a slight increase. In Hoshangabad the decline is satisfactorily accounted for by the weakness of the staff. In Mandla, however, you are of opinion that the work was not what it should have been, particularly as more had been done in previous year, when the Superintendent and four vaccinators had Census duties in addition to their own. Various reasons are shown for the decline in the Nagpur districts. The average vaccinations performed were in Nagpur and Bhandara slightly under, and in Chanda and Wardha slightly over, the average for the Province. The inspection work again in this Division appears from the table in your paragraph 26 to have been in each district under the average. You for- ward explanations of decrease of work in these districts and of noticeable features in the returns for others; and the Chief Commissioner is satisfied that with more experience of the Province you will be able to set right or fully explain whatever is seemingly amiss. Feudatory States. 5. In the Feudatory States of Sarangarh, Padampur, Chandarpur, Patna, Nandgaon, Dongargarh, Khairagarh and others, the returns of vaccination show very well. You note, how- ever, that the Hospital Assistant at Kawardha totally neglected his duties : for this he was lately suspended by order of the Chief Commissioner. The custom you bring to notice of letting out the right to inoculate in Sonpur and other States is decidedly objectionable, and a report will be called for from the Deputy Commissioner on the subject.
3 Attitude of the people. 6. You quote the opinions of some Medical officers to the effect that the opposition to vaccination is becoming less year by year or that the people are apathetic ; while another Civil Surgeon is confident that a careful vaccinator working with tact will not meet with any difficulty. The Chief Commissioner considers that such tact is essen- tially necessary and that the conduct of vaccinators should be carefully noted by the supervising staff. Hygiene. 7. The Hygiene class in the Nagpur Medical School was attended by 4 Native Superintendents and 47 Vaccinators, who all passed the examination set except 11 vaccinators. Of the present staff for the Province only 71 vaccinators now remain who have not attended the lectures and appeared at the examination. You have asked the Civil Surgeons to send some 40 to attend this year's course, and perhaps the remainder will be able to attend during the next session. The Chief Commis- sioner has repeatedly expressed his opinion that such a knowledge of hygiene is specially beneficial to vaccinators, and that it will be a great advantage to the Province when all the vaccinators have passed through a regular course of such lectures. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, C. W. IMRIE, Offg. Asst. Secretary.
No.3430/C. C. SANITARY COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE, CENTRAL PROVINCES. FROM B. SIMPSON, ESQUIRE, M. D., SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 4th of July 1882. SIR, I have the honor to forward herewith for submission to the Chief Commis- sioner the Annual Report on the Vaccine operations in the Central Provinces for the year 1881-82. 2. The delay in its preparation has been occasioned by the dilatoriness of some Superintendents in furnishing their annual reports and returns, and the want of care in others in preparing and checking them, thus necessitating their return for correction. Those from Raipur were only finally received corrected in this office on 13th June. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, B. SIMPSON, M. D., Deputy Surgeon General and Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces.
INDEX. General result of the year's operations ... ... 1 Average work performed by each vaccinator ... ... 2 Largest percentage of success obtained in Chhindwara and lowest in Bilaspur ... ... 3 Re vaccination ... ... 4 Cost of the Vaccine establishment ... ... 5 Dispensary vaccination ... ... 6Report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the season 1881-82. The general result of the past season's operations as shown in Annual State- ment No. I. is a large increase in the number of vaccinations over all previous years. 369,651 operations were performed against 301,450 in 1880-81. Of the total number, 361,310 were cases of primary vaccination, of which 347,370, or 97.40 per cent were reported successful the percentage for 1880-81 being 96-55. 2. The average work performed by each vaccinator, 1,824, also shows a considerable improvement on former years. In 6 out of 18 districts this was over 2,000, the highest average 2,531 being in Sambalpur, and the lowest 1,286 in Betul. 3. The largest percentage of success 99.75 was obtained in Chhindwara, the lowest 93.70 in Bilaspur. 4. Of revaccination there were 8,341 cases with a percentage of success 70.93 as compared with 6,695 and 74.34 per cent successful for 1880-81. Except in one or two localities, notably Chhindwara, the subject of revaccination has not apparently received any attention. In 9 out of the 18 dis- tricts not a single person was revaccinated. I think this is much to be regretted. Though primary vaccination should be their chief object, vaccinators should have ample time to devote to revaccination also, and the number operated on in Chhindwara shows the amount of success attainable with tact and perseverance. 5. Statement No. II. shows the cost of the department for the season. The Vaccine establishment in the Nagpur district was reduced by two, for rea- sons which are stated in the remarks under the head of that district; whilst in Hoshangabad, Bilaspur and Sambalpur the staff was increased by 1, 2*, and 2* vaccinators respectively. The increase under the head of pay of establishment is due partly to this, and partly to the promotion of several vaccinators to the higher grades. There is also a slight increase under the head of travelling allowance over the previous year, whilst the column contingencies shows a slight decrease. The total cost for the year was Rs. 39,102-1-11 against Rs. 37,515-2-10 for 1880-81, or an increase of Rs. 1,586-15-1. Of this sum, however, Rs. 554-14-5 is debitable to Native States. Owing to the great increase in the number of successful operations, the cost of each, 1 anna 9¼ pies, is considerably less than in 1880-81, when it was 2 annas 1¼ pies. The cost per head varies considerably in the several districts, ranging from 2 annas 7¾ pies in Betul, to 10½ pies in Sambalpur. In Damoh, the rate is 2 annas ½ pie, a high average in comparison with all other districts except Betul. In Nagpur, where one would expect high rates from the establishment being unavoidably saddled with additional expenses for superintendence, the rate is below 2 annas. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. 6. Annual Statement No. III. shows the total number of operations (27,131) for the past year. This is an improvement on the previous year, but is still very much below the mark. The dispensaries of Damoh, Narsinghpur, Betul, Bhandara, Wardha, Chanda and Sambalpur, have all fallen off since 1880-81, whilst the increase in a number of the others is only nominal. Nagpur, Chhindwara, Jubbulpore, Bilaspur and Saugor show a substantial improvement in their returns in the order named : the increase ranging from 1,307 in Nagpur, to 413 in Saugor. *For Feudatory States.
2 Annual Statement No. III. however, only shows the work done by districts: the following table indicates more clearly the work done at each dispensary :3 Dispensary Vaccination 1881-82.4 suspension or reduction should be awarded in case of non-fulfilment after due warning. I am unwilling to move in the matter at present having only recently taken charge of my office, but Civil Surgeons will be definitely instructed again to warn all Hospital Assistants serving under them, that every instance of neglect will be enquired into for the future, and that, unless a satisfactory expla- nation be given, the name of the individual concerned will be brought specially to the notice of the Chief Commissioner. 8. 943 persons were revaccinated against 488 in 1880-81. Only in 3 districts, viz. Saugor, Chhindwara and Nagpur, has there been any revaccina- tion in dispensaries. The general percentage of success in primary vaccination for all districts, 94.27, is considerably better than in 1880-81, when it was only 92.93. Vaccination in districts. 9. Saugor.5 without any serious inconvenience. If he means by this that the dispensaries are closed for patients on these days, I think the practice objectionable, and that it should be discontinued. They should be able to find sufficient time for the work without resorting to this practice. Staff.6 Staff.7 of work done in this district is very small, and yet the staff is large as compared with other parts of the Province. To illustrate more clearly my meaning I ap- pend a table showing the particulars of 6 districts as to area, population, number of villages and vaccination staff. Name of District. Population, census 1872. Area in square miles. No. of villages. No. of vaccinators. Proportion of po- pulation to each vaccinator. No. of villages to each vaccinator. Area insquare miles to each vaccinator. No. of operations by vaccinators. Average number of operations by each vaccinator. Betul ... 278,857 4,042 1,260 8 34,857 157 505 10,289 1286.1 Balaghat ... 280,101 3,135 1,043 4 70,020 261 784 9,061 2265.2 Chanda ... 481,215 6,302 1,590 9 53,468 176 700 17,751 1972.3 Narsinghpur ... 339,395 1,916 966 8 42,424 121 239 15,251 1906.4 Nimar ... 211,224 3,345 582 6 35,204 97 558 8,805 1467.5 Seoni ... 292,178 2,586 1,444 8 36,522 180 323 16,465 2058.1 I have not sufficient local knowledge as yet to give any decided opinion, but judging from the above table it would appear as if the staff might profitably be reduced in some districts and a corresponding increase made in others. Staff.8 The Staff consists of 8 vaccinators and 1 Native Superintendent. Average number of operations performed by each vaccinator 2,058. 19. Balaghat.9 marhi, some delay occurred in disposing of it. A few days before the leave was granted he started with his party for Mecca in anticipation, and was dismissed for being absent without leave. 4th.10 Assuming that this number is approximately correct for the official year, Dr. Evers has still 5,823 children under 1 year old whom his vaccinators might have practised on. His explanation of the decrease does not appear to me satisfactory. The lymph supplied from England in October proved a complete failure, but supplies from Arvi and Nagpur proved successful in every case, and by the third week in October some of the vaccinators had commenced work. As tubes were collected each man was despatched to his own circle, there to raise a supply for himself. The operations were spread over the whole district, which was divided into 7 circles. Owing to sickness in the station the Civil Surgeon was unable to go out in the early part of the season. The Native Superintendent is well reported on. Doctor Evers remarks that he devoted more time to inspection, whereas in former years he did a good deal of work that he considers should have been done by the vaccinators ; a reference to the returns of the two last years does not bear him out in this opinion. I find that in 1880-81, he inspected 8,056 children and vaccinated 2,461, whereas in 1881-82 he inspected 7,752 and vaccinated 1,257. Still the amount of work performed by him is very creditable. I have adduced these figures chiefly for the purpose of showing that a large amount of inspection work is quite compati- ble with the actual work of vaccination. Doctor Evers appears to think that the latter should be chiefly confined to the vaccinators, an opinion apparently shared by most Civil Surgeons, judging from the amount of vaccination performed by their Native Superintendents. Staff.11 ted last season though in itself large is small in proportion to the strength of the Vaccination staff, and the average number of operations performed by each man smaller than in many other districts of the Province. This low average is chiefly I think due to the following causes :12 as we have our family physicians, and dislike employing strangers if they can avoid it. The same rule will probably be found to hold good in respect of vacci- nation. The question remains, had the vaccinators a sufficient amount of work allot- ted to them. Dr. Townsend, an officer of much experience, in the rules laid down by him for the guidance of Civil Surgeons, published in 1874 and approved of by the Chief Commissioner, states distinctly in para. 3 &quot; that the number of villages contained in any one circle should be not less than 130 and not greater than 180, and the aggregate population not less than 30,000 and not greater than 60,000.&quot; On this calculation the 18 vaccinators allowed should be sufficient for the whole district if properly looked after. Roughly speaking, this is the proportion in most other districts of the Province, and as far as I am aware, no Civil Surgeon has complained of it being insufficient. On the contrary Dr. Hutchinson, the late Sanitary Commissioner, who approved of this arrangement for the Raipur district, reduced the staff in Nagpur on the ground that more work might be got from a smaller staff! and recommended a similar reduction for Narsinghpur. Vaccination staff consists of 18* vaccinators and 1 Native Superintendent. Average number of operations performed by each vaccinator 1,829 or includ- ing Feudatory States 1,417. The Native Superintendent is reported as being industrious and careful. 25. Bilaspur.13 dent and all the vaccination staff are well reported on. The former vaccinated 162 children only. The inspection report of the Civil Surgeon has one pecu- liarity. He actually finds that the vaccinators have underrated their own success. This is rather a novel feature in the annals of vaccination. Vaccination staff 4 (and one temporary vaccinator),1 Native Superinten- dent. Average number of operations performed by each 3,898. Statement showing inspections performed by Civil Surgeons and Native Superintendents during the year 1881-82. Districts. Number of days out on tour. Number of villages in- spected. Number of vac- cinated persons inspected. Number of suc- cessful cases seen. Percentage of success as seen on inspection by Civil Surgeon Percentage of success as returned by vaccinators. Percentange of success on inspection by Native Superintendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Superinten- dent. Saugor ... 40 150 235 590 4,477 10,231 4,259 9,444 95.13 98.41 92.30 Damch ... 42 148 238 592 3,890 9,936 3,823 9,770 93.23 98.89 98.33 Jubbulpore ... 40 127 186 598 1,697 6,693 1,884 5,923 84.03 97.11 88.49 Narsinghpur ... 56 146 400 659 5,690 ... 9,910 5,498 9,378 96.62 99.62 94.63 Hoshangabad ... 26 ]35 141 664 2,213 8,648 1,790 7,526 79.80 97.53 87.03 Nimar ... 54 150 249 461 3,988 7,409 3,449 7,003 86.48 96.67 94.52 Mandla ... 31 129 359 424 6,091 7,412 5,928 7,198 97.32 98.72 97.11 Bitul ... 38 147 293 451 2,398 3,633 2,070 2,961 79.67 97.80 81.59 Chhindwara ... 65 305 3,587 ... ... 3,309 92.25 99.75 Seom ... 19 133 123 1,019 1,578 13,004 1,329 10,556 84.22 97.24 81.17 Balaghat ... 10 ]71 86 372 1,418 6,858 1,406 6,075 97.09 98. 29 88.58 Bhandara ... 32 127 127 652 2,103 8,825 2,003 8,727 95.24 98.60 98.88 Nagpur ... 18 107 86 259 1,675 5,272 1,526 4,338 91.10 97.97 82.28 Wardha ... 43 135 177 538 1,675 ... 7,752 1,539 7,346 91.88 95.22 94.76 Chanda ... ... 154 ... 585 ... ... 6,956 . 6,705 95.11 96.43 Raipur ... 10 135 77 938 ... 1,838 ... 19,326 1,588 17,137 86.39 96.60 88.67 Bilaspur ... 40 183 122 910 2,160 ... 18,823 1,941 14,630 89.86 93.70 77.72 Sambalpur ... 31 132 239 363 9,551 11,267 9,534 11,195 99.82 98.88 99.36 Total 593 2,409 3,443 1,075 56,239 161,955 52,376 145,918 93.13 97.40 90.09 27. The number of days in the aggregate spent on tour by Civil Surgeons is somewhat less, and that by Native Superintendents considerably more than in the 56,239/59,611 previous year.The number of children inspected was by Civil Surgeons 56,239/59,611 by Native Superintendents 161,955/124,394; the denominators in each case represent the numbers inspected in the previous year. The Civil Surgeons of Saugor, Jubbulpore, Nagpur, and Raipur did no inspection : the inspections put down to each of these having been performed by Assistant Surgeons specially appointed for the duty. In the three cases first named the officers concerned were unable from the nature of their duties to leave head-quarters ; bat in the case of the Civil Surgeon of Raipur no such excuse would appear to exist. In the early part of the season the Deputy Commissioner states that tents were not available on account of the disturbances at Kalahandi, but that subsequently the Civil Surgeon could have been relieved of his duties at the Jail so as to enable him to go out on inspection duty had he wished to do so. In Chanda no inspection was done by the Civil Surgeon, the reason assigned being that &quot; as I did not join my appointment till January, consequently no &quot; inspection has been done by the Civil Surgeon this year.&quot; Inasmuch as the vaccination season did not terminate till the end of March there was ample time left for inspection in his case. The officers who spent the longest time in camp were the Civil Surgeons of Chhindwara, Narsinghpur,
14 Nimar and Wardha in the order noted: their reports have been all carefully drawn up, and the district officers bear testimony to their efforts in supervising the work of vaccination. The Civil Surgeon of Hoshangabad was unable to be absent long from his station on account of illness amongst the residents, but such inspection as he was able to make appears to have been most thorough, and his reports are especially valuable, as throwing light on the amount of protection afforded by vaccination against small-pox. Further remarks on inspections will be found under the head of work done in each district. 28. As regards the percentages of success as given by vaccinators and checked by Civil Surgeons and Native Superintendents, although in the great majority of instances the vaccinators' percentages have been cut down (in some cases very considerably, in Bhandara and Chanda they have been slightly raised by the Native Superintendent, and in Sambalpur both by him and the Civil Sur- geon. The Civil Surgeon of Chhindwara has reduced his vaccinators' average from 99.75 to 92.25. I am unable to reconcile this with the statement contained in the body of his report, which will be found under the head of Chhindwara district. In Balaghat the percentage, as ascertained by the Native Superinten- dent, is more likely to be correct than that of the Civil Medical officer who did little inspection. In Nimar the low percentage as ascertained by the Civil Surgeon, 86.48, was owing to two causes:15 border on foreign territory, it is always liable to invasion from outside. In the north-west corner Holkar and Government villages are a good deal mixed together, and small-pox is almost always prevalent in the former, owing doubtless to the fact that no vaccination is done there. His villages afford shelter to the more timid women of ours, who carry their children there to escape vaccination. Out of 28 villages in which 299 cases of small-pox occurred, 14 villages and 156 cases occurred there, i. e. more than half the entire number. The next most exposed locality is Chandgarh, which on 2 of its 3 sides is bounded by foreign territory, and was on 3 occasions infected from Holkar's vil- lages. On enquiry being made as to the cause of the outbreak the almost, invariable answer has been that it happened in this way. In Burhanpur and Khandwa there were slight outbreaks, but a peculiar feature of the attacks was that the majority of people who suffered were adults; in one case only was a child with successful marks of vaccination affected : a fact which points pretty clearly to the importance of revaccination. 30. Hoshangabad.16 In Sarangarh two vaccinators were employed, the number of primary opera- tions performed by them was 5,223 with percentage 98.16 successful, and by the Hospital Assistant 226 with a percentage of success 100. In Padampur and Chandarpur one vaccinator performed 2,631 primary operations with 99.16 successful, and in Bamra two men performed 12,287 primary operations with 99.8 per cent successful; in all 20,141 persons were vaccinated. There were only 28 cases of revaccination, of which 22 or 78.57 were successful. In the Patna State 10,997 primary operations were performed with a percentage of 95.6 by 10 vaccinators and Native Doctor Nur Mahomed. 112 secondary vaccinations were performed, of which only 8 were successful. In the Sonpur State there is a 3rd class Hospital Assistant, but he appears to have done no vaccination work. A special report will be asked from the Civil Surgeon regarding this man. 32. Raipur.17 There are 292 villages in this Chiefship, so the work must be considered extremely bad. In Kawardha vaccination was finally introduced only in December 1881; pre- vious attempts were made by sending vaccinators from Bilaspur, but without avail. It is likely enough that they never reached their destination, as was found to be the case by the Civil Surgeon of Nimar in the Tapti valley. The vaccinator's work is insignificant, 113 cases, of which he reports 102 successful. 3rd class Hospital Assistant Ram Din Tiwari did nothing at all, and the vaccinator pretty closely followed his example: his excuse was, that he had to keep his hospital open all day for the admission of patients who attended irregularly. This is the largest Feudatory State in the Bilaspur district, covering an area of 912 square miles, with 321 villages, and a population of 69,077 or 73 to the square mile. The quarterly return of his dispensary for 1st Quarter of 1882 shows only 708 patients treated. The Secretary to the Chief Commissioner has been addressed separately regarding this Hospital Assistant. In Pendra the vaccinator has sent in a return of 1,619 operations, with 1,234 or 76.21 successful. This is an improvement on the others, but all these figures are of little value, as no check has been exercised over any of the vacci- nators in the way of inspection, as far as I am aware. Attitude of the people. 34. Speaking generally, no serious opposition on the part of the people is reported with the exception of two cases, one in Wardha and the other in Chanda, where, in each case a vaccinator was assaulted on account of the unwillingness of parents to have their children vaccinated. Such cases are generally traceable to want of tact on the part of vaccinators, though in the present instances this is not stated by the Civil Surgeons of these districts. In some districts the inhabitants are said to be apathetic, receiving vacci- nation as a matter of course, though not apparently alive to its benefits. The Civil Surgeon of Wardha states that opposition is becoming less year by year. In some of the larger villages and a few small ones in remote parts of the dis- trict, some opposition still exists. In Hoshangabad the Civil Surgeon reports some opposition in the Sohagpur and Harda Tahsils, but adds, that he is con- fident that a careful vaccinator working with tact will not meet with any diffi- culty. Lectures on Hygiene. 35. Last session 4 Native Superintendents and 47 Vaccinators attended the class. Of these 2 Native Superintendents and 15 vaccinators obtained 1st Class certificates. 1 Appendix. From S. H. Browne, M. D., Civil Surgeon, Hoshangabad, to the Deputy Surgeon-General, Central Provinces,2 Those classed as vaccinated in every case bore good marks. No recent cases were seen, the disease having died out during the past fortnight. Vaccination in this village during the present season has been carried on chiefly by Vaccinator Sayad Ibrahim who operated on 42 children, Vaccinator Shaik Akbar also vac- cinated a few children towards the end of the season, and during the height of the small-pox outbreak the compounder of the Harda Dispensary also operated on some children. I inspected 26 children who had been vaccinated by Vaccinator Sayad Ibrahim and found the results as under:3 I have included under the head of &quot; Unvaccinated&quot; all those cases where although vacci- nation had been performed the marks were absent or badly formed. At the village of Amasail, where the disease has been especially prevalent, I examined 33 children who had suffered. As in Charwah the majority were unprotected by vaccination and the disease was of a mild type except in a few cases.My notes are as follows:4 Considering the large size of the town (population about 4,000) the vaccinator has,done very little work. At the village of Pokhurni, also in Ameer Khan's circle, small-pox has been prevalent, and new attacks are still occurring. I succeeded in seeing 7 children only who had suffered from the disease, one being a recent case, and their condition as regards age and previous vacci- nation is given below:5 Statement showing the details of inspection of the epidemic of Small-pox by the Native Superintendent of Vaccination in 4 Circles of the Hoshangabad District. NAMES OF CIRCLES. Total number of small-pox cases seen. Total number of unvaccinated children attacked with small-pox. Number of vaccinated children attacked with small-pox. Number of successfully vaccinated children attacked with small-pox. Detail marks of successful vaccination on their arms. Number un- successful and doubtful cases attacked with small-pox. Severe. Mild. Total. Severe. Mild. Total. Severe. Mild. Total. Severe. Mild. Total. 4 vesicles. 3 vesicles. 2 vesicles. 1 vesicle. Severe. Mild. Total. Pokhurni ... ... ... ... 137 118 255 117 89 206 21 28 49 4 10 23 ... 2 12 8 17 9 26 Condagaon... ... ... Handia... ... ... Charwa... ... ...
A.A.B.Comparative Statement No. IV, showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the of the undermentioned Establishment. Persons primary Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total Number. Year ending 30th April 1866. Year ending 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 10 Government ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 36,927 31,435 55,348 46,816 86,669 77,166 49,204 40,394 33,380 28,775 45,098 40,734 128,590 Municipal ... ... ... ... ... 43,259 34,417 64,827 52,033 12,299 10,037 48,764 44,606 21,127 16,440 25,090 20,455 ... Local Funds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,258 32,473 27,179 17,035 54,373 45,973 53,327 45,971 ... Native States ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Armymber of those parsons who were successfully vaccinated in the Central Provinces in each. acial years, ccinated. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. March 18882. 4 1875. 1376. 1877. 1878. 1879. 1880. 1831. 1882. 112,435 176,893 158,704 201,636 188,384 245,224 229,930 260,408 241,633 235,846 223,036 254,824 239,197 261,959 248,924 295,766 284,465 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,238 5,023 9,456 9,247 8,531 8,183 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,535 8,788 3,314 3,058 5,167 5,020 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 17,229 16,579 20,026 18,922 51,843 49,704 ... ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 20,386 18,480 23,083 20,989 26,188 24,288 ... ... ... ... ... .., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112,435 176,893 158,704 211,402 196,938 255,408 238,918 288,638 267,341 278,956 263,803 307,212 288,367 317,838 301,140 387,498 371,658
REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR. THE YEAR 1882-83. NAGPUR PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS, 1883.
No. 4008/221 FROM L. K. LAURIE, ESQUIRE, OFFG. ASST. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces, Dated Nagpur, the 13th September 1883. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of your report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the year ending on the 31st March 1883, The report was received in print by the Chief Commissioner on the 3rd instant. The delay in its submission was due to the same cause as that which hindered the completion of the Sanitary Report, viz: the difficulty experi- enced by some District officers in preparing the returns of the population under registration in accordance with the figures recorded at the recent Census. 2. The number of operations performed by the Vaccine Department were 401,683, as compared with 369,651 in 1881-82, and the number performed by Hospital Assistants at dispensaries was 32,008, as compared with 27,131 in the previous year. There was thus a total increase of 36,909 operations. It was mentioned in last year's review that the total then reached was higher than the number of operations in any previous year. 3. The increase occurred both in primary vaccination and in re-vaccination cases: the figures comparing as under:2 The percentage of successful cases was thus somewhat lower in primary cases and in re-vaccinations at dispensaries; and you are inclined to believe that the percentage of successful re-vaccination operations performed by the Vaccine Department has been over-stated. Possibly the decreased percentage of success is only nominal, and is due to more careful checking of the entries made by vac- cinators under the instructions conveyed in last year's review. 5. There were, however, certain special causes which interfered in some degree with the results of vaccine work. Some bovine lymph which was used in the Nagpur district and sent to Saugor, Narsinghpur and elsewhere did not prove so efficient in the establishing of vesicles as English lymph. Similarly in the Betul district no good results were obtained till English lymph was obtained from your office. Arrangements should be made to ensure the timely distribu- tion of good lymph to all districts. In the opinion of the Chief Commissioner the manner in which vaccination is performed and the material employed should receive equal, if not greater attention, than the number of operations recorded. There can be no doubt that the indifference or dislike to vaccination which is exhibited in many places is due partly to the fact that persons who have not been properly protected by efficient vaccination often succumb to small-pox, and partly to the fact that suffering is occasionally caused by use of impure lymph or by the hasty and perfunctory way in which the vaccinating needle is used. The encouragement of arm to arm vaccination, which was more extensively carried out during the year, will no doubt produce satisfactory results; but so long as it is possible for vaccinators to work clumsily and roughly, as did the men to whom Dr. Mayne refers in his report, without incurring the penalty of suspension or dismissal, it is unlikely that the prejudices against vaccination will be removed. Dr. Mayne's account of what he saw when following in the track of vaccinators is painful and shocking, and the Chief Commissioner will be glad to learn what steps have been taken to teach these men their duty and to prevent them and others from doing such disastrous work in future. In places where the people have objections to arm to arm vaccination, such as are described in the Wardha report, and on the other hand, look upon lymph taken from tubes &quot; as medicine,&quot; efforts should be made to humour the preference. When it is not possible to do so, the operations of the vaccinators should be closely supervised. 6. The necessity for supervision is shown not only by the facts recorded by the Civil Surgeons of Bhandara and Balaghat, but by the fact that the returns prepared by vaccinators, both of the number of operations and of the number of successful cases, stand in need of careful check. In the Seoni district a vaccinator was dismissed during the year for sending in false returns. The return of 2,955 operations as the average number performed by each vaccinator in the Balaghat district, seems also open to suspicion. Now that the popula- tion returns furnished by the new Census are to hand, the area of each vacci- nator's operations should be mapped out as nearly as possible according to the scale accepted by the Chief Commissioner in 1874, viz: from 130 to 180 villages, and population of from 30,000 to 60,000; and the necessity for careful inspec- tion of the work done, should be impressed upon all Civil Surgeons. 7. The birth-rate for this Province is given at page 89 of the Census Report for 1881 at 42.8. It is true, as you observe in paragraph 5 of your report, that at least 25 per cent of the children who can be vaccinated in any year are more than a year old: and that 25 per cent of the newly born are too young to be vaccinated. This leaves the annual total at the same figure, while it allows time for the average mortality among children of less than one year of age (given at 25 per cent in the table in page 88 of the Census Report) to work its effect upon the number of subjects for vaccination. According to page 97 of the same report, the mean annual birth-rate of this Province (excluding Feuda- tories) is (in round numbers) 420,000 infants of both sexes, and the annual deaths of children under one year of age number 35,700 (paragraph 94). The num- ber of newly born children to be vaccinated in any one year, should therefore be about 384,000. The number actually vaccinated in 1832-83 in this Prov- ince (excluding Feudatory States) was 363,781.
3 8. It must be borne in mind, however, that the number of primary vacci- nations does not represent the number of children vaccinated at and between the ages of three and fifteen months. On the contrary, it appears that the majority of the operations are performed upon subjects whose ages vary between one year and six years, and between six years and sixty years. There are no figures which show this directly; but the inference may, as you hint in paragraph 5 of your report, be drawn from the fact that out of the total of 372,462 successful primary vaccinations performed in 1882-83, no less than 215,734 (or about 58 per cent) dealt with subjects of more than one year of age. The conclusion to be drawn is, that much of the time spent on vaccination duty is occupied in making up the arrears of previous seasons. This is the more certain, because the figures denoting successful primary vaccinations given in Statement No. IV. leave a considerable margin for arrears. Thus while at the end of the year 1880-81 the number of children of 4 years of age and under in the districts of the Central Provinces (excluding Foudatory States) was 1,584,873 (see page 88 of Census Report), the number of persons who were succes- fully vaccinated in these districts (excluding Feudatory States) during that year and the three preceding years was 1,014,453 only. To the difference between these totals must be added about 300,000 to represent the mortality among children under 5 years of age. 9. Last year, under the Chief Commissioner's orders, an addition of 15 vaccinators was made to the departmental staff. You report that vaccination is, on the whole, admirably conducted in the Central Provinces; but that more supervision is required. You state that a Native Superintendent is required for Chhindwara; and that in Jubbulpore, Betul, Nagpur and Raipur, the inspection work done by the Civil Surgeon or Assistant Surgeon has been deficient. The Jubbulpore staff has recently been strengthened by an Assistant Surgeon, part of whose duties will be the superintendence of vaccination : and it appears that the Civil Surgeon of Betul was detained in the station during the marching season by special causes. The Chief Commissioner is prepared to receive any proposals from you which will promote supervision of vaccination in the other districts mentioned. 10. In paragraph 19 you quote Dr. Cullen's remarks on the objections to making vaccinators perform the duty of sanitary inspectors. The subject was also mentioned in the Sanitary report. I am to ask you to submit a special report on this matter after due inquiry. Anything that tends to make vacci- nators unpopular must of course be avoided, but with the development of local self-government the attitude of the people towards sanitary improvements and their supporters may perhaps undergo a change. 11. The Commissioner, Chhattisgarh Division, will be asked to consider your remarks regarding the want of supervision over vaccinators working in Feudatories and Zamindaris, and in consultation with you to propose some means by which adequate supervision may be secured. As Dr. Trimnell has been relieved of the executive charge of the Raipur Jail, it should be possible for him to make his inspection of the khalsa portion of that district quite thorough. 12. In the 17th paragraph of your report, Dr. Cullen is made to say that the form of our registers requires that chicken-pox and measles should be shown as small-pox. It is scarcely necessary for the Chief Commissioner to point out that they should be shown as &quot; other diseases.&quot; The error is a strange one for an experienced Civil Surgeon to make; and the Chief Commis- sioner thinks you must have misunderstood him. The difficulty of teach- ing the natives to discriminate between these diseases is well-known. But when chicken-pox or measles is recognized, there should be no doubt as to where the entry must be made. 13. There remain to be noticed the remarks which you have made on the subject of inoculation. Your statement that inoculation is a good thing and that the practice of it should not be interfered with, is opposed to all previous
4 advice which the Chief Commissioner has received on the subject. In last year's report Dr. Simpson reported that 40 deaths has been caused in the Feudatory State of Bamra by the operations of two inoculators : and it was upon his bring- ing to notice the fact that inoculation was encouraged in the Feudatory State of Sonpur, and in accordance with his advice, that the Raja of the State has been advised to employ vaccinators instead. The Chief Commissioner is not pre- pared to discuss the medical aspect of this question. In respect to this he must be guided by the responsible medical advisers of Government. But, as your opinion differs so widely from that which has hitherto been accepted, he thinks it would have been well to have reserved its discussion for a separate paper. Your report will be published, and may tend to throw discredit on work which Govern- ment has hitherto done all it could to foster. It would serve no useful purpose for the Chief Commissioner to enter into any controversy on this point; but I am to say that he cannot accept an opinion which seems so contrary to all the advice given to Government by its medical advisers in the past, until that opinion is endorsed by the highest available medical authority, and accepted by the Govern- ment of India as,the basis of its action, 14. Your report is open to the criticism that a good number of details have been thrown together somewhat indiscriminately and without systematic arrangement and compression, and that some considerable space has been occu- pied by matters of comparatively little public interest, which might quite satis- factorily have been disposed of within the Department. But the Chief Commis- sioner feels that this is mainly due to your only having recently taken charge of the Department, and being unacquainted with its general operations. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, L. K. LAURIE, Offg. Asst. Secretary.
No. 4732/C.C. FROM W. WATSON, ESQUIRE, M. D., OFFG. SANITARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 14th August 1883. SIR, I have the honor to forward herewith for submission to the Chief Com- missioner the Annual Report on the Vaccine operations in the Central Provinces, for the year 1882-83. 2. The delay in its preparation has been owing to the Deputy Commis- sioners of Raipur, Chanda and Mandla not having been able to send in the population under registration. This is required for the preparation of State- ment I. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W. WATSON, M. D., Offg. Deputy Surgeon General and Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces.
INDEX. PARA. General result of the year's operations... ... 1 Successful primary vaccination... ... ... ... 2 Re-vaccination... ... ... 3 Increase of establishment... ... ... 4 Vaccination of children over age of 6... ... ... ... 5 Cost of establishment... ... ... ... 6 Dispensary vaccination... ... ... 7 Progress of vaccination... ... ... ... 8 Vaccine inspections... ... ... ... 9 Percentage of success... ... ... 10 Registration of small-pox... ... ... 11 Vaccination in districts... ... ... 12Report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the season 1882-83. The general result of the past season's operations as shown in Annual State- ment No. I. is a large increase. There have been 32,032 more operations performed than there were last year. With regard to primary vaccination successfully performed which repre- sents the real practical work of the Vaccine department, there has been an increase of 25,092. Any further increase can hardly be expected, as the number of children annually successfully vaccinated is already in some districts equal to the birth increment of the year. Taking the number of children available for primary vaccination to be 30 per mille of the population, we find that in Saugor with a population under regis- tration of 564,950 there should be 16,948 children who can be primarily vacci- nated. The number actually successfully vaccinated as shown in Statement No. I. was 20,924. Of course the birth rate is considerably over 30 per mille, but so many children die within the first month or two that it may be taken as giving the average number who can be vaccinated. When vaccination is first introduced into a new district, there is a con- siderable number of older children available for vaccination, but these cannot be found in a country where vaccination has been practised for a series of years. This is what has probably happened in Sambalpur. Last year there were 50,124 cases of successful primary vaccination in Sam- balpur. This year there have only been 48,720. 2. With regard to successful primary vaccination there has been an increase this year in 8 districts 2 Vaccinators must have one standard for judging success in primary cases, another standard for judging of success in cases of re-vaccination. Re-vaccination has been more attended to than it was in previous years. Last year there were only 8,341 cases. The previous year there were 6,695. This year the number has increased to 12,891. In many districts, however, such as Narsinghpur, Seoni, Mandla, Bhandara and Bilaspur, no re-vaccination has been done. 4. By letter No. 3815-217 of the 6th October 1882, from the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner, an increase of 15 vaccinators was sanctioned in the Vaccine establishment. They were distributed as follows :3 year. This is not strictly correct, for practically vaccination is only done during 6 months of the year, and a vaccinator cannot vaccinate children under 3 months and has to go round a large circle visiting a new place every day. It follows from this that when a vaccinator arrives at any given place on any given day, say the 1st November, he cannot vaccinate the children born in August, September and October. On the other hand, he has to vaccinate all the children still alive who were born in August, September and October of the previous-year. The same is true of every day and every village. Consequently wherever he goes a vaccinator is unable to vaccinate 25 per cent of the children under one year, and has to vaccinate, as primary cases, 25 per cent of cases over one year. This is on the supposition that when he left the village a year ago he left no arrears of work. 6. Statement II. gives the cost of the Vaccine department calculated for each district. The cost varies from 11½ pies per successful case in Jubbulpore, to 2 annas 5¼ pies in Betul. 7. Statement III. shows the amount of Dispensary vaccination done in each district. The following table gives the amount done at each dispensary :4 District. Name of Dispensary. Number of vaccina- tions at each dis- pensary in 1882-83. Total. Number of vaccina- tions at each dis- pensary in 1881-82. Mandla... ... Mandla... ... 145 531 120 315 Ramgarh... ... 383 132 Mandla Road P. W. D. ... ... ... 60 Police... ... 3 3 Betul... ... ... Badnur... ... 265 534 27 131 Multai... ... 269 104 Chhindwara... ... ... Chhindwara... ... 1,574 1,960 1,332 1,537 Lodhikhera... ... ... 386 205 Seoni... ... Seoni... ... 540 634 658 761 Lakhnadon... ... 94 103 Balaghat... ... Balaghat... ... 322 547 88 351 Hatta... ... * 5 Wara-Seoni... ... 168 242 Behir... ... ... 57 16 Bhandara... ... Bhandara... ... 289 751 252 506 Tirrora... ... 217 157 Sakoli... ... 140 97 Pauni... ... 105 ... Nagpur... ... Itwari... ... 559 4,515 702 5,066 Rai Bahadur... ... 671 750 Heude... ... 62 71 Umrer... ... 912 920 Khapa... ... 725 775 Mowar... ... 599 629 Katol... ... 425 708 Ramtek... ... 562 502 Wardha... ... Wardha... ... 285 1,505 224 1,319 Hinganghat... ... 282 259 Arvi... ... 408 373 Sindhi... ... 211 231 Deoli... ... 251 111 Jail and Police... ... 68 121 Chanda... ... Chanda... ... ... 2,036 155 1,317 Sironcha... ... 347 188 Brahmapuri... ... 613 121 Armori... ... 428 372 Mul... ... 307 279 Warora... ... 314 202 Jail... ... 27 ... Raipur Raipur... ... 110 1,890 186 1,806 Sadar Bazar... ... 212 83 Arung... ... 169 85 Drug... ... 484 102 Dhamtari... ... 858 1,350 Jail... ... 50 1,350 Police... ... 7 ... Bilaspur... ... Bilaspur... ... 202 1,250 106 641 Seorinarian... ... 264 73 Mungeli... ... 214 187 Sukti State... ... 226 122 Pandhana State... ... 91 153 Police... ... 58 ... Kawardha... ... 160 ... Pandaria... ... 35 ... Sambalpur... ... Sambalpur... ... 168 1,031 ... 271 Bargarh... ... 507 13 Police... ... 76 18 Sarangarh State... ... ... 149 226 Jail... ... 131 ... Total... ... ... 32,008 ... 27,131 * Closed.
5 8. Statement IV. shows that vaccination in the Central Provinces has steadily progressed year by year. No less than 400,576 cases were successfully performed, and the inspection in most districts of the Central Provinces is so thorough that there can be no doubt these figures are substantially correct. VACCINE INSPECTION. Districts. Number of days out on tour. Number of villages inspected. Number of vaccinated per- sons inspected. Number of successful cases seen. Percentage of success as seen on inspection by Civil sur- geon. Percentage of success as re- turned by vaccinators. Percentage of success on in. spection by Native Super. intendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super. itendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super- intendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super. intendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super- intendent. Saugor... ... 35 145 212 669 4,543 11,423 4,327 10,135 95.24 97.93 88.72 Damoh... ... 48 141 294 591 5,107 7,945 4,930 7,371 96.53 97.38 92.77 Jubbulpore... ... 33 151 121 808 1,747 11,618 1,556 9,537 89.06 98.05 82.08 Narsinghpur... ... 30 146 441 458 6,005 6,017 5,899 5,837 98.23 99.34 97.01 Hoshangabad... ... 40 129 220 646 3,091 7,586 2,801 6,645 90.61 97.82 87.59 Nimar... ... 53 192 325 572 6,450 13,062 5,931 12,472 91.95 97.75 95.48 Mandla... ... 47 146 381 538 5,897 11,352 5,785 10,907 98.10 98.51 96.07 Betul... ... ... 37 153 217 412 1,961 4,235 1,736 3,734 88.52 96.72 88.17 Chhindwara... ... 59 ... 574 ... 5,859 ... 5,565 ... 91.98 99.80 ... Seoni... ... 17 159 64 1,026 631 10,476 541 9,050 85.73 97.14 86.27 Balghat... ... 66 162 393 547 6,441 11,282 5,999 10,044 93.10 98.11 89.04 Bhandara... ... 41 150 181 767 1,961 9,569 1,754 9,285 89.44 98.39 97.03 Nagpur... ... 21 155 106 454 2,408 6,653 2,109 5,934 87.58 96.99 89.19 Wardha... ... 35 125 85 540 632 9,621 536 8,822 84.81 96.32 91.69 Chauda... ... 25 157 224 672 2,786 7,438 2,482 6,642 89.08 94.13 89.29 Raipur... ... 88 134 393 899 8,368 17,551 7,470 16,230 89.00 94.21 92.47 Bilaspur... ... 26 129 81 793 1,474 17,430 1,358 11,457 92.13 96.70 65.73 Sambalpur... ... 41 123 239 437 8,477 14,478 8,318 14,258 98.12 99.16 98.52 Total 742 2,497 4,551 10,832 73,832 1,77,780 60,097 1,58,360 93.57 97.21 89.10 9. In all the districts except Chhindwara there are two inspecting officers; the Civil Surgeon, (or in the three districts of Saugor, Jubbulpore and Nagpur, an Assistant Surgeon, specially appointed for that duty), and the Native Super- intendent of vaccination. In Chhindwara there is no Native Superintendent. These two officers between them ought to see if possible at least half the total number of operations performed, and this has been done in Saugor, Damoh, Narsinghpur, Hoshangabad, Nimar, Mandla, Seoni, Balaghat, Bhandara, Bilas pur and Sambalpur. It has not been done in Jubbulpore, Betul, Chhindwara, Nagpur and Raipur. In Raipur this may be accounted for by the enormous number of operations performed, and in Chhindwara by the absence of a Native Superintendent. With regard to the other three districts, Jubbulpore, Betul and Nagpur, it is to be hoped that the inspecting officers will be able to see more cases next year than they have done this year. The temptation to a vaccinator to send in fictitious returns is very great; and if he thought his work was not likely to be thoroughly inspected, I am afraid many a vaccinator would yield to the temptation. In Damoh, Mandla and Nimar the number seen by the two inspecting officers is greater than the number vaccinated, so that some cases must have been seen by both officers, not by one only. 10. With regard to the column giving percentage of success it must always be remembered that every now and then a doubtful case will occur. There is no column for doubtful, so every case must be entered successful or unsuccessful, and in practice it inevitably occurs that what one honest and care- ful Inspector enters in the tables as successful, another would have entered as unsuccessful.
6 These percentage columns, however necessary and valuable, are emphatically columns which should not be carried to places of decimals. They are only approximately true, never absolutely. The only entries therefore that appear to me worthy of notice, are those of Bilaspur, where the vaccinators claim a per- centage of 96, the Civil Surgeon allows them one of 92, and the Native Sup- erintendent only gives them one of 65. It appears almost certain from this that very bad work was done in that part of the Bilaspur circle inspected by the Native Superintendent, and that this work was falsely reported by the vaccina- tors as being good. Small-pox. 11. Many Civil Surgeons complain that children dying from measles are often entered in the Registration returns as having died from small pox. I am afraid this is unavoidable, and that it will occasionally happen all over India for many years to come. Even in London many cases are annually sent to the Small-pox Hospital diagnosed as small-pox which turn out to be some other eruptive disease. This year small-pox was epidemic in the following districts7 He is intelligent and energetic, and his character and conduct good. He himself vaccinated 131 cases, of which 122 or 96.12 per cent were successful. Many of these operations, as well as those performed by the Assistaut Surgeon, were on children of well-to-do people.&quot; The following table is submitted by the Officiating Civil Surgeon :8 vaccination among the people, but active opposition is rare. The Civil Surgeon writes :9 The Civil Surgeon saw many cases of small-pox in adults who had had small-pox in infancy. &quot; This points to the necessity of re-vaccination, which will be attended to in future. Till now the vaccination staff was small and untrained, and it was as much as they could do to overtake the work most urgently called for, vaccinating children.&quot; I entirely concur with Dr. Rice in his views in this point, and think that till the vaccine staff can do an amount of primary vaccination equal to the birth increment they ought not to attempt secondary vaccination. After that the more secondary vaccination they do the better. The reason of course is that lymph used in secondary vaccination yields no return. A child successfully vacci- nated gives lymph with which to vaccinate other children, an adult, however well vaccinated, gives none. Dispensary vaccination improved from 5,948 to 6,288. Dr. Rice concludes his report by writing10 Small-pox occurred during the spring months, and Dr. Dapthary saw, many cases himself. Staff11 Time will no doubt do much, but I fear it will be many years before vac- cination is popular to the degree that inoculation was formerly popular in Bengal and in the Himalayahs. There are two reasons for this :12 They are known as Debi mata, Kangni mata and Bodri mata. The only difficulty is, that in our registers there are no columns for the two latter, and should a child die of measles it has to be entered as small-pox. Of the remaining 2,183 cases which were really small-pox Dr. Cullen found that 2,057 had not been vaccinated. Of the 125 who had been vaccinated, 77 bore one mark, 41 two marks and 7 three marks. With regard to inspection of vaccination the Civil Surgeon saw 6,450 cases. Of these successful 5,931. The Native Superintendent saw 13,062 cases, of these successful 12,472. The municipality of Khandwa and Burhanpur have passed bye-laws making vaccination compulsory at the age of six months. This is understood by the common people to forbid vaccination at an earlier age than six months. During the present epidemic few children reached 6 months without taking small pox. In the district Dr. Culleu found the super- stitious old women, as a rule, bitterly opposed to vaccination. The men he found apathetic on the subject. The real fact is, that India is quite unlike England. In England the question discussed by supporters and opponents of vaccination is this :13 It was formerly the practice in this district to vaccinate from points, crusts, or tubes, not from arm to arm ; but this year strict orders were given to vacci- nate invariably from arm to arm. The Civil Surgeon doubts, however, whether his order was always obeyed. He says that the registered births for the year was 10,506, and the deaths under one year 2,925. The number actually vacci- nated under one year was 7,831. The number of cases which were reported unknown is in the Civil Surgeon's opinion far too high. The number of re-vaccinations was 3,575, including persons in jail and Govern- ment officials as well as the free population. The Civil Surgeon was much surprised to see typical vaccine vesicles appear on the arms of a man 30 years of age and well pitted with small pox. Great difficulty was sometimes experienced in finding the village registers. When asked for, the reply often was that it was lost. The want of these lists was much felt during the recent epidemic of small-pox. When the Civil Sur- geon inquired whether a certain child had been vaccinated in infancy or not, it was impossible to verify the answer given as the old lists could seldom be found. Dr. Price proposes that in future the vaccine registers should form part of the Kotwar's books, and the Deputy Commissioner writes that he has issued orders on the point. There were in the district 1,230 reported cases of small-pox, with 269 deaths; but the Civil Surgeon believes that many of the cases were measles, not small- pox. He himself saw this to be the case in many instances. During the epi- demic, the rules laid down in Nicholl's Digest, page 570, were brought to the notice of the district authorities, but judging from the disbelief in the protective power of vaccination which still exists among the people, he fears that the orders remained unattended to, especially in regard to segregating the affected and treating them outside the village. Dr. Price believes that much of this disbelief in vaccination is owing to the vaccinators having been allowed to vaccinate from crusts, points or tubes. At dispensaries there were14 The Officiating Civil Surgeon inspected the work of each of the vaccinators at least once during the year, in some cases he inspected two or even three times. There is no Native Superintendent in Chhindwara, which appears to me to be a great mistake. The following table gives the amount of work by each vaccinator and the amount inspected by the Officiating Civil Surgeon:15 Primary cases... ... ... 15,026 Of these successful... ... 14,335 Last year primary... ... 16,704 Of these successful... ... ... 16,067 It is to be hoped that the Civil Surgeon will be able to inspect the vaccina- tion thoroughly next year as illness prevented him this year. 21. Mandla.16 quite alarmed after examining his work at Kopah to see the frightful arms he had made. It was sickening work examining. &quot; So much for the new hand, and now I will show what I found from watching the most experienced vaccinator Nur Ali, the man from the Chhindwara Zilla. He has been some seasons drawing the pay of a first class vaccinator. I saw this man vacci- nating, only the lower orders appeared to be present. He was working quite unconcerned with an abominably dirty needle at Lanji 19th of February. If the most experienced vaccinator does this with impunity it may be imagined that this is pretty often the case with the whole of the other five. This kind of vaccinating accounts for the abscesses and excessively inflamed arms I have seen. &quot; Nur Ali also was not careful in taking the lymph, but pricked the arm making the blood appear. It would not be, I think, saying too much to say that children die from this careless vaccinating. I believe I know of a case and will mention it in this report, but before I leave Nur Ali's work. Nur Ali vaccinated none in the upper castes at Lanji. I am afraid he is not a very reliable man. I do not think he has increased in standing, although he has been receiving pay of the 1st class. &quot;In moving camp away from Lanji, I saw two children at the village I think of Chingerah. These were among a host of others and they had been vaccinated. These had two enormous abscesses. Nur Ali had vaccinated them. They were so large that I had to take both of them to head-quarters and treat them. I removed about a pint of pus from one of these. There was no doubt these had been caused by vaccination. &quot; In another part of the district I saw two other cases. These had formed over the chest on the same side as the vaccination, and they pointed towards the axillary border. &quot; Both children were suffering much, and I drew the attention of Colonel Bloomfield to the cases. It looked like cause and effect17 Two vaccinators fell ill at the beginning of the working season, one of fever, the other was bitten by a snake and afterwards became deranged in mind. This caused the amount of work done to be less than it otherwise would. The Civil Surgeon also states that his predecessor by mistake brought all the vaccinators into Bhandara at the end of March 1882 for the purpose of compiling their returns. Owing to this no work was done in April. But for this mistake of his predecessor, the Civil Surgeon estimates that 1,680 more cases would have been done. During his tour the Civil Surgeon found that the cicatrices were often elongated, not round, owing to the vaccinators using flat vaccinating needles instead of circular Cooper Rose's needles. He has prohibited for the future the use of flat needles. He considers that the work of the Bhandara vaccinators is not altogether satisfactory or creditable to them. Staff18 &quot;Seeing to the introduction of a new system of propagating lymph, and seeing to the energy of the vaccinators when proceeding to their respective circles on account of their recent promotion, it was expected that the number for this year would be large. This hope was the more cherished as almost all the causes which brought on a decrease for the last year were absent at least at the beginning of the working season. But unfortunately a powerful cause, which was not even dreamt of, and which though true I am as yet diffident to unfold, dashed down all our hopes and kept us nearly in the same position in which we were last year. The vaccinators appointed to work in the interior of the district were directed by end of last Octo- ber personally to select subjects from among a number of vaccinated children for extracting lymph for their use, so that they might have no cause to complain against the city vaccinators, upon whom always the charge of providing lymph lies. Thus supplied they began their operations, but almost all of them had to return to Nagpur, as the lymph in some cases signally failed and in others the quantity of lymph obtained was too small to admit of their carrying on their work with energy. Nearly the whole of November was spent without doing anything material, and the general return for that month was very low in consequence. This state of things was not confined to the month of November only. It extended, though in a less degree, to the whole of the working season. This lymph manifested extraordinary phases. In the first place a number of children proved unsuccessful; secondly, from vesicles of successful children available for lymph, lymph sufficient for the requirements of the vaccinators was not to be had. These circumstances were not universal. Sometimes it produced as good effects as lymph usually does.&quot; During the year 1882 there were only 4 reported cases of small-pox. Staff19 A supply of lymph was kept up throughout the year in Chanda town, and ten tubes were received from Nagpur on 4th October, all of which proved suc- cessful. The Civil Surgeon saw 2,786 vaccinated children, of these 2,482 were successful. The Hospital Assistants at the various dispensaries vaccinated 2,036 chil- dren, 1,817 successfully. There was no small-pox during the year. Staff20 The Hospital Assistant of Dongargarh saw the work of 4. At Nandgaon none of the vaccine work was inspected, as the Hospital Assistant has so much to do in the station that he cannot get away. I think that a Native Superintendent should be appointed specially to inspect the work of the 16 khalsa vaccinators, and he might be assisted by the Hospital Assistant of Khairagarh and Dongargarh in his inspection duties. To leave 16 vaccinators without any regular system of inspection is most anomalous and improper. The Civil Surgeon of Raipur has a large jail and cannot easily leave the station. Yet he has 18 khalsa and 16 Zamindari vaccinators under him and 4 Hospital Assistants who are also ordered to vaccinate work in khalsa. Staff21 With regard to vaccination in Native States, the Civil Surgeon says that until this year vaccination was much neglected in Kawardha both by the Hospi- tal Assistant and the vaccinator. The Sanitary Commissioner visited the place in December 1882, and trans- ferred the Hospital Assistant and dismissed the vaccinator. The new Hospital Assistant and vaccinator began work in earnest and suc- ceeded in carrying on operations in the town and surrounding villages. Pandariah.22 Rehrakol had one vaccinator sent to it, but the vaccinator encountered great difficulties, as the people preferred inoculation. He managed, however, to vac- cinate 580 persons. His work was inspected by the Civil Surgeon and found to be good. Two vaccinators were sent to Bamra State and they vaccinated 6,381 persons, many of them adults. The work was inspected by the Civil Surgeon, who found it satisfactory. Two vaccinators were sent to Rajgarh, and the Rajah after some hesitation and delay allowed them to begin work. They vac- cinated 4,337 persons. The Civil Surgeon inspected their work and found it very satisfactory. The Native Superintendent of Vaccination vaccinated 92 persons. Of the Hospital Assistants most work was done by the Hospital Assistant of Bargarh dispensary, but his work was not satisfactory, as in almost all cases he made only one puncture. The Civil Surgeon was out 41 days and inspected 239 villages. The Native Superintendent was out 123 days and inspected 437 villages. Staff23 In Patna the Hospital Assistant is the supervising officer, but for the pur. pose of comparison with the returns of previous years, the Patna returns have been included in the returns for Sambalpur. It would perhaps be better in future years to give them separately, as the Civil Surgeon of Sambalpur is not directly responsible. The following table shows the returns for the Patna State as sent me by the Hospital Assistant. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Name of the Native Superintendent. Number of Vaccinators. Circle or Town. Population. Average population per square mile. Average number of Vaccinators employed during the year. Total number of per- sons vaccinated in- cluding those re- vaccinated. Average number vaccinated by each vac- cinator. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination. Primary and re vaccination. Percentage of suc- cessful cases exclud- ing those unknown from the total, Total number vaccinated. Successful Unsuccessful including those doub- ful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful including those doubt- ful. Unknown. Caste. Under 1 year. Over 1 and under 6. Over 6 years. Total. Christian. Wahomedan. Hindu. Others. Males. Females. Total. Primary. Re-vaccination. None. 10 Patna State. 2,57,959 2,399 10 6,296 5,937 12,253 1225.3 12,209 3,381 8,302 433 12,116 90 3 44 44 ... .. 6 12,247 99.24 100.00 LECTURES ON HYGIENE. 31. Last Session 1 Native Superintendent and 45 vaccinators attended the class. Of these, 10 vaccinators obtained First class certificates; eight vaccinators obtained Second class certificates; one Native Superintendent and 15 vaccina- tors obtained Third class certificates; and 12 failed to pass the examination. Of the present staff, viz: 192 (including Native Superintendents and 15 vaccinators sanctioned by the Chief Commissioner during the year under report and exclud- ing vaccinators attached to Feudatory States) 121 have passed successfully, 24 have failed, and 47 remain unpassed. GENERAL REMARKS. 32. I believe that vaccination is, on the whole, admirably conducted in the Central Provinces, but vaccinators in India require constant European supervision. and to make vaccination perfect in the Central Provinces, it requires even more supervision than it has hitherto received. Every Civil Surgeon, unless prevented by serious illness or by unavoidable detention at head-quarters, ought to spend at least two months in camp every winter, and ought if possible to see every one of his vaccinators. This is perhaps not possible in Raipur, Bilaspur and Sambalpur, but it could be done everywhere else. Every vaccinator ought to feel that his work will in all probability be care- fully examined and that he will be judged of, not by the returns he sends in, but by the work he actually shows to the Civil Surgeon, W. WATSON, M. D. Officiating Deputy Surgeon General, Sanitary Commissioner and Superintendent of Vaccination, Central Provinces. NAGPUR: The 14th August 1883.
AA.-VACCINE DEPARTMENT. Statement No. IIB.Comparative Statement No. IV.ber of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Central Provinces in each of official years. manly vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. March 1882. 1875. 1876. 1877. 1878. 1879. 1880. 1881. 1882. 1883. 176,893 158,704 201,636 188,381 245,224 229,930 260,408 240,603 235,816 223,036 254,824 239,497 261,959 248,924 295,766 284,465 318,794 305,921 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,238 5,023 9,456 9,247 8,534 8,183 7,334 6,979 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,535 8,788 3,314 3,058 5,167 5,020 7,001 6,801 ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 17,229 16,579 20,026 18,922 51,843 49,702 55,660 52,761 ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 20,386 18,480 23,080 20,989 26,188 24,288 30,619 28,114 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176,893 158,704 211,402 196,958 255,408 238,918 288,638 267,341 278,958 268,803 307,212 288,367 317,838 301,140 387,498 371,658 419,441 400,576
REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES FOR THE YEAR 1883-84. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1884.
No. 4611/269 FROM LINDSAY NEILL, ESQUIRE, C. S., SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 1st December 1884. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge your report on Vaccine operations in the Central Provinces during the year 1883-84. 2. The outturn of work was less than in the year 1882-83, though above the amount of any year previous to it. The total vaccinations of 1883-84 were 421,542 against 433,691 in 1882-83, and these numbers are thus made up :2 A very common excuse for short outturn of work is that children were not avail- able. You do not say if, in your opinion, the plea is a reasonable one. It is, however, clear from your résumé of district details that, in some districts, the arrangements for maintaining or procuring a supply of lymph- were defective ; that vaccinators were idle and inefficient; and that, in some cases, supervision and control were weak. These causes sufficiently explain short work. 5. Compared with the preceding year, Civil Surgeons were on tour for a shorter number of days, inspected fewer villages, and saw a smaller number of vaccinated persons. The percentage of successful cases seen by Civil Surgeons increased from 93.57 in 1882-83 to 95.41 in 1883-84. The Civil Surgeon who was longest on tour was the Civil Surgeon of Nimar, who was 68 days on tour, visited 290 villages, saw 7,128 vaccinated persons, and certified the percentage of success to be 97.23. The Civil Surgeon of Mandla, though only 53 days on tour, accom- plished more work. He inspected 505 villages, saw 10,186 vaccinated persons, and verified success in 97.25 per cent of cases. The inspections of some Civil Surgeons seem of very limited duration. The Civil Surgeons of Bilaspur, Bala- ghat, Wardha and Seoni were only 31, 25, 22 and 20 days on tour respectively. It appears that the Civil Surgeon of Balaghat, who was only shortly before the cold season posted to Civil duty, did not at once go on tour; the Civil Surgeon of Wardha is said to have been prevented by sickness at the Head-quarters station from being out much, and the Civil Surgeon of Seoni was prevented by causes which are not given. 6. While reasons may exist for Civil Surgeons staying at Head-quarters, it is difficult to understand the variations in the length of Native Superintend- ents' tours of inspection. Constant inspection and supervision is their raison d' etre, and if they fail in these they would seem to be useless. The Native Superintendents of Nimar and Balaghat were longest on tour, viz. 175 and 171 days respectively, the Superintendents of Bhandara and Chanda only 117 days. 7. The statistics of the year's work are thus not altogether satisfactory, and more systematic supervision and control seem needed. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, LINDSAY NEILL, Secretary.
No. 4649/CC FROM JAMES H. LOCH, ESQUIRE, M. D., DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces, To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, 15th August 1884. SIR, I have the honor to forward to you, for submission to the Chief Commis- sioner, the Annual Report of Vaccine operations in the Central Provinces for the year 1883 84. 2. I regret the delay in submitting this report, which has arisen from a mis- understanding on my part of the Chief Commissioner's orders. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, JAMES H. LOCH M. D. Deputy Surgeon General and Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces .
INDEX. PARA. The figures of the Feudatory States are separated from those of the Province ... ... ... 1 Comparative table of work done in the past and previous season ... 2 Number of operations performed during the year ... 3 Percentage of success and the cost of each successful case ... 4& 5 Remarks on Provincial and Feudatory State vaccine department ... 6Report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the Season 1883-84. As directed by the Chief Commissioner in his No. 586-31 of 7th February 1884, the figures of Fendatory States are separated from those of the Province, and those of each State are shown separately. 2. The following table gives the comparative amount of work done in the past and previous seasons by each of the 4 agencies in the Province viz. :2 4. The percentage of success of all the operations was for the two sea- sons :3 10. The difference in the number of vaccinators is due to an increase of 1 in the Provincinal, and a decrease of 3 in the Feudatory State department. 11. The decrease in the average number of operations performed by each vaccinator, was a necessary consequence of the falling off in the total number of operations, and would have been more marked in the case of the Feudatory State department, but for the reduction in the number of vaccinators from 34 to 31. 12. The percentage of success is very high for cases of re-vaccination. 13. While the amount paid to establishment has been rather more than last season, the total cost of the department has been less, owing to a con- siderably smaller amount having been drawn on account of travelling allowance. 14. The cost of each successful case was Rs. 0-0-¾ more in the Provincial than in the Feudatory State department, owing to there not having been any regular staff of Native Superintendents attached to, and to a very small amount of travelling allowance having been paid by the latter. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. (Provincial and Feudatory State). 15. A comparison of the work done in the two last seasons is given below:4 inserted in which the figures for this season are calculated just as they were for last:5 19. The following figures give the chief facts connected with the working of this department in the two past seasons :6 two latter are higher than last season when they were 93 and 89 respectively, but that of the vaccinators is practically the same. 31. Chhindwara vaccinators returned the percentage of success in primary cases, as 99.70 and those of Chanda as 92.56, these being the two extremes in the Provincial department. 32. A comparison of the cost of the establishment in 1882-83 with that in 1883-84 shows that the total expenditure was nearly the same, that the cost of establishment was more, and travelling allowance less in 1883-84, than in 1882-83, while each successful case cost Rs. 0-1-9¼ in 1883-84, as compared with Rs. 0-1-9 in 1882-83. 33. The cost of each successful case varied from Rs. 0-1-0 in the Sambal pur to Rs. 0-2-3¼ in the Damoh district. Feudatory State Vaccine Department. 34. The work of this Department during the two past seasons is shown below :7 Provincial Dispensary Vaccination. 41. The following is the work done by Hospital Assistants attached to Government dispensaries in the two past seasons :8 District. Name of Dispensary. Number of vacci- nations at each dispensary in 1883-84. Number of vacci- nations at each Dispensary in 1882-83. Jubbulpore ... Jubbulpore ... 463 7,090 365 6,347 City Branch ... 2,358 2,835 Thaggi ... 557 420 Murwara ... 801 1,008 Sehora ... 1,396 1,063 Bijeragogarh ... 557 656 Civil and Jail ... 958 ... Narsinghpur ... Gadarwara ... 340 856 323 1,008 Narsinghpur ... 311 498 Chhindwara ... 178 132 Jail and Police ... 27 55 Hoshangabad ... Hoshangabad ... 522 2,653 591 3,517 Kothi Bazar ... 200 237 Harda ... 864 720 Seoni ... 645 972 Sohagpur ... 407 972 Pachmarhi ... 15 25 Nimar ... Khandwa ... 123 341 318 635 Pandhana ... 80 90 Civil Station ... 11 76 Burhanpur ... 94 92 Mandhatta ... 33 59 Mandla ... Mandla ... 131 393 145 531 Ramgarh ... ... 383 Dindori ... 248 ... Jail and Police ... 14 3 Betul ... Budnur ... 250 410 265 534 Multai ... 160 269 Chhindwara ... Chhindwara ... 1,337 1,826 1,574 1,960 Lodikhera ... 489 386 Seoni ... Seoni ... 319 400 540 634 Lakhnadon ... 81 94 Balaghat ... Balaghat ... 44 148 322 547 Wara Seoni ... 78 168 Behir ... 26 57 Bhandara ... Bhandara ... 227 938 289 751 Tirora ... 275 217 Sakoli ... 82 140 Tumsar ... 152 ... Pauni ... 202 105 Nagpur ... Itwari ... 384 1,337 559 4,515 Rai Bahadur ... 467 671 Heude ... 15 62 Umrer ... 849 912 Khapa ... 302 725 Mowar ... 571 599 Katol ... 481 425 Ramtek ... 268 562 Wardha ... Wardha ... 229 965 285 1,505 Hinganghat ... 134 282 Sindi ... 104 211 Arvi ... 194 408 Deoli ... 148 251 Jail and Police ... 156 68 Chanda ... Sironcha ... 267 1,612 347 2,036 Warora ... 340 314 Brahmapuri ... 361 613 Armori ... 252 428 Mul ... 206 307 Chanda ... 60 ... Jail ... 108 27 Allapilli ... 18 ...
9 District. Name of Dispensary. No. of vaccinations at each Dispen- sary in 1883-84. No. of vaccinations at each dispen- sary in 1882-83. Raipur ... Raipur ... 146 2,559 110 1,890 Sadar Bazar ... 204 212 Arung ... 538 169 Drug ... 610 484 Dhamtari ... 965 858 Jail ... ... 50 Police ... 96 7 Bilaspur ... Bilaspur ... 111 976 202 864 Mangeli ... 219 214 Seormarain ... 321 264 Jail and Police ... 50 58 Pandaria ... 171 126 Pendra ... 104 ... Sambalpur ... Sambalpur ... 160 375 168 882 Bargarh ... 77 507 Police ... 101 76 Jail ... 37 131 Total ... 27,794 31,473 Feudatory State Dispensary Vaccination. 47. At these institutions the following work was done :10 Small-pox. 51. The following districts were visited by this disease in an epidemic form during the period from 1st April 1883 to 31st March 1884:11 52. The only district in which the Civil Surgeon or his Assistant Surgeon did not do any inspection of vaccination work was Nagpur. 53. In 16 districts half or more of the vaccinated persons were seen by the Civil Surgeons and the Native Superintendents together ; in three of these, Damoh, Nimar, and Mandla, more than the whole number having been seen. 54. In Chhindwara and Nagpur less than half the number of those operated on were inspected, the reason being, that in the former there was no Native Superintendent, and in the latter the inspection had to be done by the Native Superintendent, and he saw only 31 per cent of the cases, a smaller pro- portion than that seen by any other Native Superintendent. 55. The Civil Surgeons of Wardha, Seoni, Balaghat, and Bilaspur, saw a very small number of cases. 56. The three first mentioned officers give the reasons for this in their reports. 57. The inspection of the work done in Fendatory States is unsatisfactory. The only district in which anything like a fair proportion of the cases was inspected being Raipur. 58. The percentage of vaccinated persons in Feudatory States seen by in- specting officers are as under :12 they are really not, and an attack of small-pox causes them and their friends to lose faith in vaccination. DISTRICT VACCINATION. 67. The following is a rèsumè of the reports submitted by the Civil Sur- geons. 68. Saugor.13 The dispensary work is said to have been specially good, and Hospital Assis- tant Ramkrishna Apaji in charge of the Sehora, and Chuni Lal of the City branch dispensary are particularly mentioned. The attitude of the people towards vaccination is the same, but the quality of the work is improving. The Assistant Surgeon is commended for his inspection and report. 71. Narsinghpur.14 The Civil Surgeon could not take any long tours in consequence of his presence being needed in the Sadr station : he devoted much attention to the register of births and deaths, that he might assure himself of the amount of infant life. The Native Superintendent is well reported of by the Civil Surgeon, and the Tahsildar of Khandwa, and the Naib Tshsildar of Burhanpur gave willing help, while the interest taken by the District Officer was of great assistance in the work. 74. Betul.15 There was an increase in the number of operations performed by the vaccinators of the Vaccine establishment, but a decrease in that at the dispen- saries. The Civil Surgeon says that each circle is so large that the vaccinators cannot do more than half of it in the season, so that with the present staff of vaccinators half the district is untouched season by season. The Civil Surgeon was 53 days on tour and inspected 10,186 cases of vaccination. The Native Superintendent is very favourably reported of. There were 1,883 cases of small-pox, the majority of the sufferers being unprotected, and the disease being very mild in such as had been vaccinated. As many adults as possible of those unprotected by previous vaccination or small-pox were vaccinated. 78. Balaghat.16 The work of the Hospital Assistants was found very good, especially so at Umrer and Khapa; that of the Kamptee vaccinator is not well spoken of by the Civil Surgeon; Dispensary vaccination is now confined to the town in which the dispensary is situated. The Civil Surgeon does not consider the present staff of vaccinators for Nagpur city and its suburbs sufficient. The supply of lymph was kept up at Nagpur and Kamptee. The small increase in the number of operations over that of last year is ascribed to the presence of new vaccinators. one of the old ones died of cholera while treating those ill of that disease. Small-pox was general in the district, and while persons who had been vac- cinated were found to have the disease, such was the case in comparatively few ; and in all such persons the disease was very mild. The advantages that would result from a village register of children who are attacked with small-pox, and from the adoption of better means of pre- serving the village vaccination register are pointed out in the Native Superinten- dent's report, and the latter in a special report by the Civil Surgeon. 81. Wardha.17 83. Raipur.18 85. Sambalpur.STATEMENTS.
A.Feudatory States. Raipur District. 1 Khairagarh ... 166,138 176.74 6 3,919 3,862 7,781 1,297 7,781 2,233 4,880 7,265 ... ... 93.80 ... 43.72 6,549 39.42 ... ... 2 Nandgaon ... 164,339 181.59 4 1,739 1,630 3,369 842 3,369 1,225 1,874 3,207 ... ... 95.19 ... 19.51 2,568 15.63 ... ... Total... 330,477 179.12 10 5,658 5,492 11,150 1,115 11,150 3,458 6,754 10,472 ... ... 94.22 ... 31.68 9,117 27.59 ... ... Bilaspur District 3 Sakti ... 22,819 198.43 1 548 564 1,112 1,112 1,112 156 789 958 ... ... 86.15 ... 41.98 673 29.49 4 0.17 4 Kowardha ... 86,362 97.36 1 417 503 920 920 920 17 809 915 ... ... 99.45 ... 10.59 358 4.14 40 0.46 Total ... 109,181 108.96 2 965 1,067 2,032 1,016 2,032 173 1,598 1,873 ... ... 92.17 ... 17.15 1,031 9.44 44 0.40 Sambalpur District . 5 Sarangarh ... 71,274 131.98 2 1,302 1,319 2,621 1,310 2,613 1,325 1,191 2,547 8 6 98.34 75.00 35.82 3,456 48.49 ... ... 6 Raigarh ... 128,943 86.77 2 1,915 1,850 3,765 1,882 3,764 238 3,138 3,759 1 1 99.87 100.00 29.16 1,779 13.79 ... ... 7 Bamra... ... ... ... 81,286 40.80 2 3,166 3,037 6,203 3,101 6,203 326 4,517 6,167 ... ... 99.60 ... 75.87 6,522 80.23 ... ... 8 Rairakol... ... ... 17,750 21.30 1 648 613 1,261 1,261 1,253 36 331 939 8 7 81.58 87.50 53.30 526 29.63 ... ... 9 Sonepore ... 178,701 197.24 2 928 910 1,838 919 1,838 178 1,573 1,832 ... ... 99.67 ... 10.25 3,846 21.52 ... ... 10 Patna ... 257,959 107.53 10 5,782 5,639 11,421 1,142 11,354 4,321 6,514 11,255 67 26 99.19 41.27 43.73 11,800 45.74 ... ... Total .. 735,913 90.27 19 13,741 13,368 27,109 1,407 27,025 6,424 17,264 26,499 84 40 98.57 50.00 36.06 27,929 37.95 ... ... Total of Feudatory States 1,175,571 106.88 31 20,364 19,927 40,291 1,300 40,207 10,055 25,616 38,844 84 40 97.04 50.00 33.08 38,077 32.39 44 0.04 Total of Vaccine Deptt (Provincial and Feudatory States) 10,346,273 118.67 215 1,99,206 1,93,728 3,92,934 1,801 3,83,303 161,562 1,85,015 3,68,870 9,631 7,409 97.37 82.05 36.37 3,26,387 31.54 10,610 1.02
A.STATEMENT II. A.B.STATEMENT III.Comparative Statement No. IV. showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the num Establishment. Persons Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Year ending 30th April 1886. Year endin 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 Government ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 36,927 31,435 55,348 46,816 86,669 77,166 49,204 40,394 33,380 28,775 45,098 40,734 128,590 112,4 Municipal... ... ... ... ... ... 43,259 34,417 64,837 52,032 12,299 10,037 48,764 44,606 21,127 16,440 25,090 20,455 ... ... Local Funds... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,258 32,473 27,173 17,035 54,373 45,973 53,327 45,971 ... ... Native States .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Army.. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... European... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Natives... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total... ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 80,186 65,852 120,175 98,849 141,226 119,676 125,141 102,035 108,880 91,188 123,515 107,160 128,590 112
ber of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Centrs marily vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. 31st March 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 176,893 158,704 201,636 188,384 245,224 229,930 260,408 241,633 235,846 223,036 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176,893 158,704 211,402 196,958 255,408 238,918 288,688 267,341 278,958 263,803
ber of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the CentraProvinces in each of the undermentioned official years. marily vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. 31st March 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1883 1884 176,893 158,704 201,636 188,384 245,224 229,930 260,408 241,633 235,846 223,036 4,824 239,497 261,959 248,924 295,766 284,465 330,788 316,681 329,518 316,836 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,238 5,023 9,456 9,247 8,534 8,183 7,334 6,979 13,578 13,190 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,535 8,788 3,314 3,058 5,167 5,020 7,004 6,801 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 17,229 16,579 20,026 18,922 51,843 49,702 43,666 42,001 40,207 38,844 ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 20,386 18,480 23,083 20,989 26,188 24,286 30,649 28,114 26,333 24,508 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176,893 158,704 211,402 196,958 255,408 238,918 288,688 267,341 278,958 263,803 307,212 288,367 317,838 301,140 387,498 371,658 419,441 400,576 409,636 393,378
REPORT ON THE VACCINE OPERATIONS IN THE CENTRAL PROVINCES, FOR THE YEAR 1884-85. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] NAGPUR: PRINTED AT THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE PRESS. 1885.
No. 3520/179 FROM A. H. L. FRASER, ESQUIRE, C.S., OFFG. SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE DEPUTY SURGEON GENERAL, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 11th September 1885. SIR, I am directed to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of your letter No. 4840 C. C., dated 21st ultimo, submitting the Vaccination Report for 1884-85. Provincial Staff. 2. The operations performed by the Provincial Vaccine Departments were more numerous than in any preceding year. They were as follows for the last three years :2 it is accompanied by more efficient performance of the proper work of the dis- pensaries. The rules which the Chief Commissioner has recently issued provide that Dispensary Committees acting under the advice and sanction of the Civil Surgeon and Deputy Surgeon General may prescribe the limits and conditions of Dispensary vaccination, or even set Hospital Assistants free from it altogether. It will be for you to see that these rules are properly worked, and that Dispen- sary vaccination is not unnecessarily neglected on the one hand nor allowed to interfere with the special work of dispensaries on the other. The Chief Commis- sioner is satisfied that in some cases the popularity and efficiency of the dispen- sary have suffered from ill-judged attempts on the part of the Hospital Assistant in charge to vaccinate over too great an area and during unhealthy months, when his presence at the dispensary was specially required. Feudatory vaccination. 4. It is difficult to compare the figures showing vaccination operations in Feudatory States this year with those for last year; as the Patna returns have not been received. The Chief Com- missioner will be glad to receive an explanation of their non-submission. The figures (including Dispensary vaccination) for the Feudatories are :3 done. The attitude of the people towards vaccination has improved: the people are nowhere hostile: they are generally perhaps indifferent; but the Chief Com- missioner is glad to hear that they are not infrequently favourable to vaccination, and to acknowledge the cordial and valuable assistance given by some whose services are recorded by Civil Surgeons. There is little doubt that any difficulty still experienced may easily be overcome by tact and patience. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. H. L. FRASER, Offg. Secretary.
No. 4840/CC FROM JAMES H. LOCH, ESQUIRE, M. D., SANATARY COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. To THE SECRETARY TO THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER, Central Provinces. Dated Nagpur, the 21st-August 1885. SIR, I have the honor to forward you for submission to the Chief Commis- sioner the Annual Report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the season 1884-85. 2. The last of the District reports was not received till late last month. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, JAMES H. LOCH, M. D., Deputy Surgeon General and Sanitary Commissioner, Central Provinces.
INDEX. PARA. Figures of the Feudatory States are separated from those of the Province as was done last year ... ... ... ... 1 Comparative table of work done in the past and previous season ... 2 Number of operations performed during the year... ... 3 Percentage of success and the cost of each successful case... ... 4&5 Remarks on Provincial and Feudatory State Vaccine Department... 6Report on Vaccination in the Central Provinces during the Season 1884-85. 1. Last year the operations in the Province were for the first time shown separately from those in Feudatory States. The same arrangement is followed in this report. 2. The following table gives the amount of work done in the past and previous season by each of the 4 agencies at work. Table I.2 Thus calculated the percentage of success for the two last seasons is :3 9. There is an increase of 26 in the average number of operations per- formed by each vaccinator, although the number of vaccinators employed was larger than it was in the past season. 10. There has been an increase in the expenditure under every head, so that although the number of operations is greater, each successful case cost more than it did in 1883-84. Each successful operation cost Rs. 0-0-9¼ less in the Feudatory State than in the Province, the difference being caused chiefly by the very small inspecting staff maintained in the former. DISPENSARY VACCINATION. Provincial and Feudatory State. 11. A comparison of the work done in the two last seasons is given below: 4 15. Vaccination was introduced this season for the first time into the Zamindaris of Laffa, Kenda, Chooree and Korba in the Bilaspur district. 16. There has been an increase of 7,805 in the total number of opera- tions. The increase was in both primary and re-vaccination. The increase in the number of primary operations took place in the districts of Narsinghpur, Nimar, Betul, Chhindwara, Seoni, Balaghat, Nagpur, Wardha, Chanda and Raipur ; and was greatest in Balaghat (2,793), Seoni (2,488), and Chhindwara (2,389). 17. The decrease in primary vaccination work was most marked in the districts of Hoshangabad (2,967), Mandla (2,239), and Bhandara (1,866). The Civil Surgeon, Hoshangabad, attributes the decrease in the number of operations returned in his district chiefly to the non submission of the returns for February and March by the vaccinator of one circle. The decrease in Mandla is considered by the Civil Surgeon due to &quot; a &quot; smaller number of adults being vaccinated ; last year there were adults of all &quot; ages operated upon.&quot; The smaller number in the Bhandara district is, the Civil Surgeon thinks, due partly to the vaccinators having been delayed in going to their work by the non- receipt of vaccinating needles, but chiefly to the illness of a vaccinator. 18. The number of re-vaccination operations is 4,148 greater than it was in 1883-84. Special enquiries were made regarding the cases returned as those of re-vaccination, and all the Civil Surgeons report that the cases are properly so called, except those of Chanda and Betul. These officers' replies make it clear that the term has been misapplied and that the cases returned as those of re-vaccination were really cases in which the operation had been repeated in consequence of previous failure. 19. At the late Mr. Price's request the Native Superintendent was with- drawn from the Chhindwara district: it was, however, thought desirable to re-appoint one, and the best of the vaccinators was promoted to the post and took charge of his duties on the 1st November. There is an increase of 2 in the number of vaccinators in the Nagpur district. 20. The average number of operations performed by each vaccinator was larger than in 1883-84 by 33. The average for each vaccinator is over 2,000 in 8 districts as compared with 4 in 1883-84. The highest average was reached in the districts of Chhindwara (2,609), Balaghat (2,370), and Mandla (2,261); and the lowest in those of Betul (1,468), Chanda (1,544), and Saugor (1,556). 21. The percentages of success are as returned by vaccinators 97, by Civil Surgeons 92, by Native Superintendents 92, compared with 97 by Vaccinators, 95 by Civil Surgeons, 92 by Native Superintendents, in 1883-84. The vaccinators of Sambalpur return the highest percentage of success (99.2), and those of Chanda the lowest 89-28. 22. The large increase this season in the pay of establishment is due to the Sanitary Commissioner having drawn for the greater part of the past season only officiating pay, to the appointment of 2 Native Superintendents, 1 for the Chhindwara district and 1 for Raipur Zamindaris,and to promotions among the vaccinators.
5 Damoh and Nimar paid the highest rate for each successful vaccination (Rs. 0-2-1¾), and Sambalpur the lowest (Rs. 0-1-1¾.) Feudatory State Vaccinaton Department. 23. The work of this department is shown below :6 31. There is again a very considerable falling off in the amount of work done, the decrease being in both primary and re-vaccination. The decrease occurs in 9 districts and is largest in Nagpur (2,065) and Jub- bulpore (1,519). In Nagpur the falling off is, I believe, due to the work of the Hospital Assistants at several of the dispensaries having increased so much that they cannot vaccinate as they formerly did. Dr. Rice does not give any explanation of the falling off. In some districts the Civil Surgeon found it advisable to curtail the area allotted to the Hospital Assistants. 32. The only dispensaries at which re-vaccination was carried out to any extent are those of the Chhindwara and Jubbulpore districts; in the former district the number has largely increased, while in the latter it has fallen off very considerably. 33. The percentage of success in primary cases claimed by Hospital Assistants is again considerably lower than that returned by vaccinators. 34. The following table shows the work done by the Establishment of each dispensary: 7 District. Name of Dispensary. Number of vaccinations at each dispensary in 1884-85. Number of vaccinations at each dispensary in 1883-84. Nimar ... Khandwa ... 135 413 123 311 Pandhana ... 108 80 Civil Station ... ... 11 Burhanpur ... 62 94 Mandhatta ... 49 33 Asirgarh ... 59 ... Mandla ... Mandla ... 136 368 131 393 Ramgarh ... 222 ... Dindori ... ... 248 Jail and Police ... 10 14 Betul ... Badnur ... 277 412 250 410 Multai ... 165 160 Chhindwara ... Chhindwara ... 1,384 2,229 1,337 1,826 Lodhikhera ... 845 489 Seoni ... Seoni ... 616 661 3191 400 Laknadown ... 45 81 Balaghat ... Balaghat ... 141 410 44 148 Waraseoni ... 170 78 Behir ... 99 26 Bhandara ... Bhandara ... 258 1,140 227 938 Tirora ... 426 275 Sakoli ... 131 82 Tumsur ... 103 152 Pauni ... 222 202 Nagpur ... Itwari ... ... 1,272 384 3,337 Rai Bahadur ... ... 467 Heude ... ... 15 Umrer ... 453 849 Khapa ... 292 802 Mowar ... 226 571 Katol ... 148 481 Ramtek ... 153 268 Wardha ... Wardha ... 274 1,117 229 965 Hinganghat ... 261 134 Sindi ... 212 104 Arvi ... 265 194 Deoli ... 59 148 Chanda ... Jail and Police ... 46 156 Sironcha ... 171 1,350 267 1,612 Warora ... 276 340 Brahmapuri ... 241 361 Armori ... 359 252 Mul ... 244 206 Chanda ... ... 60 Jail ... 51 108 Allapilly ... 8 18 Raipur ... Raipur ... 115 2,558 146 2,559 Sadar Bazar ... 348 204 Arang ... 510 538 Drug ... 305 610 Dhamtari ... 1,212 965 Jail ... ... ... Police ... 68 96 Bilaspur ... Bilaspur ... 75 669 111 976 Mungeli ... 224 219 Seorinarain ... 131 321 Jail and Police ... ... 50 Pandaria ... 205 171 Pendra ... 34 104 Sambalpur ... Sambalpur ... 239 586 160 375 Bargarh ... 270 77 Police ... 44 101 Jail ... 33 37 Total .. 24,460 27,79
8 FEUDATORY STATE DISPENSARY VACCINATION. 35. The work at these institutions during the past 2 seasons is as fol- lows :9 As regards the other 3 districts no such probable explanation of the preva- lence of the disease is found. The reports of the Civil Surgeons make it clear that many cases are wrong- ly reported as small-pox, and leave no doubt of the value of good vaccination as a protective from the disease. No well marked connection can be traced between the ratio of deaths from small-pox in the past year and the proportion of the population successfully vaccinated in the past season or in the previous 5 years. INSPECTION. District. No. of days out on tour. No. of vil- lages inspected No. of vacci- nated persons inspected. No. of success- ful cases seen. Percentage of success as seen on inspection by Civil Surgeon. Percentage of success as returned by vaccinators. Percentage of success on inspection by Native Superintendent. Percentage of total No. vaccinated seen. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super- intendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super- intendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super- intendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super- intendent. By Civil Surgeon. By Native Super- intendent. Saugor ... 28 160 173 631 2,961 8,892 2,636 7,278 89.02 95.24 81.85 15.83 47.53 Damoh ... 45 140 308 657 4,295 8,381 3,474 7,096 80.88 95.17 84.66 40.52 70.96 Jubbulpore ... 80 151 579 787 5,598 11,064 5,331 9,383 95.23 95.18 84.81 20.49 40.50 Narsinghpur ... 47 171 484 561 5,825 6,885 5,627 6,450 96.60 98.51 93.68 45.26 53.50 Hoshangabad ... 36 113 160 468 2,078 5,544 1,699 4,940 81.76 97.14 89.10 14.16 37.96 Nimar ... 79 185 379 629 7,283 12,005 6,772 11,572 92.98 97.12 96.39 59.03 97.30 Mandla ... 35 124 401 606 7,203 11,909 7,139 11,571 99.11 98.94 97.16 45.29 74.88 Betul ... 8 119 59 523 509 6,380 482 5,828 94.70 96.51 91.35 4.33 34.33 Chhindwara ... 40 136 378 898 3,706 10,494 2,910 9,023 78.52 98.93 85.98 17.79 50.39 Seoni ... 29 162 174 1,103 1,456 12,817 1,366 12,137 93.82 97.04 94.69 8.32 73.29 Balaghat ... 47 152 610 748 7,581 10,974 7,311 8,424 96.44 96.78 76.76 53.02 76.76 Bhaudara ... 44 137 174 861 4,229 10,117 3,895 9,429 92.10 96.99 93.20 21.85 52.27 Nagpur ... ... 82 ... 265 ... 4,134 ... 3,933 ... 97.34 95.14 ... 17.07 Vardha ... 22 136 88 591 1,608 9,259 1,593 9,045 99.07 96.77 97.69 10.00 57.60 Chanda ... 37 151 144 368 3,119 5,484 2,797 4,955 89.67 89.28 90.35 18.03 31.71 Raipur ... 37 233 330 1,053 7,916 19,617 7,021 18,062 88.69 96.26 92.07 17.08 44.12 Bilaspur ... 40 130 318 861 5,490 16,114 5,077 15,330 92.48 96.16 95.13 15.24 44.71 Sambalpur ... 9 124 18 608 386 18,350 363 18,086 94.04 99.25 98.56 1.47 69.71 Total of Province exclu- sive of Feudy. States. 663 2,606 4,777 12,218 71,243 188,420 65,493 172,542 91.93 96.55 91.57 19.76 52.27 Jaipur. Khairagarh ... 79 ... 163 ... 3,828 ... 3,499 ... 96.59 91.40 ... 45.01 Nandgaon 1 167 1 276 25 5,357 24 5,105 96.00 95.72 95.30 0.40 85.57 Chhuikhadan ... 14 ... 24 ... 574 ... 556 ... 96.38 96.86 ... 44.19 Total ... 1 260 1 463 25 9,759 24 9,160 96.00 96.23 93.86 0.15 60.75 Bilaspur. Sakti 1 1 8 19 86 191 80 164 93.02 89.86 85.86 9.17 20.38 Kawardha 2 3 7 9 125 314 124 301 99.20 93.28 95.86 11.05 27.76 Total ... 3 4 15 28 211 505 204 465 96.68 91.73 92.08 10.20 24.42 Sambalpur Sarangarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 97.17 ... ... ... Raigarh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 99.48 ... ... ... Bamra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98.50 ... ... ... Rairakol ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98.45 ... ... ... Sonepur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98.36 ... ... ... Total... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98.51 ... ... ... Total Feudatory States 4 264 16 491 236 10,264 228 9,625 96.61 96.81 93.78 0.79 34.51 Total Vaccine Depart- ment (Provincial and Feudatory States. 667 2,870 4,793 12,709 71,479 198,684 65,721 182,167 91.94 96.56 91.73 18.32 50.92
10 40. No inspection of vaccination was carried out by the Civil Surgeon or his Assistant in the Nagpur district, except that of the cases seen at dispensaries by the former officer. The duties of Assistant to Civil Surgeon were during the greater portion of the season carried on by the Assistant Surgeon in charge of the Mayo Hospital in addition to his regular duties, which prevented his leavrag the station. The Civil Surgeons of Betul and Sambalpur did very little inspection work ; in the case of the latter it is due to his having taken over charge of the district during the working season, but for the Civil Surgeon of Betul there is not any excuse. The inspection work in the Seoni, Wardha, and Saugor districts was less than is desirable. In Nimar and Balaghat the Civil Surgeons saw more than half of the per- sons operated on. There was a Native Superintendent entertained for Chhuikhadan, and some of the Zamindaris in the Raipur district. This has improved the inspection of the Feudatory State vaccination work in that district, but in Bilaspur it is very insuffi- cient, and in Sambalpur there does not appear to have been any. 41. The average ratio of successful cases for Provincial vaccination as returned by Civil Surgeons is 4 per cent lower than it was last season, and is 4.6 per cent lower than that returned by the vaccinators, while it is a very little higher than the ratio given by the Native Superintendents. With reference to the great difference between the ratio of success returned by vaccinators and by Native Superintendents in some districts, some Civil Sur- geons give, what is I believe from personal inspection, a true explanation, viz. the non-entry of the result of first operation if unsuccessful. 42. During the past cold season I inspected a considerable number of vac- cine operations in the districts of Nimar, Hoshangabad, Narsinghpur, Saugor, Damoh and Jubbulpore. As regards the number of persons vaccinated, as far as my inspections went, they may be accepted as practically true. I failed to discover anything like decided falsification, though here and there names were wrongly entered, The results are not as carefully entered as they should be ; not only are doubtful cases entered as successful, but some manifestly unsuccessful are also. The forms however in which I found this were very few. I did meet with abscesses due to the irritation in connection with vaccina- tion, but not many ; and considering the applications the mothers put to their children's arms, it is not wonderful that abscesses should result. DISTRICT VACCINATION. 43. The following is a precis of the reports submitted by Civil Surgeons. 44. Saugor.11 Of 5 children vaccinated with the English lymph supplied from the Sani- tary Commissioner's Office the operation proved successful in 4. The number of operations is less than in the previous season, and this decrease cannot be due to children not being available, as the operations are fewer than the children available by 2,626. The percentage of success as returned by the Assistant to Civil Surgeon is ... ... 89. Native Superintendent ... 81. The difference is due to the children in whom the operation had proved unsuccessful at the time of the Native Superintendent's inspection having been again operated on and with success before the Assistant Surgeon's inspection without their names having been entered as fresh cases. Re-vaccination operations were less by 1,014 than in the previous season. The inspection work was as in former years performed by the Assistant to Civil Surgeon, the Civil Surgeon having seen only about 40 cases. The Assistant to Civil Surgeon was in camp only 28 days, and did not in- spect the work of 3 circles. The reason for this very small amount of inspection is not stated. The Assistant Surgeon states that he did not discover any irregularity or dishonesty in the vaccinator's work. The Native Superintendent was on tour 160 days, visited 631 villages, and inspected 8,892 vaccinated persons: be is well reported of. I vaccinator was found by the Native Superintendent to have entered unsuccessful cases as successful. 4 vaccinators did badly. DISPENSARY VACCINATION The average of operations is less than it was last season. Of the 9 Hospital Assistants in the district, 4 are reported to have done good work. SMALL-POX. There was not any epidemic during the past season; the disease was in all cases imported from the neighbouring Native States. Vaccination is said to be becoming more popular, the apathy of the people in regard to it less, and the people placing more faith in it. Some of the Malguzars now give very decided aid, and there are but few cases of opposition to the operation. The smaller number of operations raised the cost of each successful case from Rs. 0-1-7 to Rs. 0-1-8¾. The following persons rendered valuable assistance to the Vaccination staff:12 to more careful examination and record of the results. No falsification in the register or returns was detected. The Native Superintendent was 140 days on tour, visited 657 villages, and inspected 8,381 persons; he and all the vaccinators are well reported of. Dispensary vaccination shows less work this year : this is specially due to the Hospital Assistant at Jabera being able to do but very little from ill-health. The Hospital Assistant in charge of the Main dispensary has difficulty in get- ing children, as the vaccinators work in the town all through the hot season. The attitude of the people towards vaccination remains unchanged ; there is not any active opposition, but the people would rather not have it, and hide their children on the approach of the vaccinator. Of small-pox there were very few cases, and of those reported as such a large proportion are other diseases. 46. Jubbulpore.13 The Civil Surgeon considers that the quality of the work has deteriorated in several of the circles. The Civil Surgeon was in camp 47 days,inspected the work in all the circles, and saw 5,825 vaccinated persons. The Native Superintendent is favorably reported of; he visited each circle 2 or 3 times, and inspected 6,885 vaccinated persons. He gives the average ratio of success as 93, while the vaccinators return it as 98, and he explains the difference as due to the fact that in his inspections he saw a number of recent unsuccessful cases before the vaccinators had had time to repeat the operation. 2 vaccinators are badly reported of. The attitude of the people has undergone little if any change. Of small-pox 290 cases were reported by the police. Of the 103 cases seen by the Vaccination staff 40 were found not to be really that disease; and in none of the 63 cases of small-pox had the children been vaccinated. During his inspections the Civil Surgeon found that in several villages the village forms were not forthcoming, and that in these forms there were frequent inaccuracies. The Civil Surgeon is of opinion that the system of employing Hospital Assistants on vaccination work is objectionable, as it affects their professional work, and causes much inconvenience to the people, while he believes that the duty is disliked by the Hospital Assistants themselves. In place of the Hospital Assistants in charge of the Sadr, the Gadarwara, and the Chhindwara out-station dispensaries, he would employ one Municipal vaccinator for the work of the 3 towns. 48. Hoshangabad.14 The Native Superintendent was 113 days on tour, visited 468 villages, and inspected 5,544 vaccinated persons : he is well reported of. The Civil Surgeon found the registers fairly correct, except in the case of one vaccinator, whose returns were in many instances unmistakeably false. Two vaccinators are badly reported of. Most of the vaccinators complain of the little help they get from the malguzars. The attitude of the people is much as it was : while in some parts they are quite ready to have their children vaccinated, in others they resist it : the well- to-do classes being the most opposed to vaccination. Of small-pox 560 cases were reported, and of these 258 are said to have been vaccinated : 112 cases were reported in the town of Hoshangabad. 49. Nimar.15 Of small-pox, 4 cases were reported in April: all proved to be chicken-pox. At the end of April (1884), the disease were brought to a village by a family who returned from Khandeish; 7 persons were attacked, of whom 5 were unvaccinated, and 2 bore doubtful marks : the disease did not spread. In July 4 cases in persons unvaccinated occurred in the house of a Malguzar; they had just returned from Holkar's territory: the disease did not spread. In March 1885 the disease appeared among the children of the labourers on the railway, introduced by a child who had come from Holkar's territory with the disease on it; means were taken to check it, and there was not any extension of the dis- ease. 50. Betul. 16 All the vaccinators except one are well spoken of. The number of operations is 2,239 less than it was in 1883-84, the falling off being, the Civil Surgeon thinks, due to the non-vaccination of adults.. The Civil Surgeon was 35 days on tour and inspected 7,203 vaccinated persons: the Native Superintendent was 124 days on tour, and saw 11,909 operations. The Native Superintendent is well reported of. Only half of each circle can be worked over in one season in consequence of their size. The Civil Surgeon thinks that the practice of the people offering money to the vaccinators &quot; has now ceased.&quot; Dispensary vaccination is good. From small-pox 44 deaths were reported : the deaths took place chiefly in the parts of the district bordering on Rewah. The Civil Surgeon is of opinion that by next year all the children under one year who have not had small-pox will have been vaccinated. 54. Balaghat.17 The Civil Surgeon was 44 days in camp, and saw 4,229 vaccinated persons. The Native Superintendent was 137 days on tour, and inspected 10,117 persons. Dispensary vaccination.18 He gives instances of the difficulty that is experienced in getting parents to allow the vaccination of their children, but shows how much may be done by tact and patience. The vaccination work is considered satisfactory. Dispensary vaccination is good, except that of Hospital Assistant Sheoper- shad at Deoli. The Civil Surgeon recommends that the vaccination work of Hospital Assis- tants should be confined to the towns in which the dispensray is situated. Small-pox caused 878 deaths. In all the cases of the disease in young child- ren seen by the Civil Surgeon, vaccination had not been performed as also in many of those in children over 12 years of age. 58. Chanda.19 The Native Superintendent was 151 days in camp, and saw 5,484 vaccinated persons. The Civil Surgeon considers the returns correct. 59. Raipur.20 The Civil Surgeon thinks that 4 additional vaccinators are required in con- sequence of the extension of the work. The lymph supply was kept up, and the English lymph gave good results. The Civil Surgeon was 40, and the Native Superintendent 130 days in camp. The Native Superintendent is well reported of. There is a decrease in the number of operations. due, the Civil Surgeon thinks, to the absence of 3 vaccinators on cholera duty for a short part of the working season. Dispensary vaccination. The Hospital Assistant at the Main dispensary did little, partly because children were not available in the town for him after the vaccinators had worked all the non-working season, and partly because he has little time for the work. Feudatory State and Zamindari Vaccination: STATEMENTS.
A.Feudatory States. Raipur District. 1 Khairagarh ... 166,138 176.74 6 4,944 3,560 8,504 1,417 8,504 2,431 5,127 8,214 ... ... 96.59 ... 49.44 6,692 40.28 ... ... 2 Nandgaon ... 164,339 181.59 4 3,160 3,100 6,260 1,565 6,260 1,824 2,845 5,992 ... ... 95.72 ... 36.46 2,727 16.59 ... ... 3 Chhuiknadan ... 32,979 189.54 1 697 602 1,299 1,299 1,299 313 860 1,252 ... ... 96.38 ... 37.96 ... ... ... ... Total ... 363,456 180.01 11 8,801 7,262 16,063 1,460 16,063 4,568 8,832 15,458 ... ... 96.23 ... 42.53 9,419 25.92 ... ... Bilaspur District. 4 Sakti ... 22,819 198.43 1 471 466 937 937 937 544 291 842 ... ... 89.86 ... 36.89 730 31.99 2 0.09 5 Kawardha ... 86,362 97.36 1 564 567 1,131 1,131 1,131 39 887 1,055 ... ... 93.28 ... 12.22 544 6.30 49 0.57 Total ... 109,181 108.96 2 1,035 1,033 2,068 1,034 2,068 583 1,178 1,897 ... ... 91.73 ... 17.37 1,274 11.66 51 0.46 Sambalpur District. 6 Sarangarh ... 71,274 131.98 2 1,563 1,588 3,151 1,575 3,147 1,589 1,450 3,058 4 3 97.17 75.00 42.95 3,021 42.39 ... ... 7 Raigarh ... 128,943 86.77 2 2,315 2,282 4,597 2,298 4,597 305 3,617 4,573 ... ... 99.48 ... 35.46 2,767 21.46 ... ... 8 Bamra ... 81,286 40.88 2 962 972 1,934 967 1,934 112 1,546 1,905 ... ... 98.50 ... 23.44 6,473 79.69 ... ... 9 Rairakol ... 17,750 21.30 1 332 315 647 647 647 49 451 637 ... ... 98.45 ... 35.89 736 41.46 ... ... 10 Sonepore ... 178,701 197.24 2 633 651 1,284 642 1,282 147 1,043 1,261 2 ... 98.36 ... 7.06 1,673 9.36 ... ... Total ... 477,954 83.08 9 5,805 5,808 11,613 1,290 11,607 2,202 8,107 11,434 6 3 98.51 50.00 23.93 14,670 30.69 ... ... Total of Feudatory States. 950,591 108.34 22 15,641 14,103 29,744 1,352 29,738 7,353 18,117 28,789 6 3 96.81 50.00 30.29 25,363 26.68 51 0.05 Total of Vaccine Depart- ment (Provincial and Feudatory States) ... 10,365,162 117.49 208 199,785 190,407 390,192 1,858 376,491 168,934 169,098 363,564 13,701 9,765 96.56 71.27 36.01 335,651 32.38 8,339 0.80
A.STATEMENT II.B.STATEMENT III.Comparative Statement No. IV. showing the number of persons primarily vaccinated and the number Establishment. Persons pri Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Year ending 30th April 1866. Year endin 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. Government ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 36,927 31,435 55,348 46,816 86,669 77,166 49,204 40,394 33,380 28,775 45,098 40,734 128,590 112,43 Municipal ... ... ... ... ... 43,259 34,417 64,827 52,032 12,399 10,037 48,764 44,606 21,127 16,440 25,090 20,455 ... ... Local Funds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,258 32,473 27,173 17,035 54,373 45,973 53,327 45,971 ... ... Satire States ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensaries ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Army ... Europeans ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... Natives ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... ... ... 17,466 15,060 80,186 65,852 120,175 98,848 141,226 119,676 125,141 102,035 106,880 91,188 123,515 107,160 128,590 112,43
of those persons who were succe marily vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. 31st March. 1875. 1876. 18 176,898 158,704 201,636 188,384 245,224 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176,893 158,704 211,402 196,958 255,40
of those persons who were successfully vaccinated in the Central Provinces in each of the undermentioned official years. marily vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated, Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated, Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. Total number. Number successfully vaccinated. 31st March. 1875. 1876. 1877. 1878. 1879. 1880. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 176,898 168,704 201,636 188,384 245,224 229,930 260,408 241,633 235,846 223,036 254,824 239,497 261,959 248,924 295,766 284,465 330,788 316,681 329,518 316,836 330,877 319,345 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,238 5,023 9,456 9,247 8,534 8,183 7,334 6,979 13,578 13,190 15,876 15,430 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,535 8,788 3,314 3,058 5,167 5,020 7,004 6,801 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,976 8,744 24,015 23,653 17,229 16,579 20,026 18,922 51,843 49,702 43,666 42,001 40,207 38,844 29,738 28,789 ... ... 9,766 8,574 10,184 8,988 19,304 16,964 19,097 17,114 20,386 18,480 23,083 20,989 26,188 24,288 30,649 28,114 26,333 24,508 23,964 22,095 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176,893 158,704 211,402 196,958 255,408 238,918 288,688 267,341 278,958 263,803 307,212 288,367 317,838 301,140 387,498 371,658 419,441 400,576 3 409,636 393,378 400,455 385,659
