REPORT ON VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL (PROPER.) WITH AN APPENDIX. CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING. 1868.
ERRATA. Dr. W. A. Green's Report. Page 3, line 18, for &quot;to&quot; read &quot;by.&quot; REPORT ON VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL (PROPER.) WITH AN APPENDIX. CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING. 1868.
INDEX. PARA. First Report on vaccination in Bengal Proper ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 History of vaccination ; sources of information ...... ...... ...... ...... 2 Earliest record of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 One system of vaccination throughout India; its imperfection ...... ...... ...... 4 Superintendent General of Vaccination at Calcutta, his duties and their rela- tion to the authority of the Medical Board ...... ...... ...... ...... 5 Assistance of the Civil authorities and native influence afforded in aid of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 6 The Bombay system of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 7 Vaccination in Bengal Proper ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 8 The Bombay system introduced into the N. W. Provinces. A new era of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 9 Recapitulation. History of vaccination more in detail, giving the salient points in order of date and sequence ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 10 Dispensary vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 11 Large vaccine depôts abolished ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 12 The Government Vaccinators of Districts become Dispensary servants. Civil Surgeons are called upon to pay more attention to vaccination ...... ...... 13 Deputation and Travelling Allowance given to Civil Surgeons for inspecting Vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 14 Dr. Pearson's appointment, his system of vaccination in the N. W, Provinces ... 15 Hill depôts of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 16 The independent Dispensary system of vaccination still continued ...... ... 17 Agra vaccine division, or circle set up ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 18 Hill depôts of Simla superseding Subathoo ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 19 Progression of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 20 Other vaccine divisions set up in the N. W. Provinces and in the Punjab ... 21 Vaccine system in the Punjab ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 22 Jhansie and Allahabad Vaccine Circle ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 24 Madras vaccination, its original status and subsequent improvement ... ...... 24 Central Provinces and Oudh vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 25 Bengal Proper vaccination improved. Calcutta vaccination under the Superin- tendent General at the Presidency Town ...... ...... ...... ...... .... 26 Vaccination extended to tracts around Calcutta, where small-pox inoculation prohibited ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 27 New Vaccine Circle, composed of four districts encircling Calcutta, proposed ... 28 Small-pox inoculation prohibited in places ...... ...... ...... ...... ... An increased staff of vaccinators allowed for the extended operations around 29 Calcutta ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 30 Municipalities support Vaccinators ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 31 Bengal Zillah vaccination unsatisfactory ...... ...... ...... ...... 32 Bengal Proper, new circles of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 33
ii PARA. Character of Vaccine Virus ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 34 Instrument used in vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 35 Converting and employing the native inoculators of small-pox ...... ...... 37 Deterioration of Lymph ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 38 Arm to arm vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 39 Vaccinations performed in the whole of the Bengal Presidency ...... ...... ... 40 Report of the Superintendent General of Vaccination at Calcutta. Quality and preservation of Lymph ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 41 A large Establishment required for Calcutta ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 42 Vaccination without the Suburbs of Calcutta ...... ...... ...... ...... 43 Extra Superintendents required for vicinity of Calcutta ...... ...... ... 44 Darjeeling Circle of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 45 Ranchee Circle of vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 54 Sonthal Pergunnah vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 62 District and Municipal vaccination ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 63 Detached vaccination at Sankerberiah ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 68 Moveable vaccine establishment ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 70 Contents of figured statement ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 73
REPORT ON VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL PROPER, WITH AN APPENDIX. From DR. W. A. GREEN, M. R. C. P., Lon. Inspector General of Hospitals, Lower Provinces, to the Secretary to the Government of Bengal. First Report on Vaccination in Bengal Pro- per. As the system of Vaccination has been very considerably extended and unfolded within the last two or three years in Bengal, thus bringing it, in its wider and more complete operations, up to the level of vacci- nation in the Bombay Presidency, in the North-Western Provinces, and the Punjab; and as the Government of Bengal has called for a distinct report upon the proceedings of the vaccine department working under its orders the whole vaccine proceedings in Bengal Proper, will, therefore, be published in a separate shape, comprising the reports, for the year and season of the several vaccine superintendents, together with a numerical statement of results in a tabular form. History of Vac- cination, sources of information. 2. Before proceeding to comment upon the several reports herein published, it may be interesting to give a brief summary of the origin, progress, and advancement in improvement of vaccination in British India generally. I shall draw my details principally from the report on vaccination in Bengal by Dr. Stewart, Superintendent General of Vaccination at Calcutta, published at Calcutta in 1844; from the proceedings of the Government, North-Western Provinces which resulted in the introduction of the Bombay system of vaccination into the North-Western Provinces in 1854-55; from the proceedings of the Punjab Government in 1863, which issued in the introduction of a systematic working of vaccination under a European Superintendent A
2 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT from the report of the Superintendent General of Vaccination for Calcutta of 1865; and from the numerous annual reports on vaccination, published by the several Governments of the whole of British India, and from the proceedings of the several administrations upon these. Earliest record of vaccination. 3. Vaccination, it is alleged, was first introduced into India under the auspices of the Right Hon'ble Lord Clive, in the year 1802. The earliest report on vaccination in Bengal is that of Dr. Shoolbred, Surgeon to the Native Hospital at Calcutta, for the year 1804, published by order of Government in 1805. The total number vaccinated during 1804, in the Bengal Provinces (including, besides, Prince of Wales' Island and Fort Marlborough) was 8,140. Dr. Shoolbred enumerates, amongst the difficulties besetting the spread of vaccination, the avowed hostility of the whole body of native small-pox inoculators. Thus early, too, it was proposed to conciliate the opposition of the small-pox inoculators, by engaging a certain number of the most considerable amongst them to practise vaccination instead of small-pox. Dr. Shoolbred pressed this scheme with considerable success. Many small-pox inoculators were thus enlisted in the cause of vaccination, and adhered to vaccination, they and their children, for a long period afterwards. A paper was signed by 26 of these inoculators at this early time, declaring their full conviction of the anti-variolous power of the vaccine disease, of its entire freedom from danger, and that they were not aware of any circumstance which should render its adoption improper by any rank of Hindoos. One system of vaccination throughout India. its imper- fection. 4. The system of vaccination throughout British India at this period, and for many years up to 1827, seems to have been pretty much the same throughout the whole country, and in the different Presi- dencies and Governments. The work of vaccination was entrusted to the supervision of Civil Surgeons at the larger zillah stations throughout the country, who had a staff of native vaccinators under them. The Civil Surgeons worked for the most part under the Super- intending Surgeons, who, again, were directed by the Medical Board, The native vaccinators at first, in some places, were paid head-money for each person vaccinated; subsequently they were entertained as perma- nent servants; subsistence allowance or small presents of money were sanctioned by Government to be given to those bringing their children to be vaccinated, and allowing arm to arm vaccination from their children. But in all the Presidencies this system was pronounced to be a failure, because the vaccinators were too few, and it was found necessary to take vaccination to the very doors of the apathetic natives of
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 3 this country, which could not be done. There was next to no inspec- tion or supervision of the native vaccinators; their returns were there- fore declared to be unsatisfactory. Civil Surgeons had not time to inspect and see that they did their work properly. The Bengal Medi- cal Board in December 1828, in recommending changes in the vaccine system, observe that in the Provinces and out of Calcutta a pure and genuine lymph cannot be maintained during certain months of the year, and that a spurious disease is thus propagated by the native vaccinators. Dr. Pearse, Secretary to the Medical Board at Madras, in a report sub- mitted by the Board to the Government of India, on the state of vacci- nation within the Madras Presidency, writes in 1841, &quot; that the conduct of the native vaccinators is as satisfactory as can be expected from persons, the faithful performance of whose duties must, notwithstanding the few checks over them, be in a great measure voluntary.&quot; Superintendent General of Vac- cination at Cal- cutta, his duties and their rela- tion to the au- thority of the Medical Board. 5. The office of Superintendent General of Vaccination at Calcutta seems to have been instituted early in this century, and attached to it appears to have been a general direction of vaccination within the Presi- dency; but from 1816, as related to Dr. D. Stewart, the duties of the office were confined to Calcutta, and a salary of Rs. 300 a month then fixed for the appointment ; the general superintending duties were transferred to the Medical Board, his duties having been henceforth comprised in keeping up vaccination under European personal inspec- tion, and in maintaining the vaccine lymph in its purity and integrity, and establishing a vaccine depôt, whence sound vaccine lymph was dis- tributed all over the Presidency; receiving, besides, periodical supplies of lymph from the National Institution in London for annual distribu- tion throughout Bengal. This seems to have been well accomplished, at Calcutta especially, during a number of years. An officer of the same kind, with general control and superintendency over vaccination at the Presi- dency Town, existed at Madras; the management of the department there rested in the hand of the chief medical authority. Assistance of the civil authori- ties and native influence afford- ed in aid of vaccination. 6. During these early years the assistance of the civil authorities was invoked and obtained; the collector in his superior sphere, the zemindars, the talookdars, teshildars, and the head-men of villages were kept informed of the names and numbers of the vaccinators employed, and were directed to look to the operations of these officers of Government in their estates, in the district and villages, and to inspect and check their registers of vaccination. The Bombay system of vac- cination 7. The first grand step of advancement in the vaccine system in British India owes its origin to the enlightened rule of the Hon'ble
4 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT Mount Stuart Elphinstone at about the year 1827, in the Bombay Presi- dency; when four European Superintendents of Vaccination, (being- medical officers) were at first appointed, who were distributed in four vaccine districts, thus dividing between them the whole of the Presi- dency ; under each European Superintendent is placed a head vaccinator and an establishment of native vaccinators, varying in numbers with the size of the division, with grades of pay sliding from Rs. 18 to 10 a month. The Bombay system requires the close inspection by the European Superintendent of the work done by his native vaccinators. He keeps his establishment spread over a district at reasonable distances apart, principally in the neighbourhood of large towns, from which they pro- gressively move on, protecting all the towns and villages in succession. The European Superintendent follows them up. Arriving at any place in the course of his tour, he has the children already vaccinated brought to him, and examines their arms to assure himself of the soundness of the vaccination; he sees the recently vaccinated cases, looking at the arms in all their stages of the vesicle, ascertains the purity of the vaccinia, and of the lymph used to propagate it. He compares the native vaccinators' registers on the spot with the children and people entered in them and with the vaccinator's own register, and thus verifies the work performed. His duty is also to see that the local registers of small-pox occurrences ordered to be kept up are so done. This excellent system appertained to Bombay alone for many years, and is still in operation, the number of circles and superintendents and native vaccinators having been increased only. This system essentially comprises the examination of every case vaccinated upon, either by inspection of the arm during some one or other of the stages of the vesicle, or else by investigation into the kind of cicatrix left; com- paring the people vaccinated with the native vaccinator's registers; look- ing at the crusts saved and produced. Vaccination in Bengal Proper. 8. In the Bengal Presidency, from time to time, slight shiftings and alterations of the system have taken place. At Calcutta, under the immediate eye of the Superintendent General of Vaccination a sound vaccinia was maintained, but vaccination did not find its way into the homes of the native population of Calcutta. From Calcutta sound vaccine lymph was distributed all over the Presidency ; it was the only large depôt for years, assisted by periodical supplies of lymph sent from the National Vaccine Institution in London. By the resolution of the
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 5 Government of India in February 1829, the emoluments of the Civil Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons at the 30 vaccine stations, previously in operation, were reduced from Rs. 260 a month, which embraced the whole cost of he establishment, to Rs. 160, and of these six only were to be kept up, viz. Dacca, Moorshedabad, Patna, Benares, Bareilly and Subathoo. The reason assigned for this change was, that the success in vaccination, as shown by the returns, had in no degree corresponded with the expense incurred. This curtailment of establishments led to a great falling-off in the numbers of vaccination, as shown by the returns. The Medical Board took the matter up, and in April 1834 the sanction of the Board of Directors was obtained to the granting of a vaccine allowance, Rs. 20 a month, to Civil Surgeons acting as Superintendents of Vaccination of their stations. This became a general allowance at all stations. The vaccine institutions at the above six large stations were maintained. In the course of a few years these were abolished also. The Bombay system intro- duced into the North-West Pro- vinces A new era of vaccina- tion, 9. No material improvements were put in practice until the Go- vernment of India, in 1854, introduced the Bombay system into the North-Western Provinces. Hence a new era in vaccination in the Bengal Presidency was inaugurated. Dr. Pearson had, it would seem, been carrying on vaccination under his own eye and special supervision for some time previously to the introduction into the North-Western Provinces, by Government order, of a system similar to the Bombay one. Recapitula- tion. History of Vac- cination more in detail, giving the salient points in order of date and sequence. 10. To recapitulate, in Bengal, from the report of the Superin- tendent General of Vaccination at Calcutta published in 1831, it appears that there were up to the year 1828, 30 vaccine stations within the Bengal Presidency at a monthly cost of Rs. 260 each. By the resolution of Government, of March 1830, these stations were reduced to six, viz., at Dacca, Moorshedabad, Patna, Benares, Bareilly and Subathoo, with a diminished allowance of Rs. 160 a month, upon the ground of the exhibited inadequacy of the issues, and the absence of anything like really substantially good results following upon the great outlay made by the State; to which the like testimony was borne by the Medical Board. The Board seems at this time to have advocated the committing of vaccination, and its subsequent management, to a European Medical Officer only, to the exclusion of native assistance; but the very important point of European minute management and supervision was not strenuously and persistently adhered to. The contraction of the sphere of vaccine operations and
6 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT diminution of the number of stations was followed by an alarming lessening of the numbers vaccinated from 61.910 in 1830, to 15.119 in 1832. This state of things called forth the remonstrances of the Medical Board, and the Government, in consequence, ordered that from January 1835 a vaccine allowance for local superintendence of Rs. 20 per month, should be given to all Assistant Surgeons at civil stations, whose allowances do not exceed Rs. 300 a month; for this they were to vaccinate themselves, and teach their Native Doctors to vaccinate around them; a vaccinator was employed at many zillah stations. Dispensary vaccination. 11. An important advance next took place in 1839 by the setting up of dispensaries at 12 large towns in all parts of the Presidency; the establishments costing each, upon an average, Rs. 250 a month. These dispensaries were under the superintendence of the Civil Surgeon, an educated Native Doctor, with a salary varying from Rs. 40 to 100, was put in immediate medical charge, two or three subordinate assistants, capable of performing vaccination, were attached to the dispensaries. Large vaccine depôts abolished. 12. By order of the Government of India in April 1842, the allowance of Rs. 100 a month, being part of the Rs. 160 to the Civil Surgeons, Superintendents of Vaccine Depôts, at Dacca, Moorshedabad and Patna, was put a stop to. The Govern- ment vaccinators of districts be- come dispensary servants Civil Surgeons are called upon to pay more atten- tion to vaccina- tion. Vaccinators' pay increased. 13. In 1853, the Medical Board again drew the attention of all medical officers to the obligation bearing upon them to advance the work of vaccination, especially in connection with Charitable Dispen- saries. The Government Native Vaccinators, two in number at most civil stations, were then placed at the dispensaries where such existed. They were to operate under the eye of the Civil Surgeon, the Super- intendent, and of the Sub-Assistant Surgeon in charge. They were to resort on certain days of the week to different public places of the town, and there to vaccinate in the presence of the medical officers; careful registers were to be kept of their work ; the pay of the vaccinators was raised to Rs. 10 each. This system has continued in Bengal Proper up to the present day. Deputation and travelling allowance given to Civil Surgeons for inspecting vaccination. 14. The Bengal Government, in November 1867, granted travelling and deputation allowance to Civil Surgeons for going out into their dis- tricts, and visiting the vaccinators, and inspecting their work. This is a step in advance certainly, but it is inefficient and not likely to bear much fruit. The Civil Surgeons have not time for the work; the inspections are scanty and intermittent. A good deal of good may be
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 7 done in this way by the Civil Surgeon keeping his vaccinators around his station, within a radius of 3 or 4 miles, he may then visit them frequently, and with advantage, and his actual expenses of carriage should be allowed to him, although the distances may be small. This mode of proceeding is now adopted in practice in the Punjab. Dr. Pearson's appointment, his system of vaccination in the North-West Provinces. 15. In 1854, Dr. Pearson was appointed Superintendent of Vac- cination in Rohilcund and Kumaon. The following is the system pursued by him, extracted from one of his reports:8 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT Hill dopôts of vaccination. 16. In Kumaon or Gurhwal, (at Almorah) a hill vaccine depôt was established thus early under Dr. Pearson. The indepen- dent dispensary- system of vacci- nation still con- tinued. 17. With the introduction of this system of close inspection under a distinct vaccine department, vaccination still continued at some zillah station dispensaries under the supervision of the Civil Surgeon. Agra vaccine division or circle set up. 18. In 1856, the Agra division of vaccination was set up under the superintendence of a European Medical Officer. Hill depôt of Simla supersed- ing Subathoo. 19. Subathoo had ever since 1828 been one of the centres of vaccination in the Bengal Presidency. Lymph had probably been taken and preserved, and distributed thence to the stations in the plains; latterly, the civil station of Simla became a depôt under the Civil Surgeon there. In 1858 Dr. Peskett was appointed Superintendent of the Simla vaccine hill depôt, as a distinct and separate duty. These hill depôts, on the application of the Superintendents, were kept supplied with lymph from England, besides that of their own collecting and preserving on the spot. Progression of Vaccination. 20. Vaccination had thus fairly been started in the North-Western Provinces, and there and in the Bombay Presidency, and at the metro- polis of India, Calcutta only, had a sound system of vaccination been practised. The rest of Bengal and Madras remained benighted in this respect. Other vaccine divisions set up in the N W. Provinces and in the Punjab. 21. In 1864 the Agra and Meerut, and the Benares and Goruckpore, circles of European superintendence were established in the North- Western Provinces. Dr. Pearson, to whom especially vaccination owes so much, in 1864 was most deservedly and advantageously appointed Superintendent General of Vaccination of the North-Western Provinces with his head quarters at Kumaon. In 1864, a Superintendent General of Vaccination was appointed for the Punjab, with his head quarters, during the summer months, at Simla. Vaccine system in the Punjab- 22. The Punjab vaccine establishment is as follows, and is formed in accordance with the Bombay system: To each of the three divisions into which the Punjab vaccine department has been divided, five for Dalhousie, and at Simla and Murree six Native Superintendents are allotted, with a salary of Rs. 20 for five months, and Rs. 16 for seven months, with 46 vaccinators, with varying scales of pay from Rs. 12 to Rs. 8 for five months, and Rs. 8 to 6 for seven months, at the Simla Division; and 33 vaccinators for Murree and Dalhousie each. At the hill depôts it is recommended that the Native Superintendents be paid their
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 9 full salaries for the whole year, and that the Native vaccinators there be also paid their full salaries for three months longer than in the plains. This system gives about three vaccinators to each district of each division, besides leaving a reserve for emergencies. The European Superintendent (one only is sanctioned ) visits a part of his large province, and looks to the work, and supervises the performances of his vaccinators thoroughly before he proceeds to another part; he ascertains the character of the vaccine used, and supplies fresh virus. In so extensive a Government as the Punjab, it is evident that anything like thorough inspection can go on but very slowly; he can go over a small part only of his department each year. Jhansie and Allahabad Vac- cine Circle. 23. In 1865, the Allahabad and Jhansie circle of European superintendence was brought into operation. Madras vacci- nation, its origi- nal status and subsequent im- provement. 24. To go back to Madras, the system was that of the employment of Civil Surgeons as Superintendents at stations of circuit and zillah courts, together with the establishments of native vaccinators, all working under the authority of the Superintending Surgeons of Divi- sions. The Superintendents were the channel of communication between the working vaccinators and the higher authorities; their duty was to assist and support the vaccinators; to vaccinate themselves; to inspect and check the vaccinators' work from time to time; they were to verify their registers by every practicable means. But the strange system existed in the Madras Presidency of placing the body of vaccina- tors in each district immediately under the orders and control of the Collector, by whom they were paid, and their movements directed. This plan was established under the idea, it would seem, that, as the Collector was moving about in his district, he could more effectually watch the vaccinators' operations, and urge the more influential inhabi- ants of every place to assist in the spread of vaccination, and induce these men to overlook and check the work at any or every village. The Civil Surgeon was expected to do little more than supply good lymph, and receive and transmit to the Superintending Surgeon the vaccinators' periodical returns. He was to visit the vaccinators employed in the district upon any emergency. The check and supervision was evidently a loose one, and very different from that of the European Superintendent on the Bombay side, who was always in the midst of his men, moving about with them, and keeping his eyes upon them here and there, and everywhere. The Madras Principal Inspector- General of Hospitals, in his report of 1860-61, declared the present B
10 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT system at Madras to be a failure, and its maintenance little better than waste of public money. In 1863, the Government of India called for a report on, and revisal of, the system. Since 1865 the Bombay system has been introduced. The Madras establishment in 1865 consisted of one General Superintendent; 11 deputies ; 145 vaccinators, and 25 peons. There are 11 small circles with a deputy to each, and one Native vaccinator or nearly so to every talook of each circle. The system, as well described by one of the Deputy Superintendents, consists in the Deputy Superintendent itinerating through the district with the vaccinators working as a body, going in gangs or small parties from village to village, doing the work thoroughly, although slowly. The vaccination is thoroughly done in one talook at a time; the deputy himself looking into the whole work. The Superinten- dent General visits each Deputy Superintendent in his circle, in the midst of his vaccinators, and spends a few days with each, thoroughly examining the work. The method employed in the several circles is to work thoroughly in a given locality ere proceeding to another. This is the admirable Rohilcund plan of Dr. Pearson. Central Pro- vinces and Oudh vaccination. 25. Vaccination under a European Superintendent was intro- duced into the Central Provinces in 1864, and into Oudh in 1867. Bengal Proper, vaccination im- proved. Calcutta vacci- nation under the Superintendent General at the Presidency Town. 26. Thus was seen spreading through India at large the benign influence of vaccination, permeating everywhere by degrees, and offering the blessings of protection against the scourge of small-pox. Bengal Proper now aroused herself from her vaccine lethargy (excepting, in the necessity for this, Calcutta itself). Dr. Charles, in his long and able paper, published in the Calcutta Gazette of the 19th January 1866, lays the whole subject of vaccination fully before the Government, regarding its present condition as well in Calcutta as throughout India at large. He reviews the several systems in vogue at the several Presidencies. He thus describes the Calcutta system of vaccination:THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 11 in any two or more individuals. The whole is superintended by the Superintendent General. The expense of the system is necessarily great, from the thoroughness and minuteness of the inspection. Vaccination extended to tracts around Calcutta where small-pox inocu- lation prohibi- ted. 27. Dr. Charles especially reports upon vaccination at and around Calcutta. He had already extended vaccination by his personal exer- tions beyond his own legitimate boundaries, viz., the town and suburbs of Calcutta. In order, if possible, to check the onslaught of small- pox on Calcutta and its importation from without, he carried protective vaccination into the villages and thannahs around Calcutta, and along the highways and thoroughfares of rail and road. New vaccine circle composed of four districts encircling Cal- cutta proposed 28. A very interesting part of his report is his scheme of vaccina- tion for the mofussil. He proposes to set up a shield of protection around Calcutta, by bringing within one new vaccine circle, the presi- dency districts of the 24-Pergunnahs, Hooghly, Burdwan and Nuddea, under thorough European supervision, and with an adequate staff of Deputy Superintendents, head vaccinators, &c. I most fully endorse this proposition, and trust that the Government of India in the Financial Department will accede to it. It has been submitted and strongly recommended from my office.* Small-pox in- oculntion prohi- bited in places. 29. In furtherance of the exertions made by Dr. Charles, inocula- tion has been prohibited in Calcutta by law since 1865; and in the villages and police stations in the neighbourhood of Calcutta, and in several large stations in Bengal Proper since June 1866. By recent Government enactment inoculation has been further prohibited in Gurhwal. An increased staff of vaccina- tors allowed for the extended operations around Calcutta. 30. In aid of carrying on vaccination efficiently in the localities more immediately bordering upon Calcutta, where inoculation has been prohibited, the entertainment of a large additional staff of vaccinators and head vaccinators has been sanctioned by the Government. These for the present will work under Dr. Charles, who will lend the aid of one or more of his experienced Calcutta Superintendents. But all such work is additional to that really appertaining to his office as Superintendent General of Vaccination at Calcutta. The approval of the proposition for the institution of a new vaccine circle around Calcutta is anxiously looked for, within which these new localities will be included. Municipalities support vaccina- tors, 31. In consequence of the prohibition of inoculation at many of the large stations of Bengal Proper, it has become necessary to * It has received sanction.
12 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT augment the number of vaccinators. The municipalities have been appealed to, with the view of their maintaining out of the town funds one or more additional vaccinators, and of looking well after the steady performance of their duties by the vaccinators. The municipalities have met the Government in their views. These proceedings have been con- firmed by the Government of India in Financial Resolution of January 1867. In Bombay and the North-West Provinces the municipalities had already contributed their quota of vaccinators. Bengal Zillah vaccination un- satisfactory. 32. Vaccination, as carried on in the several zillahs throughout Bengal Proper (where not included in any recently-established vaccine circle) being a part of the dispensary system, has always been most unsatisfactory and unreliable, and is so still. It has run parallel with the Madras system in operation, previously to its regeneration in 1865 ; vaccinators from the dispensaries being sent out into the interior of the district to vaccinate, and left to themselves to keep their registers carefully or not, to work really, or not to work, and with the greatest uncertainty prevailing as to whether they were dispersing a genuine protective vaccination or not. No regular or systematic super- vision has been exercised over them. In November 1867, the Govern- ment of Bengal granted travelling and deputation allowance to Civil Surgeons for visiting the interior during the vaccinating season, and inspecting the works of the vaccinators. Bengal Proper, new circles of vaccination. 33. During 1866 and 1867, large strides in vaccination in Bengal were made towards bringing Bengal up to the level of the other Governments of India. The Darjeeling circle of European superin- tendence commenced operations at the cold season of 1866-67. The Ranchee circle of European superintendence (within the Commis- sionership of Chota Nagpore) commenced operations with the cold season of 1867-68; and so also did the small Sonthal Pergunnahs superintendency, under the auspices of a Sub-Assistant-Surgeon. I trust that we are gradually inclosing the whole of Bengal Proper within the meshes of a sound vaccine system of close and reliable supervision and inspection. Character of vaccine virus. 34. The hill depôt lymph and crusts from Kumaon and Simla, now so generally distributed and in use throughout this Presidency, are more successful, perhaps, than any other virus. I may add that herme- tically-sealed liquid lymph is now in general use throughout India. It was in use in Madras in 1855. It has been so since 1860 in Upper India ; and in Calcutta since 1859. It is taken, and is readily and
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 13 safely transmissible, at the proper season. Throughout India, vaccina- tion by crusts is largely practised also, and great care is now taken as to the preservation, and proper time of removal from the arm, of vaccine crusts. It has been observed at Madras that English tube lymph lasts three months there, and that although the vaccinia produced by it, in the first instance, may pass through its stages prematurely, yet after the second or third transmission through individuals, a good and sound vesicle results. Instrument used in vaccina- tion. 35. Vaccination by scratching the arm with needles, after laying on the lymph, is very much superseding the perforation by the lancct and insertion of the virus. 36. Considering the vast numbers of the population of this country of India generally, the efforts of the Government to make vacci- nation universal by paid vaccinators is a chimera almost; as Dr. Pearson has observed, all that can be done under ordinary means, and such as the finances will admit of, is merely like a shower to the ocean. Converting and employing the native inocu- lators of small- pox. 37. I am glad to observe that Dr. Pearson writes in his vaccine report of 1866-67, that some plan must be devised whereby vaccination can be brought to' the door of every family, and this can only be accomplished by enlisting the services of all native practitioners, Brahmin tikadars, bhaids, hakims, &c., in the cause. To this I would add and suggest the attempt to engage the present inoculators of small-pox of all kinds in the cause of vaccination. Dr. Pearson, in the same report regarding the Benares circle, writes that attempts will be again made next year to induce Brahmin inoculators to enrol themselves as vaccinators, for it is by enlisting the sympathies of the inoculating class, and by providing them with remunerative employment, that the bigoted attachment of the Hindoos to inoculation can be best overcome. I have already pointed out Dr. Shoolbred's successful efforts in this direc- tion, as he has described them in his report on vaccination, so long back as 1804. The same idea and recommendation is evident in all the different vaccine reports from time to time ever since. At Madras, Bombay, the Punjab and Oudh it is so. Indeed, many of our present vaccinators in various parts of India originally practised inocula- tion. The hakims of the King's Hospital at Lucknow have success- fully exerted themselves, it is alleged, to overcome the prejudices of the people against vaccination. I have already pressed this sub- ject upon the notice of the Bengal Government, in my letter No. 237, dated 7th July 1868.
14 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT Deteriotation of lymph. 38. Dr. Charles, in his report above alluded to, makes some interesting observations upon the superiority of the infecting power of lymph obtained direct from England, over that closed up in the same way in hermetically-sealed tubes from vaccination performed in Calcutta. The Calcutta vaccinations from recent lymph taken from the arm answered well in the early part of the season, but, if removed and sealed in glass tubes thus early, and sent about for use, it failed in its infecting power at and near to Calcutta; whilst the same kind of lymph in sealed glasses, sent far up-country, succeeded well. This seemed to show, Dr. Charles thinks, the greater proclivity of certain parts of India to undergo the vaccine disease than Calcutta at the same season of the year, and the unsuitability of the climate of Calcutta in the early part of the vaccine season to favor the propagation of the vaccinia. English lymph hermetically-sealed had at the same time succeeded in Calcutta in the early part of the season. This inferiority in the sealed Calcutta lymph to infect in Calcutta, disappeared by degrees; and by the end of January its infecting power became very great. The practical application which Dr. Charles made of this recognised difference in the infecting power of the Calcutta lymph, at different periods of the season, has been to induce him to collect for store a large quantity of the lymph, at the time of the season in which it exhibited its greatest infecting power, for distribution at the commencement of the next vaccinating season. Arm to arm vaccination. 39. Arm to arm vaccinations are preferred and practised through- out India where permitted. This proceeding is objected to by native mothers in many parts. Presents are, however, provided for and given to the people to allow of this, and to induce them to carry their children for the purpose from place to place. This method is commonly in use at Calcutta and its neighbourhood. It is with difficulty carried out in many parts of the N. W. Provinces. It is permitted by the people in some parts only of Madras, Bombay, and the Punjab. 1864. Total number vaccinated. Successful cases. Percentage of successful cases. Bengal Presidency including 8,140 7,213 ...... Prince of Wales' Island and Fort Marlborough ... ... 1867-68. For Bengal Proper only ... 2,37,748 1,01,487 80.54
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 15 1866-67. 40. For the whole of the Bengal Presidency, together with Madras and Bombay:16 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT A large esta- blishment re- quired for Cal- cutta. 42. With the full establishment of three Superintendents and the staff of head vaccinators co-operating with, and guiding, and directing the vaccinators, there is no doubt that vaccination in Calcutta is well done, under the eye of the Superintendent General of Vaccination; and in a large city like Calcutta, so multifariously and diversely peopled with different races and creeds, nothing less than this establish- ment will suffice. Throughout the long lines of native streets and gullies the recusant population have to be spoken to, from house to house, and their prejudices and denials overcome. Small-pox, with a very small beginning, breaking out in one of these gullies imperils all Calcutta. By this Calcutta system, much real work is being done from year to year, and barriers of opposition are pro- gressively being beaten down. Dr. Charles is now exerting himself in superintending and organizing vaccination beyond his boundaries, which comprise the city and suburbs only. He should receive extra remu- neration for this. Vaccination without the Suburbs of Cal- cutta. 43. I would also prominently bring to notice that the forty additional vaccinators, whose permanent entertainment has received the sanction of the Government of India by Resolution of 21st January, 1867, have been employed during the past year and season in the new districts immediateiy around Calcutta, where inoculation has been prohibited. There have been 72,936 vaccinated, and almost the whole of these are recorded as successful; six-sevenths of the cases have been individually inspected and verified. These vaccinations have been conducted by the Calcutta Superintendents. The duties in Calcutta have thus, in a measure, been in abeyance for a portion of the vaccinating season. Extra Super- intendents re- quired for vicini- ty of Calcutta. 44. It is now earnestly solicited that additional Superintendents, Sub-Assistant-Surgeons, may be appointed to carry-out the work in thannahs and villages around Calcutta, so that the very important Calcutta vaccination may not be detrimentally interfered with. This has become a necessary measure pending the decision as to the institu- tion of the new vaccine circle, comprising the districts and zillahs around Calcutta, under a distinct European Superintendent, which has not yet been arrived at. To account for the disagreement between the percentages of successful cases set down in Dr. Charles' Calcutta report, and in the general table for Bengal Proper (to be found in the Appendix) as far as relates to Calcutta, it is to be noted that Dr. Charles, in his report, draws his percentage from the primary and ascertained vaccina-
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 17 tion results only. In the tables, the percentage is calculated upon the whole vaccinations, including re-vaccinations and unascertaned ones. Darjeeling Circle of Vac- cination. 45. The Darjeeling circle of vaccination is under Assistant-Surgeon Mathew, as Superintendent. The increase this last season numbers 12,673. The percentage of successful cases 89 this last year over 82 of 1866-67. These results have been verified by the Superintendent by following up the work of his Deputy Superintendent and head vaccinators, and inspecting severally the cases of vaccination, and testing the accuracy of the vaccination registers. Dr. Mathew states that his operations, this last season, were very materially aided and furthered by the addition to his working party of three head vaccinators (kindly supplied to him by Dr. Pearson) acting as Native-Superinten- dents, who made themselves most useful in guiding his vaccinators, verifying their work, and convincing the people, in many instances, of the groundlessness of their objections to vaccination upon caste and religious scruples. It is worthy of remark that out of twenty-six vacci- nators, twelve are men previously inoculators, who have worked satis- factorily. The work this year has been carried on at Rungpore, Dinage- pore, Rajshahye and Western Dooars. 46. Dr. Mathew's efforts in engaging the co-operation of the civil authorities, and in publishing abroad in every possible way the advent of vaccinators amongst the population, and the benign purpose that brought them there, have been successful and praiseworthy. It is a very encouraging fact that so little has been heard of the presence and doings of small-pox inoculators. It may lead the Government to hope that a complete and efficient system of vaccination, based upon the closest and most rigid inspection and verification, and spreading over the land with a view to meet the scourge of small-pox in a fair field of opposition, will ultimately be crowned with success. 47. The whole system is amazingly promoted and advanced by the addition of every new circle to the general scheme now carried on more or less throughout the Bengal Presidency; another link is added to the chain, and the whole strengthened. The community at large became more and more familiar with the prophylactic, mutual assistance is more feasible and easy; and from this general and combined good result the vaccination proceedings in the sister and contiguous Presidencies of Madras and Bombay cannot be excluded. 48. The season's work commenced in November. 49. The work throughout has been satisfactory on the whole, and has met with much less opposition than it encountered last year. The C
18 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT work has been found to be true and sound. A good vaccine vesicle has been established and disseminated, and the prestige and character of the inoculators of small-pox have been, I would hope, considerably damaged in the eyes of the populace. 50. The proceedings of the Superintendent, of his Deputy, and his head vaccinators and general staff of workers traversing the districts, mixing with the people, enlightening them, disabusing them of ignorant prejudices, doing them real good, and convincing them that to avert the danger of small-pox is their sole object in dwelling amongst them, opens a scene to the Government of Bengal which must well compensate for the comparatively trifling outlay incurred. 51. There would seem to be no sufficient reason for detaining a vaccinator during the whole season at Buxa, where the numbers to be operated upon are so scanty; he should visit the place, but might leave to it resort to some other station in the Dooars. 52. Dr. Mathew acted very judiciously in not spreading out his work too much. Whatever number of districts may be included within the circle, that is a matter of little consequence. His performances for any one season must be so arranged and restricted, as to admit of his thoroughly looking into the work of the whole of his party during the working period. 53. Dr. Mathew has been working with his own lymph during the season. Lymph originally supplied by Dr. Charles from Calcutta has pre- served its efficacy during the two seasons. Hermetically-sealed lymph supplied from England has proved excellent also. Ranchee Cir- cle of Vaccina- tion. 54. Dr. Hoskins' first report on the Ranchee circle. The duties in this new circle were first entered upon by Sub-Assistant-Surgeon Neem Chand Goopto, as Deputy Superintendent for the time, at the end of November 1867. Dr. Hoskins, the Superintendent, did not join the circle and commence his work until very late in the season, viz., on the 3rd of February, when there were not much more than two working months left. 55. The new circle comprised the extent of territory included within the control of the Commissioner of Chota Nagpore. 56. At Hazareebaugh, where the work was commenced late in November, the Deputy Superintendent was met and opposed by all sorts of prejudices and childish superstitious fears. Dr. Hoskins enu- merates the numerous objections raised by the people to his proceed- ings, and to those of the Sub-Assistant-Surgeon,
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 19 57. The work was necessarily chiefly confined to Hazareebaugh. 58. Dr. Hoskins describes the Bengallee baids, the original inocu- lators of small-pox, as having relinquished their calling for ten years past, and their work of inoculation having been taken up by vermilion sellers &quot;Sindooreahs,&quot; and with success, amongst the people. If the natives are so impressible, and so open to change, as this testifies to, there is some hope for the success of the more rational and protective system of vaccination after a time, and so soon as the inhabitants become rightly informed on the subject. Three of these Sindooreahs have already taken service as Government vaccinators. At Ranchee, one of the districts of the circle, some of the tikaits, Bengallee native inoculators, have been en- listed in the Government service as vaccinators. 59. Dr. Hoskins, in his para. 13, does not evidently exactly under- stand the system upon which he is to work his party ; this will be ex- plained to him. The results of the cases at Hazareebaugh have been veritably tested, and proved to be true. Captain Money's system, put in operation in Pooroolie, will not answer, as has been shewn. If the inocu- lators come to be employed as vaccinators, the closest supervision and' inspection must be practised. With this close observation in force, with an active Native Superintendent appointed to each district, the inocu- lators (tekaits) might be enlisted as vaccinators, and might be allowed to remain in the particular part of the district to which they belong, and where they possess influence, and carry on vaccination according to our method and system of registration, &c., &c. They might then, under close inspection, be allowed to collect their legitimate gains as before (oppression and over-reaching of the poor being prohibited, and guarded against by the authorities), substituting vaccination for small- pox inoculation merely. 60. The presence of the new circle staff of vaccinators at Hazaree- baugh has had a beneficial influence on the public mind, although the number of vaccinations performed may have been small, and the exer- tions and moral influence of the Deputy Commissioner have very much furthered this good effect. The inoculators of small-pox, either through persuasion or fear, have this year much relaxed their labours. Small- pox did not break out as in previous years. The Superintendent, Dr. Hoskins, expresses his opinion that the local inoculators of small-pox are ready to come over to the side of Government, and to become vaccinators, as soon as they see a decided opposition to inoculation exhibited by the ruling authorities.
20 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT 61. The number of vaccinators employed in the new circle has been 20. The head vaccinators allowed have not been employed for want of sufficiently good men. Sonthal Per- gunnah vaccina- tion. 62. The Superintendent, Sub-Assistant-Surgeon Nocoor Chunder Banerjee, took charge of his duties late in December 1867; he did not do much until the middle of January; very little was done in May, and during one month of the season he was unable to travel about for want of carriage. The Sub-Assistant-Surgeon met with much opposition to, vaccination from the traders of the Damen, after the panic, resulting from a small-pox epidemic which had shewn itself, had in a measure subsided. During the presence of the small-pox, the people applied for vaccination to the Government vaccine party, which had proceeded to the infected region. Vaccination continued until April. The Superin- tendent carried on his duty of supervision for less than three months, and it is to be feared that his inspection was not so close, and really valuable, as it ought to have been. In fact, he seems to have displayed indolence and apathy, and is not a fit man for the post. He has, in consequence, been removed from this particular duty. District and Municipal vac- cination. 63. Vaccination within districts by vaccinators attached to the Government charitable dispensaries and by Municipal vaccinators. 64. The proceedings of this department of the Bengal vaccine scheme are unreliable, except so far as the work lies within the range of the Civil Surgeon's daily rounds and observation. It is a system obnoxi- ous to caprice on the part of the inspecting officer, and, even when carried on close to the beat of the medical officer, is more or less looked after, according to the leisure of the surgeon from other urgent and more im- mediate and pressing duties, and to his aptitude for labour, and to his especial earnestness and desire to diffuse vaccination, and ward off approaches of small-pox. 65. The system is, however, gradually undergoing supercession and obliteration, by the setting up of special vaccine circles under medical officers, whose sole duty it is to look after vaccination, and who are responsible to the Government for the spread and maintenance of a vaccine prophylactic against small-pox, which is one of the scourges of India at present. 66. The district vaccination is not specially reported upon; allu- sion is made in the various dispensary reports (which are now being published) to the more or less successful working of it; to the reception given to it by the people at large, and to the character of the vaccinia
THE GOVT. OF BENGAL PROPER. 21 so disseminated; but it is not conducted under special superintendence and guardianship, the results, therefore, are not altogether reliable. 67. The results of the district or zillah, and municipal vaccina- tion are shewn in the table in the Appendix. Detached vac- cination at San- kerberiah. 68. Dr. Charles' account of the stamping out of small-pox at Sankerberiah is very interesting, and together with his corollary upon the proceedings therein, viz., his urging upon Government the sanction for a moveable vaccine establishment, also find place in the Appendix. 69. I make the following remarks upon these papers :22 VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT, &C. the new circle will not, in the meanwhile, be in any way interfered with or curtailed ; but, should the expenditure be objected to by Government, I think that some of the 60 vaccinators, and of the nine head vac- cinators already granted, may be told off, and made to understand that they constitute a moveable body, and are to be available for itineration to infected parts at any moment, working at other times with the general body of the rest of the staff. Contents of figured State- ment. 72. I should be sorry to see the proposal, now before the Govern- ment, for a new circle of vaccination under a European medical officer, comprising the several large districts or zillahs encircling Calcutta, in any way prejudiced by a further additional and less important suggestion, desirable as I acknowledge it to be. 73. The tables, exhibiting the number vaccinated in Bengal Proper, are herewith attached. They include the vaccination by Dr. Charles, the Superintendent General of Vaccination at Calcutta, performed at and around the city itself; also those performed in the zillah districts, under the dispensary system and within the municipalities; and, besides, the vaccination carried on in the Darjeeling and Ranchee circles, and those within the Sonthal Pergunnahs.
THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. BY T. EDMONDSTON CHARLES, M. D., M. R. C. P. LOND. SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION.
INDEX. Nature of the Report ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Duties of the Superintendent General of Vaccination ... ... ... 2 CHAPTER I. Lymph Supply. Character of the Virus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 Degeneration of Vaccine ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 English Lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 Mr. Pearson's Hill Lymph ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Storage of the Virus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 Number of supplies sent ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Reports of Results ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Causes of failure ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 Measures for obviating this tendency to decompose ... ... ... 11 Other modes of retaining Virus active ... ... ... ... ... 12 CHAPTER II. Vaccination in Calcutta and the Suburbs. Superintendents ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 Vaccinators ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 Character of Vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 Numbers Vaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 Progress of Vaccination. ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 Classes who do not receive Vaccination .. ... ... ... ... 18 Measures of Medical Police for arresting small-pox epidemics at their commencement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 CHAPTER III Vaccination in the Districts round Calcutta. History of the Temporary arrangement ... ... ... ... ... 20 General Superintendence... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 Superintendents ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 Head Vaccinators ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 Vaccinators ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 Positions in which the Vaccinators worked ... ... ... ... 25 Example shewing mode of working ... ... ... ... ... 26 Number Vaccinated ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 Falling-off when compared with the previous season ... ... ... 28 Proposal to keep back part of the pay of the younger Vaccinators... ... 29 Character and Success of Vaccination ... ... ... ... ... 30 Explanation of Success ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. Nature of the Report 1. The following report has been called for by the Principal Inspector-General of the Medical Department, in order to enable him to report fully on the present state of vaccination in Bengal. It will embrace only the operations conducted under the direction of the Superintendent General of Vaccination. The vaccination conducted by the recently appointed Superintendents of Vaccination in the Darjeeling and Ranchee circles of vaccination, and in that of the Sonthal Pergun- nahs, have not been in any way under his control. These new circles as well as the vaccinators attached to the various civil dispensaries, are quite independent of the Superintendent General of Vaccination, and are immediately under the general medical administration of the country. Duties of the cination. 2. As stated in the first special report on the Presidency Vac- cination Department, the functions of the Superintendent General Vaccination are twofold:2 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE lowing paragraphs, the lymph sent out from this office has been procured from Calcutta itself. The virus has been of unexceptionable quality, and, during the cold months, has been used most successfully. The virus throughout the year has been kept in a high state of perfection, and no vesicle which was not typically perfect has ever been used to provide lymph for transmission to another station. In minor characters, the vesicles in January differ somewhat from those in July, but in all essen- tial characters they are precisely similar. Their contents I believe to be identical in all important particulars. Arguing from analogy, I feel sure that if simultaneous vaccinations were practised with the virus procured in Calcutta at different seasons, at any place where climate did not lead to the slight alterations in the appearance of the vesicles alluded to, the vaccinations, after very few transmissions, would be found to be not distinguishable, the one set from the other. Degeneration of Vaccine. 4. In looking into the annals of vaccination in India, I find doubts have been expressed as to the efficacy of Indianized lymph. No facts have been brought forward in support of such allegations, and I look upon them as entirely groundless. The tendency of the virus to degenerate and cease to produce vaccinia, seems to have been the founda- tion on which such a hypothesis has been brought forward. Two ques- tions are here involved, which, if accuracy is desired, must be kept separate. The virus, it is true, degenerates in the sense of being unable to keep up its kind, in consequence principally of superadded in- flammatory results. When such changes first begin, the virus may, by careful management, be brought back to a state of perfection. Even in a single transmission it may become degenerated beyond recall; at times the change may be more gradual. The moment this transforma- tion has taken place it is no longer vaccine. A succession of degenerated vaccinations is not kept up. If a vaccinator attempts from such a source to keep up a lymph supply he fails. Once or twice he may succeed in creating inflammatory processes of sorts; but his power of effecting even this soon stops. No favouring change of climate can ever bring back such lymph to the characteristic normal vaccine. The virus, on the other hand, cannot degenerate in the sense of becoming less protective against variola, and still continuing to be vaccine. The virus of vaccinia may have subsidiary characteristics impressed on it, some of which are salutary, while some are prejudicial; but in its great, essential feature, the fact that it is variola deprived of its secondary eruption, vaccine as long as it is vaccine remains the same. The differences between the various forms of small-pox are very great
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 3 and we do not know of one form of small-pox affording more protection against a second attack than another will. The differences between one specimen of vaccinia and another are infinitely small when compared to the differences between even a slight attack of small- pox and any form of vaccinia, and while it is held that vaccinia pro- tects equally with a previous attack of variola against an attack of small-pox, it is extremely difficult to believe that a minor difference in a vaccine vesicle can, in any way, affect the result. Till the contrary has been proved by facts, the mere assertion that this vaccine is good, or that vaccine is bad, in the sense of a greater or less protective efficacy, deserves but little attention. Degeneration of the virus in this sense I have never seen to occur, and in the following remarks it is to be understood, that it is not implied that any kind of vaccine is superior to another as a prophylactic. English Lymph. 5. A supply of lymph in tubes, as well as on points and glasses, was received from the National Vaccine Institution on the 12th November, 1867, and at once despatched to different stations. The virus in Calcutta was perfect and was not renewed from this source. With each supply a memorandum was sent requesting information as to its success, with the view of comparing the results against those obtainable from the lymph procured from Calcutta vaccinations, as well as from that obtained from the Hills. So few replies have been received, that such a comparison is not practicable. From the fact that so few reports of failure have reached this office regarding it, it may be supposed that a fair amount of success has attended on its use. I beg to draw attention to the fact of the late arrival of the supply of lymph from England, and suggest that arrangements be made to ensure its being sent at an earlier date. It requires several transmissions to be made, before a sufficient abundance of virus can be obtained for extensive vaccination, and as the vaccinating season is short, the loss of some weeks at its commencement, constitutes an obstacle to the spread of vaccination, which should be carefully avoided. Mr. Pearson's Hill Lymph. 6. Knowing that Hill people are extremely liable to small-pox in very virulent and fatal forms, and having seen among them vaccination under some of its most typical and perfect aspects, at an early period of my service in India, I contracted a great partiality for vaccine lymph from such a stock. Believing that the use of such virus might tend to a more early success in vaccinating throughout Bengal, I procured several supplies of such lymph from Mr. Pearson, the Superintendent General of Vaccination in the North-West Provinces. Owing to a
4 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE very general want of acknowledgment of the memoranda sent out with such supplies, it is to be regretted that it is impossible to make the com- parative statements which it was desired to prepare. From having myself seen vaccinations from this lymph, I am able to bear testimony to its being a vaccine possessed of the most desirable characters, to its infecting power being great, and to its results proving that the very greatest care has been taken in its propagation and selection, by those entrusted by Mr. Pearson with this duty. I regret much not having been able to bring the results out in a statistical form, as such would, doubtless, have shewn its perfection in a striking light. As on a recent tour through Europe I have enjoyed opportunities of critically inspecting vaccination in England, Scotland and Ireland, as well as in France, Russia, Prussia, Austria, various of the smaller German states, Holland, &c., &c., I am in a position to claim considerable weight for my opinion on the subject of the excellency of Mr. Pearson's Hill lymph. I have rarely seen vaccine with which I have been so thoroughly satisfied as with that with which he has supplied me, and I have never seen any that I would prefer to it, unless it be that to be had in Bengal in January and February, when the climate is such, that vaccinia flourishes in a state of perfection that it seems impossible to surpass. Storage of the virus. 7. Up till 1864, the lymph sent out by this office was generally sent in a dry state on ivory points, or between pieces of glass. In either way it was found to be so unsuccessful that, trusting to my experience in colder climates, I commenced to make an extensive use of Dr. Husband's capillary tubes. These tubes had been in use in the department before I assumed its direction. I find that my predecessor, Dr. J. Macpherson, had indented for 250 tubes in the year 1859. There is no record of how many of these were used, as it was only in November, 1862 that a column was introduced into the records to shew how many tubes were filled. In the whole 12 months of 1863, I find 315 tubes were filled. Since the end of 1864 and beginning of 1865 the use of the tubes has become so general as almost to exclude all other methods; tubes being sent in answer to all applications unless points or glasses are specially asked for ; very few medical men ask to be supplied with lymph in any other way, many expressly mentioning that they desire the supply in tubes. Number of sup- plies sent. 8. As a rule, each supply consists of three tubes ; though through- out the whole year occasional applications are made for lymph, it is prac- tically only during the six cooler months that any demand for virus
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 5 exists. Even in them the bulk of the applications is confined to November and December, during which two months, above nine hundred tubes were distributed last year. In October, January, and February only some 650 tubes were distributed. In March, little over a hundred, and in April, only 42 tubes were despatched. Report of re- sults. 9. As already stated, I have to regret my inability to tabulate the results with exactitude. It has been attempted for years to obtain such precise information, that the degree of untrustworthiness of the virus supplied may be judged of, especially when compared with that from other sources of supply. By determining the date at which vaccination can generally be commenced at stations, at different distances from Calcutta, it was hoped that the supplies might be so timed, that the annoyance and other undesirable results, consequent on a yearly failure to establish vaccinia at the commencement of the season, might be avoided. Owing to the over-occupation of the medical officers, the answers to the memorandum accompanying the lymph have been much fewer than would have been desirable, and many of them have been so devoid of precision as to be only useful in a very general way. In estimating the value of the answers actually received, it must be borne in mind that a medical officer, receiving a supply of vaccine, is much more ready to reply, if the result is not successful (as this is necessary to ensure a further supply being sent) than he is, when success is obtained and no further supplies are required. The ratio between success and failure cannot even be approximately guessed at by any information at my disposal. The effect of season, in determining the result, is evident from the following table, though owing to a want of precision in the reporters even this must not be taken to represent absolute correctness. Table shewing the results which have been reported from the use of Calcutta Lymph from October, 1867 to March, 1868. Year and Month. Reports of success. Reports of failure. 1867. October ... ... ... ... 2 4 November ... ... ... ... 12 15 December ... ... ... ... 16 5 1868. January ... ... ... ... 11 1 February ... ... ... ... 13 3 March ... ... ... ... 6 1 Grand Total ... ... ... 60 29
6 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE As examples of stations in which success was obtained early in the season, I may instance Mozufferpore and Midnapore, the dates of the respective reports being 22nd and 30th October. As shewing that it has been possible to send lymph in an active state for long distances, in spite of very hot weather at the end of the vaccinating season, I may state that lymph, despatched from Calcutta on the 15th and 22nd February, and the 4th and 21st March, was success- fully used at Jhansi to re-vaccinate the 93rd Highlanders. I append a table shewing the results which have been reported from the use of lymph from different sources, which, though very defective and not quite reliable, is nevertheless of interest. Table shewing the results of English, Hill, and Calcutta Lymph despatched from this office in each month, commencing from October 1867 to April 1868. English Lymph Hill Lymph. Calcutta Lymph. Year and Month. Number of Supplies Successful Failed. Not Reported Number of Supplies Successful. Failed Not Reported Number of Supplies. Successful. Failed. Doubtful Not Ascertained Not Reported. 1867 October ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74 2 4 1 ... 67 November ... 21 ... ... ... 18 1 1 ... 131 12 15 1 ... 103 December ... ... 2 2 ... 3 4 ... ... 127 16 5 ... 1 105 1868 January ... ... 1 2 ... ... 1 1 ... 80 11 1 ... ... 68 February ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1 ... 65 13 3 ... ... 49 March ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 43 6 1 ... ... 35 April ... ... ... ... ... 10 ... ... ... 9 3 ... ... ... 6 14 29 Grand Total ... 21 3 4 14 38 6 3 29 528 63 29 2 1 433 Causes of failure. 10 In exceptional cases, want of skill in vaccinating, leaving the virus unused for some time after its arrival, and the attempt to vacci- nate too many subjects with a small amount of virus doubtless lead to some of the want of success. That I am possibly insisting too lightly on such causes, may be suspected, when I mention that two medical officers reported that with three tubes they had respectively attempted to vaccinate 30 and 40 subjects, but met with failure. Primary differences in the infecting power of the lymph, and in the receptive power of individuals in unfavourable climates, as well as the prejudicial effect of a merely high temperature on the virus, may also be surmised to be accountable for some of the failures. The great cause of want of success, is to be found in the fact, that the virus becomes rapidly inactive after being shut up in the tubes. In arm to arm vaccination success is all but absolutely certain; but at
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 7 a very early period after the virus is removed from the arm it becomes inert. Under the microscope the lymph is found to have undergone transformation, and frequently very beautiful crystalizations are met with. Destructive changes of a putrefactive nature are very generally observable in such lymph. The virus sent from England, as well as that procured from the Hills, is also liable to become inert. That introduced into tubes in Calcutta, is much more apt, however, to decompose than either of the other varieties. I attribute the extreme liability to decomposition to two causes : 1st, to the use of improper tubes. 2nd, to the existence in the atmos- phere of Calcutta, in great abundance, of an active agent which leads to rapid Putrefaction. Measures for obviating this tendency to de- compose 1st provision of better tubes 11. In my first special report in 1865, I pointed out that the tubes supplied by the Medical Store Department, were unlike those proposed by Dr. Husband, which I had previously been in the habit of using. Both the bore, and the thickness of the glass, are excessive. From this it results, that an unnecessary amount of air is shut up in the tubes, and an avoidable amount of heat is required to close them: both evils of the first magnitude, when delicate results are at stake. In 1864 the imperfections of these tubes were pointed out to the Officer in charge of the Medical Stores; and a representation on the point was sent to the authorities who supply them in England. I observe also, that a letter from the Government of Bengal, No. 6925, of the 2nd December, 1865, to the officiating Principal Inspector- General, says in para. 6 : &quot; His Honor requests that you will either pro- vide the capillary tubes referred to by Dr. Smith, or authorize him to obtain them at a cost not exceeding Rs. 500,&quot; as I was not in India then, and can find no further correspondence on the subject, I do not know what further steps were taken in the matter. The same form of tubes is issued as before my representations were made. The worst of the tubes are rejected, and not filled with lymph, but when even the best are bad, such a process of selection affords only limited advantage. Early attention to this matter is solicited. 2nd counterac- tion of putrefac- tive agency. At first sight the observation that vaccine lymph, shut up in tubes in the Delta of the Ganges, at certain seasons, has a marked tendency to, decompose more rapidly than that similarly treated among the heights of the Himalayah, might seem to be a fanciful one. It is in strict accord, however, with the investigations of Schroeder and other earlier observers on similar points, unconnected with vaccination. The numerous enquiries
8 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE of Pasteur during the last ten years into the subject of various fermen- tations and decompositions, and especially his more recent labours on the question of putrefaction, tend to explain what might be mysterious or inexplicable in the fact I now bring to light. Pasteur's researches also serve to guide us in making efforts in an intelligent direction towards obviating the tendency to spoil. We have abundant agencies at our command, to prevent the lymph from undergoing the decomposition complained of, but unfor- tunately most of our best antiputrescents are also disinfectants. At the same time that we prevent decomposition we also destroy completely the active principle of the virus. In experimenting with sulphurous acid it has been found, that a ten per cent. solution of that gas in water within a few seconds renders the virus inert. A similar solution of carbolic acid is not nearly so destructive, but as it coagulates the virus, in this strength at least, it will not fulfil neces- sary requirements. I do not yet despair of finding some feeble antisep- tic, which, in a state of great dilution, may sufficiently overcome this tendency to putrefaction, without destroying the potentiality of the virus. Knowing that cresylic acid possesses most of the properties of carbolic acid, without the power of coagulating albumen, a supply of it has been sent for from England, as none is obtainable in this country. Memoranda for experiments, with a long list of substances, have been prepared, some of which have already been tried or are at present being investigated. As no useful purpose would be served by a simple enumeration of partial success or failure, or of undetermined results, I have not thought it necessary to give any detail regarding the experiments. In the present state of the enquiry I may mention that salts of soda and potass seem to hold out the most encouraging prospects. Glycerine by itself is possessed of little power of preservation, possibly a glycerole of the chlorate of potass, or some similar preparation may be found to answer. A ten per cent. solution of the chloride of sodium in water affords most material aid in keeping the lymph effective. Even were no other result obtained, the knowledge of this one single fact would repay me for the thought and labour the investi- gation has required. The property which such a solution has, of keeping the virus from spoiling, can be usefully taken advantage of by the medical officers all over India, as everywhere in the plains the difficulty of keeping lymph exists. Now that the key to the solution
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 9 of the question has been found, every medical officer will be able to assist in the enquiry by experimenting with likely agents. It is only now a question requiring time and observation, to determine the relative capabilities of different substances in definite proportion, in accomplishing this end. Though it has been indicated that salting the lymph in a good method, it cannot yet be predicated what will be found the best pro- cedure. In the course of these experiments it has been determined that cobra poison (another animal virus) loses its potentiality by keeping. Two specimens of dry cobra poison, which had been long kept in a dry state, were found to be inert. Solutions of these specimens were injected below the skin of pigeons, without effect. The influence of temperature in facilitating decomposition was early noticed during these enquiries. In the early months of 1865, stores of lymph were shut up in the expence magazine of the Calcutta Ice-house. The temperature was not sufficiently low to resist the extreme tendency to decompose, and the experiment was a failure. As even a few extra degrees of heat favour the production of such changes (whether antiseptic agents are used or not) it has been found a useful precaution to expose the tubes to the air as little as possible. They are habitually kept in porous vessels filled with water. The evaporation, when the air is dry, tends to reduce the temperature of the water, and though a very simple measure, the precaution is sometimes very efficacious in delaying the changes which it is wished to guard against. I consider that this practise is so useful, that it deserves to be made generally known to others, who may have experienced the same difficulties in preserving a little store of lymph even for short periods. Other modes of retaining virus active. 12. As my experience of the fluid lymph stored in tubes, differed so much in India from my former experience of it, (at a time when it seemed uncertain, as to whether success would be arrived at, in the endeavours to keep lymph in a fluid state) some experiments were made to ascertain the feasibility of keeping crusts or dried virus in an active condition. Since so great a necessity for the investigation has not existed, such an enquiry has been partially desisted from; it doubtless deserves, however, future prosecution. As one instance, further exemplifying the direction experiment ought to take, it may be stated that the virus was rapidly dried over strong sulphuric acid in the exhausted receiver of an air b
10 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE pump, and then kept under the influence of soda lime to ensure extreme dryness being retained. CHAPTER II. VACCINATION IN CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. Superin- tendents. 13. The three Sub-Assistant-Surgeons, who are the Superintendents of vaccination in Calcutta, continue to discharge their duties, as well as the present arrangements, which require that most of their time should be devoted to superintend vaccination in the surrounding districts, will permit them to do. In my two previous reports, I have drawn attention to the fact, that it is extremely undesirable that the practice of taking them away from their substantive duties should be allowed to continue. In consequence of my previous representations on this question, I anti- cipate that they will be required to devote themselves to their duties in Calcutta and the Suburbs during the next vaccinating season. Vaccinators. 14. The pay of the vaccinators is entirely defrayed by the muni- cipalities of the respective places in which they are employed. The Suburban Municipality has been paying for fifteen vaccinators at the rate of ten rupees each per mensem since October 1866, while the Calcutta Municipality has, since 1st January, 1868, provided for the pay of three head vaccinators and twelve vaccinators at the rate of fifteen rupees for each head vaccinator, and ten rupees to each man of the other class. Owing to the unequal distribution of the suburbs round Calcutta, it was found difficult to divide the duties, so as to make an equal share of work fall on the class of head vaccinators. The arrange- ment has been made that the pay of the Suburban Vaccinators shall be graduated, so that those in positions little lighter than those of a head vaccinator, shall be more highly recompensed than others. Vacccinators have been entertained on a pay of eight rupees to permit of the arrange- ment being carried out without entailing extra cost. In one instance, in which the charge was more heavy than the others, the pay has been supplemented up to that of a head vaccinator. Character of vaccination 15. After the remarks made, regarding the degeneration of vaccine in para. 3, I trust my present meaning will not be liable to be misinter- preted. During the last year I have seen more cases shewing a tendency to take an inflammatory action than I have seen in Calcutta since 1865. In the north division, I had again and again to call the attention of the Superintendent to the subject, and to guard the vaccinators against the danger they ran of allowing the virus to degenerate. My own attention
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 11 was not attracted to the point so much in the other divisions; but in the diary, kept by the Superintendent of the middle division, I see he has made the same observation repeatedly, and has been most indefatigable in insisting upon the vaccinators guarding against this fault. This daily record of his proceedings has been most diligently prepared by Baboo Buddynath Brummo and might serve as a model of neatness, complete- ness, and precision, for any one requiring to be taught how to furnish such a document. It serves to aid the Superintendent General in a most effective way to obtain a more exact insight into the daily working of the department than he could possibly obtain in any other way. This inflammatory tendency is a great part preventable. As soon as the Superintendents can devote more of their attention to the vaccinators it may be expected to diminish. For this alone, if for no other cause, I would urge that the Superintendents should be allowed to confine themselves to the duties for which they were appointed. Independent of the importance of a supply of perfect virus, the question of good or bad vaccination exercises much influence on the popularity with which the practice is received. The pain and fever attendant on unnecessary inflammation, are drawbacks to accepting vaccination, of which unwilling people will be ever ready to take advantage in disparaging this prophylactic. Numbers vaccinated. 16. The numbers vaccinated in Calcutta during the last vaccinating season have amounted to 3,848, while those in the Suburbs have been 4,685. These numbers may be taken to represent pretty fairly the amount of vaccination among the permanent population of Calcutta and its Suburbs, as many more persons have been vaccinated by the same establishment, but have not been included in the above statements, owing to their having only been temporary residents while passing through Calcutta to some other destination. A great proportion of these have been cases of juvenile vaccination, but the exact extent to which infant vaccination has been practised cannot now be stated, as the time, necessary to determine this point, precludes the calculation being made before the report must leave this office. For practical purposes, however, the figures as they stand might be compared against the birth-rate of Calcutta, and they approach somewhat closely to the births which have been registered. Owing to the imperfection of the data, as regards the number of births, which actually take place in Calcutta, this happy state of matters is only an apparent one; the real fact being, that the numbers vaccinated yearly will be found to fall very far short of the birth-rate
12 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE whenever a reliable registration is ensured. As stated in the second special report, arrangements were made to register the vaccinations according to the districts in which the births were registered, so that those places in which the greatest discrepancy existed between the two might be known. Owing to the system of registration having been again changed during the year, I am yet unable to make the com- parison wished for. Progress of Vaccination 17. In spite of the unsatisfactory nature of the figures which I have more than once brought before the Government, and on the signi- ficance of which I have before dwelt, I am personally aware of the fact that year by year fresh families are persuaded to accept vaccination who have never consented to receive it before. This fact is mentioned, more with the intention of convincing the Government that something can be done to remedy the unsatisfactory condition of matters at present exist- ing, than of pretending that any real efficient progress is being made. If, for a short series of years, a well organized attempt were directed towards the accomplishment of this end, undoubted progress would be certain. The fact was early recognized, that an ignorant vaccinator, a man of no social standing, was absolutely ineffective as an agent for persuad- ing the citizens of the metropolis to allow themselves to be vaccinated That a medical man should go from house to house and combat the obstacles which prevent progress, is a necessity that cannot be avoided. As soon as the Superintendents are again made available for this duty, more or less advance will follow as a matter of course. In 1865 very strong recommendations were made to push the advantage we had then within our reach. With the terrors full in remembrance of the unparalleled calamity from the epidemic of small- pox which had, at the time of my report desolated their households, the task of forcing vaccination on their acceptance, would have been compara- tively an easy one. Now the amount of labour required will be tenfold more than it would have been if the suggestion had been acted on at the time that it was made. The counter proposal to delay action in this matter has resulted in a check to the further advance of vaccination in Calcutta, which it will take many years, and much hardwork, to overcome. Classes who do not receive vac- cination. 18. In addition to large numbers of the Bengalee population, who have not yet adopted the practice of vaccination, simply because it has not been systematically and effectively forced on their acceptance, there exists a large class of Hindustanee residents, who have never yielded to the strongest solicitations. The task does not seem a very hopeful one
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT 13 but still I consider that if every year the subject is brought before them, and urged on their attenion, some of the most influential members of the community may yet be talked over. If this anticipation should be real- ized, for the others to yield also, will only become a question of time. At present the greatest danger to Calcutta from small-pox,lies in the presence of this community. The thousands living in the &quot; Burra Bazaar&quot; form an assembly of unprotected persons, among whom the slightest spark of small-pox contagion would be sufficient to light up a conflagra- tion, which would endanger the public health of every street in the city. This community is too wealthy and too fond of having recourse to law courts, to leave much ground for hoping that firmess in insisting that they should comply with the practice of all other classes of their fellow citizens, will for the present avail much. They are aware that the subject of a compulsory vaccination law, at some future date, has already been mooted for their special benefit. They have told me, as they have no objection to vaccination, the passing of such a law would not distress them. That when the law is passed they will at once obey it, but that till then they will not allow themselves to be vaccinated. In the mean time should the measures alluded to in the following paragraph be legalised, they will doubtless re-act by making the Hindu- stanee population more ready to listen, when appeals are made to them on the subject of vaccination. Measures of Medical Police for arresting small-pox epi- demics at their commencement 19. Some measures of medical police are urgently called for, before the good effects of systematic vaccination can be brought out, in the forcible light in which they are capable of being exhibited. It is necessary that each case of small-pox, as it occurs, should be brought to notice, and that steps should be taken to ensure more or less strict isolation of such cases. A report on this subject has been addressed to the Commissioner of Police in Calcutta, and it is hoped that he will take the necessary steps for having the matter brought before Government. It seems unnecessary to go again into the question at length, and a copy of the report referred to, is appended to this one from which any further information that may be desired can be obtained. CHAPTER III. VACCINATION IN THE DISTRICTS ROUND CALCUTTA. History of the temporary ar- rangement. 20. As already detailed in para. 2 of this report, the present arrangement for vaccinating round Calcutta has resulted from a very small beginning. It was desired to ascertain whether the country people
14 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE in the neighbourhood could not be induced to accept vaccination. An experiment was begun. In carrying it out, it was stipulated that no cost beyond that of travelling should be incurred. In the beginning of 1865 a sum of Rs. 500 was sanctioned, to pay for a few extra vaccinators, and as, before the end of the season, the sum allowed had been expended, a grant of Rs. 400, (required to enable vaccination to be continued till the hot weather set in), was also sanctioned. A permanent establishment, on the ground that the undertaking had now exceeded the bounds of an experi- ment was proposed, and Superintendents, head vaccinators, vaccinators, and, all the machinery for a complete vaccine establishment was asked for. Permanent arrangements were deferred, and a grant of Rs. 900 for extra vaccinators was made; subsequently two successive sums for Rs. 500 were also provided, making a total of Rs. 1,900 for the vaccinating season of 1865-66. In December 1866, the entertainment of forty vaccinators during six months was provided for, the arrangement being retrospective to meet expenses which had been incurred in anticipation of the sanction. On the 2nd of September, 1867, these forty vaccinators became a permanent instead of a temporary establishment, the season 1867-68 being the first one in which a permanent establishmeut of vaccinators for working round Calcutta has been in existence. General Super- intendence. 21. While the experiment was being tried, the Superintendent General directed the operations. Even after special vaccinators had been sanctioned he continued in charge as a voluntary duty, anticipating that permanent arrangements would shortly be made; without any correspon- dence on the subject, the work of these vaccinators has been directed. Last season it was found impossible on many occasions to leave Calcutta when his presence in the districts round would have been very bene- ficial. In other words, the necessary amount of supervision was found incompatible with the due performance of the duties of his substantive appointment. The general superintendence of vaccination, when counted by the hundred thousand, constitutes no light or easy task when properly performed, and it is respectfully urged that it is not a duty which can be tacked on to those of an officer who has already sufficient occupation. I beg that the Principal Inspector-General will forward a strong repre- sentation to Government on the subject, in order that I may be relieved from a charge, which though cheerfully assumed, while an experiment, was being made, has for long quite out-grown my capacity for exercising
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 15 an effective control. I trust, that under no circumstances will it be found necessary for me to continue in this charge any longer; but should the exigencies of the public service require that this establish- ment should be directly under me, during the next working season, I trust that arrangements will be made to recompense me for the responsibility involved. It is impossible to predict what will be the out-turn of work performed by this establishment during the coming cold weather; but if, as is expected, Superintendents are appointed, it will be such, at to compare against the whole vaccination in the Punjab or North-West Provinces. In the following season, if extra vaccinators are sanctioned, it will prove a source of disappointment if the work does not exceed that performed by the other vaccine establishments named. If the matter were so placed before Govern- ment, it seems certain that they would not expect that duties, now no longer on an experimental footing, should be gratuitously performed. Even in the event of a special officer being appointed to this duty, it will probably seem right that, for the present at least, the direction of the establishment should remain in my hands. Any medical officer, could very soon make himself capable of performing the duties of general superintendence; but it would take him much longer time to direct efficiently, such a large undertaking. Superinten- dents. 22. The three Superintendents of Vaccination for the Town and Suburbs have been, from necessity, employed in the supervision of the vaccination practised in the Mofussil. No Superintendents have yet been appointed for this duty. The duties to be performed by them are very laborious, and when extensive vaccination is being practised in the Mofussil, it is a most unsafe arrangement to entrust its supervision to men with other duties. In the Calcutta system, the Superintendent being a medical man, may be held to represent the keystone of the arch. He is the centre round which every minor arrangement hinges. He may be said to be not only the controlling power but the moving power of the whole machinery. In minor points of the arrangements, slight deficiencies matter little, but by anything affecting the superintendence the welfare of the department in every direction is involved. Diminish the supervision, and the Calcutta system is no longer what it professes to be; seriously interfere with it, the system collapses, the establishment becomes inefficient for good, powerful only for evil. Gangs of vaccina- tors working in Bengal, without the strict controlling agency of medical
16 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE supervision, constitute an element, dangerous to the ultimate success of vaccination, which cannot too carefully be guarded against. Baboos Jadub Chunder Ghose, Buddynath Brammo, and Sreenath Mookerjee have performed the duties of Superintendents. The two first mentioned Sub-Assistant-Surgeons have been engaged in their present duties for many years, and are most efficient, trustworthy, and meritorious in regard to the responsibilities entrusted to them. They possess natural aptitude for the work; while years of experience and training, render them efficient in the discharge of their duties, to a degree which renders their services in this department very valuable. Baboo Sreenath Mookerjee is a First Grade Sub-Assistant-Surgeon of 19 years' standing. This has been the first season that he has been in the vaccine department, consequently I am not in a position to bear such emphatic testimony regarding him. I am glad, however, to be able to say that he has been anxious to do his duty, and up to his abilities-, has discharged his various functions to my satisfaction. During his long service, he has commanded the good opinions of all under whom he has served, and he possesses testimonials, pointing to his diligent service, of no ordinary character. In several respects I con- sider him not so well qualified to fill the appointment he now holds, as he would be to do justice to almost any other post. As I believe him to be a very deserving and meritorious servant of the Government, I have much pleasure in recommending that he should be promoted to any other position, in which his services would be more appreciated, in consequence of his greater fitness to discharge duties other than those he now performs. I have the less hesitation in recommending such a measure, as he has evinced his readiness to leave the vaccine depart- ment by applying for another appointment. At present his loss to the department will not be felt; after two or three years of training and experience, it would doubtless be more difficult to part with his services. Head Vaccina- tors. 23. In the first special report on the Presidency vaccine establish- ment the need for such a grade was pointed out, and sanction asked for an addition of nine such men. In the second special report the same point was again adverted to. On the 23rd October, 1867, a letter was addressed to the Secretary to the Government of Bengal, requesting that nine men of this grade might be provided for work during the coming season. Sanction was given to the arrangement, and a report called for, as to its working, at the end of six months. On the 16th April this report was submitted, and these nine head vaccinators now
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 17 constitute a permanent part of the establishment. In paras. three and four of this report, it was stated18 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE well trained, others give promise of turning out well, and I have no doubt that the majority of them will prove nearly as good workers as can be secured for the wages allowed them. It must not be supposed that these vaccinators have been trained to the degree of excellence that the quality of the work done, might fairly lead one to suppose. The fact is, that many of the vaccinators have performed but few vaccinations; while they were in a state of pupilage, they have been employed in assisting others, who could ensure a larger percentage of success by operating dexterously; and even when they have by degrees shewn that they had acquired the manual trick, which enabled them to avoid failure, each vesicle, from which they were to take their virus, has been selected for them. By management of this sort, the bad effects on the minds of the population, resulting on their seeing constant failures, has been avoided. It is no empty boast to be able to say, the people have yet to learn that a vaccination performed by the department can fail. A fondness for attracting inoculators into the vaccine establish- ment, is a partiality inherited from a long line of my predecessors. It has been a source of constant disappointment that, as the department increased, the majority of the new vaccinators could not be recruited from among the old inoculators. The demand not being a gradual one, and the necessity for at once procuring new men being a sudden emer- gency, which left little room for choice in the matter, the constitution of the establishment is very different from what I should have preferred, had selection been possible. Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose has been more successful than the other Superintendents in procuring the services of inoculators, but even under his superintendence the number are few when compared to what they should be. The bad character, and intolerance of discipline, of many of the old inoculators, which has led to their discharge even after they have been entertained, has doubtless had some influence in reducing the proportion they bear to the others. By filling up vacancies as they occur, with as many inoculators as can be persuaded to turn vaccinators, it may still be hoped that many more of this class will join the establishment than have lately done, and that the old associations of the department may be in a measure restored. Lists have been prepared of the vaccinators, in which each of their qualifications and tendencies is noted; as the peculiarities of the head
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 19 vaccinators are also recorded, the various gangs can now be put together, with regard to their special qualifications. The idle or negligent, though thoroughly trained, can be made to work under a severe task-master, while the less able, though more willing vaccinators, can be placed under a careful head vaccinator, even should he be deficient in firmness. The skilled operator can be made to work with the man cunning in persuasion, so that the defects of one can be counter-balanced by the strong points of the other. Again the energetic leader of a gang who brooks no refusal, may be employed where his fault will not be liable to run him into mischief, while the more cautious though less pushing head vaccinator, may have his defect made one of less consequence, by being trusted to keep his gang out of collision with a population ready to resent over-zeal on the part of the vaccinators. Positions in which the vacci- nators worked. 25. The vaccinators under the superintendence of Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose, commenced work in three gangs at the following places:20 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE Baboo Sreenath Mookerjee's vaccinators commenced work in three divisions, No. one at Kooshteah, No. two in the Nawabgunge Thannah, No. three in the Dhuniakallee Thannah. Owing to the cyclone and inundation, the first gang, after having completed all arrangements, and prepared a full supply of virus to enable them to carry on the work actively, had to be withdrawn, or more correctly withdrew themselves, when it was found impossible to vaccinate in that neighbourhood. They were sent to the Biddabatty Thannah, but with this exception no further changes took place, the vaccinations being extended uniformly from these centres. In the month of February a fourth gang was sent to work in the Kudumbagachee Thannah. The gangs working in the Thannahs of Dhuniakallee and Nawabgunge, laboured under great disadvantages in consequence of fever prevailing extensively. Example shewing mode of working 26. No circumstances occurred requiring that the gangs, working under Baboo Buddynath Brummo, should be changed from one position to another. His report will therefore now be introduced. In spite of the vaccinators working under great difficulties, it shews very distinctly the advantages of working the men in gangs, and pushing steadily over a given tract of country, and will give a fair idea of what can be done by steadily pursuing this system. &quot; Vaccination in the Mofussil. &quot; In October last, twelve vaccinators left Calcutta with virus to com- mence vaccine operations in the Mofussil. They commenced work in three Divisions on both sides of the Railway between Boinchee and Sactyghur, making Mymaree, Cossypore and Corrundah their head- quarters. Within two weeks the vaccine operations were fairly established in the three divisions, and would have rapidly extended, had not fever prevailed epidemically in the villages, and amongst the vaccinators, to an unusual extent at the time. During November and December last, almost all the vaccinators suffered severely from repeated attacks of fever one after another. The three head vaccinators with three others were obliged to be absent from their Divisions on sick leave from four to twenty weeks. Extra men were sent to act in their places. This unfortunate occurrence greatly interfered with the progress of the vaccine operations, and caused the falling-off in the number of vacci- nations in the Mofussil. At the close of the season, the line of vaccine operations extended to about sixteen miles from east to west, and twelve miles from north to south. The number of villages in which vaccine operations were carried on amounted to one hundred and sixty- two.
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 21 Result of Primary Vaccination. Successful ... ... ... ... ... 16,528 Partial ... ... ... ... ... 8 Failed ... ... ... ... ... 110 Total. 16,646 Number Inspected ... ... ... ... ... 13,329 &quot; Numbers vaccinated. 27. As regards the numbers vaccinated, the Superintendents report as follows:22 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE Falling of when compared with the previ- ous season. 28. In the annual return for 1867, the actual numbers stated to have been vaccinated show a falling-off of two thousand five hundred and seventy for the previous year. For the present this deficiency may be explained by the cyclone desolating the places where the vacci- nators worked, and preventing the people from being able to take vaccinations. Had it not been for this, the out-turn of work would doubtless have been greater than in the previous year. Quite inde- pendently of this explanation, there is another which has also to be considered before a correct estimate can be formed. During the previous year, thousands of famished persons from Orissa had been vacci- nated; and before I returned from England large numbers of such vaccinations had found their way into the monthly returns. On my arrival I found this to constitute such a disturbing element in the returns, as to falsify them for all purposes of true comparison; and eliminated 4,570 such vaccinations from the columns of the first monthly return which I signed, not putting such work to the credit of the establishment, and only making a marginal note of the fact. Taking this into consideration in spite of a slight decrease in actual numbers, the work of the year may be considered more satis- factory than that of the previous one; success in the early months of the year making up for deficiencies in the later months. In the same way, as regards the annual return for 1868, we may still hope that the deficiencies of the beginning of the year, may be nearly counter-balanced by the increased success in the later months, should no unforeseen calamity interfere to prevent such a result. So far for the out-turn of work as calculated by the year. When looked at as a season's work, that under consideration con- trasts most unfavorably with that of the preceding season. As already stated the work in the end of the year, was all but put a stop to, by the ruin and desolation, in which this part of Bengal was involved by the cyclone as well as by pestilence which prevented the people from accepting the services of the vaccinators. These causes (especially fever) also interfered seriously with the work in the early months of 1868. Besides the unfavorable effect on the persons among whom they worked, whole gangs of vaccinators were disorganized by repeated attacks of fever. Many of the vaccina- tors requiring to be sent away to their homes on leave. Week by week the falling-off in the numbers was commented on, and week after week brought nothing but continued reports of imperfect success.
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 23 The Superintendents did all that energy could effect, but no marked improvement was apparent till February, when the very fair number of 27,046 vaccinations during the month was reached. Even this must only be taken as good, after making allowances for the sickness of the vaccinators, and the state of distress the people had recently been in. In March again, the numbers diminished; and here is the first period of the want of success under review, in which I think the establish- ment failed me, in making as great an effort to retrieve lost ground as could have been made. Had I had no other occupation, I think that at least one-half more work would have been done in this month. Of course I may be unjust to the establishment in making this supposition, but after having studied the circumstances most carefully, such is the judgment I have arrived at. During the month of March vaccination round Calcutta requires to be conducted with great care on account of the heat. As soon as the vesicles begin to cause irritation, all extensive operations require to be put a stop to. Possibly every year the numbers may be liable to very great variation, but this year they are much lower than the actual state of the season warranted. The dilemma in which the department is placed is this :24 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE case of the new vaccinators, it will be in part put into force this season, and probably to a fuller extent next year. Some means of inciting the vaccinators to increased exertion, has always been felt as a great want. For actual fault, or negligences, they can be fined, but it is difficult to deal with them for less marked failure of duty. By placing the bulk of the establishment on the footing of smaller pay for the hot months, a system of rewards for special good service can be gained, without any additional cost being entailed. This year such inducement for extra exertion will come at a most opportune moment, when the most strenuous efforts will be required to make up for the want of success in the early months of the year. Character and success of vacci- nation. 30. Hitherto the want of success as regards numbers has been dwelt on. Unfavorable circumstances, which no foresight could pre- dict, no systematic management could guard against, unavoidably led to the result. Now it is under very different circumstances that I come to speak of the character of the vaccination, and of the ratio of suc- cessful cases to those of doubtful and failures. Here the establishment had the matter in their own hands, and have not been wanting in pushing success to nearly the utmost limits of attainment. As before pointed out, the excellence is so absolute, that it is necessary to guard against the supposition, that it fairly represents the amount of perfec- tion to which individual vaccinators have been trained. The following Table shews the results arrived at under each of the three Superintendents:PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 25 of the vaccination conducted in Calcutta seems to have presented a marked contrast to that in most other parts of India. For the last year or two gradual improvement has been taking place. Taking the whole of the operations performed by the department as superintended by the three Sub-Assistant-Surgeons, I find that the following table is suffici- ently accurate to compare against the work of the last season at present under consideration :26 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT ON THE the National Vaccine Establishment, he found that the failures were only one in 170. In a foot-note it is stated that in 1863, Mr. Marson failed only three times out of 1,479 vaccinations ; and that both Mr. Marson and Mr. Sheppard have each vaccinated 2,000 times without a failure. As regards success, whatever can be done in England can be done in Bengal; and with careful training, I have no doubt that for three months of the year, if only the work of the best trained vaccinators were taken into the calculation, very soon a higher percentage of success may be reached, than has ever been recorded in Europe. The men are most expert, the virus is most perfect, and the climate is all that could be desired ; and under these circumstances, failure ought to be a difficulty, and success an unfailing result. Of course when the work of the entire department, extending over the whole season, is embraced in the cal- culation, allowance will always require to be made for some unskilled operators, or careless vaccinators, while possibly a few failures may be occasioned by climate. Besides the high rate of percentage of successful cases, which seemed to exceed that of previous seasons, there was a much more marked and noticeable feature of the vaccinations of the last season, in the fact, that owing to departmental rules having been more strictly enforced, a greater uniformity in the results was observable. Most of these improvements depended on greater nicety in little points. As regards the protection to the individual afforded by the vaccination, such a change for the better can have no influence. Pro- bably even with regard to communities the advantages in themselves might be insignificant. From thepoint of view of departmental efficiency however such a change is no slight gain. It points to the vaccinators. having been better in hand; it bears evidence to the controlling power having been more successfully employed; and it shews that the various elements of which the establishment consists, can be guided in a given direction more efficiently. Individual marks of care may constitute trifles in themselves, but the sum of such trifles goes far to make the difference between a perfect and a slovenly method of conducting the operations. When I see such trifles have been attended to, I have less hesitation in feeling sure that more important matters have not been overlooked. Explanation of success. 31. Careful insertion of the virus below the cuticle, and little niceties of manipulation, probably assist a little in leading to this success. Selection of the individuals to operate on, may, perhaps, also exercise a
PRESIDENCY VACCINE DEPARTMENT. 27 certain amount of influence on the result. I might besides dilate on the advantages of attending to many other precautions which, though small in themselves, may be more or less important when spread over large numbers. Were I to do so, it would only serve to lead to erroneous conclusions, as the explanation is to be found mainly in the following three points, to which I attach a value in the order in which they are placed. (1.) All of these vaccinations have been practised from arm to arm. (2.) The supply of virus has been practically unlimited, and its selection entrusted to only the most competent persons. (3.) No man has been allowed to vaccinate largely till he has shewn himself expert. With regard to the last two points I shall add nothing more, but will now make a few observations in regard to the importance of arm to arm vaccination. If there is one thing of which I am more convinced than of another, with regard to public vaccination in India, it is of the fact, that if even a remote approach to perfection is aimed at, it can only be reached through arm to arm vaccination. Preserved lymph, crusts, and other contrivances for avoiding arm to arm vaccination, to my mind constitute only so many agencies for making failure more easy. Under many circumstances such are the only available means for commencing vaccination; but when one perfect vesicle has been procured, to continue to vaccinate with crusts, or lymph preserved in any way, is to court failure. Every one of the cases vaccinated in the Mofussil have this year been performed from arm to arm. Of course each of the Superin- tendents, as well as myself, was aware that such was practically true, but in case a single crust or tube or other means had been used, unknown to us, the vaccinators were asked the question and deny that on even a single occasion was this the case. This is only an instance of a right principle having been carried too far. If the practice of arm to arm vaccination is universally carried out, a few exceptions to the rule, if judiciously allowed, would not materially affect the results, and serve somewhat to render vaccination on such a large scale rather more easy. In after years, when the people have been drilled into the necessity of complying with the exigencies of arm to arm vaccination, the vaccinators may be safely trusted to employ stored lymph to help them on any emergency, and the knowledge of the superior efficacy of fresh lymph, will prevent them from abusing the privilege. For the present I consider that the Superintendents can hardly be too
28 THIRD SPECIAL REPORT, &C. strict in enforcing compliance with the rule of operating direct from the vaccine vesicle. It involves difficulty and entails a slight expense, but the result attained is cheaply bought. If the people are once shewn it is not a necessity, they will give much trouble in after years; but once having learned that such is the custom, each year makes it more easy to get them to conform to it. Such a mode of working provides for success a dozen of years hence, and half an hour occupied in arguing the point with a refractory villager is not time badly spent. Conclusion. 32. As an Appendix to the third special report on the Presidency vaccine establishment, I forward the following reports :REPORT OF THE DARJEELING CIRCLE OF VACCINATION FOR 1867-68. BY T. MATHEW, M. B., SUPERINTENDENT, VACCINE CIRCLE.
REPORT OF THE DARJEELING CIRCLE OF VACCINATION FOR 1867-68. From DR. T. MATHEW, M. B. Supdt., Darjeeling Vaccination Circle, to the Secretary, Inspector-General, Indian Medical Department, Lower Provinces, dated 28th April 1868. I HAVE the honour to submit the returns of vaccination for the districts comprised in the Darjeeling circle for the season 1867-68. 2. In the subjoined table, the total operations for 1867-68 are contrasted with those for 1866-67, and an increase, for the present season over the last, is shown of 12.673 successful cases, and of 13.313, of all vaccinations, checked and verified throughout, on the system described in my first report:2 DARJEELING CIRCLE I submitted my first report, of seeing vaccination, at no distant date, established upon as firm a basis in the circle as that it stands upon in the North-West. 4.The success which has attended this season's operations must be ascribed in no small degree to the fact of my having been provided, through the courtesy of the Superintendent General of Vaccination, North- Western Provinces, with competent Native Superintendents. On my making known to him that I had failed to find qualified men in Bengal, Dr. Pearson was good enough to select from his staff three of his most trustworthy and experienced vaccinators to fill these appointments, and they proved a very valuable acquisition. Thoroughly trained in the working of the system which has proved so successful in the North- West, and which it has been my endeavour from the first to imitate, they proved most useful, not only in guiding the vaccinators, and in verifying their work before and after my visit to their districts, but in placing the boon offered to the people in the clearest way before them. Objections too to vaccinations, founded on religious and caste scruples, which natives would naturally hesitate to acknowledge to an European, they freely disclosed to one of themselves, and in demonstrating how groundless such objections were, the Superintendents were of the greatest assistance to me. 5. The establishment of vaccinators remains the same in point of strength as it was last year. The few vacancies that existed at the commencement of the season were filled up by inoculators, and the new men have worked very fairly; but, of the originally entertained vaccinators of this class, several had to be dismissed, in the course of the season, for irregularities that could not be over-looked, and my experience of them did not induce me, when filling up their places, to look for inoculators to the exclusion of all other candidates. I found that inoculators, as a rule, worked less steadily than others, that few men, with any pretensions to respectability, belonged to their body, and that, unless an inoculator be placed as a vaccinator in the very place he had formerly practised inoculation, (and this can be very seldom done) he does not seem to possess any special influence with the people by reason of his previous occupation. Of the twenty-six vaccinators of my Plain's establishment at the commencement of the season, sixteen were formerly inoculators, and of these I found it necessary to part with four. The remaining twelve have done satisfactorily. 6. In addition to the districts named in my first report, vaccin- ators were placed, this season, in the Western Dooars; but, unless an
OF VACCINATION. 3 increase to the establishment be granted, it would not, in my opinion, be wise to take up the as-yet unoccupied districts of Maldah and Pubna. In fact, the- number of districts in which vaccine operations can be successfully undertaken, must be determined by the number of Native Superintendents, and I have but three at my disposal. A district as large as Dinagepore or Rungpore is quite as much as one Native Super- intendent can manage, if he is to be held responsible for the genuiness of the work of the vaccinators under him. After placing a Native Superintendent in charge of each of these districts, I had but one left to supervise Rajshahye and Bogra, so that, if I had taken a few vaccin- ators from any of the districts named, and placed them in Maldah and Pubnah, I could not have provided for their supervision beyond my own passing inspection, and this would have been quite inadequate. The Darjeeling Terai and the Western Dooars were assigned to the Deputy Superintendent. Sub-Assistant-Surgeon Nil-Moni Chowderee; as he was new to the work, I did not wish to give him a larger tract of country than he could easily manage, he is active and energetic, and promises to be a very efficient officer. 7. Considerable inconvenience and loss of time having been ex- perienced last year in paying vaccinators directly4 DARJEELING CIRCLE 9. In obedience to paragraph 12 of the Lieutenant-Governor's Resolution, dated 24th July, 1867, the district officers were solicited to aid in any way in their power the Native Superintendents and vaccin- ators, and the latter were accordingly furnished with sealed perwannas by the Magistrates, recommending them to the people; the objects for which vaccinators were sent among them, were also proclaimed at the larger Hauts in the vicinity of which the vaccinators were stationed. In addition to these means for securing the good-will of the people, every necessary explanation was given by myself in the course of my tour, and by the Native Superintendents in their respective districts. It needs scarcely be added, that nothing like compulsion was ever attempted. 10. Further, the Magistrates were asked, that no opportunity might be lost of showing the people the value of the boon offered them, to communicate with the Native Superintendents, should the break-out of small-pox be reported in any part of their districts, and the latter were directed, immediately upon the receipt of such communication, to proceed with one or more vaccinators to the place indicated. It is rather remarkable that no cases of small-pox were reported, and that I myselfOF VACCINATION. 5 this season, than I had the season before, and that it occurred to me but once during the present season, (it happened often during the last) to arrive at a place and find the vaccinator absolutely idle. It is true, that my staff of vaccinators was more experienced this season, and that I had the assistance of Native Superintendents of great energy and intelli- gence ; but making every allowance for these important aids, I am still encouraged by all that I have seen, to believe, that vaccination has, by its own merits, already taken some hold upon the minds of those of the people amongst whom it has been practised. 13. The system of check by village register, described in my first report, was maintained throughout. Every vaccinator's diary was re- peatedly examined, and its figures compared with those in the village record, by the Native Superintendent to whose district he belonged. The vaccinators' papers were also inspected by myself in the course of my tour, and I feel very confident as to the genuineness of the num- bers returned under the heading &quot; total vaccinated.&quot; But one vaccinator was discovered by me to have made entries of operations in his diary, which did not tally with the village register, and he was at once dis- missed. I found, however, in the papers of several vaccinators, a less serious irregularity, the return as successful of doubtful cases. This occurred from mere carelessness, and was not done with an intent to mislead, as in all such instances, the totals of operations in the village records were accurate. It was sufficient, in such cases, to warn the vaccinators against a repetition of their negligence. 14. The season's work commenced in November in the Darjeeling Terai, where I had arranged for my being joined by the Native Super- intendents on their arrival from Rohilcund; it was necessary that I should see them together to settle how the districts were to be distri- buted among them. Some slight delay occurred before they could be sent to their destinations, as I was not quite satisfied with the lymph supplies I had collected during the rainy season at Darjeeling. How- ever, the first operations made in the Terai resulted in a genuine vesicle. Supplies of lymph were sent to the more distant vaccinators in the Rajshahye and Bogra districts by post, and the Native Superintendents ordered to proceed to their posts with as little delay as possible. 15. Leaving a vaccinator at work in the Terai, I went on to Julpigoree, the Deputy Superintendent remaining with me for a short time, as he had had no previous experience in conducting vaccine operations.
6 DARJEELING CIRCLE 16. Three vaccinators were placed in the Western Dooars, at Mynogoree, Julpigoree, and Buxa. At the first-named place, a very active vaccinator commenced work in the last week in November. I visited the place a week after he began, and was gratified to see that he had established a good vesicle, and to find that the people made no difficulty about accepting his services in sufficient numbers for a begin- ning, vaccination never having been practised there before. During the season, he made an average of 300 successful vaccinations per month, and on my again inspecting his work and his records in March, I found that he had been very accurate and painstaking. 17. At Julpigoree, where vaccination had been commenced last season, and had made some way, I placed a man who had previously practised there. I saw him well to work before I left, the people being by no means ill-disposed towards vaccination: he worked pretty steadily for a couple of months, but then became careless and idle; and, on my return I found his papers full of inaccuracies, and the quantity of work he was doing, triflingOF VACCINATION. 7 three vaccinators to the Western Dooars. I should be glad of the sanc- tion of the Commissioner, upon whose application I was directed to place a vaccinator at Buxa, for my removing him to some more populous locality in the district. 20. From the Western Dooars, I marched to Boda, which place I reached on the 14th December; vaccination never having been practised there before, I was pleased to find the vaccinator, who had been recently placed at Boda by the Native Superintendent of the Rungpore district, in very fair work. He had made 114 vaccinations, the majority of which I inspected, from the first of the month with scarcely a failure among them. The people told me that they had no dread of vaccina- tion except for its novelty, and several of them expressed a great dislike to inoculators. This vaccinator made an average of nearly 300 successful vaccinations per month during the season. 21. I next crossed to Nischintipore, to commence the inspection of the work in the Dinagepore district, leaving the rest of the Rungpore vaccinators to be visited later. Seven vaccinators, all of them originally inoculators, were placed in this district; I had at first proposed to appoint three of this number to Maldah, but I found that one Native Superintendent could not undertake the two districts. 22. The vaccinators were placed at the following Thannahs:8 DARJEELING CIRCLE saw some sixty successful cases on the date of my visit, the 18th. Some of the people told me that they were glad to have a vaccinator among them, and one man, who had lost two children by inoculated small-pox, inveighed very bitterly against inoculators. 24. On the 20th, I inspected at Pranuggur the work of the vacci- nator attached to the Beergunge Thannah; he was working very fairly with a good vesicle: I saw some ninety successful cases; he had had no difficulty, assisted by the Native Superintendent, in commencing opera- tions, and there was no general opposition manifested by the people. 25. I went to Hubbra on the 27th December. The vaccinator here was a newly-trained man who had been stationed at the place a few days before my visit. He had made, after some solicitation, a few vaccinations; but the people refused to submit to any more until they should have seen the result of the first cases. 26. It was much the same state of things at Gungarampore, which place I visited on the 1st January. The vaccinator had been only a few days there; but he had established a genuine vesicle, and the people promised to accept vaccination as soon as they had satisfied themselves that no ill-effects need be apprehended. 27. I inspected the work at Nawabgunge on the 10th January. The vaccinator, who had been placed there early in December, had failed completely at first, and it was not until the Native Superintendent joined him, that a beginning was made: only forty-three successful vaccina- tions were reported in December. At the time of my visit, the first fears of the people had been got over, and I inspected some successful work in the villages near the Thannah, but the vaccinator was working slowly. 28. As the season advanced, the vaccinators made, on the whole, fair progress; but with one exception, none succeeded in making three hundred successful vaccinations in a month, and the general average was a little over two hundred; however, as in this district last year, the average was below one hundred, a satisfactory advance has been made. The native Superintendent, though from the first he suffered severely from fever, attended closely to his duties during the season. 29. From Nawabgunge I continued my march into the Bogra district. The vaccinators had commenced work in November, with lymph sent them by post. There were at first four vaccinators, posted at the ThannahsOF VACCINATION. 9 30. The first vaccinator I visited was at Khetloll. He had been transferred to this place from Bogra early in December, and had made but forty-four successful vaccinations in that month, the people never having seen the operation before. When I arrived on the 12th Janu- ary, he had but very few recent cases to show me, and his diary proved him guilty of idleness. On my going into the villages in the neighbourhood, the people did not manifest to me any dislike for vaccination that might not have been overcome by a little tact. They told me that the vaccinator had visited them, but that they were too busy with the rice harvest to attend to him, and they assured me that, after gathering in the crop, they would accept his services. I learned that the Native Superintendent, who had been compelled to hasten on to Rajshahye, had not had time to visit this station; and this partly accounted for the vaccinator's backwardness, but there could be no doubt that he had not exerted himself properly; and he was warned, that unless favorably reported on by the Native Superin- tendent he should lose his situation. 31. I reached Sherepore on the 18th January. Here, where I had for a long time failed to make any impression the year before I found the vaccinator working very well with a good vesicle: I inspect- ed many of his cases, but I found them in villages at some distance from the town, the inhabitants of which remained as prejudiced as ever against the operation. 32. On the 21st I inspected the work of the Alumdiggie vaccina- tor at Doobcheechee. He was not doing as much as my last year's success at this place had led me to expect, and his records were ill-kept and irregular; but the vesicle was a good one, and the people were well disposed, if the vaccinator only exerted himself properly. He was duly cautioned on this point. 33. The vaccinator at Gobindgunge, originally an inoculator, was discovered to be a ganjah-smoker; he was removed, and a newly- trained man appointed, whose work I inspected on my return from Rajshahye. This was a new station, and the people were timid at first; but, at the time of my visit, a fair amount of success had been attained. 34. In the course of the season, the vaccinators in this district worked up to the average. The Khetloll and Doobcheechee men were more energetic after my visit, and the Native Superintendent who visited them constantly, reported well of both. In this, as in the other districts also, I hope to be able to retain the vaccinators permanently at their 2
10 DARJEELING CIRCLE respective stations : though it seems a small matter, the people dislike having a man removed with whom they have once become familiar, and are slow in employing a stranger. 35. I marched from Bogra to the Rajshahye district. Things had not gone well here early in the season. Supplies of lymph had been sent to the vaccinators in November by post, but it failed in their hands, and their report of this failure did not reach me. The Native Superintendent fell ill at Bogra, and was detained there many days under treatment; and when he reached Rajshahye, towards the end of December, the vaccinators were doing nothing. This was a very unfortunate delay, but it cannot occur again, as henceforward the Native Superintendents will be in their districts at the commencement of the season. It was not until shortly before my arrival that the vaccinators got properly to work. 36. The five vaccinators of this district were posted at the following ThannahsOF VACCINATION. 11 operation; they made no difficulty about arm to arm vaccination, and took children quite willingly from one village to another, which is very rarely permitted. The children of each of the villages I inspected were brought to an appointed spot with a readiness I had not observed before, and, as the names were called from the village Roll, I noticed an unusual eagerness to have each child examined, and to hear my opinion as to its being protected against small-pox. 40. The vaccinator at Pootea, whose work I inspected on the 28th January, and who had been but a short time established there, had at- tained very gratifying results also. Here too the people encouraged arm to arm vaccination, and in consequence almost every case I saw was successful. 41. Next day I inspected, in villages some six miles north of Rampore Bauleah, the operations of the vaccinator attached to the Charghat Thannah. He had endeavoured to get a footing in the villages close by the Thannah at first, but, as the people refused his services, he had asked permission to commence work in the villages where I found him, and where he had been successful last year, and thence worked towards the Thannah which was not very distant; he was doing extremely well. 42. Passing through Rampore Bauleah, I marched towards God- agaree where I expected to find the fifth vaccinator of the district; but, on reaching Burgachee, on the 2nd February, I learned from the people, that the vaccinator who had worked there and had made good progress last year, had, shortly after commencing operations this season, been taken ill, and had returned to Bauleah for treatment. The people told me that they were glad to have a vaccinator among them; on returning to Bauleah I went to see the vaccinator in question: I found him so ill as to be unfit for work, and granted him a short leave, on the expiry of which he resumed operations, and worked well until the close of the season. 43. Though the vaccinators in Rajshahye were late in com- mencing operations, they were more successful in point of numbers as they were last year, than the men in any other district; the average work being 280 in January, 398 in February, and 353 in March, for each vaccinator. Towards the close of the season, I received from them some hundreds of well formed crusts. It should be observed, that none of the. Rajshahye vaccinators were previously practisers of inoculation, the
12 DARJEELING CIRCLE Deputy Superintendent, as I mentioned in my first report, not having succeeded in enrolling any of that class. 44. I left Rampore Bauleah on the 5th February, marching viâ Bogra to Rungpore, which district I entered on the 17th February. Five vaccinators were stationed in this districtOF VACCINATION. 13 dent had noticed this before my arrival, and had sent for fresh virus from the nearest station, Oleypore, but he was wrong in not stopping the vaccinator's work until the new lymph had reached him. 49. The inhabitants of this place had accepted vaccination with much apparent willingness and in large numbers, but it was not a good sign of their interest in its success to see, that the elder children were permitted to plaster over the vaccine vesicles with clay. The vaccinator declared that he had cautioned them against this without being able to put a stop to it. I impressed upon the people that it would be much better not to submit their children to the operation at all, than to allow its success to be marred in this way. 50 In December, the average of each vaccinator's work in the Rungpore district was 190, in the succeeding months it was over 30014 DARJEELING CIRCLE No. 1.OF VACCINATION. 15 RETURN No. 1 16 DARJEELING CIRCLE RETURN NO 1.OF VACCINATION. 17 RETURN NO. 8.FIRST ANNUAL REPORT OF THE RANCHEE CIRCLE OF VACCINATION FOR 1867-68. BY E.J. HOSKINS, M. D., SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION RANCHEE CIRCLE.
INDEX. PARA. As to the delay in submitting report ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1 Establishment of Circle ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 2 Limits of Circle ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 3 Order of events, Sub-Assistant Surgeon Neem Chand Goopto begins work ... 4 Prejudices that he met with ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5 Sub-Assistant Surgeon Neem Chand Goopto's latter plan ...... ...... ... 6 Objections made to the operation itself ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 7 Superintendent's arrival ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ... 8 Classes of Vaccinators ... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 9 Number of Vaccinators ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 13 Amount of work done, and the percentage of success ...... ...... ...... 14
FIRST ANNUAL REPORT OF THE RANCHEE CIRCLE OF VACCINATION FOR 1867-68. As to the de- lay in submit- ting report. IN submitting this, the first Annual Report and Return, I regret that delay has occurred, attributable to the late period of the season at which I joined my appointment, and to my total inexperience of the Depart- ment in which I had everything to learn ; also to the amount of addi- tional medical work devolving on me in consequence of my having had medical charge of the Regiment at Dorundah, and having been also required to assist the Civil Surgeon of Ranchee in his duties, the two regular medical officers having been both seriously ill. Establishment of circle. 2. This circle was established by orders of Government of India No. 2811, in the Financial Department of 24th September, 1867, and on November 25th, 1867, Sub-Assistant-Surgeon Neem Chund Goopto joined as Deputy Superintendent of the Circle, pending the appointment of a European medical officer as superintendent; this latter appoint- ment I joined on 3rd February last, when the greater part of the work- ing season was already over. Limits of cir- cle. 3. The circle comprises the Province of Chota Nagpore in which are included the 4 zillahs of2 RANCHEE CIRCLE Order of events; Sub-As- sistant-Surgeon Neem Chund Goopto begins work. 4. The Sub-Assistant-Surgeon began work in accordance with his instructions in the District of Hazareebaugh ; he was directed to use no other means than pure persuasion to induce the people to accept vaccination; he found them almost universally unwilling, and very suspicious of the new and extended system, and of himself. The mere fact of his presence in a village seemed to render the people so suspi- cious of what might be the ulterior object of his visit, and of the Government in sending him, that his going amongst them in the first instance seemed to do more harm than good to the scheme, and to be a hindrance to their accepting vaccination. Prejudices that he met with. 5. All kinds of fears seized the minds of the natives; that he wanted to steal the children for some purposes of witchcraft, or to send them away as coolies to some other British possessions, and that to this end they were vaccinated by way of setting the Government mark upon them, so that they might be readily traced, when wanted, by the police. The most general idea was, that it had reference to some new capitation tax to be imposed, not now perhaps, but after a few years, when their fears should have gradually subsided, and the Government should, in the meantime, by this indirect means, have obtained a &quot;census&quot; of each village. Again that the operation of vaccination was for the purpose of extracting a drop of blood, many of which would be given to a ship proceeding to England, and that in the event of shipwreck the sailors drowned would return to life, at the expense of an equal number of the native children vacci- nated in India (whose blood they had brought with them) who would as suddenly die. Sub-Assistant- Surgeon Neem Chund Goopto's latter plan. 6. Finding these difficulties, and acting on the advice of the Deputy Commissioner and Civil Surgeon (Major Boddam and Dr. Delpratt) he adopted the plan of not going to the villages himself in the first instance, but of sending the vaccinators ( Sindooriahs of the district, and already known to the people) first, to try to gain over the people and to vaccinate cases, and of then proceeding himself some days later to verify the results. This caused a great waste of time and labour, but it seemed to be the only plan that afforded a hope of success under the &quot; purely persuasive system.&quot; Objections made to the operation itself. 7. Other points in which the people object to the operation itself areOF VACCINATION. 3 2nd. They object to more than one point of insertion for a simi- lar reason. These points if conceded4 RANCHEE CIRCLE mans' services, they were therefore discharged on 8th February, imme- diately after my arrival. 2nd. Four Bengalis were specially sent up by the Inspector- General of Hospitals, L. P., in December last; to them also the people generally object, as being strangers to them; but they are intelligent, and their work, though small in amount, has been very good in quality; they do not like the district, however, and are dissatisfied with the pay. One of them resigned his post on the 1st April, and the other three wished to do so also. They have no knowledge of English (for keeping records) nor of the local languages of the district, nor have they the slightest influence with the people; for these three reasons I thought them unsuitable for employment as &quot; Head Vaccinators &quot; on the higher rate of pay (at Rs. 20 per month) and submitted a recommendation that they should be discontinued here, and be replaced by natives of the district. Orders have since been received for their discharge accordingly. 3rd. Sindooriahs of late years have practised inoculation largely in the Hazareebaugh district; the story appears to be, that up till some nine or ten years ago all the inoculation in the Hazareebaugh zillah was in the hands of some Bengali baids living at Ectrakh* who made an annual tour through the villages. But about that time it is said that &quot; they feared to come &quot; owing to an idea of Government having set its face against their practices. On their thus leaving the field open, the Sindooriahs, sellers of vermillion (Sindur) &c., at once came forward in their place which they have retained till now, and have completely obtained the confidence of the people. The Bengali baids used to take, as their lowest fee, four annas for a male child, and two annas for a female, and they continued in attendance till the child was considered well enough to be bathed (about the fourteenth day.) Besides this, they always got food and drink; and very often a buksheesh besides, from 1 Rupee upwards, from well-to-do parents. In some cases I am assured that the present was as much as 20 to 50 Rs. They worked only during three months, January, February and March, and one of my informants made a guess that an ordinary operator's average gains per season might probably reach from Rs. 100 to 150. I am informed that in all these points the Sindooriahs follow the custom of their Bengali predecessors. Three of these Sindooriahs have been employed as Government vaccinators during the past season, and have proved decidedly successful. * A large native town six miles from Hazareebaugh.
OF VACCINATION. 5 10. In the Ranchee district the vaccinators have been of various castes and creeds, but all residents of that part of the country. Three have been employed about Ranchee and one * in the Sub-Division of Palamow. 11. In Chyebassa, four Hindoo Tekaits (Bengalis) have been employed as Government vaccinators, these men have their homes, how- ever, in the district of Maunbhoom. 12. In Purulia, with a temporary exception, no men have been employed on Government pay as vaccinators, a special system having been started by Captain Money, the Deputy Commissioner, of which more hereafter. Number of vaccinators. 13. Twenty vaccinators, and three head vaccinators, total 23, have been santioned for the whole circle, but as yet no head vaccinators have been appointed, it being very difficult to find suitable men ; indeed, if it is intended that these three head-men should entirely superintend the vaccination in three of the four districts, while the Superintendent himself looks after the fourth, it is very doubtful, I think, whether the remuneration offered, Rs. 20 per month, for the five working months, and 16 per month, during the non-working season, is sufficient to attract the stamp of men required; they would necessarily be left almost to them- selves for long periods, and too far away in the interior usually, for either the Civil Surgeon to assist the Superintendent in overlooking their opera- tions, or for the latter officer to do it for himself, as he would be occupied in his own district. Men are wanted, therefore, who can be trusted to work satisfactorily by themselves, and whose returns of work done can be accepted as reliable; moreover, (it appears from a reference to the Accountant-General) they would send in to the Superintendent, who must be greatly dependent on them in these matters, the pay bills for the men working under them, and on his countersignature would draw the pay and distribute it; it is, therefore, the more necessary that they should be men of a responsible and trustworthy character. It is hoped, however, that three good men may be procurable as head vaccinators before the beginning of next working season. Amount of work done, and the percentage of success. 14. The Return appended shows the total number of vaccina- tions for the past season for the whole Circle to be 6,447, of which 5,118, or 75.7 per cent. are returned as successful. * A Tekait.
6 RANCHEE CIRCLE Hazareebaugh District. To take the four Districts separately. Hazareebaugh has been by far the most satisfactory; in that zillah there were 1,357 cases, of which 879 were successful, being at the rate of 64.7 per cent. These absolute numbers may seem small; but it is to be remembered that this was the first season of the new system, the number of operators employed necessarily small, and the difficulties of all kinds to be encountered very great. So much as this could not have been done but for the earnest support of the Deputy Commis- sioner and the Civil Surgeon, and of the authorities generally. As the operators gain experience, it is hoped that a higher average may be attained still. The percentage of success is, I submit, to be considered satisfactory, in that it is thoroughly reliable. Indeed, I doubt whether sometimes cases have not been excluded as not quite coming up to the mark which might perhaps have been considered fairly successful; every &quot; successful&quot; case has been verified by a competent officer, either by the Sub-Assistant-Surgeon, who was in charge before my arrival, or by myself, or by Dr. Delpratt, the Civil Surgeon. To Dr. Delpratt my warmest acknowledgments are due for his very cordial aid and support generally, as well as for most valuable assistance in personally inspect- ing cases in my absence, and also in many other ways in which I have sought his co-operation, which has invariably been most willingly and efficiently accorded. Ranchee Dis- trict. In Ranchee district (as also, I believe, at Purulia and Chyebassa) supervision has unavoidably been not so close and complete. The large amount of current medical duties at Ranchee (with the cantonment of Dorundah) and illness, left but little time for supervising vaccination. The Return shows 1,589 cases, of which 966 were successful, being a percentage of 60.7, from this proportion (less than that of Hazareebagh) and the result of inspections; I think these numbers also trustworthy. Chyebassa Dis- trict. Of Purulia and Chyebassa I have no personal knowledge. The Returns of Chyebassa show a total of 2,995 cases, 2,858 successful, giving a proportion of 95.4 per cent. Purulia Dis- trict. In Maunbhoom, only one man was employed (during only three months) on Government pay. The Return shows a total of 506, and 415 successful, a proportion of 82 per cent. 15. In Maunbhoom, in January 1867, Captain Money, the Deputy Commissioner, started the system described in Supplement to Calcutta Gazette for August 7th, 1867, page 341, of allowing the regular Tekaits to vaccinate on their own account, without any pay from Government, on merely being supplied with vaccine virus and lancets; in fact they were
OF VACCINATION. 7 to do everything just as usual, merely vaccinating instead of inoculating. An idea had got about the district that inoculation was forbidden by Government which made them willing to come forward. This system at first seemed to promise very well; but of late, there being no means of watching their operations, they took to inoculating again in several instances, as shown on enquiries made by Captain Money through the Civil Surgeon. Doubtless, they had of late discovered that they could not be punished for inoculation, as it was not illegal, and it in every way suits their customs, convenience, interests and prejudices much better to inoculate than to vaccinate. 16. The success of Captain Money's system wholly depends (as he himself is of opinion) on these men being constantly checked by supervision; but under present circumstances proper supervision is impossible, they are beyond the reach of the Civil Surgeon; and as regards the Superintendent of vaccination, he has four zillahs to look after, and cannot devote the whole of his time to one only, nor if he could do so, would he be able to supervise all these men without systematising his work and taking the different lines of country in some kind of regular order, which necessarily he, and not they, must be allowed to arrange; whereas each of these Tekaits, Captain Money states, has an hereditary right by ancient custom to all the inoculation (or, under the proposed system, vaccination) within a certain area. (There would therefore be difficulty, from their mutual jealousies, in employing any particular man out of his customary limits.) These men of course adopt just whatever system, or want of system, best suits their own convenience, and the wishes and customs of their patients. Thus, in some months, scarcely anything is done anywhere , again in other months they are operating all over the district in a great many different places at once and without any method or regularity, thus defying all attempts at systematic supervision. As long as it is perfectly optional with them whether they adopt vaccination or not, they are not likely to alter their system to suit the plans of the Superintendent who, indeed, cannot in any way compel them to take up vaccination at all, or to desist from inoculating. 17. If inoculation were prohibited, and the people thereby com- pelled to accept vaccination, or to remain unprotected, it would then be possible for the circle staff to adopt a scheme for vaccinating the whole country gradually in some kind of order, as circumstances might require, and with every hope of success,
8 RANCHEE CIRCLE 18. We cannot be surprised at the unwillingness of the people to accept vaccination voluntarily. Even in England itself it was not able to contend successfully with small-pox, until not only was inoculation made a penal offence by Act of Parliament, but in addition, vaccination was made compulsory ; and I am supported by the universal opinion of all the experienced officers of this and the neighbouring districts whom I have consulted on the matter, that similar measures (or at least the prohibition of inoculation) will be found necessary before we can hope for much success in making vaccination general. I earnestly hope, therefore, that Government may think fit to take some action in the matter. 19. Failing such authoritative prohibition, the only course likely to succeed seems to be that advocated by Captain Money and others, of enlisting on our side the hereditary Tekaits, to whose interests otherwise vaccination would be opposed. Captain Money's own scheme attempts this, but breaks down for want of supervision. 20. A similar difficulty will apply, I fear, to the Government scheme recently proposed, of paying head-money for successful cases only, at a rate not exceeding 2 annas per head to inoculators who take up vaccination. It is absolutely necessary to avoid imposition, that every case should be seen and vouched for by a medical officer, as stated in Circular Memo. No. A., dated 24th January last, of the Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, Dinapore Circle. To enable this supervision to be kept up, the men must be few in number and must work, not according to their own fancy at whatever times and places may suit them best, but as the Superintendent may be able to arrange for them. Thus the amount of work done consis- tently with due verification will probably be but small, and the men would grumble greatly and with justice at losing the pay for successful cases, because it happened to be out of the power of the Superintendent or of the Civil Surgeon to inspect and certify to their success. There- fore, I think the men will soon find it difficult to earn as much money by vaccination as they could before by inoculation, when one man could do a whole village at a time without any failures or any troublesome inspections and verifications to enable him to get his fees. Thus, as it is purely optional with them whether they forsake inoculation for vaccination, or stick to their old practices, we can only expect that they will do the latter.
OF VACCINATION. 9 21. Major Boddam, the Deputy Commissioner of Hazareebangh, has proposed a third scheme, that the inoculators should be offered a fixed minimum pay as subsistence allowance of Rs. 5 per month in any case, and head-money besides for all the successful cases beyond a certain number. This was to meet the objection made by some, that the pay of even a good man, if dependent solely upon head-money, might not be enough for him to live on, if he had bad luck in going to villages where the people would not accept him ; and also to meet the opposite objection that a fixed pay of Rs. 10 per month certain might prove a premium to idleness. This scheme, too, has the same objection of the difficulty of verifying the cases, otherwise it seems a happy combination of the fixed-pay system and the head-money scheme, and superior to either of them alone. 22. The success for a time (and since partially) of Captain Money's system in Purulia is due, (both he and the Civil Surgeon, Dr. Wilson, think) solely to the idea that had got about, that inoculation was prohibited. 23. The same is the case with such success as was attained at Hazareebaugh, where also the Deputy Commissioner and the Civil Surgeon are of a similar opinion, and had taken determined action on the matter. Inoculation had been forbidden, and some men caught inocu- lating had been punished with imprisonment, and I can myself also testify that it was this idea only, that induced several of the Sindooriahs (from Khurrukdihee and elsewhere in the Hazareebaugh zillah), as they themselves told me to offer to take to vaccination on the head-money system. This was expressly reported in my letter No. 2, dated February 10th, 1868, being reply to Circular Memo. No. A. of 24th January, from Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, Dinapore, But now this is all altered. Recently, some of the men imprisoned have been released on appeal to the Judicial Commissioner of Chota Nagore, who has decided that the clause (against spreading an infectious disease) under which they were convicted was not intended to apply to inoculation for small-pox, which consequently is perfectly legal. The Police have now, therefore, been directed by the Deputy Commissioner of Hazareebaugh, not to interfere in any way with the inoculators who will now be able to do just as they like. 24. The aggregate number vaccinated was very small compared with the population of the zillah, and the people were decidedly averse b
10 RANCHEE CIRCLE to vaccination ; still the determined opposition of the Deputy Com- missioner had done much good by deterring the inoculators so effectually, that small-pox, after being very prevalent during several previous seasons, was last season scarcely heard of. No disturbances were excited, the inoculators were beginning from self-interest to come round to vaccination, and, doubtless, in course of time, having the ear of the people they would have gradually induced the latter to do so too. But now there is not the slightest probability that these inoculators will help us in the least. 25. With the mass of the people wedded to inoculation, and the interests of the inoculators bound up with it too, (its performance not being illegal,) the prospects of vaccination for next season are poor indeed ! 26. Experience, both in other places (Kumaon and Gurwhal for instance) as well as here shows, I think, that the prohibition of inoculation is not likely to cause any serious political consequences; while it is essential for the general success of vaccination ; and I would respectfully solicit that Government be moved to enquire from the Commissioner of Chota Nagpore whether any special objection exists to inoculation being forbidden by law throughout this circle, with a view to some speedy action being taken on the subject.
OF VACCINATION. 11 First Annual Return of Persons Vaccinated by the Establishment attached to the Ranchee Circle of Vaccination for the Season 1867-68. DISTRICTS. Number of Vaccina- tors attached. NUMBER OF PERSONS VACCINATED. Total. NUMBER OF SUCCESSFUL CASES. Total. PERCENTAGE OF REMARKS. October. November. December. January. February. March. October. November. December. January. February. March. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful Not ascertained. Ranchee... 5 ... 34 584 539 232 200 1,589 ... 14 341 335 131 145 966 60.7 18.9 20.2 ... Not&quot; ascertained &quot;REPORT ON VACCINATION OPERATIONS IN THE SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS FOR 1867-68. BY NOCOOR CHUNDER BANERJEE, SUB-ASSISTANT-SURGEON.
REPORT ON VACCINATION OPERATIONS IN THE SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS FOR 1867-68. From BABOO NOCOOR CHUNDER BANERJEE, Sub-Assistant-Surgeon, to the Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, Dinapore Circle,2 VACCINATION OPERATIONS IN THE by threats and encouragements paved the way to further success during the past season, and opened an extensive field for the ensuing year. The Bengallee and Hindoostanee traders, living in this part of the Damin, were the most difficult to deal with, and by their perverseness and obstinacy set bad examples to the Sonthals. If it were not for the hearty co-operation of Mr. Wilmot, I fear I could scarcely have been able to overcome these difficulties. During March and some part of April vaccination throve prosperously; but in the latter part of the month the heat became so excessive that the result in most of the cases was either unsuccessful, doubtful, or ungenuine, and stray cases of malarious fever, either of an intermittent or remittent type, appeared among the vaccinated, when simple fever should have been the con- sequence of vaccination. I reported the matter, and before any orders were received, with the approval of Dr. Chundra, I found it necessary to reduce the scale of work, and eventually to stop it on the beginning of May, and did not think it prudent to resume owing to the excess of heat and reluctance of the people. With regard to my internal management, I have the honour to re- port that vaccination has been adopted in four Pergunnahs in the dis- trict, to the three smaller I located three vaccinators, and to the fourth, that is Burhait and its suburbs, which was comparatively large and very populous; I put to work three men, on the arrival of the batch from Dinapore on 17th March. It was my duty to go out and inspect the workings of my vaccinators; to induce people to adopt the blessing; to ascertain the different stages of vaccine pustules; to give instructions to the vaccinators with reference to cases collected and examined by my own eyes, and thus preventing any falsification in the compilation of returns; to ascertain the character and bearing of my vaccinators, and to address the people. By this course of duties I have been able to keep a constant watch over my men, and to have as much work done by them as practicable. The collection of crusts and arm to arm operations were, on the whole, I think, very satisfactory, considering the race of people we had to deal with, and their superstitious notions. The statement given below will show the number of cases operated with lymph from one arm to another. The whole area touched this season in this district, measures more than fourteen miles in length by six miles average breadth.
SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 3 TOTAL. Operations. Results. Charges of Lymph. Sonthals. Mahomedans. Hindoos. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Arm to Arm. Crusts. Tubes. December... 2 ... 1 1 2 ... ... ... 2 January... 549 486 6 57 507 39 3 189 320 40 February .... 1,929 1,619 43 267 1,848 75 6 1,231 698 March... 2,394 1,607 239 548 2,185 187 22 1,080 1,297 17 April.......... 2,856 2,225 99 532 2,537 309 10 2,433 423 .. May... 19 19 ... ... 13 6 . 19 ... .. GRAND TOTAL 7,749 5,956 388 1,405 7,092 616 41 4,952 2,740 57
[NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted APPENDICES.
( ii ) GENERAL RETURN OF FOR BENGAL PROPER, ASSAM, CHOTA STATIONS, NUMBER OF VACCI- NATORS EMPLOYED. VACCINATION OF JANUARY. FEBRUARY. MARCH. APRIL. MAY. JUNE. JULY. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Central Depôt, Calcutta ... 2 198 75 199 15 155 8 64 8 24 2 16 4 15 ... Park Street Dispensary... 1 18 ... 40 ... 37 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Medical College Dispensary 1 147 48 87 109 41 29 2 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... North Division... ... 28 8,196 288 10,499 305 9,845 420 1,894 76 267 32 185 23 86 3 Middle (ii) GENERAL RETURN OF FOR BENGAL PROPER, ASSAM, CHOTA VACCINATION OF UARY. FEBRUARY. MARCH. APRIL. MAY. JUNE. JULY. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. 75 199 15 155 8 64 8 24 2 16 4 15 ... ... 40 ... 37 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48 87 109 41 29 2 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 288 10,499 305 9,845 420 1,894 76 267 32 185 23 86 3 277 8,744 883 6,366 1,456 1,705 802 842 1,130 881 960 266 270 96 12,892 288 17,654 237 3,555 104 842 44 105 21 159 66 784 32,461 1,600 34,098 2,153 7,220 993 1,975 1,208 1,187 1,008 526 339 52 43 26 228 160 100 55 45 16 ... ... ... ... ... 50 14 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 56 38 192 299 206 337 233 314 250 164 127 28 29 3 157 ... 123 ... 121 ... 19 ... ... ... ... ... 118 270 67 177 135 331 177 263 89 90 60 95 30 14 557 5 612 5 22 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... 42 322 109 446 94 219 54 98 50 15 19 5 8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 865 ... 119 3 759 ... 596 43 426 28 378 29 11 508 13 347 7 104 10 22 9 18 7 10 7 18 64 10 24 9 25 17 20 22 23 19 2 8 ... 147 12 169 13 112 4 125 1 21 ... 24 ... 1 1 4 3 ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 25 32 7 7 1 131 11 283 40 ... ... ... ... 132 1,931 233 1,827 141 1,160 45 870 35 1,193 30 607 13 26 108 46 101 29 132 24 55 22 47 24 50 26 5 77 5 40 3 17 2 ... ... 13 2 17 2 4 560 8 468 2 165 2 53 1 26 2 18 3 150 141 35 107 199 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 159 3 135 15 80 7 13 20 ... ... 40 7 12 99 11 58 5 67 2 65 2 61 1 ... ... 73 194 94 254 213 629 23 24 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 744 6,323 894 5,544 1,240 4,511 676 2,866 610 2,098 319 1,274 162 * It is stated that there were, besides the Vaccination here shown, 625 cases
[NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted (iii) VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1867. NAGPORE, AND BEHAR PROVINCES. EACH MONTH. TOTAL VACCINATIONS OF 1867. TOTAL OF 1866. RATIO PERCENT. OF SUCCESSFUL CASES TO THE TOTAL NUMBER VACCI- NATED. OPERATIONS OF 1867. AUGUST. SEPTEMBER. OCTOBER. NOVEMBER. DECEMBER. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total vac- cinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Total vac- cinated. 16 1 13 1 28 2 86 6 120 9 1,065 934 131 1,289 1,462 87.70 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 100 97 3 59 73 97.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... 14 5 27 3 515 318 197 895 1,053 61.75 115 5 93 2 88 ... 1,902 13 4,410 24 38,771 37,580 1,191 25,378 28,870 96.93 123 117 110 32 238 139 2,206 247 2,343 217 34,468 27,938 6,530 39,783 51,903 81.05 298 112 292 60 493 39 2,088 107 3,657 64 51,213 49,975 1,238 42,779 45,341 97.58 552 235 508 95 847 180 6,296 378 10,559 317 1,26,132 1,16,842 9,290 1,10,183 1,28,702 92.63 ... ... ... ... ... ... 54 18 56 15 1,033 691 342 731 937 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 7 84 63 21 27 39 3 14 ... 21 ... 13 3 24 9 27 2,393 1,201 1,192 259 677 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 19 663 641 22 1,098 1,133 75 38 60 30 ... ... 2 8 36 5 2,327 1,570 757 1,684 2,456 ... ... ... ... 5 1 29 5 25 8 1,624 1,576 48 973 1,059 19 9 33 27 47 37 46 20 295 76 2,310 1,765 545 1,399 1,877 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,080 3,925 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 262 2 264 262 2 52 75 303 18 314 16 365 16 604 31 682 23 6,350 6,143 207 3,722 3,824 14 8 24 8 48 8 794 19 974 20 3,491 3,364 127 2,200 2,305 ... ... ... ... 4 26 28 27 64 41 510 313 197 251 473 36 ... 3 9 15 ... 40 2 103 8 1,017 968 49 1,244 1,275 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 11 5 32 39 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 3 71 16 733 630 103 87 101 647 21 685 13 635 20 765 11 1,008 15 13,859 13,150 709 11,882 12,642 24 .24 41 28 13 28 18 28 75 18 1,063 740 323 801 1,217 9 2 2 1 ... ... 22 3 73 10 596 561 35 849 891 15 4 14 3 18 5 39 7 295 18 2,209 2,150 59 2,734 2,781 ... ... 6 5 21 3 9 15 53 9 953 537 416 395 514 32 4 37 4 55 10 83 2 100 10 1,066 982 84 2,879 2,950 60 6 67 2 25 4 28 3 28 5 700 647 53 2,025 2,278 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 9 1,602 1,180 422 47 83 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 155 32 196 155 41 1,120 1,258 1,237 148 1,286 167 1,251 171 2,580 235 4,396 393 45,059 39,300 5,759 39,571 44,809 during the first six months of the year, of which no accurate record was kept.
( iv ) GENERAL RETURN OF FOR BENGAL PROPER, ASSAM, CHOTA STATIONS. NUMBER OF VACCI- NATORS EMPLOYED. VACCINATION OF JANUARY. FEBRUARY. MARCH. APRIL. MAY. JUNE. JULY. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Backergunge... 1 77 8 63 22 88 11 23 11 5 15 4 13 ... 22 Bograh... ... 47 6 214 5 325 27 7 ... 6 2 2 ... 1 4 Chittagong... 1 1 6 6 9 3 4 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... Cherrapoonjee... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Cachar... ... 1 170 77 61 21 192 36 36 12 7 2 ... ... ... ... Dacca... ... 6 246 93 251 160 261 73 196 110 152 73 98 88 106 73 Debrooghur... ... 1 33 8 55 7 230 18 88 ... 54 10 17 4 9 ... Furreedpore... ... ... 72 1 41 15 28 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Gowhatty... ... 1 79 5 79 26 145 27 117 22 ... ... ... ... ... ... Mymensing... ... 1 95 23 140 10 175 19 71 6 60 7 49 7 ... ... Noacolly... ... ... 6 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... Pubna... ... 1 5 9 3 7 2 5 3 5 4 6 3 5 3 6 Seebsaugor... ... 1 205 21 232 105 220 69 219 103 48 28 28 26 13 12 Shillong... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Sylhet... ... 1 27 2 22 ... ... 25 17 ... 9 4 ... 15 ... ... Tezpore... ... ... 8 2 14 4 25 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tipperah... ... 1 34 1 23 9 119 6 73 2 110 2 ... ... ... ... TOTAL... 17 1,105 266 1,206 400 1,813 337 851 275 455 149 201 161 132 117 Arrah... ... 2 67 21 115 37 173 48 127 30 41 22 ... ... ... ... Bhaugulpore... ... ... 4 1 90 33 43 11 50 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... Buxar... ... ... 57 17 89 10 8 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Chumparun... ... 1 60 46 67 42 62 37 72 46 ... ... ... ... 24 17 Chyebassa... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Deoghur... ... ... 233 9 69 3 171 27 185 ... 26 ... ... ... ... ... Dinapore... ... 1 29 10 22 7 8 3 22 1 ... ... 10 2 15 6 Gyah... ... 1 46 19 67 51 37 37 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hazareebaugh... ... 3 33 210 163 6 451 271 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Monghyr ... ... 2 177 22 188 84 257 59 69 42 ... ... ... ... ... ... Patna... ... 8 826 74 1,006 69 1,139 90 1,024 64 ... ... ... ... ... ... Purneah... ... 1 64 73 25 23 10 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ranchee... ... 4 283 29 262 368 271 160 22 9 ... 2 ... 5 ... ... Sarun... ... 1 174 21 221 76 264 59 290 77 ... ... ... ... ... ... Tirhoot... ... 2 171 55 272 36 279 39 262 47 ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL... 26 2,224 607 2,656 845 3,173 858 2,127 321 67 24 10 7 39 23 GRAND TOTAL... 152 29,876 2,401 42,646 3,739 44,628 4,588 14,709 2,265 5,363 1,991 3,496 1,495 1,971 641 * Excluding the Return from Akyab C. R. FRANCIS, M. B., Surgeon Major, Officiating Secretary to Inspector General, Medical Department, L. P.
(iv) GENERAL RETURN OF FOR BENGAL PROPER, ASSAM, CHOTA VACCINATION OF UARY. FEBRUARY. MARCH. APRIL. MAY. JUNE. JULY. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. 8 63 22 88 11 23 11 5 15 4 13 ... 22 6 214 5 325 27 7 ... 6 2 2 ... 1 4 6 6 9 3 4 1 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 77 61 21 192 36 36 12 7 2 ... ... ... ... 93 251 160 261 73 196 110 152 73 98 88 106 73 8 55 7 230 18 88 ... 54 10 17 4 9 ... 1 41 15 28 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 79 26 145 27 117 22 ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 140 10 175 19 71 6 60 7 49 7 ... ... 4 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... 9 3 7 2 5 3 5 4 6 3 5 3 6 21 232 105 220 69 219 103 48 28 28 26 13 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 22 ... ... 25 17 ... 9 4 ... 15 ... ... 2 14 4 25 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 23 9 119 6 73 2 110 2 ... ... ... ... 266 1,206 400 1,813 337 851 275 455 149 201 161 132 117 21 115 37 173 48 127 30 41 22 ... ... ... ... 1 90 33 43 11 50 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 89 10 8 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46 67 42 62 37 72 46 ... ... ... ... 24 17 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 69 3 171 27 185 ... 26 ... ... ... ... ... 10 22 7 8 3 22 1 ... ... 10 2 15 6 19 67 51 37 37 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 210 163 6 451 271 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 188 84 257 59 69 42 ... ... ... ... ... ... 74 1,006 69 1,139 90 1,024 64 ... ... ... ... ... ... 73 25 23 10 16 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 262 368 271 160 22 9 ... 2 ... 5 ... ... 21 221 76 264 59 290 77 ... ... ... ... ... ... 55 272 36 279 39 262 47 ... ... ... ... ... ... 607 2,656 845 3,173 858 2,127 321 67 24 10 7 39 23 2,401 42,646 3,739 44,628 4,588 14,709 2,265 5,363 1,991 3,496 1,495 1,971 641 * Excluding the Return from Akyab C. R. FRANCIS, M.B., Surgeon Major, Officiating Secretary to Inspector General, Medical Department, L.P.
[NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted ( v ) VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1867. NAGPORE, AND BEHAR PROVINCES. EACH MONTH. TOTAL VACCINATIONS OF 1867. TOTAL OF 1866. AUGUST. SEPTEMBER. OCTOBER. NOVEMBER. DECEMBER. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful Total vac- cinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Successful. Total vac- cinated. ... 14 ... 10 ... 7 7 21 90 106 617 357 260 432 582 1 3 ... 2 ... 15 16 ... 447 15 1,145 1,066 79 540 568 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 1 3 42 12 30 382 542 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 32 2 ... 3 2 ... ... 17 12 23 24 697 511 186 315 378 129 106 130 79 137 104 168 109 197 113 3,252 2,071 1,181 1,385 2,094 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 27 25 13 602 515 87 203 273 ... ... ... ... ... 9 59 16 45 21 324 245 79 235 313 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 27 9 566 447 119 394 584 42 13 35 12 35 8 34 11 38 5 895 774 121 638 797 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 15 8 7 33 45 2 6 1 6 2 7 1 8 ... 8 107 29 78 42 111 26 39 ... ... 3 3 44 8 91 83 1,606 1,129 477 488 613 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 32 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 ... 22 2 161 113 48 183 264 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 2 3 62 52 10 10 36 ... ... ... ... 1 1 4 9 9 8 411 373 38 238 312 202 161 169 111 178 154 373 256 1,017 413 10,502 7,702 2,800 5,567 7,576 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 681 523 158 278 414 ... ... ... ... ... 12 4 16 1 5 275 192 83 81 129 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 182 154 28 104 142 ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... 26 26 525 311 214 331 551 ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 15 6 68 102 19 83 32 33 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 725 686 39 1,606 1,646 31 11 21 4 22 0 8 5 23 7 276 211 65 95 131 ... ... ... ... 1 5 19 40 60 14 396 230 166 234 357 ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 30 ... 2 1,205 686 519 844 1,492 ... ... ... ... ... ... 48 12 182 63 1,203 921 282 287 407 ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 35 582 58 4,998 4,608 390 2,751 3,162 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... 12 228 99 129 198 258 ... ... ... ... ... ... 44 20 469 262 2,206 1,351 855 1,104 2,878 ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 8 167 97 1,474 1,136 338 288 363 ... ... ... ... 148 44 212 42 301 37 1,945 1,645 300 834 1,055 31 11 21 4 171 70 434 228 1,819 651 16,421 12,772 3,649 9,067 13,018 2,022 555 1,984 377 2,447 575 9,683 1,097 17,791 1,774 1,98,114 1,76,616 21,498 1,64,388 *1,94,105 incorporated in the General Return of 1866. JAMES L. BRYDEN, M.D., Asst. Surgeon, In charge Statistical Branch Office, Bengal Medical Department.
( vi ) RETURN OF THE DARJEELING CIRCLE OF DISTRICTS. NUMBER OF VACCI- NATORS EMPLOYED. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND THE NOVEMBER. DECEMBER. JANUARY. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vaccina- ted. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vaccina- ted. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vaccina- ted. Western Doars and Terai... 4 42 8 ... ... 50 8 662 85 6 5 758 85 1,109 90 20 13 1,232 87 Dinagepore... ... 7 9 ... ... ... 9 ... 520 54 13 5 592 57 1,398 121 33 36 1,588 92 Rungpore... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 744 39 9 6 798 39 1,562 68 24 22 1,676 70 Bogra... ... 4 262 174 ... ... 436 174 273 61 13 3 350 61 695 110 55 14 874 107 Rajshahye... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 5 ... ... 14 ... 1,421 97 17 9 1,544 73 Darjeeling Circle... ... 24 313 182 ... ... 495 182 2,208 244 11 19 2,512 242 6,185 186 149 94 6,914 429 RETURN OF VACCINATION IN THE SANTHAL DISTRICT. NUMBER OF VACCI- NATORS EMPLOYED. NUMBER OP OPERATIONS AND DECEMBER. JANUARY. FEBRUARY. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Santhal Pergunnahs... ... 6 2 ... ... 2 307 39 3 549 1,848 75 6 1,929 Of 7,749 Vaccinations, 5,956 were performed on Santhals, RETURN OF THE RANCHEE CIRCLE OF DISTRICTS. NUMBER OF VACCINA- TORS EMPLOYED. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND OCTOBER. NOVEMBER. DECEMBER. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. Ranchee... ... 5 ... ... ... 14 20 34 341 243 584 Hazareebaugh... ... 9 36 25 61 ... 5 5 120 4 124 Purulia... ... 1 ... ... ... 16 3 19 71 16 87 Chyebassa*... ... 4 * * * * * * * * * TOTAL... 19 36 25 61 30 28 58 532 263 795 * The details for the Chyebassa District have been inaccurately rendered C. R. FRANCIS, M.B., Surgeon Major, Offg. Secretary to Inspector General, Medical Department, L. P.
(vi) RETURN OF THE DARJEELING CIRCLE OF NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND THE NOVEMBER. DECEMBER. JANUARY. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vaccina- ted. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vaccina- ted. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vaccina- ted. 42 8 ... ... 50 8 662 85 6 5 758 85 1,109 90 20 13 1,232 87 9 ... ... ... 9 ... 520 54 13 5 592 57 1,398 121 33 36 1,588 92 ... ... ... ... ... ... 744 39 9 6 798 39 1,562 68 24 22 1,676 70 262 174 ... ... 436 174 273 61 13 3 350 61 695 110 55 14 874 107 ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 5 ... ... 14 ... 1,421 97 17 9 1,544 73 313 182 ... ... 495 182 2,208 244 11 19 2,512 242 6,185 186 149 94 6,914 429 RETURN OF VACCINATION IN THE SANTHAL NUMBER OF VACCI- NATORS EMPLOYED. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND DECEMBER. JANUARY. FEBRUARY. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. ... ... ... 6 2 ... ... 2 307 39 3 549 1,848 75 6 1,929 Of 7,749 Vaccinations, 5,956 were performed on Santhals, RETURN OF THE RANCHEE CIRCLE OF NUMBER OF VACCINA- TORS EMPLOYED. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND OCTOBER. NOVEMBER. DECEMBER. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... 14 20 34 341 243 584 ... ... ... 9 36 25 61 ... 5 5 120 4 124 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 16 3 19 71 16 87 ... ... ... 4 * * * * * * * * * ... 19 36 25 61 30 28 58 532 263 795 * The details for the Chyebassa District have been inaccurately rendered. C. R. FRANCIS, M.B., Surgeon Major, Offg. Secretary to Inspector General, Medical Department, L. P.
[NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted ( vii ) VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON 1867-68. RESULTS IN EACH MONTH. OPERATIONS AND RESULTS FOR THE SEASON. RATIO PER CENT. OF SUCCESSFUL CASES TO THE TOTAL NUM- BER VACCINATED. FEBRUARY. MARCH. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vaccinated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vacci- nated. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. Re-vacci- nated. 1,013 47 33 5 1,098 47 645 44 14 4 707 44 3,471 274 73 27 3,845 271 90.28 1,914 80 60 30 2,084 80 1,554 106 68 10 1,738 106 5,395 361 174 81 6,011 335 89.75 1,204 64 150 23 1,441 64 1,318 54 82 14 1,468 54 4,828 225 265 65 5,383 227 89.69 1,231 104 51 7 1,393 114 1,317 147 51 4 1,519 141 3,778 596 170 28 4,572 597 82.63 1,993 74 72 22 2,161 65 1,766 70 47 25 1,908 79 5,189 246 136 56 5,627 217 92.22 7,355 369 366 87 8,177 370 6,600 421 262 57 7,340 424 22,661 1,702 818 257 25,438 1,647 89.08 PERGUNNAHS FOR THE SEASON 1867-68. THE RESULTS IN EACH MONTH. OPERATIONS AND RESULTS FOR THE SEASON. RATIO PER CENT. OF SUCCESSFUL CASES TO THE TOTAL NUM- BER VACCINATED. MARCH. APRIL. MAY. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. 2,185 187 22 2,394 2,537 309 10 2,856 13 ... 19 7,092 616 41 7,749 91.52 1,405 on Hindoos and 388 on Mahomedans. VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON 1867-68. THE RESULTS IN EACH MONTH. OPERATIONS AND RESULTS FOR THE SEASON. RATIO PER CENT. OF SUCCESSFUL CASES TO THE TOTAL NUM- BER VACCINATED. JANUARY. FEBRUARY. MARCH. Successful. Unsuccessful and Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccess- ful and Doubtful. Total. 335 204 539 131 101 232 145 55 200 966 623 1,589 60.79 334 168 502 162 119 281 227 157 384 879 478 1,357 64.78 328 72 400 ... ... ... ... ... ... 415 91 506 82.02 * * * * * * * * * 2,858 137 2,995 95.42 997 444 1,441 293 220 513 372 212 584 5,118 1,329 6,447 79.38 and the results of the Vaccination of each Month cannot be shewn. JAMES L. BRYDEN, M. D., Asst. Surgeon, In charge Statistical Branch Office, Bengal Medical Department.
OFFICE SUPDT. GOVT. PRINTING OFFICE SUPDT. GOVT. PRINTING.REPORT ON THE STAMPING OUT OF SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA BY T. EDMONDSTON CHARLES, M. D., M. R. C. P. LOND., SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION.
INDEX. PARA. SECTION I.ii SECTION VI.REPORT ON THE STAMPING OUT OF SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. SECTION I. POLICE REGULATIONS AGAINST SMALL-POX NECESSARY. Argument for restrictions of Medical Police 1. In the following report I have to call attention to the fact that very much might be done by a judicious system of Medical Police to prevent the mortality attendant on an epidemic of small- pox, when that scourge is allowed to make head in Calcutta. Public attention in Great Britain has been recently strongly directed to the advantages to be derived from restrictions being applied to those who are for the time dangerous, in consequence of laboring under disease which they can communicate to those around. Sir James Simpson, President of the Public Health Section of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, has published an address on the subject, and it would be well for India, were a copy of it placed by Government in the hands of every medical man, and every civil administrator in the country. In the following report, I shall have to follow some parallel lines of thought, and avail myself of illustrations similar to those which he has made use of, and it would be impossible to introduce the subject more fittingly than by taking the following quotation from the address referred to:2 THE STAMPING OUT OF of stamping out could be as successfully applied to the extirpation of small-pox among us as it has been applied to the extirpation of rinderpest; but of course with great differences. The rinderpest has been stamped out by killing all the animals laboring under the disease; and in many instances all those animals of the same flock which had been exposed to the contagion of it, but which were not yet attacked by the malady. The mission, however, of the human physician is ever to save life, never to destroy it.&quot; &quot;And yet in accordance with this leading and divine principle, we could, in my opinion, as surely and as swiftly stamp out small-pox as rinderpest has been stamped out. For all that appears necessary for the purpose is simply the methodic temporary seclusion, segrega- tion, or quarantine, of those affected with small-pox, until they have completely passed through the disease and lost the power of infecting and injuring others; the poleaxe was the chief and leading measure required to stamp out rinderpest. ISOLATION is the chief and leading measure required to stamp out small-pox.&quot; Mortality from small-pox in Calcutta 2. In a special report on the Presidency vaccine establishment I laid before the Bengal Government in 1865 a table of the deaths from small-pox which had taken place in Calcutta since the year 1832. From this it can be seen that small-pox exists in Calcutta every year, and that in the thirty-four years included in the table it had assumed epidemic proportions on seven occasions. On each of these occasions the loss of life has been so terrific as to make one shrink from dwell- ing on it. The figures have already been published in the Calcutta Gazette of the 17th January 1866. This figured statement seems to have attracted but little attention. It is difficult to appreciate the full significance of abstract figures; perhaps with the aid of illustration I may be more fortunate in drawing public attention to the subject. To exemplify in what degree a small-pox epidemic means death, let me take as an extreme instance what occurred in the last small-pox epidemic. During February and March 1865, exceeded that in England for a year. 3. In the months of February and March 1865, 2,957 people died of small-pox in the town of Calcutta,SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. 3 Comparison with naval ac- tions. 4. The fearful carnage on board a ship of war during a naval engagement is one easy of comprehension. Naval appliances for wholesale slaughter are very perfect; with the enemy collected together in individual ships, every condition is secured to render destruction on a large scale very easy. When you search through history for an example of a large fleet having so suffered as to serve as a parallel for the death-rate from small-pox in Calcutta during the year 1865, not the most remote approach to such an illustration can be found in the whole annals of our naval warfare. By com- bining together any number of our most noted and bloody actions at sea, if you take only the killed into the account, it is difficult to secure such an illustration. To get over this difficulty if every wounded English sailor is added to the list of those killed, and you make a list of naval engagements, as of those at St. Vincent, Camper- down, the Nile, Trafalgar, Algiers, and Navarino, the total sum of killed and wounded combined may be compared against the loss of lives from small-pox in Calcutta in the-one year referred to. Even then, however, the illustration falls considerably short of the full number required. Comparison with wars on land. 5. Again, the science of war ashore is by no means defective in its means for destroying human life; let us take an example of a war extending over a considerable period, and seek by having such an instance in mind to appreciate the terrible loss of life from small- pox. If we fix on a period of four years, the last years of the Peninsular war will furnish the example. During this eventful period, 8,899 British soldiers were killed in action or died of their wounds. If to the deaths from small-pox in the year 1865 just alluded to, we add those which took place in another year (1850), we get a total of 9,415. Here we find that in this one city, 516 people died of this disease in two years, over and above the total numbers that the whole of the armies of Great Britain lost while engaged with a powerful enemy for double that time. Small-pox killed more people in Calcutta in two years, than all the shot, shell, and grape of the Artillery, all the sabres of the Cavalry, and all the bullets and bayonets of the Infantry could destroy, when used against large armies of English soldiers for four years. Comparison with accidents in civil life. 6. Come now to civil life : accidents here occur which every now and again startle society from some horrible sacrifice of human life.
4. THE STAMPING OUT OF But analogy here completely fails to furnish even a remote equivalent catastrophe for the one with which I wish to compare it. Take all the Railway accidents in India, add to them all those from falling buildings crushing their occupants in their ruins, throw into the account all explosions from gunpowder, and every accident that has caused a single death, and you cannot get numerals, expressing a sufficiently large number of deaths, to compare against the thousands of deaths which have steadily continued to take place in Calcutta for as long a time as any record can be procured. I have before me a tabulated statement of deaths from small-pox in Calcutta extending back to the year 1832. As no real illustration can be found to give an idea of the immense loss of life, let an impos- sible one be invented for the purpose. Boiler explosions every now and then occur, and when a few succeed one another at short intervals, they are much talked about. Suppose a series of boilers bursting every week, and let each of them kill fourteen persons, and you get a series of deaths, which if extended over a long number of years, would repre- sent very nearly the fatal nature of small-pox in Calcutta. The table which I published included thirty-four years; the average weekly rate of mortality closely approaches to fourteen deaths. Fourteen people have been dying week after week from small-pox whose lives could easily have been saved. Had such a mortality been taking place for thirty-four years, as the result of boiler explosions, means would have been found to put a stop to it. The whole machinery of legislation would have been put in motion to avert such a terrible series of catastrophes, and nothing would have been considered too stringent as a legal enactment to prevent such an unheard of succession of fatal accidents. It is to guard against a precisely similar amount of loss of life that the &quot; stamping out&quot; of small-pox in Calcutta is a necessity. Only a slight amount of legislative assistance is required to allow this to be effectively done. SECTION II. POSSIBILITY OF STAMPING OUT SMALL-POX. Purely contagi- ous nature of small-pox. 7. It is a fact known to all who engage themselves with such affairs that this mortality can be effectively put a stop to. In the language of those who write on such subjects it is called a preventible mortality. Small-pox is one of those diseases which propagates itself solely by
SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. 5 contagion. Where no contagion exists, no small-pox will be found. No case of small-pox can be originated from any combination of cir- cumstances; it can only arise from a germ derived from a previously existing case of the disease. As soon would a student of Natural History believe that an elephant, or a banian tree, had sprung into existence without parentage, as the natural historian of disease, of the present day, would credit the assertion that a case of small-pox had been generated de novo. Three factors necessary to allow of small- pox becoming epidemic. 8. To allow of small-pox spreading there are three conditions essentially necessary6 THE STAMPING OUT OF Facility of prevention. 10. Fortunately with regard to Calcutta at least, the carrying out of both of these requisites, to an extent capable of restraining the ravages of this disease to a minimum, is easily within our reach, provided the legislature will render legal the necessary restrictive measures. None of these enactments will fall heavily on individuals, nor, if judiciously and vigorously worked, will their incidence affect vexatiously any large numbers. SECTION III. REMOVAL OF THE SUSCEPTIBILITY OF RECEIVING THE DISEASE. Repeated attacks of small-pox rare. 11. A large and extended experience over all the world, has shown that those who have once suffered from an attack of the disease, are but little susceptible to the contagion of small-pox, and but rarely undergo a second or third attack. It is also known, that those who have been artificially caused to go through the disease by means of inoculation with the small-pox virus, or by means of vaccination, possess the same immunity when exposed to the contagion of small- pox. Present Vaccine Establishment capable of protecting Calcutta. 12. A Vaccine Establishment exists in Calcutta, and if the Government of Bengal sanctions a slight alteration of a defect in the working of the Department, the necessity for which I pointed out in 1865 and again in 1867, in consequence of its interfering most seriously with the efficiency of its operations, there is every reason to believe that it is capable of affording Calcutta all the protection against small-pox which, under the present state of Native feeling on the subject, and in the absence of vaccination being made compul- sory, is capable of being provided for the city and suburbs. In working it, two objects held in view. 13. In working this establishment two great objects are held in viewSMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. 7 public writings on this subject, I have expressed my intention of moving the legislature at some future time to pass such an Act. But I have stated, also, that for the present, I am not prepared to press for such a law, till all other means of having the people protected have been fairly pushed with energy and determination. Such a law is an inevitable necessity; but the people must first be educated by watch ing vaccination and learning about it, up to the standard of receiving such an act as by no means entailing serious hardship. Thus to accomplish the first of these objects I do not for the present ask for any special assistance from the Commissioner of Police. Vaccination round cases of small-pox. 15. With regard to the second, however, it is different, and without some assistance the object can be but very imperfectly attained. To vaccinate round a case of small-pox, pre-supposes that the occurrence of the case shall have become known. Experience has shown that the means at the disposal of the Vaccine Establishment to provide itself with this knowledge are most imperfect. Cases of small-pox occur of which nothing is heard; while others are brought to notice after so long an existence of the disease, that protective measures are only had resort to, at a time that much preventible mischief has taken place. Early notifi- cation of the occurrence of small-pox. 16. To enable the vaccinators to carry out this part of my instructions with any measure of success, it will be necessary that they be provided with the information that a case of small-pox exists in a given locality. The simplest way to effect this object seems to be, that it shall be rendered imperative that each case be notified at the nearest Police station, and that the Inspector of Police fill up and forward a printed form, detailing the name and residence of the person affected, to the Superintendent of Vacci- nation of the division of the town in which the case occurs. Several reasons might be adduced why the report should be forwarded through this channel; and no further Police assistance is desired, provided the notice of the occurrence of small-pox has been given early. The assistance asked under this head is very moderate. I will now mention a few instances in which I have been able to stop small-pox from spreading, by removing the susceptibility to the disease of those residing round it, in order to prevent objections being raised to the necessary powers being granted. With results so marked and striking, accruing every year from a systematic following out of the principle of depriving those surrounding small-pox cases of their
8 THE STAMPING OUT OF susceptibility of receiving the contagion, I trust no difficulty will be experienced in having it rendered compulsory to give early notifi- cation of each case of small-pox as it occurs, and providing for the imposition of a heavy penalty on the head of the house in every case in which he has failed to give (or cause to be given) the necessary information to the Police. SECTION IV. INSTANCES OF SMALL-POX BEING &quot;STAMPED OUT&quot; BY REMOVING THE SUSCEPTIBILITY TO CONTAGION OF THOSE AROUND. Stamping out In Calcutta. 17. In Calcutta, small-pox attacking a family has been in so very many instances prevented from spreading to the other members by vaccinating or re-vaccinating all in the house that no note is kept of such instances. Strangers bringing it to the town have also been prevented from spreading it in the same way. Thus in December last a man arrived in Calcutta from Benares. He was suffering from the initiatory fever of small-pox, and on the second day after he reached Calcutta, the eruption appeared He pos- sessed no protection against small-pox, the disease was confluent, and he died of it. He remained for three days in one house and was then removed into another. Vaccination was performed in both of these houses, and in the neighbourhood of each, and not a single other case of small pox occurred. Again in January a man came to Calcutta from Ramkistopore, a village on the other side of the Hooghly. He, too, was laboring under the initiatory fever of small-pox, and the eruption came out in due time. The unprotected persons in his house, and immediately around it, were vaccinated, and he communicated the disease to no one. So also in the next month, a woman arrived from the Jehanabad district, and stated that inoculation was being extensively practised in the village in which she had been residing. Small-pox attacked her soon after reaching Calcutta, the contagion having been received at her previous residence. She was prevented from being a source of danger to those around, by all coming within her influence being deprived of their receptive power, and again no one caught small-pox from her,
SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. 9 I know of other cases which have this year been imported into Calcutta and its immediate neighbourhood, but by being so dealt with have been rendered harmless. Stamping out at Sanki- beriah. 18. To strengthen my case, let me also briefly describe two instances in which small-pox has been &quot; stamped out&quot; within com- paratively short distances of Calcutta during this year and the last. To begin with what took place this year. At the commencement of the hot weather of 1867 small-pox originated about forty-eight miles south of Calcutta, in the Diamond Harbour sub-division, owing to inoculation having been practised. Sankiberiah was its head quarters, the epidemic involving a large number of the surrounding villages. Early in 1868 vaccinators were sent there with orders to stop the epidemic at once. After January, with two exceptions, not a case occurred in the villages which had been thus invaded. Owing to a fair, the disease was carried to a village at some distance. This village and all surrounding ones were vaccinated, and the conflagration again died out for want of fuel. Seven thousand seven hundred and twenty-one people were successfully vaccinated by the gang of vaccinators sent to Sankiberiah, and the prompt and instant check to small-pox fully verified all my previous experience in regard to the facility of successfully stamping out the disease in this way. Stamping o at Sookchur. 19. So also in January 1867, small-pox broke out at Sookchur, about ten miles north of Calcutta, and the disease showed itself to be of a very malignant type. Eight vaccinators rapidly protected fourteen hundred indivi- duals in the neighbourhood of the outbreak. Those in whom the disease was incubating at the time of the vaccinators' arrival, were the only ones seized with small-pox, except two persons, both of whom died, and these would not consent on any terms to be vaccinated. SECTION V. GUARDING AGAINST THE DIFFUSION OF CONTAGION BY AFFECTED PERSONS. Isolation of affected per 20. The third element necessary to the spread of small-pox I stated to be the existence of persons or of things capable of com- municating the contagion. In a practical argument it may be accepted B
10 THE STAMPING OUT OF that those only laboring under the disease, the clothing and conveyances used by them, or in general terms whatever has come into contact with their bodies, possesses the power of conveying to others an attack of the disease. No restrictions of any sort are placed on those who thus for the time being are gifted with the most fatal powers of communicating disease and death to all who come within their influence. It is open to any one with small-pox to act in such a way that he may be the means of causing the death of hundreds of his fellow-beings. Cases have come within my own knowledge where individuals, insen- sible to the entreaties of those around, and deaf to the remonstrances of medical men, have refused to go to the small-pox hospital, or take other steps to avoid doing the infinite mischief which was sure to follow on their remaining in their own overcrowded dwellings and localities. In a city such as this, where small-pox is met with every year, it is very difficult to estimate the exact prejudicial influence exercised by individual cases of small-pox. But under other circum- stances the results can be estimated with startling facility. Illustration of danger from the mischief caused by the Ditto. 21. In his recent address to the Social Science Association, Sir James Simpson recounts an instance which will convince every one on this point:SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. 11 attacked. In the gigantic naval fight of Trafalgar, one of the greatest battles ever fought at sea, between 1,600 and 1,700 of the British sailors fell. Thus, the one infected sailor, cruelly left by the ship Delta upon the shores of Puynipet, destroyed nearly twice as many human lives as were destroyed by all the artillery and musketry fired by the French fleet at Trafalgar.&quot; Necessity for legislation. 22. There are few law-makers who, had they possessed the power of legislating so as to prevent the loss of these 3,000 lives, would not gladly have exerted their functions to prevent this sailor from becoming such a wholesale destroyer of human life. There are few restrictions, which in such a case as this, would be considered too great an interference with the liberty of the subject. In Calcutta, it is precisely a similar amount of mortality which I point out as pre- ventible, only the death-rate I have chosen as my example extends over two months alone; the heavy mortality both before and after this period not being now dwelt upon. In Calcutta, it is true we can hardly hope to trace an epidemic to the influence of a single case. If we were so fortunately situated in this respect, as only to expect one sailor capable of spreading small-pox, to be left with us in any single year, it might be long before it was deemed requisite to ask for legislative protection. The case is different, however, when every railway, road, river, canal, and creek may any day introduce the disease among us. Vaccination along all routes of communica- tion. 23. Already the attention of the Bengal Government has been called to the fact that this city lies extremely open to invasions of small-pox, owing to the circumstance that the country around has never been protected by vaccination. For this reason local outbreaks of the disease in the vicinity are extremely frequent, and any one of these, places Calcutta in danger. Efforts are being now systematically carried on, with the view of protecting all the lines of communication, leaving for future years those districts which are more isolated in their position, and therefore less liable to influence Calcutta in this way, or to receive small-pox from it in times of epidemic visitation. One case has been quoted as an instance in which small-pox was brought from Benares within the last few months. Since that case occurred a Sikh soldier's wife also brought the disease with her from the same place. She was effectually isolated, and did not spread the disease. In both of these instances the scourge was brought to us by rail from a greater distance than 500 miles.
12 THE STAMPING OUT OF It only requires time and observation to be able to record such cases being brought from double or treble the distance of Benares. It can hardly be hoped that the protective influence of vaccination will be carried to such distances within the life-time of those in Calcutta, whose interests are now affected, and some simple, yet effective, measure is urgently required, in the meantime, to guard against our periodic epidemics. Principle of such a law not new. 24. Such an enforced temporary seclusion has its evident parallel in the removal of dangerous lunatics to an asylum or of those suffer- ing from contagious disorders to a lock-hospital; for both of which Indian law already provides. It is but a short step to apply such a principle to those who are dangerous to others while they suffer from small-pox; while the danger to be guarded against is far greater than either of those against which the law already provides. Isolation at sea. 25. There are very many recorded examples of the effective security which can be attained to by the isolation of those affected with small-pox. For obvious reasons, those occurring at sea are the most striking. Sir James Simpson relates that a shipful of Chinese, who were unprotected, were saved from the ravages of small-pox, which was brought on board by a European passenger, by the judicious seclusion of the affected person. Another very striking illustration is recorded by Dr. Currie, in which eight cases of small-pox appeared on board a Guineaman shortly after she had left the African Coast. Those affected were confined to the main-top, some twenty feet above the deck, none of the other passengers or crew took the disease. Comparative facility of such quarantine ashore. 26. If judicious police regulations can effect so much among the crowded population of an emigrant or passenger ship, how much more easily can protection be provided for, under the more favorable circum- stances at our disposal ashore. What we require is legal authority to enforce isolation of those affected with the disease, and also restrictive measures to prevent them from touching anything while they are ill which is liable to be made use of by others. Absence of all restrictions in Calcutta, . 27. At present those covered with small-pox are allowed to sit or lie in the public streets. Even in our broadest thoroughfares, such a practice is most reprehensible, and when it takes place in a narrow lane
SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. 13 or crooked alley, the danger is much greater. During the last small-pox epidemic, I have very many times, while wandering about the infected localities, been appealed to for charity by beggars who were covered with small-pox crusts, and therefore possessed the power of conveying the disease in a very high degree; and I have seen children similarly situated as regards contagion, constituting the centre of a group of sympathising companions, who were quietly playing round them. I have seen the healthy child, as yet unprotected, being lulled to rest by its father, in close contact with the body of its mother, who was too near her death from small-pox, to care for anything on earth. It was a daily occurrence to see children, as yet free from the disease, made to sleep with those who had the disease in a bad form: and many are the instances in which I witnessed the firm protective power of vaccination under such circumstances. At almost any hour of the day there could be seen in the same confined hut those dying of small-pox, those more recently attacked, and those who had not yet got the disease. SECTION VI. LEGAL ENACTMENT TO COMPEL ISOLATION. Seclusion to be enforced. 28. To guard against such a wholesale neglect of precaution, nothing short of legislative interference will avail. In private houses. 29. Those affected by small pox must be compelled by law to keep themselves separate. If their circumstances are such that they can do so at their own homes, such an indulgence may in most cases be allowed, on the production of medical evidence, in writing, to the effect that they are able to keep up an effective seclusion. In hospital. 30. In the case of those who, from limited means, are unable to comply with the necessary requirements, arrangements should be made to provide, at the cost of the community to be protected, for their isolation; and powers must be asked for to make it compulsory for such persons to accept the provision thus made for them. Classification of patients. 31. In making such isolation in places set apart for the purpose incumbent, it will be obviously right to make such a restriction fall as lightly as possible on those subjected to it. With this end in view, special reserved accommodation should be set apart in the small-pox hospital about to be built, to enable those who can afford to pay for it, to keep themselves separate from the public wards. Not only might a few
14 THE STAMPING OUT OF absolutely private wards be provided, but also a few small wards capable of holding three or four patients. These would allow for the classification of the patients to a certain degree, and with a graduated scale of pay- ments, would prove a boon to those who, though they could not afford the expense of strictly private accommodation for themselves, would value being saved from a compulsory association with those less for- tunate in life than they were. Relations and private attendants. 32. Those of the sufferers who desired it, might have the consolation of being cared for by a relation or private attendant, in every case where the expense for food could be defrayed from private sources. Those who entered the hospital without the disease, however, would have to comply with the regulations of the hospital as regards previous protection from variola, and compulsory residence till legally discharged. Such a concession would tend to lessen the evils-attendant on the admission of visitors to the hospital. Probably if a law existed to make such seclusion compulsory, in most cases where the necessity for it existed, those affected would comply with the law on any medical man advising them to this effect. Means for enforcing com- pliance. 33. Provision will require to be made for the case of those who will not otherwise provide for their own isolation, or resort to the small-pox hospital. One of the simplest ways of doing this would be to provide that any Justice of the Peace or Magistrate could sign an order for removal to the hospital, on a certificate for its necessity which was signed by two medical men who had seen the patient. The Commissioner of Police might also have such a power of action, on the certificate of the Superintendent of Vaccination for that division of the town in which the patient resides, countersigned by the Superintendent General of Vaccination. The Superintendents of Vaccination are always medical men, and before signing such a certificate would have seen the person affected. The counter-signature of the Superintendent General of Vaccination might involve only a knowledge of the case, derived from the vaccinators, or others, by whom it might have been brought to notice. SECTION VII. PRECAUTIONS WITH REGARD TO FOMITES AND OTHER CARRIERS OF CONTAGION. Infected rooms, clothing, and bedding. 34. Another element which serves to propagate small-pox, will also require careful regulation,SMALL-POX IN CALCUTTA. 15 the bodies of those suffering from certain stages of the disease, may become the vehicle of disseminating the scourge. All the bedding and clothing made use of by those labouring under the disease, or by those in close attendance on them, should be burned, or thoroughly disinfected, and the rooms which they have occupied while so affected should be purified in such way as the knowledge of the day should point out as the most effectual. For the latter purpose, after thorough cleaning and ventilation, if the apartment were for some time kept filled with the fumes of burning sulphur, and subsequently white-washed, the most prominent indication would be fulfilled. Any clothing or bedding worth preservation, after being boiled in water to remove impurities as far as possible, should be exposed to dry heat in special chambers, or thoroughly fumigated with sulphur. As in some continental hospitals, such disinfecting chambers might be provided at the small-pox hospital, so that patients and their friends might have their clothes disinfected before leaving the hospital; while the public might also be allowed the privilege of the gratuitous disinfection of private clothing. Public convey- ance. 35. During the last epidemic I had to address the then Commis- sioner of Police on the subject of the public conveyances being used by those suffering from small-pox, and pointed out the necessity for the pro- vision of special conveyances for such a purpose. The restrictions then imposed worked well, and might now be made to take a more permanent form. Dangerous occu- pations. 36. The exercising of trades by those convalescent from small-pox, or in buildings where small-pox exists, calls for special prohibition. I have seen in a washing establishment three small-pox cases being attended to by those engaged in getting up the clothes, and I have seen sheets, which might next day lie upon the beds of those liable to small- pox, used as screens to protect the sufferers labouring under this disease from the clouds of flies hovering over them. I have also seen loaves of bread being handled by those capable of spreading the disease, and others have seen tailors and dressmakers endanger-public safety by sending out infected garments, which have led to the death of those who wore them. All of these, and similar infringements, of well known precautions, which are liable to endanger public health, call for special measures to guard against the possibility of their occurrence, for the future.
REPORT ON THE OUTBREAK OF SMALL-POX AT SANKIBERIAH, THANNAH SULTANPORE, STAMPED OUT BY EXTENSIVE VACCINE OPERATIONS. BY T. EDMONDSTON CHARLES, M.D., M. R. C. P. LOND., SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION.
INDEX. PARA. Position of Sankiberiah ... ... ... ... ... 1 Origin of the Epidemic ... ... ... ... ... 2 Progress of the disease ... ... ... ... ... 3 Extent and mortality ... ... ... ... ... 4 Actual condition when Vaccination began ... ... ... 5 Commencement of Vaccination ... ... ... ... 6 Progress of Vaccination; Small-pox stamped out ... ... ... 7 Farther extension of Vaccination ... ... ... ... 8 Detail of Arrangements ... ... ... ... 9 Small-pox reported at Ramjannagur ... ... ... ... 10 Origin of this outbreak ... ... ... ... 11 Extent which outbreak had reached ... ... ... ... 12 Vaccination and cessation of Small-pox ... ... ... ... 13 Varicella at Ghateshara ... ... ... ... ... 14 Total number vaccinated and results ... ... ... ... 15 Inspection by the Superintendent of Vaccination ... ... ... 16 The Superintendent deputed to Sankiberiah ... ... ... 17 Reliable nature of the above report ... ... ... 18 Amount of successful cases not overstated ... ... ... 19 Nominal cost of these Vaccinations ... ... ... ... 20 Nominal cost of each Vaccination ... ... ... ... ... 21
REPORT ON THE OUTBREAK OF SMALL-POX AT SANKIBERIAH, THANNAH SULTANPORE. Position of Sankiberiah. Sankiberiah is a village, forty-eight miles south of Calcutta, in the Diamond Harbour Sub-division. Although this village was the head- quarters of the epidemic, it extended in a severe form to several neigh- bouring villages; in the following report the operations recorded were not confined to the one village of Sankiberiah, but extended to all local- ities in which small-pox was to be found in the surrounding country. Origin of the Epidemic. 2. At the end of March 1867 a number of the inhabitants of the village of Bhajna were inoculated. The exact number cannot now be ascertained, though two hundred may be stated as a close approximation. A considerable proportion of the inoculations seems to have com- municated the disease in a severe form, and eight persons died during the following month in consequence of the small-pox thus artificially engrafted on them. There was no small-pox in the neighbourhood at the time that inoculation was practised in this village, and the very com- mon practice of inoculating all the unprotected portion of the inhabi- tants was not followed. In particular, the inhabitants of Baniaparah, a suburb or continuation of Bhajna, first put off the day of inoculation for a short time, and then being alarmed at the results of the inoculation already practised refused to have inoculation performed. This remark applies also in a less degree to some of the inhabitants of Bhajna proper. In the month of April natural small-pox was communicated to several of these unprotected individuals, and the disease, originating in this way, was spread from person to person; apparently, however, it did not extend out of their village during the whole of May. Progross of the- disease. 3. In June the contagion was conveyed beyond the limits of Bhajna, and during this and the following three months was slowly disseminated among the surrounding villages. Up till the end of Sep- tember the following villages had been infected2 OUTBREAK OF the disease followed on inoculation. Most of the cases of small-pox occurred in four of these villages, which might be included in a circle the diameter of which was four miles. The disease was put a stop to in these villages in the end of January by extensive vaccination. The last two cases of small-pox which occurred appeared on the 2nd and 5th of February 1868. Extent and mortality. 4. Up to this time it had attached one hundred and forty-nine persons, of whom thirty-five had died. Of those included in the number attacked, seven had just been vaccinated, three of whom got the initiatory fever of small-pox on the fourth day. It so happened that none of these seven cases were fatal. It must also be noted that six of the deaths among these cases of small-pox were violent ones which took place during the cyclone on the 1st November 1867. Two of these persons who so died seem to have been moribund at the time of the accident, and in the other four the disease had assumed a virulent type, and was so far advanced, as to render it impossible for those affected, to move away from the danger with which they were threatened. Actual condition when Vaccination began. 5. On the arrival of the Head Vaccinator he reported having seen thirty-seven cases of small-pox, seven of the cases being in such a condi- tion as to render recovery hopeless. The population of the villages referred to were in an excited state, in consequence of the events which had occurred, and alarmed at the steady progress the disease was making among them. No vaccination had ever been practised among them, but as they were an extremely poor and ignorant population, and fully appre- ciated their present danger from small-pox, they listened readily to the promises of safety made to them, if they would accept the English pro- phylactic, and they allowed themselves to be vaccinated in numbers. Commeneement of Vaccination. 6. Romanauth Ghosal, one of the Head Vaccinators, belonging to the Vaccine Establishment, was deputed to stamp out this outbreak. He left Calcutta on the 17th January and reached Sankiberiah on the 21st. On his way he picked up a boy of twelve, from the nearest centre of vac- cine operations, who had been previously vaccinated, and whose services had been entertained for this duty. The means of communication in this part of the country are so defective, that this boy could not be returned to his own village for seventeen days. On the 22nd, ten persons, not immediately exposed to small-pox, were persuaded to allow themselves to be vaccinated, with the view of their providing a reliable lymph supply in case of subsequent vaccinations proving not readily
SMALL-POX, &C. 3 available for the purpose, should small-pox supervene during the course of the vaccination. On the 23rd he began to vaccinate in the houses where small-pox existed, and on this and succeeding days fifty-three individuals were vaccinated from the boy to whom the disease had been communicated by six points of insertion; sixty-three persons in all were thus vaccinated from the vaccinifer the vaccinators had brought with them. Every one of these persons was successfully vaccinated, not even a single doubtful case having been met with. Progress of Vaccination. 7. As these cases became ready to supply lymph, very extensive vaccination was practised from them, so that up to the 31st January eight hundred and fifty seven individuals had been operated on. Among this number, there were only four failures and two doubtful cases. Up till the 7th February nine hundred and seventy-three more were vaccina- ted, among which number, there were two failures and three doubtful cases. On the 7th February the four villages in which the disease had been worst were reported absolutely safe. Small-pox had been stamped out. Further exten- sion of Vaccina- tion. 8. The safety of vaccination, the fact of its practice being so free from all distress, and the prompt way in which small-pox had ceased under extensive vaccination, was acknowledged by every one in the neigh- bourhood ; and dozens of people from the surrounding villages had flocked to the vaccinators for protection. On the 12th February it was reported that twelve villages round Sankiberiah had been thoroughly protected by vaccination, and that there was not a single case of small-pox in the neighbourhood. In spite of this absence of small-pox, however, the people showed considerable willingness to take vaccination, and village after village continued to be dealt with, as long as the weather remained so cool as to render the operation advisable. Detail of Arrangements. 9. Romanath Ghosal, the Head Vaccinator, had at first only one vaccinator under his orders. At once on his arrival he reported the exact state of matters which he found, and the outbreak being of such large proportions, two additional vaccinators were sent to him, who joined him on the 12th February, and later on in the same month other two vaccinators joined him; so that during March and April he had five men under his superintendence. Small-pox reported at Ram- jannagur. 10. On the 12th February a report was received from the Zemin- dar at Dehi Gungadhurpore that small-pox had broken out in one of his villages. This village is situated to the north-west of Sankiberiah at a
4 OUTBREAK OF distance of eight miles. Reports of the success of the vaccine operations had reached him, and he invited the vaccinators to work on his estate, beg- ging in particular, that they would come at once to the relief of the village in which small-pox already existed. Origin of this out-break. 11. In the beginning of February three cases of small-pox occur- red at Ramjannagur. There was not much direct communication between this village and those in which small-pox existed. However, a market took place twice a week both at Koolpee and at Gungadhurpore, the former of which is quite close to Ramjannagur, and the latter to Bhajna, where the Sankiberiah outbreak originated. Both of these markets are numerously attended; the people of Ramjannagur going close to the first centre of infection, and those from the infected villages coming also close to the second centre of infection. In this way four times a week abundant facilities were afforded for small-pox to spread from one place to another, though the actual individuals who transmitted the contagion cannot now be traced. Extent which out-break had reached. 12. The disease was confined to one house; one of the grown-up male members having been first affected, seems to have communicated it to his wife, and she again to a boy of fourteen, on whom the disease had reached the eleventh day at the time the vaccinators arrived. Vaccination and cessation of Small-pox. 13. Two vaccinators, each provided with a child from whom to vaccinate, were deputed to work in Ramjannagur. This village was a small one, and only sixty-three unprotected individuals were found in it and were all vaccinated on the same day. On previous years inoculation had been practised in this village; but this year, hearing of the success of vaccination eight miles off, the ryots moved the landowner to apply to our vaccinators for their aid. About twenty-five villages round this one were vaccinated, and no more cases of small-pox occurred either in Ramjannagur or the neighbourhood. Varicella at Ghateshara. 14. At the village of Ghateshara several cases of varicella occur- red, and the people thinking that it was variola, took fright and sent to Sankiberiah, a distance of fourteen miles, for vaccinators. It was ex- plained to them that vaccination did not protect against chicken-pox, but as the vaccinators were there, advantage was taken of the circum- stance to protect this village and five surrounding ones against small-pox. Total number vaccinated and results. 15. Thetotalnumber vaccinated by RomanathGhosal and the division of vaccinators under his orders amounted to seven thousand seven hundred and twenty-one, of which seven thousand six hundred and sixty-nine were
SMALL-POX, &C. 5 successful, thirty-one doubtful, and twenty-one failures. I beg to be al- lowed to lay great stress on this amount of success, and to point it out as deserving the careful consideration of the Government. It exhibts an amount of perfection beyond which excellence in vaccination can scarcely be attained to. This subject will again be alluded to in a later paragraph. Inspection by the Superinten- dent of Vaccina- tion. 16. As is usual in the working of this department, all the villages in which vaccination was practised, were visited by one of the Superin- tendents of Vaccination. The distance from the places in which he was already engaged was so great that he could not follow the standing rule, of seeing every vaccination while it was in progress; but he carefully inspected every case that had been vaccinated which could be procured, and in this way saw five thousand five hundred and seventy-four individuals who had been vaccinated. In all seventy-two per cent. of the total numbers vaccinated. This want of correspondence between the numbers vaccinated and cases in- spected is an apparent and not a real difference. In every large inspection the numbers fall short of the reported cases; some are away in the fields; some have gone to neighbouring villages on business or pleasure; children have gone to play at a short distance; some of the women from other causes are not visible at the time of the inspection; and so, from one cause or another, a considerable deficiency results at such inspections. It would be possible to go again and again, till every case had been inspected; but in working, this is found to be impossible, as to return, it may be miles, to inspect a dozen of cases which have evaded inspection, involves that a hundred cases requiring inspection are not overtaken. Speak- ing generally, the number of cases left uninspected at Sankiberiah, may be stated as being far too high to be sanctioned by any system professing to ensure to all, that protection from small-pox, which vaccina- tion is capable of supplying. In the present instance, the large propor- tion inspected may be considered highly satisfactory, and such a high percentage could not have been attained to, unless the population had been unusually willing to follow the directions of the vaccinators, in stay- ing at home during the day on which the Superintendent was to inspect their villages. The Superinten- dent deputed to Sankiberiah. 17. No special Superintendent being available for this work, Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose, Graduate of the Bengal Medical College and Superintendent of the Southern Division of the Town of Calcutta, was directed to proceed to Sankiberiah and inspect the cases there. He reports that the people have thorough confidence in vaccination, that they bear testimony to the kindness and attention of the vaccinators who have
6 OUTBREAK OF worked among them, and are most grateful for the assistance which the Government sent them during the outbreak. He had opportunities of seeing vaccination during every day of its progress, and pronounces the vesicles to have been typically perfect; to. have run the exact course which is known to be normal; the areola in appearance and course to have been strictly perfect; and the cicatrices of the less recent cases, to have been deep, well defined, and presenting characters which are said to belong only to perfect vaccination. Reliable nature of above report. 18. In estimating the value of the circumstances above reported, every thing depends on the trustworthiness of the Government servants reporting. It seems superfluous for me to point out, that the report on the cases actually inspected by the Medical man deputed for the purpose, must be received as literally and strictly true. He has been in Medical charge of civil stations for ten years in the Punjab, for seven years of this time, as an extra Assistant Commissioner, he also exercised judicial functions both in civil and criminal suits. On very many occasions he has received the thanks of Government for his services, and I am glad to avail myself of this opportunity of again pointing him out as one of the very best of the graduates of the Medical College serving the Bengal Government, and in bringing it prominently to notice that on this, as on every other occasion, his duties have been discharged in an efficient and energetic manner and are worthy of acknowledgment. With regard to the Head Vaccinator Romanath Ghosal, he was specially selected for this duty, as it was evident from the first that very much would require to be left to his truthfulness and honesty, as many of the vaccinations could not be inspected during their course. It is quite at variance with every tradi- tion of this department to place any reliance on the reports of vacci- nators till they have been verified by the Superintendents; but in this individual instance, there seems no reason to question the correctness of the returns, and every possible enquiry was made to test their accuracy. Reports were received, week by week, of the amount of work done, and of the quality of the vaccinations of the week before. Amount of suc- cessful cases not overstated. 19. Exception may be taken to the great proportion of successful cases, and the small proportion of failures, as no such success is reported in other parts of the plains of India. On this point, though I did not see one of the cases, I can speak with the utmost confidence. At the season of the year when these vaccinations were made, this success (if the vaccinators attend to the rules and precautions laid down for them) is
SMALL-POX, &C. 7 not exceptional among carefully trained men. The main figures corre- spond exactly; the decimal figures only vary to a slight extent, from the results of vaccinations, which have been minutely and carefully watched, as well by the Superintendent General as by the Superintendents of Vaccination. Such an absolute and exact correspondence of the results, as can be traced month by month, between these vaccinations which were not seen, and the vaccinations by many such batches of vaccinators, the results of which could be verified, affords strong corroborative evidence of the truth of the statements regarding the numbers operated on. The nominal cost of these Vaccina- tions. 20. The nominal cost to Government of these vaccinations has been Rs. 258-6-9. This sum comprises Rs. 181-10-9, the pay of the vaccinators, Rs. 59-4, the travelling expenses of the Superintendent, Rs. 17-8 contingent charges, comprising carriage hire, reward for the child who accompanied the vaccinators, &c. This can only be looked on as a nominal and not a real cost. Although it includes every extra expense incurred for these Sankiberiah vaccinations, nothing has been placed to this account as a share of the salary of the Super- intendent General; in the same way, no part of the pay of the Super- intendent who inspected the cases has been debited in this account. The mere pay of the vaccinators is in the same way a defective item. The results obtained could not have been secured by sending down untrained men; vaccinators from the permanent establishment were temporarily detached from it. The difference between the value of work which they would have overtaken had they remained at their own posts, and of that performed by the untrained men by whom their places were filled, would have to be added to this account to make it any- thing more than a nominal charge. Nominal cost of each Vaccina- tion. 21. In consequence of the extensive frauds which are constantly perpetrated by vaccinators in making false returns, it is absolutely necessary, in estimating the cost of any particular vaccinations, to make all calculations on the number of cases which have been inspected by a Medical man. Of these cases five thousand five hundred and seventy-four have been so inspected, the cost, as already stated, having been Rs. 258-6-9. The price, therefore, of each vaccination, which has been inspected, has been less than nine pie. So a fraction more than a penny for each has been paid by Government on account of vaccinations, for which it has the guarantee of a Medical man, not only that they have been actually performed, but that they have been of a perfect character; this cheapness, though a bonâ fide occurrence, is exceptional, and the explanation of this has been detailed in the previous paragraph.
REPORT ON THE STAMPING OUT OF SMALL-POX EPIDEMICS, OCCURRING WITHIN A CERTAIN DISTANCE OF CALCUTTA, BY MEANS OF A MOVEABLE VACCINE ESTABLISHMENT. BY T. EDMONDSTON CHARLES, M.D.,M.R.C.P. LOND., SUPERINTENDENT GENERAL OF VACCINATION.
INDEX. PARA. Small-pox epidemics in the neighbourhood of Calcutta ... ... ... ... ... 1 Proposed Vaccine Establishment only sufficient to overtake work near Calcutta ... ... 2 Establishment sanctioned for definite work ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 Additional provision to be made for stamping out epidemics ... ... ... ... 4 Argument why present establishment should not be thus employed ... ... ... 5 Unsafe nature of the arrangement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 Unfavorable impression produced on the population ... ... ... ... ... 7 Distasteful to the Vaccinators ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 Proposal for a moveable Vaccine Establishment ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 Stamping out of Small-pox ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 Cost of each Vaccination performed by such an establishment ... ... ... ... 11 True estimate of the results attained at Sankiberiah ... ... ... ... ... 12 Economy of proposed arrangement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
REPORT ON THE STAMPING OUT OF SMALL-POX EPIDEMICS, OCCURRING WITHIN A CERTAIN DISTANCE OF CALCUTTA, BY MEANS OF A MOVEABLE VACCINE ESTABLISHMENT. Small-pox epidemics in the neighbourhood of Calcutta. 1. In connection with a report dated September 1868, on an epidemic of small-pox at Sankiberiah and the neighbourhood, which was put a stop to by vaccination, I have the honor to solicit the attention of His Honor the Lieutenant Governor to the subject of dealing with small-pox epidemics in the districts of Bengal not far removed from Calcutta. Proposed Vaccine Establishment only sufficient to overtake work near Calcutta. 2. Should the scheme for the vaccination of the Presidency districts, contained in my second Special Report on the Presidency Vacci- nation Department, dated 23rd October 1867, receive the sanction of the Government, the need for at once dealing with small-pox epidemics' in the neighbourhood of Calcutta will be met. In the outlying portions of these districts, and even in places within fifty miles of Calcutta, where the means of inter-communication are very imperfect, it will be impossible with the small establishment asked for, to deal satisfactorily with any epidemics which may occur. Establishment sanctioned for definite work. 3. Within the area of the proposed circles very large numbers of people will be vaccinated, and year by year successive tracts of country will be brought under the influence of vaccination. For reasons stated in the report alluded to, those places most closely connected with the metropolis will be first overtaken, and so for very many years, the operations of the establishment will be confined to within a comparatively short distance of Calcutta. As also stated before, it is not contemplated that with the establishment asked for, all the country included within
2 THE STAMPING OUT OF the Presidency districts will ever be overtaken. The working power represented in the provisions of this scheme being altogether incom- mensurate with the magnitude of such an undertaking. Additional provision to be made for stamping out epidemics. 4. Under these circumstances, if it is the intention of the Govern- ment, that when small-pox epidemics arise, measures shall be taken by means of vaccination, to arrest their progress, it is absolutely neces- sary that some provision should be made to enable such intentions to be carried out. The necessity exists equally with regard to Jessore or other places so close to Calcutta that a Vaccine Establishment can on occasion be deputed to them, and in the case of those portions of the Presidency districts which cannot be dealt with by any establishment for which sanction is likely to be obtained at present. Argument why present estab- lishment should not be thus employed. 5. Having a readymade Vaccine Establishment for a certain work, there is at all times a tendency to indent largely upon it for duties quite beyond its sphere, where the services of a vaccinator seem temporarily called for. The extreme facility of the arrangement, requiring only an imperative order from either the head of the Medical Department or from the Govern- ment, renders it tempting to such a degree, as to be dangerous to the efficient working of any Vaccine Establishment. To cheapen the price of each vaccination with a fixed establishment, or, in other words, to furnish the maximum of return for the money at the disposal of the Superintendent General of Vaccination, it is essential that the vaccinators should work continuously in the same neighbourhood. Months are required to make an impression on any given point, and the result must be judged of by the season's work, and not by what can be shown for the early months of the vaccinating season. The call for vaccinators to deal with small- pox year by year, comes at the very time, when, departmentally speaking, the services of a vaccinator are worth many times as much as his monthly salary ; and it is most unfair to the department to insist on its parting with its vaccinators at that precise part of a short vaccinating season, on which it depends for being able by a high annual average, to make up for the unavoidably low monthly ratio of the rest of the year. Were no simple remedy at hand, such an argument would not deserve much weight ; but as the difficulty can be easily obviated, it clearly merits full consideration. Unsafe nature of the arrange- ment. 6. Much more important reasons, however, lead me to urge the matter strongly on the Government. The experience of half a century has shown, that a system of public vaccination to be so safe as to
SMALL-POX EPIDEMICS. 3 warrant the Government in pressing it on the people, absolutely demands that almost every case shall be personally inspected by a Medical man. Such a system has actually been in force in Calcutta since 1853, and I conceive it to be my duty to point out that in this year the Superintendent General has been made to deviate from it. No argument of temporary necessity can justify a departure from so imperative a rule. To be able to supervise the number of vaccinations required of him, the Superintendent must live in the midst of his men. If he is forced to leave them to go and look after a batch of vaccinators working in a small-pox epidemic, he necessarily must neglect his legitimate duties. It seems a very problematical advantage, to leave hundreds of vaccinations uninspected in one part of the country to overtake the inspection of not a tenth of the number in another. Unfavorable impression produced on the population. 7. The impression produced on the people of any place from which vaccinators are removed, is a most unfavorable one. At the time when they have made up their minds to accept vaccination, the opportunity is denied them. A sense of uncertainty connected with being vaccinated is fixed on their minds, and they use this as a strong argument when refusing to accept vaccination. The above is not only my own experience, but it has also been pointed out in forcible language in the general records of vaccination in India. Distasteful to the Vaccinator. 8. To the vaccinators themselves it is equally distasteful, and proves a serious obstacle to retaining the services of the best men. No individual from the neighbourhood of Calcutta will accept service on ten rupees a month, if he is subjected to the chance of being sent on the shortest notice, to a distance from his home, at any time that necessity seems to call for such a measure. It is evident that to secure men per- manently, the service must be made popular to them. A vaccinator of some years' service, and of known character, is of such value to the department that every endeavour is made to meet his legitimate wishes. In ways which it is not necessary to detail, a small number of vaccina- tors can be from year to year kept available for such service, but they must constitute a separate body, distinct from the other establishment, the men of which latter must feel safe from the liability to such irregular duties. Proposal for a moveable Vaccine Establishment. 9. In my letter No. 13, dated 11th October 1867, addressed to the Commissioner of the Presidency Division (which is already before the Government), I have (in from paras. 6 to 10 inclusive) pointed out that
4 THE STAMPING OUT OF the cheapest and best way of meeting the difficulty of dealing with small-pox epidemics which do not occur near any place where regular bodies of vaccinators are working, consists in having a &quot; Moveable Vaccine Establishment,&quot; attached to the &quot; Presidency Vaccine Establish- ment.&quot; Such a corps would be always available to work in the actual sphere of all small-pox epidemics within a certain distance from Calcutta; such limit being fixed at 50, a 100, or a 150 miles according to the local facilities for transit. The strength proposed for this moveable esta- blishment was a small one. Three head vaccinators on Rs. 15 a month each, and 18 vaccinators on Rs. 10 a month, being considered sufficient as a permanent establishment. When not employed where there was small-pox, these men would not remain idle, but would be scattered among the various gangs of vaccinators belonging to the Presidency establishment, and be employed in extending the ordinary vaccine opera- tions. The total annual cost of such permanent establishment would be Rs. 2,700. Other incidental expenses would be incurred each time they were deputed to deal with small-pox. The salary of a Sub-Assistant Surgeon to supervise their working would come under this head; the travelling expenses of the vaccinators; their batta when on such service; the pay of temporary vaccinators to assist the permanent establishment when the work was found too great for them, and certain contingent charges; would also require to be considered as items extra to the per- manent fixed cost of the establishment. Stamping out of Small-pox. 10. I have gone into considerable detail in the report on the Sankiberiah epidemic for the purpose of showing the Government how certainly and how quickly, small-pox epidemics can be &quot; stamped out&quot; by the operations of such a moveable establishment. I have on various occasions brought this matter forward, and detailed how the Vaccine Establishment have abruptly arrested epidemics existing round them, so that the Government are now in a position to take action in the matter. It is no longer on a mere assertion or assumption of what may be done that such arrangements are called for, but on the actual experience of what has successfully been done in the past. Cost of each vaccination per- formed by such an establish- ment. 11. Some years ago I pointed out that the probable average cost of a vaccination in the country districts of Bengal, when each case was supervised by a Medical man, might be estimated at four annas. It is on this estimate, and not on the low nominal cost of the Sanki- beriah vaccinations, that the cost of each vaccination performed by such a moveable establishment must be judged of. Even with such a standard,
SMALL-POX EPIDEMICS. 5 there is no room for doubt that not only is such a plan as that brought forward the most perfect way of dealing with such epidemics, but that it is at the same time the cheapest. As far as I know, no other measures which might be suggested could compete with this in point of economy. True estimate of the results attained at San- kiberiah. 12. In estimating the results attained by the body of vaccinators deputed to Sankiberiah, it requires a certain knowledge of the laws of small-pox to arrive at just conclusions. By merely looking at the number of deaths which occurred over so many previous months, the most erroneous estimate of the amount of good attained would be formed. During the first seven months during which small-pox was present, the season of the year is so unfavorable to the spread of the disease that it is never epidemic. The power of propagation being at its minimum, small-pox simply existed from month to month; but in obedience to natural laws, it was unable to attack large numbers. During the next three months the season was still such that the spread was necessarily tardy and the original focus did little more than extend to a number of different centres, and thus become ready to burst out into an epidemic, during the season when such outbreak is to be looked for. It was during February, March, and April that such an augmentation of small-pox was to be expected as to constitute a calamity, and the mortality would then doubtless have been very great indeed. By this time the vaccinators had been at work, and the small-pox was stamped out entirely, just as it was ready to assume epidemic form and virulence. The saving of life must not be estimated by tens, as perhaps the previous progress of the disease might at first sight seem to suggest, but by hundreds, as indicated by a correct understanding of the natural climatic laws which govern the diffusion of small-pox in Bengal. Economy of proposed arrangement. 13. When a sacrifice of life requiring to be calculated by the hundred is at stake, it requires but little apology for treating the subject at length. The expenditure which I have indicated is a small one, whether looked on as a whole, or considered from the point of view of the cost of rescuing an individual from the chance of death during an epi- demic visitation. I trust that the proposal for a Moveable Vaccine Establishment will meet with the approval of Government, and that it may be in full working order on the 1st October of this year.
(RESOLUTION.) MEDICAL. Fort William, the 23rd January 1869. READ a letter No. 528, dated 3rd November 1868, from the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Lower Provinces, forwarding the report on vaccination proceedings in Bengal for 1867-68. This is the first report which embraces the whole of the vaccine operations conducted in the Lower Provinces, and no doubt the bringing together of reports which used formerly to be submitted separately has contributed to the delay in laying this report before Government. It is hoped that in future the report will be ready much earlier. 2. The Lieutenant-Governor thinks that it is clearly esta- blished that the system of carrying on vaccination by men attached to the Charitable Dispensaries, and working indepen- dently of the Superintendents of Vaccination, is not calculated to produce any satisfactory or reliable results. It is impossible under that system to secure proper and effective supervision, and indeed it depends entirely upon the inclination of the Civil Medical Officer of the Station whether any supervision at all is exercised, and whether this important duty is not set aside in favor of some more congenial and possibly pressing duty. The minimum distance for which Medical Officers in charge of Civil Stations can draw travelling allowance has been reduced from five to three miles, with the special object of affording facilities for inspecting vaccine operations. It is hoped, however, that the circle system will, before long, cover the whole of the Lower Provinces, and bring the whole of this important duty into the hands of a properly organized and trained department relieved of all other duties.
( 2 ) Vaccination where carried on. Period. Total number vac- cinated. Successful. Percentage of suc- cessful cases to total number vac- cinated. Remarks. Dispensary and District Vacci- nation ... ... ... ... Jan. to Dec 1867 1,98,114 1,76,616 89.14 Darjeeling Circle ... ... ... Nov. 1867 to Mar. 1868 25,438 22,661 89.08 1,647 re-vaccinated. Sonthal Pergunnahs ... ... Dec 1867 to May 1868 7,749 7,092 91.52 Ranchee Circle ... ... Oct. 1867 to Mar. 1868 6,447 5,118 79.38 Dalcutta and Suburbs ... ... Not given ... ... *8,533 .... ... * These represent vaccination among the permanent po- Districts round Calcutta ... Ditto ....... 72,919 72,223 99.04 3. The table on the margin exhibits the results of opera- tions during the year under report. It is observed that in the Districts round Calcutta the highest per- centage of successful cases has been obtained. Next in order come the Sonthal Pergunnahs, while the Ranchee Circle which has only been a short time at work, shows the lowest percentage. 4. Recently sanction has been accorded to the formation of the Metropolitan Vaccination Circle for the Districts of Nuddea, 24-Per- gunnahs, Burdwan, and Hooghly. Dr. Charles, it is observed, demurs to taking charge of this Circle, it having quite outgrown his capacity to exercise effective control over vaccination in these Districts in addition to his other duties. He, however, trusts that if the exigen- cies of the public service require him still to look after the establish- ments working in these Districts, some recompense may be made for the responsibility he incurs. In the arrangements made for the Metropolitan Circle a Superinten- dent has been provided for, but on a report from the Inspector- General of Hospitals that no Officer was available for this charge, Dr. Charles has been appointed to supervise the Circle in addition to his other duties, on a salary of Rupees 300 per mensem. This arrangement is, however, a strictly tempo- rary one. 5. The results of the operations conducted under the supervision of Dr. Charles reflect great credit on his manage- ment. He also deserves commendation for his efforts to discover some agent by which to preserve vaccine virus, and the Lieute- nant-Governor hopes, in the interests of science, that the investigations and enquiries initiated by Dr. Charles will even- tually lead to success.
( 3 ) 6. It is observed that this year the same complaints are made by Dr. Charles as were made by him in his report for 1864, regarding the tubes used for storing lymph. The Inspector- General should place himself at once in communication with Dr. Charles on the subject. It is to be regretted that no remedial measures were adopted earlier, although in 1865 an expenditure of Rupees 500 was sanctioned for the purchase of capillary tubes. 7. The question of extensively employing inoculators as vaccinators is still under consideration. From the reports of Dr. Mathew and Dr. Hoskins, however, it appears that inoculators who take to vaccination are utterly untrustworthy unless closely supervised. It has been elsewhere asserted that these inocula- tors unless they are watched will resort to inoculation while professing to vaccinate, and that they are not so reliable as men who have been trained from the beginning to vaccinate. It appears to the Lieutenant-Governor that this is probably true. The chief object of employing old inoculators in the vaccine operations in preference to other better qualified vaccinators is to prevent their carrying on inoculation, and providing them with employment which shall induce them to retire from their former mischievous occupations. In other respects no doubt their employment is open to objection. 8. In the Darjeeling Circle the percentage of successful eases is this year 89 against 82 in the previous year. This is satisfactory, and the general results are favorable to Dr. Mathew, the Superintendent of the Circle. The Lieutenant-Governor notices that much is due to the three head vaccinators, who were supplied by Dr. Pearson from the North-Western Provinces. Too great importance cannot be attached to the proper training of men qualified to take the practical superintendence of vacci- nation in new Districts as they are by degrees embraced in the Circle system. 9. A vaccinator need not be retained permanently at Buxa, where it is asserted there is not sufficient work for him. The Superintendent of the Circle should make such a disposition of his vaccinators as will best utilize their services. 10. The Rajshahye District has recently been added to the Darjeeling Circle, and it is probable that Maldah will be added hereafter, but the Lieutenant-Governor remarks that in a Report for 1867, when these changes were not contemplated, Dr. Mathew speaks of Pubna and Maldah as included in the
( 4 ) Circle limits, notwithstanding that in Government, Order No. 4434, dated the 6th November 1866, the Principal Inspec- tor-General of the Medical Department (now the Inspector- General of Hospitals, Lower Provinces,) was directed to instruct Dr. Mathew that Pubna, Bograh, and Rajshahye were not included in the Darjeeling Circle, which was only to comprise Darjeeling, Cooch Behar, Purneah, Rungpore, the Bootan Dooars, and Dinagepore. Care must be taken that the Circles are not made too large to admit of real honest supervision. 11. The Ranchee Circle, considering the short time it has been working, that a complete staff has not been organized, and that the Superintendent, Dr. Hoskins, besides having been appointed late in the season, had to attend to work other than that of vaccination, has made fair progress. Possibly head vaccinators might be obtained by application to Dr. Pearson, as was done in the case of Darjeeling, or men trained in the Darjeeling Circle might be transferred. 12. The Superintendent complains of the ill-success that has attended the efforts made to persuade the people to accept vaccination. Better results will probably be secured next season, but as in the case of the Darjeeling Circle, the local authorities will be instructed to give every possible aid to the Superin- tendent, by explaining to the people the object of the introduc- tion of vaccination, that it is offered free of cost, and that while it affords effectual protection against small-pox, it does not run counter to caste or religion. Beyond this, however, in the existing state of things, the District Authorities should not go. 13. It is observed that in Hazareebaugh punitive measures were resorted to to check inoculation, but the Judicial Commis- sioner of Chota Nagpore properly interfered. The question of prohibiting inoculation, however, within the limits of the Ranchee Circle by the introduction of Act IV. (B. C.) of 1865 is now under consideration, in connection with certain rules which it is proposed to issue for observance in the event of an outbreak of small-pox. 14. The Sub-Assistant Surgeon, who was appointed to superintend vaccine operations in the Sonthal Pergunnahs, had to be transferred, as he did not appear fit for the post. The Lieutenant-Governor trusts his successor will show more earnest- ness and interest in his work. 15. Several changes have been effected of late, or are about being effected in the number of vaccinators attached to Districts
( 5 ) and Charitable Dispensaries consequent on the extension of the Circle system. The sanction of the Government of India has been requested to these changes. 16. Among the Appendices is a report addressed by Dr. Charles to the Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, suggesting the introduction of a system by which the agency of the Police should be made available for arresting small-pox epidemics at their commencement. Mr. Hogg will be asked to report upon this proposal, and his reply will be considered in connection with the proposed rules referred to in paragraph 13 of this Resolution. 17. The report on the check given to an outbreak of small-pox at Sankeberiah is interesting, and exhibits plainly the value of vaccination in arresting the disease. The services of Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose, Superintendent of the Southern Division of the Town of Calcutta, are highly spoken of by Dr. Charles, both generally, and with special reference to the operations conducted under his supervision at Sankeberiah. Another Superintendent, Baboo Buddynath Brammo, is also favorably mentioned. 18. The last Appendix contains a proposition by Dr. Charles for a moveable vaccine establishment to be employed in arresting, by special measures, incipient outbreaks of small-pox occurring within a certain distance of Calcutta. The Inspector-General of Hospitals, while approving of the plan as a most excellent and desirable one, considers that it would be concentrating the expenditure of the State for vaccination too much in one centre, and that equal claims might be put forward for the Darjeeling and Ranchee Circles. The Lieutenant-Governor concurs in this view, and is of opinion that any expenditure which it is necessary to incur would be more profitably laid out in the extension of the Circle system, and that the plan of moveable vaccination establishments for localities within, or bordering on, the limits of existing Circles, may well be deferred till the general requirements of the Lower Provinces are better pro- vided for. Ordered, that a copy of the Resolution be forwarded to the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Lower Provinces, for infor- mation and guidance. Also, that an extract (paragraph 12) be forwarded to the Commissioner of Chota Nagpore for information, and for the guidance of Officers subordinate to him.
( 6 ) Further, that an extract (paragraphs 13 and 16) be forward- ed to the Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, with a request that he will submit the report indicated. By Order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, A. EDEN, Secy. to the Govt of Bengal. No. 278. COPY as above forwarded to the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Lower Provinces. No. 279. EXTRACT as above forwarded to the Commissioner of Chota Nagpore. No. 280. EXTRACT as above forwarded to the Commissioner of Police, Calcutta. FORT WILLIAM, P. DICKENS, The 23rd Jan. 1869. Offg. Under-Secy. to the Govt. of Bengal.
