REPORT ON VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL WITH AN APPENDIX FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1869. BY J. MURRAY, ESQ., M. D., INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDTCAL DEPARTMENT CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, 1869.
REPORT ON VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL WITH AN APPENDIX FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1869. BY J. MURRAY. ESQ., M. D., INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING 1869.
INDEX. Page. INSPECTOR GENERAL'S REPORT TO GOVERNMENT ON VACCINATION... ... v VACCINATION IN CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS, BY DR. CHARLES... ... xi VACCINATION IN THE THREE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES... ... xiv FIRST METROPOLITAN VACCINE CIRCLE... ... xvii SECOND DITTO DITTO... ... ... xviii THIRD DITTO DITTO... ... ... ib. REPORT FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION, DARJEELING CIRCLE xxvi DITTO DITTO DITTO, RANCHEE CIRCLE xli DITTO LATE OFFICIATING DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION, SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS... ... ... xlix GENERAL RETURN OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR 1863... ... ... lii REPORT ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEONS AS SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION, BY DR. CHARLES... ... Ivii REPORT ON THE UNSATISFACTORY STATE OF THE ARRANGEMENTS FOR VACCINATION AS PRACTICED UNDER THE MUNICIPALITIES OTHER THAN THOSE OF THE TOWN AND SUBURBS OF CALCUTTA, BY DR. CHARLES... ... lxi REPORT ON THE NECESSITY FOR REGULATING THE PRACTICE OF SMALL-POX INOCULATION IN BENGAL, WHERE IT IS NOT PROHIBITED, BY DR. CHARLESNo. 482. FROM THE INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL. Fort William, 22nd July 1869. SIR, I have the honor to submit a report of the Circles of Vaccina- tion under the Government of Bengal for the year ending 31st March 1869. 2. The following table gives an epitome of the whole work performed; there are slight discrepancies between the annual report of the Circles and the returns figured at the last page, resulting from the figures being drawn from different sources:vi REPORT. in these returns, yet their correctness is questionable, and a peculiarity that must be noticed is, that while residents in Calcutta show only a ratio of 93.10 per cent. of successful operations, those in the suburbs and metropolitan circles at a distance round show from 98.05 to 99.64. 4. The following table, of which the results agree more with my experi- ence than Dr. Charles' high averages, is entered for the sake of comparison:REPORT. vii This circle, instituted in July 1866 as an experimental measure, may cer- tainly be now stated to be a success. As years go on, the benefits of vaccin- ation will become better known in districts where it is still looked upon with distrust. A reference to the last year's report shows, that for the year 1866-67, 12,125 operations were performed, with successful result in 82 per cent. In 1867-68 the number was 25,438, and successful percentage 89. The numbers during the year ending 31st March 1869 shows the great increase that has taken place. 8. It would certainly be an object not to pursue vaccination during the two most rainy months in the year, and the plan proposed by Dr. Matthew in his 5th paragraph should be adopted for the future. It is satisfactory to notice that in nearly every part of the circle, the feel- ings of the people in regard to vaccination are becoming more enlightened. 9. By this Office Circular of 28th May, Civil Surgeons are instructed to send a report to the Superintendent of Vaccination of the Circle whenever small-pox breaks out. 10. The value of arm to arm vaccinations is evidently becoming more appreciated, and as operators get more expert and villagers more willing, a larger percentage of successful cases will be obtained. 11. In his 32nd paragraph, he desires an increment of pay to one of his Native Superintendents. These officials receive Rs. 20 a month in the working season and Rs. 16 a month at other times. In the next paragraph, he suggests power to give gratuities to vaccinators who have distinguished themselves by assiduity. I quite concur in his view and should be glad if some reward could be accorded to his men. 12. Dr. Matthew's remark on his circle being so short handed as to require four times the number of men already employed (30) will be alluded to further on. 13. Assistant Surgeon Hoskins, Superintendent of the Ranchee Circle, submits his second annual report. It shows a total of 7,904 cases vaccinated, with a successful ratio per cent. of 58.42; last year the figures were 6,447, with successful ratio of 75.7. 14. The year's operations seem to have been accomplished with difficulty, owing to the heat of the weather and the ill health of the Superintendent, the troubles he experienced with his vaccinators, and the unwillingness, often amounting to resistance, of the villagers to accept the operation. The way has now been paved in this circle for future operations, which under new superintendence and a more efficient staff of vaccinators, will, it is to
viii REPORT. be hoped, prove more successful both in removing the prejudices of the zemin- dars and villagers and extending the protection against the disease. 15. Sub-Assistant Surgeon Gopal Chunder Dey, Deputy Superintendent of Vaccination, was employed in the Sonthal Pergunnahs during the year. This officer was temporarily sent from Calcutta to conduct the operations until the arrival of a Sub-Assistant Surgeon, who was employed in the Punjab. The pay received by the Deputy Superintendent of these Pergunnahs is the bare pay of his grade, with travelling allowances, and it is doubtful if a thoroughly efficient man is to be procured on these terms. I would strongly advise extra pay of Rs. 50 a month be granted to the Sub-Assistant Surgeon who superintends these operations. 16. The Sub-Assistant Surgeon states he performed 3,931 operations with his five vaccinators, in a few days during the month of April, with a successful ratio per cent. of 89.57. The Superintendent was a young man just entered the service, ignorant of the work, and he complains of the ignorance of the vaccina- tors. His returns must, therefore, be accepted with caution; but it is to be hoped that the evidence he gives of the feelings of the inhabitants towards vaccination is correct. 17. In the 2nd paragraph of the Resolution, dated 23rd January 1869, regarding my predecessor's report on vaccination for the year ending 31st March 1868, occurs these words. &quot; It is hoped, however, that the circle system will before long cover the whole of the Lower Provinces, and bring the whole of this important duty into the hands of a properly organized and trained department relieved of all other duties.&quot; 18. At present I cannot consider the vaccination operations under the Government of Bengal in such satisfactory a condition as in the other provinces of the Presidency, and I am glad to learn, therefore, that there is a prospect of vaccination operations being extended. The mass of the population in Bengal Proper has at present less protection afforded to them than in any other part of India. 19. The Sonthal Pergunnahs and the Ranchee Circle might for the present remain as they are; but a revision of the Darjeeling Circle appears desirable. It now includes the districts of Darjeeling, Cooch Behar, Purneah (no operations performed there yet), Rungpore, Bhootan Dooars, Dinagepore, and Rajshahye. In the Bograh District the work has been going on without any specific orders, but special orders were issued that as the work had begun it should not be stopped. The district of Maldah, Government says, is to be added eventually when the proper time arrives. I would submit that the proper time has now arrived for the consolidation of the above districts into one vaccination circle,
REPORT ix presided over by one Superintendent, and would beg to request the orders of Government on the subject. The present staff isx REPORT 23. This table (C.) shows that in the stations, &c., named, 71,307 vacci- nations were performed, of which 84.1 per cent. were successful against 67,011, with the same ratio of success in the year 1S67. 24. In reviewing the wants of the province, I concur with Dr. Charles, who, in his 11th paragraph, suggests the appointment of a Superintendent General of Vaccination for Bengal Proper. 25. Two or more circles would have to be established, presided over by a Superintendent. A circle is urgently required to be established for Eastern Bengal, the head-quarters of which should be at Shillong. This subject was first mooted by this Office in 1863, and a detailed plan was laid before your Government in No. 635 of 13th November 1865, to which the establishment of the Darjeeling Circle would appear to be a reply; the time has now arrived, I consider, for the completion of the scheme. 27. The vaccine lymph employed appears to have been good throughout all the operations. Arrangements have recently been made to ensure a regular supply of lymph annually from England, direct to each Superintendent General in. the Presidency. 18. I append three reports of Dr. Charles, for the information of Govern- ment, in which he shows considerable skill in the treatment of the subjects. Yet, although his propositions are plausible, I should hardly consider them practicable. These comprehensive views of vaccination for India are inapplicable where the means of carrying them out are scarce as compared with Europe, and where they have as yet proved ineffectual in eradicating the disease. This proposal to make some experiments with inoculation carried out by subsidizing native inoculators is both faulty in principle and wrong in application; the result of the operation is well known, and the subsequent prophylactic influence may be observed in thousands of the people who have suffered from the disease, which no one doubts being the same as that induced by the operation. Should it be considered advisable to try such experiments, more trustworthy agents than four vaccinators should be employed. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, JOHN MURRAY, M. D., Inspector General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department.
VACCINATION IN CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. History. 1. SINCE 1816 there has been a Superintendent General of Vaccination at the Presidency, whose duties consisted in supervising vaccination in Calcutta and in keeping up and forwarding to different parts of India a supply of vaccine lymph. Before that date the officer who discharged these duties had a more extended sphere under his control, and seems to have exercised some sort of general superintendence over the whole of the vaccination taking place in the Bengal Presidency, including districts now under the Government of the North-Western Provinces. No annual report seems ever to have been furnished before, and hence the present one has been called the first annual report. Reports other than annual ones have been published from time to time. As early as 1805 the Government published a report written in 1804 by Dr. Shoolbred, from which it seems that 1,426 successful vaccinations took place in that year in Calcutta. A report by Dr. Cameron was published &quot; On Vaccination in Bengal in 1829.&quot; Dr. Duncan Stewart's report on small-pox in Calcutta and vaccination in Bengal bears the date of 1844, and in 1850 Dr. Stewart as Secretary to the Small-pox Commissioners wrote their report. In the Supplement to the Calcutta Gazette of the 17th January 1866 is published a &quot;Special Report on the Presidency Vaccine Establishment, Calcutta, 1865.&quot; In addition to this report, I also addressed to the Government a &quot; Second Special Report on the Presidency Vaccine Department, 1867.&quot; This report has never been published, and on its recommenda- tions, which supported those contained in the previous report, for an increased and remodelled establishment, the present arrangements have been sanctioned. In the following year a report was called for by the head of the Medical Department to enable him to report fully on the present state of vaccination in Bengal. The informa- tion was furnished under the title of &quot; Third Special Report on the Presidency Vaccine Department.&quot; This was published along with a report by Dr. Green &quot; On Vaccination Proceedings throughout the Government of Bengal Proper, 1868.&quot; Superintendents of Vaccination. 2. During the past vaccinating season the Superintendent of each of the three divisions has been changed. Two of the three Superin- tendents who previously held charge having been appointed to two of the new circles of vaccination in the presidency districts, have been re- placed by two Sub-Assistant Surgeons who have been brought down from the Punjab and North-Western Provinces. A third vacancy caused by the removal of a Sub-Assistant Surgeon who proved himself unfit for the duties of a Superintendent of Vaccination, has also been filled by a Sub-Assistant Surgeon from the Punjab. As it was not until early in January that the first of these new Superintendents arrived, and the last of them did not take over charge till the end of that month, the superintendence of the Calcutta vaccination was conducted during the first half of the season by the Superin- tendents who also held charge of the new circles of vaccination. As in previous reports I have had to dwell on the undesirable nature of this arrangement, I will not again refer to it, as by recently sanctioned arrangements the disadvantages pointed out will now no longer exist. Baboo Bhoobun Mohun Mitter joined his appointment on the 6th of January and has charge of the North Division. Baboo Kalli Das Bose took charge of the Middle Division on the 14th January. Baboo Kassee Chunder Dutt was placed in charge of the South Division and relieved Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose on the 31st January.
xii CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. As these new Superintendents have so lately joined, it would be premature to speak fully regarding their qualifications. They have already, however, given fair promise of their fitness for the duties entrusted to them. None of them are afraid of the hard work which has fallen to their share. Each of them recognizes the necessity for special exertion, and though they have already experienced personally the rebuffs and discouragements they will have to encounter, none of them has shown any symptom of faint-heartedness or of want of perseverance. There seems every reason to hope therefore that after five years of work, should they continue to advance as they have begun, such an impression will be made on the people who have hitherto not accepted of vaccination as to leave Calcutta and its suburbs in a state of protection from small-pox such as it has never yet enjoyed. Character of the vaccination. Numbers vaccinated. 3. During the past season the good effects of efficient supervision over the vaccinators has already begun to make itself felt in the im- provement in the character of the vaccinations. Although the new Superintendents have been so short a time in charge, their presence at the time that the weather began to get hot and inflammatory results had to be guarded against, was most opportune. Owing to their personal efforts, the vaccinators have been kept better in hand, and have therefore been more careful both in regard to their selection of virus and to the method of operating. Last year I had to comment upon shortcomings in respect to the character of the vaccination, and considering the influence which the absence of irritation and other unpleasant consequences exercises on the popularity which vaccination will ultimately enjoy, the improvement this year noted is a matter of some interest. During the year from May to April inclusive, three thousand nine hundred and fourteen persons, residents of Calcutta, have been vaccinated, exclusive of cases of re-vaccination and cases in which the result was not ascertained. Of these, three thousand six hundred and forty-four cases have proved successful; the percentage of success here arrived at being 98.40. In the suburbs, excluding in the same way cases in which the result was not ascertained and re-vaccination cases, five thousand nine hundred and twenty-seven cases were vaccinated among the resident population, with a result of five thousand eight hundred and twelve successful vaccinations. Here the percentage of success has been 98.05. Besides this, other persons not permanent residents have been vaccinated, but as the result does not bear materially on the protection of Calcutta from small-pox, such cases are separated to allow of a comparison being made year by year of the amount of protection afforded to Calcutta. The numbers vaccinated in the town remain much the same as last year, while some advance has been made in the suburbs. An epidemic of measles interfering with vac- cination. 4. Calcutta has been this year visited by an epidemic of measles which has been widely spread through the city, and in many places seems to have affected almost every house. Just at the time that vaccination is most readily taken by the people, this epidemic had become very exteusively diffused. Its presence in so very many houses at one time constituted a very formidable difficulty while endeavouring to get people to have their children vaccinated. Not only were the children with the disease not available for the vaccinators to operate on, but as for long many of them remained in an indifferent state of health, the shortness of the vaccinating season precluded the possibility of vaccinating many who might otherwise have been protected. As might be expected, those averse to allow their children to be vacci- nated, were not slow in urging the prevalence of the epidemic as an excuse ; while many from timidity refrained from bringing their children forward, who under other circumstances would not have held back in the way they did. The want of measures of medical police for arresting small-pox epidemics at their commence- ment. 5. In the appendix of last year's report this subject was treated at length in a separate report. The urgency for some arrangement which would place Calcutta in a position of security against small-pox, w s brought forward. The subject of how these epidemics arose and spread was discussed, and after showing the facility with which small-pox epidemics could be prevented, attention was
CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. xiii drawn to the most necessary points on which legislative assistance was required. Among these the necessity for early notice of each case of small-pox as it occurred being furnished to the Superintendents of Vaccination and the necessity for some restrictions being placed on persons with small-pox to prevent them disseminating the disease to those around, were prominently dwelt on. As yet no steps have been taken to remedy the dangerous position of Calcutta which was then brought forward, and in spite of a whole special report having been devoted to the subject, the city remains in the same precarious condition in both respects as it did during the thirty-four years, upon the recorded deaths from small-pox during which I founded the remarks I had to make. It has once fallen to my share to direct the operations of a vaccine establishment, through such a catastrophe from small-pox, as to make me shrink with no ordinary feeling of dread from having such a task to perform again. With the remembrance of the close on 3,000 deaths from small-pox which took place in February and March 1865 yet fresh before me, I may be permitted to urge in the most forcible terms that the necessity for legislation is one that urgently calls for attention. To illustrate the want which exists I bring forward a few of the instances with which this year has supplied me, in the hope that by having such instances before them the Government may be in a position to realize the danger in which Calcutta lies, and to feel that the remedy suggested is the only one to meet the exigencies of the case. Two cases illustrative of small-pox spreading to a second person for want of early notice to the Vaccine Establishment. 6. A syce in Dalhousie Street had this year an attack of small-pox, and before it was found out that he was affected he had communi- cated the disease to another syce. A woman named Bindoo Beharry residing in Palmer's Lane, Entally, went to Chander- nagore to see her daughter who had small-pox. On her return two days after leaving her daughter the fever of small-pox appeared and subsequently a confluent eruption was developed. She had communicated the disease to a child of eight before it came to light that she was suffering from small-pox and steps could be taken to prevent its spreading. Other instances of small-pox imported into Calcutta. 7. Two children residing in the Baniapooker Thannah were taken to a village named Punchna in the Selamabad Thannah in the Burdwan District. They got an attack of fever just before they returned, and soon after their arrival in Calcutta the eruption of small-pox appeared. It could not be traced how they caught the disease, but as they had to pass through country where inoculation was going on, and had come in contact with persons who could so infect them, it is not difficult to understand how they became affected. A child from the village of Jabatty in the Monghyr District was brought to Sealdah ; four days after its arrival in Calcutta small-pox appeared on it. The disease was reported to have been raging in the village when the child left. An inhabitant of Kidderpore went to his village in the Khanakool Thannah in the Jehanabad Sub-division. While he was there his family were inoculated. On the 13th day of the inoculation he returned to Calcutta, and three days after his arrival he was seized with the initiatory fever of small-pox and subsequently the eruption developed itself. The wife of a European living in Entally was seized with small-pox, but the source of the disease could not be traced. A lad of fourteen living in Armenian Bazaar also got an attack of small-pox, the origin of which could not be traced. Case exemplifying the necessity for a law to enforce isolation. 8. A syce in the employ of a gentleman living in Dalhousie Street caught small-pox from another syce whose case is the first one that has been brought forward. Every endeavour was made to induce him to go to hospital, but he steadily declined to do so. Instead of isolating himself he went to a densely inhabited quarter and took a hut among a low class population, very many of whom were in an unprotected condition and who gave great trouble before they allowed themselves to be vaccinated. Such an occurrence as a servant refusing to go to hospital is not uncommon, it is also usual for them to hire a hut or a portion of a hut for a trifling sum and to set themselves down in a crowded locality to be the centre from which outbreaks of small-pox become disseminated. Servants are not the only class who thus become wilfully dangerous. It is 4
xiv CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. open to any vagrant or stranger in Calcutta so to conduct himself as to make it a work of great difficulty to prevent small-pox from becoming epidemic. Occasions also occur when those inhabiting lodging-houses ought for the public good to be removed to places provided for them by the public, where they will cease to be foci of danger to the public health. Argument for legislative restriction. selves from feeling the law a grievance. 9. It seems advisable to bring every one within the provisions of the law providing for isolation, as the great majority of the inhabitants of the metropolis could without any trouble save them- selves from feeling the law a grievance. Even in the case of those who would never require to be sent to a hospital, the law pro- posed would provide for the prevention of any glaring neglect in keeping themselves separate so far as to avoid becoming dangerous. All past experience of small-pox in Calcutta shows that such a law would effectually check the spread of small-pox without requiring to be put in operation on an average in the case of one person a month. In estimating the value of the last statement, it must be borne in mind that the remark implies the exercise of a vigorous and unceasing vigilance in carrying out the law. For allow a score or more of small-pox cases to occur without being reported, and accord to a few of them the privilege of spreading the disease unrestrained which they now enjoy, and in the course of two months the multitude of cases to whom the law would extend and affect in a harsh and grievous manner, would have become such a formidable one, as by the mere force of numbers to render the law futile. A law providing for effective isolation becomes practically a dead letter in a crowded metropolis while it is being devastated by an epidemic. A few hundreds may be shut up in hospitals, similar numbers may be encouraged to keep themselves more or less secluded, but with regard to the masses of the population affected, the thousands suffering from small-pox, all action of the executive is practically paralized. When every quarter in Calcutta is overrun with small-pox, when every lane, alley, and bustee teems with scores of pestilence-stricken persons, the proposed law would fail so far in its objects, and affect so many interests, that it would not be warrantable, even were it possible, to force its provisions on the population. The proposals, however, are preferable to what they would be, even could they meet such a contingency, inasmuch as they entirely do away with the possibility of such a deplorable state of things ever again occurring. The crucial merit of such law lies in the fact, that by taking care of the few and by providing for their safe dis- posal, it protects the many from the danger by which they were menaced, without making them to feel in any way the incidence of the law. VACCINATION IN THE THREE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. History of this Establishment. 10. As previously explained in three Special Reports on the Presidency Vaccine Estab- lishment, in 1863 an experiment was made, by means of the establishment sanctioned for Calcutta, to introduce vaccination into the surrounding country. The small-pox epidemic of 1864 was seized on as a favorable time for pushing the experiment farther, and a small temporary addi- tional establishment of vaccinators was entertained. As detailed in the third Special Report, &c., these vaccinators were year by year temporarily entertained till finally the establishment was sanctioned as a permanent one. In September 1868 sanction was received for the forma- tion of three circles of vaccination round Calcutta, in which these vaccinators were to work, superintended by three Sub-Assistant Surgeons, and the complete scheme originally placed before the Government in 1865 has now during the last vaccinating season been in active operation. General superintendence. 11. In proposing the formation of these new circles, attention was drawn to the fact that general superintendence would require to be provided for them, and it was suggested that if the interests of the public service demanded that this duty should be undertaken by the Superintendent General at the Presidency that he should receive some remuneration for the large amount of extra work thus thrown on him. As a temporary measure, he was directed to assume charge of the new circles, and an allowance of Rs. 300 per mensem was granted to him for this duty. As a per- manent arrangement, a provision of Rs. 500 a month was made as the salary of a Commissioned Medical Officer as Superintendent. As the whole of this scheme has been originated by me, and, consequently, quite independently of the interest I naturally feel in it, the Government must in a manner hold me responsible for the success of the undertaking, 1 most respectfully seize on this as the first opportunity I have had for bringing the matter forward, and to urge the Government to reconsider the question of general superintendence.
CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. xv I am fully convinced that to appoint a young Medical Officer on such imperfect remu- neration will be most fatal to the success of the undertaking. The responsibility involved and the constant attention required, together with the many désagréments inseparable from the appointment, render it one that no officer of any standing in the service would volun- tarily accept. Even any young officer thrust into the appointment would take the first oppor- tunity of resigning, as either the military service or the charge of the smallest civil station would gladly be accepted by him in preference to such a distasteful charge. The appointment which is required is that of a Superintendent General of Vaccination, similar to that in Bombay, Madras, North-Western Provinces and Punjab, which carries a salary of Rs. 1,050 and a Surgeon along with it. Such an officer would of necessity, in addition to exercising a general superintendence over these circles, also stand in the same relation to the vaccine circles at Darjeeling and Ranchee, and be the adviser of the Government on all vaccine matters connected with Bengal. Now that considerable sums of money are being spent on vaccination, it seems to be of importance that one head should direct the vaccination of the whole province. Certainly it will seem very strange to any critic who examines into the question a few years hence, that such diversity should exist in the arrangements for vaccinating in different parts of Bengal. If it is true, as strongly insisted on in the first Special Report on the Presidency Vaccine Establishment, that the Calcutta system is superior in many respects to that in practice elsewhere, it will be difficult for him to understand why the same system was not extended to other parts of Bengal, when new circles were formed, after many years of success had proved its efficiency at the Presidency. Nature of the general superintendence. 12 In two of the circles the work of every vaccinator has been twice inspected during the season, and in the other circle each man's work has been thrice similarly looked into. The reason for inspecting one of the circles more often than the others was that on the two first occasions it was not found to be in such a satisfactory state as the others, owing to their Superintendent Baboo Sreenauth Mookerjee, as pointed out last year, having proved himself unfit for the duties of Superintendent. Besides a personal inspection of the work performed by the vaccinators, the Superin- tendent General has every week seen each of the Superintendents, and made himself acquainted with the progress the work was making, and in conjunction with them all necessary arrange- ments have been made. The registers kept by the vaccinators have been examined and from time to time verified. The diary kept by each Superintendent has also assisted in furnish- ing data to provide for an effective general superintendence, while the crusts sent to Calcutta every week have served in a minor degree towards the same object. Superintendents. 13. The three Superintendents in charge of these new circles were previously in the same position in Calcutta, and each of them has had many years of experience in the work ; not only so, but as they had worked for years under my general superintendence, they were thoroughly at home under my guidance, and throughout the season have zealously seconded me in every effort that has been made to ensure a thoroughly successful vaccinating season. I beg to bring them prominently forward to the notice of His Honor the Lieutenant Governor of Bengal as most deserving of his approbation. Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose has, as is usual with him, succeeded in getting more work out of his vaccinators than either of the other Superintendents. He has a special natural fitness for the hard and laborious life he leads, and his success in overcoming opposition has often excited my admiration. Baboo Buddynath Brummo has throughout kept his circle in the most perfect order. The vaccinations I saw in his circle might each have served as a model from which to describe what success a good vaccinator could arrive at, and the neatness and exactness of his diary and of any work required of him personally were most praiseworthy. At times he labored under great difficulties owing to many of his vaccinators being laid up with fever and owing to illness depriving him of their services at the time he required them most. The population among whom he labored, too, was a fever-stricken one, and one therefore requiring much exertion on his part to overcome their scruples in being vaccinated. Baboo Ram Soonder Ghose rejoined the department on the 22nd January from Moorshe- dabad, where he has been in charge of the dispensary. Owing to the unfitness of his prede- cessor Baboo Sreenath Mookerjee for the post of Superintendent, having allowed the vaccinators to become lax and careless, the duty which devolved on him of getting his circle into better order has been by no means a light one. His tact with the men, however, and the thorough knowledge he possesses of vaccination, have enabled him to effect a large measure of improve- ment, and by instructing the men who are still deficient during the hot season, I have every confidence that under his management the circle will next year prove as effective as either of the others.
xvi CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. Head vaccinators. 14. Six of the nine men of this higher grade have given me great satisfaction. The other three who had not been so carefully trained and directed while under the superintendence of Baboo Sreenath Mookerjee, have had to be rather sharply dealt with for faults which they could easily have guarded against; but since they have been working under other superintendence, they have already begun to perform their duties more satisfactorily. Two of the head vac- cinators under Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose are old inoculators. Vaccinators. 15. In consequence of death, resignation, and discharge for misconduct, 14 new vaccina- tors have been entertained since the 1st May 1868. All such changes are to be deplored, as the work of a young vaccinator falls far short, both in quantity and quality, of that which can be pro- cured from old and trained hands. These changes tell more on a young establishment; and considering that the whole of the vaccinators have been recently entertained, every single change is felt as a disadvantage. One cause of discharge has been the interference of the vaccinators with the women among whom they were working. Such a crime in a vaccinator must be met with summary dismissal from the service ; as, independently of all other considerations, any distrust of the vaccinators on this score would make any population hostile to vaccination. It can easily be understood that on the small salaries available, only uneducated men can be induced to accept employment as vaccinators. Some of the men cannot write at all, while others write so badly that they cannot be allowed to keep up the registers. Arrangements have been made with the view of improving the education of those who stand most in want of it, and during the hot season classes have been formed which it is expected will so far improve the deficiency as to enable several of the vaccinators who cannot now do so to be of assistance in keeping up de- partmental records. An attempt has also been made to induce the vaccinators to avail them- selves of the Savings Bank with the view of obtaining a hold of the men by raising their self- respect. At present, with a small salary and hard work, it is difficult to influence the men, as on slight provocation they show a tendency to seek for other employment in which the work will be lighter. With a nucleus for their savings once established, it is hoped that ultimately they may accumulate such little sums as to furnish them with incentives to remain in an employ- ment in which such collections have been proved possible. As mentioned in the third Special Report on Vaccination, during the hot months the pay of the vaccinators was reduced with the view of having a fund from which to reward those of the vaccinators who showed special diligence during the vaccinating season. So far the experiment was a success that its effect in stimulating the vaccinators to increased exertion was decided. The measure, however, gave rise to such a great amount of dissatisfaction that I should be most unwilling to put it again into operation. It proved not only extremely distasteful to the vaccinators, but each of the Superintendents was strongly opposed to it. On these grounds, I feel it incumbent on me to relinquish this mode of paying for a greater amount of efficiency, and to resort to the other alternative which had previously been intro- duced among the establishment working in the town and suburbsCALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. xvii The retention of a permanent establishment of vaccinators is an unavoidable necessity. Without a permanent establishment of trained vaccinators it is impossible to work an impromptu establishment during the vaccinating season safely and profitably ; with a trained establishment, however, the case is different, and a certain number of new men can be adequately supervised and made to work so efficiently as to return a fair equivalent for the cost entailed by their entertainment. The existence of such a temporary establishment is of considerable importance as a training school and recruiting ground for the permanent establishment, and will give to the whole Vaccine Department an amount of life and elasticity that is much needed. On my first assuming charge of the department, one great difficulty to be contended against was the one of discharging a vaccinator. The detriment to the annual season's work caused by getting rid of a single vaccinator was so great as to render it a very serious step to discharge him, however desirable it might be to do so. In this way, an idle, careless, it may be a partially incompetent man if he knew anything of vaccination, was often retained simply because, however bad he might be, he was superior to an untrained recruit. Such an undesirable state of matters can be at once got over by having a temporary establish- ment, in which candidates for employment can year by year learn their duties and show their fitness for permanent employ. While working in this way, a very tolerable estimate of the honesty, sobriety and industry of the extra vaccinators can be formed, and the perma- nent establishment can be placed in the advantageous position of having men of known character who understand something of vaccination to recruit from as vacancies occur in its ranks. Position in which the work was carried on. 17. In arranging for the three new circles of vaccination round Calcutta, permanent districts have not yet been assigned to the Superintendents. It is not quite clear how much work they will be able to overtake, and what extent of country they will be able to keep vaccinated. Till some near approximation is arrived at of what can be effected by the staff of each of the circles, it would be difficult so to arrange them that the circles would co-operate in such a way that the part protected by each would support those overtaken by the others, and thus mutually be of use the one to the other in excluding small-pox. For the present it has been arranged so to employ the staff as to enable it to fulfil the urgent consideration of protecting Calcutta from small-pox, and while thus conducing to the safety of the city, guarding the country immediately in its neighbourhood from the danger of being constantly exposed to receive small-pox from Calcutta when the epidemic raged in that centre of population. With this view, though the circles have been kept quite distinct, the united force of the three circles has been brought to bear upon the protection of the strip of the Hooghly district lying contigu- ous to the river and rail. These two chief lines of communication with Calcutta have been so far protected as to lessen the chance of sending small-pox from the Hooghly district by such a large extent as might be roughly represented by any high figure approaching 75 per cent. The barrier thus thrown up between the metropolis and small-pox is a most efficient one; but as soon as the staff of one or more of the circles can he spared for the purpose, the work will be so carried on as to increase the protected tract till it has an average width of 25 miles. A part of the third circle was worked during a considerable portion of the season in the 24-Pergunnahs to the south of Calcutta, in places in the neighbourhood of those where vaccination had been carried on last year. As will be detailed in the next paragraph, small parties of vaccinators had also to be detached on special duties. FIRST METROPOLITAN VACCINE CIRCLE. Superintendent BABOO RAM SOONDER GHOSE. Work overtaken by each circle. 18. This year the vaccinators belonging to this circle worked along the line of rail from Howrah up to the Mugrah Station on the East Indian Railway. It overtook a tract of country about 30 miles long and about 8 miles in breadth, having an area of some 240 square miles. In this tract of country the vaccinators worked in 537 villages. Besides. this, in consequence of small-pox having been reported as prevalent in some villages near Dum-Dum in the Ooriaparrah Thannah, some of the vaccinators belonging to this circle were sent to work in and around the infected villages, and soon succeeded in stamping out the disease. 5
xviii CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. A little vaccination was also done at and about Khurdah, a large village in the Nawabgunge Thannah. On a report that small-pox was raging there, a party of vaccinators was despatched to stamp it out, but the disease turned out to have been varicella, and their services were not required. The Superintendent in spite of this availed himself of the occasion to establish vaccination there, and about 300 people were vaccinated. SECOND METROPOLITAN VACCINE CIRCLE. Superintendent BABOO BUDDYNATH BRUMMO. The ground which was taken up by this circle lay on both sides of the railway, and extended to the north boundary of the Hooghly District. Many vaccinations were also made in the Burdwan District, where it is continuous with Hooghly and lies adjacent to the line of rail. From this as a northerly limit it extended down the railway to the Mugrah Station. It included a tract of country measuring about 20 miles and having an average breadth of 18, thus embracing an area of about 360 square miles. During the season the vac- cinators of this circle worked in 343 villages. Besides this, Baboo Buddynath Brummo, with some of his vaccinators, took advantage of a favorable opportunity which occurred of commencing vaccination at Nuddea, and thus, besides establishing an important era in the history of vaccination on this side of India, effected an opening for next season's work. THIRD METROPOLITAN VACCINE CIRCLE. Superintendent BABOO JADUB CHUNDER GHOSE. The vaccination by this circle was carried on both in the Hooghly District and in the 24-Pergunnahs. The portion of the Hooghly District overtaken lies adjacent to the river, and extends from Howrah to the most southerly limit of the district, the river front measuring about 40 miles. The extreme south of the district included between the Hooghly and Roopnarain rivers measures about 8 miles in width. Immediately north of this the district is much wider, and the vaccinators worked up to an average distance of 14 miles from the river. An area of about 438 square miles was overtaken in the Hooghly District. In the 24-Pergunnahs the vaccinators worked in the Thannahs of Joynuggur, Sooltanpore, and Banki- pore. The Joynuggur Thannah, with the exception of a few villages in a desolate corner, has been thoroughly vaccinated, and about a third of the other two thannahs has been overtaken. An area of about 70 square miles of the 24-Pergunnahs has this year been vaccinated, and the vaccinators have worked in 655 villages. Besides this, two vaccinators worked for some weeks in the Bongong Sub-division in Nud- dea, and put a stop to local outbreaks of small-pox. After the vaccinating season was over, three others had to be sent to the Kooshtea Sub-division where small-pox was reported. Attitude of certain villages towards vaccination. 19. On the banks of the river for a few miles above Calcutta, the people had been accus- tomed from time to time to visits from vaccinators, and came forward readily enough as soon as the vacci- nators arrived at their villages. The time at which vaccination was this year practised among them was exactly that at which inoculation was year by year practised, and that therefore which they looked on as the best time for vaccination. This last fact added to their previous knowledge of vaccination rendered it so easy to work among them that I think it would be no exaggera- tion to say that they were really anxious to be vaccinated. This willingness was confined to almost the very bank of the river. At a distance of five miles from it, in many places very steady resistance was encountered, and numbers had to be left unprotected. In the same way, in the south of the Hooghly District, many of the villages, owing to the vaccinators working there in February and March, though they knew nothing previously of vaccination, were able to be vaccinated, while other villages only a few miles off succeeded in preventing any vaccination being done among them. The villages last alluded to lie chiefly in the Ampta and Juggutbullubpore Thannahs, and the inhabitants have promised to allow of vaccination in October next. It is highly probable that this promise is only a ruse to gain time, and that in October they will be ready with another excuse. This check, for it was a very decided one, was most judiciously accepted by Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose, the Superintendent of the circle, as a less evil than pushing vaccination till the population were made hostile. In October next a determined attempt will be made to win them over to be vaccinated; but as soon as their temper has been ascertained to be such as to render further measures impolitic, the vaccinators will be withdrawn from among them for the present. In future years when they have been hemmed in and surrounded by a vaccinated population, they will be more easy of persuasion and less chance be run of raising in them a spirit of determined opposition to the practice. It may here be mentioned that the Mahomedan population are even more difficult to persuade than the Hindu, and in some seven or eight villages between Pundooa and Mugrah inhabited by Mahomedans, not a single vaccination could this year be procured.
CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. xix Attitude of the population towards vaccination. 20. As a rule, the people have shown themselves very backward in appreciating the bene- fits to be derived from vaccination, and have required that much time and trouble should be expended before they consented to allow of vaccination being performed. Quite independent of any dislike or distrust of vaccination, an indefinite fear of some ulterior object of Government very frequently showed itself. At one time they fancied that protection from small-pox was only a bait thrown out to induce them to allow the vaccinators to mark them with the view of identifying them in some way when a capitation tax was to be levied. Stories, even more childish and incredible, were in frequent circulation among them, all bearing a surprising similarity to fables recorded as being current in other parts of India. Very frequently the impression was conveyed to my mind, even when it was not ex- pressed in words, that the people knew that a benefit was being conferred on them, but that at the same time they individually would have been glad, if they had not been brought by circumstances into participating in the benefit. In numerous villages various spokesmen spontaneously declared themselves grateful for what was being done, and in some instances I cannot doubt their sincerity in doing so ; while in others I regarded the words as merely those of empty compliment, and as far from representing the true feeling of the people. Very often a sort of enthusiasm was noticed during my inspections, the older children rushing about and commenting loudly on the large numbers of vaccinations which they had witnessed, and looking on the whole proceeding as a sort of festival. The vaccinations in the south of the 24-Pergunnahs were effected without any marked opposition ; while the people knew nothing of vaccination and would rather not have been vaccinated, they still listened to what was said and ultimately they were talked over into coming forward in large numbers. In some of the larger villages as many as 500 would come forward in one morning to be operated on. To procure this of course the gang of vacci- nators required to have been persuading them for some days, and the personal efforts of the Superintendent himself, were often required before any progress could be made. Instances of such large numbers coming forward were only met with in the south of the 24-Pergunnahs, and are mentioned as an example of how at times progress was made at an exceptionally rapid rate. Nothing approaching to this was met with elsewhere, and in many cases a painfully slow advance was made, person by person requiring to be talked over one by one. Vaccination of the Nuddea Pundits. 21. As narrated in a previous paragraph, vaccination was this year established in Nuddea. Considering the high estimation in which Nuddea is everywhere held in Lower Bengal as the chief seat of all theological learning, the position this year gained in inducing the Pundits to accept vaccination is one which constitutes quite an era in the progress of vaccination in India. In this classical repository of ancient learning, the Pundits who give their own interpretation to all questions bearing directly or indirectly on Hinduism, exercise a widely spread influence on the whole of the surrounding country. Vaccination, though not in itself a religious act, of constituting a breach of religious observance, is yet, from both these points of view, very inti- mately associated in the mind of the Hindu with religion. Being able to point to the Nuddea Pundits as having accepted vaccination, will to a material degree make it for the future more easy for hesitating members of the Hindu commu- nity to allow themselves to be protected by it. This vaccination of the Nuddea Pundits has been effected at a most opportune moment, as next season two of the metropolitan circles of vaccination will have the duty assigned to them of protecting the country which lies between Kishnaghur and Calcutta. Advantage will be taken by means of printed circulars to make it very generally known that the Nuddea Pundits regard vaccination favorably, and have allowed it to be introduced into their families. Acknowledgments are due to Mr. Tweedie, Joint Magistrate of Nuddea, for having led the way to this important result. While in the district, he took advantage of being in the neighbourhood, to try and interest several of the older and more influential of the Pundits in the cause of vaccination. He so far succeeded in doing so, that he believed that if he only had the opportunity he could induce some of them to allow their families to be vaccinated. On his communicating with me on the subject, I judged the occasion such an important one that it should not be suffered to slip away. Though the vaccinating season was just coming to an end, and the energies of every vaccinator were being strained to finish work already on hand, after consultation with Baboo Buddynath Brummo, he was deputed to take some of his vaccinators and make such use of the opportunity as he was able.
xx CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. He left fully impressed with the importance of the duty with which he was entrusted, and most successfully carried out the task allotted to him. On his way to Nuddea he received a letter from Mr. Tweedie to the address of the leading Pundits. When they had perused the letter, the Pundits met together, and after long consultations and repeated discussions with the Superintendent of Vaccination, they were prevailed on to allow vaccination to be practised among them. In his report Baboo Buddynath Brummo states that on the 4th of March Brojonath Biddyarutno, first Pundit of Nuddea, led the way by having his children vaccinated. Among other reasons which led me to select the agent, whom I did, to carry out the vaccination of the Nuddea Pundits, was the fact that Baboo Buddynath Brummo had been Sub-Assistant Surgeon of Kishnaghur for some years, and was consequently personally acquainted with some of the Pundits, while to others also he was known by reputation. Mr. Tweedie was not asked by me for any assistance and spontaneously adopted the course he did. In the step which he took in attempting by personal persuasion to induce the Pundits to accept vaccination, I consider that he went out of the sphere of his more legitimate duties, so that I have the more pleasure in recording my obligation to him. Discontent occasioned by fancied want of attention. 22. On several occasions discontent was expressed at the conduct of the vaccinators in not giving the necessary amount of attention to people who had been vaccinated. Every time that complaints were made, an investigation was instituted on the spot, and on the statements of the complainants themselves the vaccinators were proved to be free of all blame. As a rule, in the course of such enquiries it came out, that the vaccinators had exceeded their instructions and gone to see the progress the vaccination was making more often than they had been ordered to do. The cause of this feeling of discontent was very clearly traced to the circumstance that after inoculation the complainants had been accustomed to receive a certain amount of atten- tion from the Bengalee inoculators, and they were under the belief that a similar amount of care ought to have been expended on them by the vaccinators. Any such feeling of discontent, should it become widely spread, would be apt to lead to a hostile feeling towards the practice of vaccination, and even though it rests on a false founda- tion, must nevertheless be carefully guarded against. Till the people are sufficiently acquainted with vaccination to be able to know from their own experience that the numerous and long continued attentions which are usual after inocula- tion are quite unnecessary after vaccination, it is proposed to anticipate the rising of such a feeling of discontent. To guard against its occurrence a printed statement, that all such visits from the vaccinators are quite uncalled for, will be placed in their hands at the time of vaccination, and in this document will also be distinctly laid down the exact number of visits that the vaccinators are required to pay them. It is to be expected that when they are in the possession of such information, and know that the matter has been authoritatively fixed, they will be less likely to take offence in fancying that the vaccinators are remiss in this respect. It is obvious that all visits of the vaccinators, over the number laid down for them, should be guarded against with considerable care, as occupying time which should be expended in carry- ing on further vaccinations. Each single unnecessary mark of attention by repetition comes to be looked on as a requisite part of the process, and in subsequent years comes to be an un- necessary cause of delay in the work. The whole tendency of the vaccinators is to rear up a system of guards and restrictions requiring their counsel and assistance, and so to invest themselves with all the greater importance in the eyes of the population. A check has to be brought to bear on all such needless complication by instilling into the minds of the people that one great characteristic of really good vaccination is that only the most evident and simple precautions are necessary, and that the only reason the vaccinators require to visit them is for the purpose of assuring themselves, that the virus has been successfully en- grafted, and that the prophylactic has run such a course as to ensure thorough protection. While thus a clear and definite course will be pursued in this matter, full discretionary power will be given to the head vaccinators, and care be taken that they avail themselves of it to make exceptions when occasion requires it. A timid village will require exceptional treat- ment, and in awarding to them any unusual amount of attention, it will be kept up before them that such watching over them is quite unnecessary. It will also be pointed out, that this is only permitted till they, from experience in the harmless nature of vaccination, can gain assurance, and allow of its being practised among them without dread.
CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. xxi Attitude of the Zemindars towards vaccina- tion. 23. Whenever the vaccinators were working on the estate of a Zemindar whose influence could be brought to bear on the people to induce them to submit to vaccination, it was as a rule readi- ly granted. Several of the Zemindars shewed a most enlightened readiness to assist the vaccinators, and their good will proved very beneficial in securing the work being more rapidly carried on. In the instances of only two Zemindars with small holdings did they prove an obstruction. In one of the instances I had to write a letter to a Zemindar within five miles of Government House, who would not allow his ryots to accept vaccination. I wrote to him in a conciliatory strain, inviting him to come and see me if he felt any doubts on the subject of vaccination, while I pointed out to him that he must not interfere in the way he was doing. He withdrew his opposition without having any interview with me, and the vaccinators effected their purpose. The other instance occurred also very near Calcutta; three or four joint holders of land, one of whom was a law-agent, chose to interdict their ryots, who were willing enough, from being vaccinated. They too were addressed on the subject, and while it was pointed out to them that they were perfectly free not to receive vaccination in their own families, they were told that they could not be al- lowed to take away the same liberty for action from others who had no objection to accept it. Their ryots were all vaccinated after this communication. The incarnation of Sittolah assisting the vac- cinators. 24. It may be interesting to put on record an incident which this year occurred in the Shampore Thannah. The wife of a priest of Sitto- lah seems to have believed herself to have been pos- sessed or inspired by the goddess and to have been of considerable assistance to the vaccinators. While listening to the detail of what occurred soon after it had taken place near the site of this incident, the mind was carried at once back to the descriptions of the orgasms of the Pythia at the Delphian temple. This incarnation of Sittolah seems to have thrown herself into a state very much resembling that narrated of the priestess at ancient oracles, and with violent gesticulations and fervour to have made known the will of the divinity presiding over small-pox in a state bordering on ecstacy. She declared that the vaccinators were commissioned by the goddess to stay small-pox and order- ed that food should be given to them, and that the people should accept their services. In 1864 in the village of Parool, in the Dhunniakhally Thannah, a similar instance of a woman believing herself to be inspired by Sittolah occurred. She however amid incohe- rent ravings denounced the vaccinators and prophecied that every one they operated on would die. Only three vaccinations were done that year in Parool, one of them having been per- formed in my own presence. In a subsequent year most of the inhabitants of Parool were vaccinated, this woman assisting the vaccinators after saying that Sittolah had given her permission to do so, when all the surrounding villages had been overtaken. While speaking of the incident which occurred this year, Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose, the Superintendent of the circle in which it took place, says in his reportxxii CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. on the other hand they were sometimes so far worsted as not to be able to get a single case to submit to inoculation. More than once when a village has been talked over and a day fixed for vaccination, the vaccinators have found themselves forestalled by the inoculators, and had the mortification of seeing that the whole village had been inoculated. Such experiences sharpened their wits and they have been able to repay their rivals with similar disappointments. On hearing that a day had been fixed for inoculation, they have been able by leaving the work they were engaged in, to single out such villages and have them vaccinated before the inoculators had an opportunity for disputing possession of the village with them. When they have been unable to effect so great a success, they have still been able to vaccinate many in the same villages in which the inoculators have been at work. While inspecting I have myself had the opportunity of seeing inoculation running its course in children who were brought to me almost side by side with children who had been success- fully vaccinated. It is almost superfluous to say that while these inoculators were working against them, the progress of the vaccinators was impeded. Usually the inoculators stood their ground well, but on one occasion an inoculator seems to have been so much alarmed at his position when he learned that his rivals were Government servants, that he went to the Thannah and wished to deliver up the implements used in inocu- lation. The Sub-Inspector refused to receive them, so he made them over to a vaccinator and they are now in my possession. This armamentarium consists of a shell and a joint of bamboo half an inch thick and rather more than three inches long, with a piece of a smaller joint of bamboo as a cork. The shell is used to carry about the cotton soaked in small-pox matter, while the bamboo case holds the instruments used to operate with. These consist of a hard thorny spine of more than an inch in length and three needles about 1½ inches in length and of degrees of fineness. The needles are flattened out at the head into a sort of scoop. They are roughly manufactured and would perhaps be more properly described as resembling nails rather than needles. Influence exerted by those already vaccinated on others. 26. One of the great advantages to be derived from employing large bodies of vaccinators within a limited area, instead of scattering them broad cast over large tracts of country, consists in the influence exerted on the population by witness- ing vaccination going on all round on an extensive scale. I believe it would be difficult to overrate the assistance which has in this way been gained in conducting the operations of the past season. Villages which at first would scarcely listen to what the vaccinators had to say, ended in some cases by entreating that they might not be passed over. Of course other causes which assisted in leading to this change of behaviour deserve their full share of consideration. The continued importunities of the vaccinators, the reiterated assurances of the Superintendents, doubtless tended much towards the attainment of this end. That argument however without which the best intentioned efforts would have failed in attaining success, was furnished in the spectacle of universal vaccination all around. This seems to appeal with a force and significance specially its own to the intellect of a hesitating village. In the first steps of the process it forces their attention towards a consideration of vaccination and through intermediate stages relating to the safety and desirability of the protection afforded, it ultimately ends by leading them to accept it. The final effect is not always the same, at times even in accepting vaccination they do it with hesitation. Some- times while willingly courting it, they dread the proceeding, at others all feelings besides seem sunk in the one fear lest their irritating delays and resistance to the appeals of the vaccinators should lead to their village being left in the forlorn position of being passed completely over. Such a powerful agency as the mental effect caused by seeing vaccination everywhere is one which should on every possible occasion be made use of. So to hem in a village that they cannot escape from their little world into a region in which vaccinators are not work- ing in full activity, is a most legitimate mode of influencing a refractory village. If they go to their usual hâts, there they are met by inevitable vaccinators. If they go to any relative's house within a few miles, they come across hundreds of vaccinated persons. On the right and on the left, before them and behind them, always the same sight presents itself. It would be a subject for surprise if they could escape from the conclusion that they too should become as the others. Sometimes in giving in, or in asking for vaccination, the people seem to have had no very distinct motive for doing so, and to have taken no special precaution before pro- ceeding to the step, when they saw vaccination going on far and near. Some of the villages however were most systematic and painstaking in deciding the question for themselves. In one village where great satisfaction was expressed to me, I found that the vaccinators had visited them eighteen times, and the Superintendent had gone to them several times before they gave their consent. Besides assuring themselves in a general way regarding the extent to which vaccination was being carried on, they had sent emissaries to the villages all round
CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. xxiii to watch the proceedings of the vaccinators, and only when they had satisfied themselves on all points, did they come forward and offer themselves for vaccination. Knowledge regarding vaccination possessed by those newly made acquainted with it. 27. On many occasions I naturally sought to make myself acquainted as to how far the people knew regarding the benefits they were to expect from vaccination. The comparative merits of vaccina- tion and inoculation were frequently brought up with the view of trying to elicit the prevalent state of feeling on the subject. In nearly every ins- tance the replies were most satisfactory. At times I was answered that whatever the Govern- ment liked was the best, or by a vague and general reply to a similar effect. This however was the exception and the rule was a clear and explicit statement showing forth the advan- tages of vaccination. Of course the ideas had been given them by the vaccinators, but the emphasis and assurance with which the reply was given was the result of their having had experience in the matter, and the tone assumed was of those who had been able of themselves to verify the truth of their statements. It was by talking to the young lads of the village that the encouraging results became most evident, but after their natural shyness had been overcome, the short answers of the women were found also to be very much to the point. The influence which such a widely spread acquaintance with the subject will exert in making the people who have once been vaccinated ready to come forward and permanently adopt the practice requires no explanation to cause it to be understood, and this fact is simply mentioned as having a most hopeful ten- dency. It has been judged that a few simple sentences on the point would make it more easy for the vaccinators to explain the subject and would help at first to keep the matter more fully in their remembrance, and therefore for use next season, such a document will be prepared. Simultaneous vaccination. 28. In every instance where a small community, those for instance living in one quarter of a village, could be gained over to allow of vaccination being practised simultaneously, an effort was made to get them to fix on the same day, the vaccinators guiding them to a day on which an abundance of virus was procurable. Should it prove possible to carry out this system, as undoubtedly it will be to a very considerable extent, a great point will have been gained, as to vaccinate the whole of a small community at once occupies but little more time than each section of them would require if waited on at separate times. The preliminary arrangement to vaccinate a village takes little more time than that occupied in fixing to suit the conve- nience of an individual. If therefore each individual can be ignored and the village repre- sentatives alone consulted, the whole labour of house to house visitation will be saved. For the purpose of giving notice that vaccination is going on, or that the vaccinators desire to inspect those who have been vaccinated, a Burmese gong is sounded. After the merits of various sounding instruments had been discussed, this one was selected as being light and portable while its sound was penetrating, and as it was unlike any other sound which was to be heard among the villages, in the course of time its note would come to be associated with the visits of the vaccinators and come to be recognized without difficulty. An attempt is also made to select a point or points in each village as those to which to resort for vaccination, so that the people may have no difficulty in finding the vaccinators. The various Thakoor Tullahs usually furnish convenient sites at which the people can be collected for such a purpose. It is hoped that all these detailed arrangements will materially conduce in the future to lessen the cost of each vaccination by a material economising of the time of the vaccinators. It is desired that ultimately the population should become so trained to the routine that on hearing the sounds of the gong they will betake themselves to the Thakoor Tullah, knowing that a vaccinator has arrived ; that the vaccinators will without delay be able to fix on a day for them to come forward and be simultaneously vaccinated, and that even on his first visit he will often be able to vaccinate as many people as he requires to furnish virus on his subsequent one. That on the day fixed the people will assemble and be operated on, and that on the days on which it is necessary to inspect them, to repeat the vaccination in any instances of failure and to note the results, they will again come forward in the way in which it is to be wished that they should do. Character and success of vaccination during the past season. 29. Throughout the season I have been fully satisfied with the character of the vaccination in the second and third metropolitan circles. In the first circle I have also seen a very large amount of high class vaccination. In the last mentioned circle however I have had reason to comment sharply on some of the vaccinations brought forward for inspection, on account of their being inferior to the high standard insisted on. This circle
xxiv CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. is unfortunately situated with regard to the other two ; its Superintendent was changed in the middle of the season, owing to his having proved himself incompetent last year, which was the first season he had acted in a vaccine establishment. In addition to this, two of the head vaccinators attached to it are inferior in capacity to the other head vaccinators in the department, and have only been retained in their posts because the present Superintendent insists that he can train them up to a necessary state of efficiency before next cold season, and he is anxious that there should be no change. On several occasions on which fault was found with the character of the vaccinations, it was pleaded in extenuation that the head - vaccinator was working under difficulties owing to his trained vaccinators being incapacitated through fever. It was proved that he had been carrying on the work with young vaccinators, who under other circumstances would only have been allowed to operate under the eye of those who could be trusted to guard against their faults. With such exceptions the character of the vaccination in these three new circles has been of unsurpassed excellence. The following table shows the results attained to under each of the three Superinten- dents :CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. xxv whole year instead of simply including the money actually spent during the months in which the circles have already been in operation. In this way only can a true estimate be formed of what each vaccination actually costs, and the result be made available for purposes of com- parison in future years. The computation has been based on the inspected cases alone, those which have not been verified by the Superintendents having been left out of the calculation Each cost from that of general superintendence down to contingent expenses have been included The cost of each inspected case has been Rs. 0-4-1. Thus though the introduction of the Calcutta system involves the keeping up of a most expensive machinery for vaccination, yet, owing to the large amount of work which can be overtaken by it, the result proves that each reliable vaccination can be purchased at a very small cost to the State. Inoculation within French Territory at Chan- dernagore. 31. In the course of the season the vaccinators of the first metropolitan circle have worked all round the territory belonging to the French Settlement at Chandernagore. After a year or two this portion of the Hooghly District, as well as the whole country in the immediate neighbourhood of Calcutta, will have been vaccinated. The Government will then be in a position to extend the Act prohibiting inoculation into this vaccinated area. When this has been done, as the inhabitants of the French territory follow the practice of inoculating, the residents of Chinsurah, Hooghly, and the other places situated near the French Settlement will be liable to become infected by small-pox each time communication takes place with those among whom inoculation is being practised. As intercourse between French and British subjects is very freely carried on, the contingency of small-pox being conveyed into British territory is no remote possibility, but a contingency which should at once be guarded against. Should no communication on this subject be ad- dressed to the French Government at Chandernagore till the British Government finds itself in a position to prohibit inoculation, they will have just cause for complaining that they were not warned before, so that they might have had the same time for carrying out their arrange- ments that the Bengal Government have had. It seems therefore desirable that His Excellency the Governor of Chandernagore should be informed that the Government of Bengal have deter- mined to prohibit the practise of inoculation around the French territory, and have provided that their subjects should be protected by vaccination, and that he should be invited to consider the subject now, so that when the people around Chandernagore have been prohibited from inoculation, they may not remain in danger from inoculation being practised near them. Conclusion. 32 Different subjects connected with vaccination have been occupying my attention for some years, and I now forward three reports on various subjects which, though they are not of such a nature that they can find a place in an annual report, still may suitably accompany it as an appendix The reports are on the following subjects :FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION, DARJEELING CIRCLE. To THE SECRETARY INSPECTOR GENERAL INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, LOWER PROVINCES. Dated Darjeeling, the 5th May 1869. SIR, I have the honor to submit the returns and report of the Darjeeling vaccination circle for the 12 months ending the 31st March 1869. 2. For the first seven months of this period the operations were confined to the Darjeeling hills. The results are shown separately in the table No. 2. They could not be included in the general return, as the new form was not issued until the Darjeeling season had nearly ended, and as the returns, previously kept by the vaccinators in my circle, did not enter into the particulars of age, sex, caste, &c., required under the new form. 3. The total vaccinated in the Darjeeling hills during the summer months of 1868 exceeds that of 1867 by 1,585, and the percentage of success, 83, is also higher; but, as I have already pointed out in my report upon vaccination in Darjeeling, dated 25th November 1867, the work can never be so satisfactorily prosecuted during the summer and rains in the hills, as during the cold weather in the plains. In the months of April and May, before the monsoon sets in, vaccination amongst the laboring classes of Bhooteahs and Nepaleese is followed by an amount of fever and local inflammation that is often very serious. Whether it is from hard work, such as cutting timber, carrying heavy loads, and cleaning jungle in the depths of hot valleys, or from exposure to a by-no-means powerless sun, the arm operated upon swells in some cases to twice its natural size, and the vaccine puncture becomes the centre of a slough which I have seen as large as a crown piece. Consequences such as these could not but produce an unfavor- able feeling towards vaccination, and within a few days of penning this report, I have con- sidered it advisable to prohibit adult vaccination altogether until the rains shall have set in. A single casualty from vaccination would create a prejudice against it here, which would endure for years, and casualties have occurred at home, where the operation has been performed under circumstances apparently the most favorable possible. 4. I am still of the opinion expressed in the report just mentioned, that it would be advantageous to suspend operations during the height of the monsoon, for two months at least. Inspector General Dr. Green's views on this point differed from mine, and, in accordance with his decision, the vaccinators were kept at work throughout the rains of 1868. That their work could not have been satisfactorily carried on or inspected, will be evident when I mention, that rain fell on 28 days in July, and on 28 days in August, and that on 20 out of the 28 in July, and 12 out of the 28 in August, rain-fell for the whole or more than half the day. It should be noted, that though last year's rain fall at Darjeeling was higher than usual, the number of wet days was by no means above the average. 5. In place of the two most rainy months, the vaccinators might commence operations in February, instead of as now in April, and the work done during February and March might be very easily verified by the Superintendent on his return from the plains at the end of the cold season. 6. Table No. 1, prepared in accordance with the new forms issued for the use of the Vaccination Department, shows the results of the operations performed during the cold season of 1868-69. With the same number of vaccinators as in the previous season, it is gratifying to note an increase in the total vaccinated so large as 19,095. 7. The season under report had this advantage over 1867-68, that the native superin- tendents were at their posts in the last week of October, and the lymph sent them from Darjeeling having taken well, operations commenced with November ; whereas, in the previous season, very little was done until December, for reasons mentioned in my last report; but after deducting the November operations, there is still an excess of over 15,000 for the season 1868-69. It is needless to mention that the operations were checked throughout by the diary and village nominal roll system. 8. The percentage of successful is 88 on the gross total against 89 last year. Indivi- dual vaccinators have attained a higher measure of success than this, but experience has
DARJEELING CIRCLE. xxvii satisfied me that a smaller percentage than 10 or 12 of failures cannot be attained as a general rule. 9. The operations were confined to the same districts as the previous year, namely, Western Doars, Rungpore, Dinagepore, Bograh, and Rajshahye. &quot;While the establishment re- mains on so small a scale as at present, it is impossible to say when the other districts included in my circle, and not as yet occupied, can be taken up. In truth, the vaccinators are scattered over far too wide a tract of country, the result of a misapprehension from the very commencement of the true limits of the Darjeeling vaccination circle. When I was made aware, that I had taken up districts, such as Bograh and Rajshahye, which did not properly belong to my circle, I thought it right to represent that it would be impolitic to abandon them after two years' occupation and successful work, however much it might have been for the Superintendent's convenience to do so, and the sanction of the Government was ultimately obtained for their inclusion. 10. The important step was taken last year, in the withdrawal of all vaccinators from the control of Civil Surgeons in those districts included in the Darjeeling Circle. The only untoward result that I know of from the change is, that time has been lost in taking steps to meet outbreaks of small-pox, which might have been saved if the Civil Surgeon had vaccinators under his own orders. At present he can do nothing beyond make a report to his departmental superior, and, as has happened during the season under review, weeks may elapse before the intelligence reaches the Superintendent of Vaccination. 11. In remedy of this, I would suggest that Civil Surgeons in the districts comprised in the Darjeeling Vaccination Circle, and Superintendents of Police, in addition to the reports in such cases they are already directed to make, be instructed to address a brief report, men- tioning the date and locality of the outbreak of small-pox, direct to the Superintendent of Vaccination, Darjeeling. By this plan, the least possible amount of time would be lost. I do not recommend that Civil Surgeons be empowered to give orders direct to such native superintendents and vaccinators as may be stationed in their districts, for this would inevitably lead to confusion. 12. With reference to reports of small-pox, there is one evil which it seems impossible to provide against, namely, false alarms. A constable in charge of an outlying post hears of an eruptive disease in a village in his neighbourhood, and at once reports it as small-pox; in due time, notice reaches the Superintendent of Vaccination, and a vaccinating party is despatched, who travel a distance of eighty miles perhaps, to find a few cases of measles. This is what has just occurred in the Julpigoree District. Again early in March, I was informed that small-pox was prevalent in the Terai, on hearing of it, I changed my plans and went myself to the thannah and village where the disease was reported, and found four of the inhabitants in measles. In the previous January also, official reports of small-pox had been made from this thannah by the Police. One of the inmates of the house where the disease was said to have been then existing, accompanied me to the village I visited, and declared that the disease he there saw was the same, and afterwards went to his house, and saw all who had been ill in January, and none bore a trace of small-pox. The characteristics of this disease are so marked that one would fancy the most ignorant person could scarcely mis- take it. 13. I can speak with confidence as to the marked improvement in the feelings of the people on the subject of vaccination, not only at the points where the vaccinators are working, but for considerable distances round. A vaccinator at Bograh, and another at Rungpore, was summoned directly, by the inhabitants themselves, of villages distant respectively six and twelve miles from the vaccinators' posts, to come and protect them, as small-pox had broken out. The vaccinators complied, and according to their reports, the spread of the disease was at once checked. 14. I mention these cases, not as examples of the stamping out of small-pox, for I have learned to receive native reports of small-pox with great caution, but they may be certainly taken as proof, that the people have begun to put faith in vaccination, for they must have believed that the disease, whatever it was, was small-pox, and there was nothing to prevent their having had recourse to inoculation if they pleased. 15. At another vaccinating station in the Rungpore District, an inoculator whom I had trained and entertained as a vaccinator, but whom I had to dismiss for misconduct, made an effort to thwart the vaccinator, and to resume his old practice, but the people would not accept his services, and he soon left the place. As another illustration of the progress of vaccination I may mention, that a petition was sent me, signed by many of the inhabitants of Titalyah, praying that a vaccinator might be placed among them. It reached me too late in the season to allow of my complying, but I had them informed in reply, that their wishes should be acceded to next season. It is unquestionable that if the people here were
xxviii DARJEELING CIRCLE. averse to or indifferent on the subject of vaccination, they would not have taken the trouble to address me at all. 16. I may add one instance more of the value the people set upon a vaccinator's services. I found it necessary, to fill a pressing vacancy, to remove the vaccinator who for the previous season had been working at Sherepore in the Bograh District. I had utterly failed, as I stated in my first report, to introduce vaccination there when my establishment was origin- ally formed, and during the second season the work had been only fairly successful. The inhabitants, however, when they found that the vaccinator did not re-appear amongst them, sent him many urgent messages to return. 17. These instances may be safely accepted as a great advance upon my first-season's experience, when I often spent hour after hour in villages without succeeding in inducing even one person to submit to the operation. During my tour this year, I did not find a single vaccinator, who could complain that the people generally would not accept his services; there are of course still many who decline vaccination, especially Mussulmen, on religious grounds, and many who are, as in more civilized countries, apathetic and indifferent, but at most of my vaccinators' stations such recusants are in a very decided minority. 18. Some prejudices still remain to be overcome, and the chief of them perhaps is that against submitting infants to the operation, scarcely ten per cent. of the whole number vaccinated are under one year of age. The principal reason for this is, that the fever attendant on the maturation of the vaccine pustule is generally strongly marked in native children (much more so than in European), and the parents dread its severity in the case of infants. Popular impressions of this kind are not to be overcome at once by assurances of their ground- lessness. It is to be hoped that they will wear away in time. 19. Another erroneous notion common amongst the people is, that vaccination affords a complete immunity from small-pox. I have reason to suspect that the vaccinators, in their anxiety to obtain support, have occasionally rather exaggerated its benefits and promised too much on its behalf. They have been warned on this point. 20. Throughout my circle, the lancet and the ivory points have been abandoned for the needle and ivory slips used, and, I believe, first introduced into India in the North-Western Provinces. The needles, of which I procured a supply from Moradabad, are not only much more effective than the ordinary lancet, but they cost very much less, and last a much longer time; indeed the lancet loses its fine point after a short use, and then becomes a very clumsy instrument. The ivory point, as ordinarily made, has either so fair a point that a very minute charge of lymph only can be introduced into the puncture in the skin, or it is so broad at the extremity, and I have noticed this in the points sent from England, that it would be necessary to make quite a large preliminary opening to enable it to get under the cuticle at all. The charged ivory slip used in the North West, is merely rubbed twice or thrice over the latticed scratches made in the skin by the needle, and I feel certain that by its use, the chances of failure are reduced to a minimum. 21. On the score of economy and effectiveness, I venture to recommend the exclusive adoption of the needle and ivory slip for vaccinating purposes. They do not appear to be so well known as they deserve to be in Bengal Proper, and I confess 1 first learned their value from the native superintendents sent to me by Dr. Pearson. 22. As the intimacy of the people with vaccination increases, arm to arm operations become more generally permitted; but, for the purpose of conveying lymph from one village to another, should they lie at all apart, the charged ivory slip must be still extensively used. 23. My vaccinators are, as a rule, interdicted from using crusts; with ordinary diligence, no vaccinator should find himself without a supply of recently charged slips, and there is one great objection to crusts, that, unless they are selected with great care, whether it is that the results of suppuration (which have been proved to be readily inoculable) contaminate them, or from some other cause, the chances are that out of three vaccinators from the ordinary crusts, one will result in a doubtful case. I have been frequently able to detect from a glance at his recent cases, that a vaccinator has been using crusts. 24. This observation does not apply to crusts, so far as I know, taken from European children; the latter are so much more carefully tended than the ordinary village children of the natives, that the difference is to my mind easily to be accounted for. 25. Small-pox was either more prevalent, or more carefully reported during the season just past than in the two previous. The principal epidemic was in the Purneah District, to cope with which I was directed to depute a vaccinating party, upon whose proceedings I have submitted a separate report. Purneah being one of the districts in my circle as yet not taken up, the native superintendent of the Dinagepore District was necessarily sent to the seat of the
DARJEELING CIRCLE. xxix epidemic, and the Dinagepore vaccinators were left, for the time, without supervision. In cases of emergency, and with a limited establishment, contingences of this kind cannot be avoided, but it would be well if a Superintendent of Vaccination could be spared the necessity of sending vaccinating parties to a distance from their own districts. 26. In this particular case, the proper Dinagepore work suffered; shortly after the native superintendent had left for Purneah, a report reached me, when on tour in Rajshahye, through the Medical Department, of small-pox in the Dinagepore District. The report did not specify where in the district the disease had appeared, and in the absence of the native superintendent, whose duty it is to keep me informed, and to take immediate steps in such a case, I was com- pelled to address the District Superintendent of Police, and request him to send the necessary order to the vaccinators working at the thannah nearest to the place where disease had broken out. 27. I could learn nothing more on the subject, until I myself visited the Nawabgunge Thannah in the Dinagepore District, where I expected to find the vaccinator whose post it was, but the Police could tell me nothing of him, and reported that small-pox had been raging in that part of the country for some time. Next day I found the vaccinator working in the neighbouring illaqua of Chuntamin, which he said he was authorized by the native superin- tendent to include in his operations, and it was not until after their long delay, that the vaccinator was set to work in the place where his services were urgently required. I may safely assume that this could not have happened, if the native superintendent were not out of the district. 28. I myself met with a solitary case of modified small-pox of very mild type within a few miles of the Hubbrah Thannah in the Dinagepore District; on the day I was inspect- ing there, a man came to complain to the vaccinator that, although his child had been vaccinated the previous year, she had taken small-pox ; I went to the village and saw the case ; she, as well as all the other children in the village, bore excellent vaccine cicatrics. I could hear of no other case of small-pox in the village or neighbourhood, and her father could not conjecture how the disease had been communicated. There were but a few dozen pustules on her body, and scarcely any attendant fever, and I was able to assure her father of her speedy recovery. I pointed out to him at the same time, how different the disease would have been if she had not been vaccinated. The vaccinator was directed to keep an eye upon the case and the village, and report at once if the disease should spread, but, as I anticipated, no further report of small- pox came to me from the place. 29. I have already alluded to reports of small-pox in Rungpore and Bograh Districts, but as I had no opportunity of personal investigation, I cannot speak positively as to whether the disease really occurred or not. Since the close of the working season, an outbreak of small- pox at Rampore Beauleah was reported to me by the Civil Surgeon. I at once directed the vaccinators to resume work, but there has not been time as yet for any report of their proceedings. 30. The general arrangements for the season's work were the same as during the previous year, so a recapitulation is needless. The Deputy Superintendent, Sub-Assistant Surgeon Nilmoney Chowdry, has now had a fair share of experience and is a very efficient officer. He is well qualified for the work of general inspection, and it would be an advantage, if he, like the Superintendent, could be spared to travel throughout the circle ; but, in the dearth of native superintendents, I have prefered that he should continue, during the season, in charge of the work in the Terai and Western Doars, rather than that the vaccinators there should be left for any length of time without supervision. 31. I have to express the same satisfaction as last year, with the way the native super- intendents performed their duties. I can especially recommend one of them. He is in charge of two Districts, Rajshahye and Bograh, and has, consequently, much heavier work in the way of travelling (which circumstances compel him to perform on foot) than the others. I have never met a more conscientious native servant of Government; he has, to my knowledge, stuck to his work, travelling from post to post, when suffering from daily fever, and when, if he chose to lie up, not the slightest blame could be attached to him for doing so. 32. No promotion in the department being possible for a man of his grade, I should be very glad to be empowered to make an addition to his pay of ten rupees per mensem, as a special case, in consideration of his heavier work and of the zeal he has displayed for the last two years ; should this be more than can be sanctioned, I ask permission to grant him a gratuity. There are abundant savings under the heading contingencies in the budget provision for the establishment, from which either proposal can be met. 8
xxx DARJEELING CIRCLE. 33. I should be also glad of authority to make a small money present to one or two of the most deserving vaccinators ; such a premium would be a valuable incentive to exertion. As a body I cannot complain of the vaccinators, but some are much more zealous and painstak- ing than the others, and as the Superintendent has power-to punish, it would in my opinion be advantageous, if he were also at liberty to reward in exceptional cases of industry and good behaviour. 34. I may now proceed to a review of the season's operations in each district; the lymph used was entirely of my own collecting. No English lymph was sent me this year, but I did not feel the want of it, as there are no signs of deterioration in the vaccine propa- gated from that furnished me by Dr. Charles towards the end of 1866. 35. Darjeeling, Terai, and Western Dooars.DARJEELING CIRCLE. xxxi 45. The vaccinator at Peergunge had only been entertained at the commencement of the season, but at the time of my visit he was in full work and with principally arm to arm operations. I traversed several large and populous villages without finding a doubtful case, and the inhabitants seemed to take a real pleasure in having their children vaccinated. 46. Bograh.xxxii DARJEELING CIRCLE. glad to re-appoint him and transfer the other. The former commenced work towards the end of January, and in the following months the native superintendent reported most favorably of him, and of his success among the people of the town. This is gratifying, for I know of no place where small-pox or any other zymotic disease has so many facilities for mischief as at Nattore. 56. I found at Pootea a very good vaccinator ; he had been like the rest late in com- mencing work, and had made only 197 vaccinations in December, but, on the date of my visit, the 19th January, there was nothing to complain of: he had done excellent work here in the previous season. I removed him to Rampore Beanleah, putting the former Nattore vaccinator in his place, who worked fairly until the season closed. 57. On the 22nd, I found the vaccinator at Beauleah working in the suburbs ; I saw over 100 recent cases, and the vesicle was very good. This being a large town, I placed, as above stated, a second vaccinator here. Both have strict orders to confine their operations to the town. A fair amount of success has been attained, but nothing like what was achieved by either vaccinator at the mofussil posts they occupied previously. As I have already observed in a previous report, the people of towns, who require its protection most, are, of all classes, the most indifferent on the subject of vaccination. 58. Dinagepore.DARJEELING CIRCLE. xxxiii TABLE No. I. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. TABLE showing the number and names of the Circles, and their Superintendents; the number of Vaccinators employed; the total vaccinations performed and compared with those of last year ; the total number arranged according to sex, caste, age, and result; the ratio of successful to total vaccinated ; and the average number of operations performed by each Vaccinator for the season 1868-69. Number. CIRCLES. Names of the Medical Officers, Superintendents of Vaccination Period. Number of Native Vaccinators attached. Total number vaccinated. COMPARED WITH LAST YEAR. TOTAL NUMBER VACCINATEDxxxiv DARJEELING CIRCLE. TABLE No. II. Return of Vaccinations made in the Darjeeling Hills during the seven months ending the 31st October 1868. MONTHS. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. REMARKS. April 1868 ... 120 17 12 ...... 149 May DARJEELING CIRCLE. XXXV TABLE No. III. RETURN of Vaccination, Circle, Season 1868-69. NOVEMBER 1868. Names of Districts. Total Vaccinated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. REMARKS. Male. Female. Hindoo. Mussul- mans. Other castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Tarai and Doars ... 615 350 265 398 217 ...... 68 547 380 219 16 Rungpore ... ... 1,483 969 514 677 776 30 140 1,343 1,361 91 31 Bograh ... ... 748 366 382 212 534 2 99 649 589 121 38 Rajshahye ... ... 85 47 38 1 84 ...... 12 73 76 3 6 Dinagepore ... ... 829 467 362 535 294 ...... 12 817 625 153 51 TOTAL ... 3,760 2,199 1,561 1,823 1,905 32 331 3,429 3,031 587 142 T. MATHEW, M. B., Supdt. of Darjeeling Vaccination Circle.
xxxvi DARJEELING CIRCLE. TABLE No. IV. RETURN of Vaccitiation, Darjeeling Circle, Season 1868-69. DECEMBER 1868. Names of Districts. Total Vaccinated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. REMARKS. Male. Female. Hindoo. Mussul- mans. Other castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccess- ful Doubtful. Tarai and Doars ... 1,449 885 564 1,018 431 187 1,262 1,128 280 41 Rungpore ... ... 2,135 1,403 732 846 1,249 40 173 1,962 2,025 16 94 Bograh ... ... 1,583 819 764 357 1,210 16 247 1,336 1,473 68 42 Kajshahye ... ... 556 297 259 155 398 3 47 509 451 81 24 Dinagepore ... ... 3,690 2,088 1,602 2,363 1,327 39 3,651 3,292 245 153 TOTAL ... 9,413 5,492 3,921 4,739 4,615 59 693 8,720 8,369 690 854 T. MATHEW, M. B., Supdt. of Darjeeling Vaccination Circle.
DARJEELING CIRCLE. xxxvii TABLE No. V. RETURN of Vaccination, Darjeeling Circle, Season 1868-69. JANUARY 1869. Names of Districts. Total Vaccinated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. REMARKS. Male. Female. Hindoo. Mussulman. Other castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Tarai and Doars ... 2,351 1,394 957 1,245 500 606 266 2,085 2,071 202 78 Rungpore ... ... 2,399 1,448 951 1,521 747 131 474 1,925 2,178 84 ]37 Bograh ... ... 2,012 950 1,062 449 1,472 91 168 1,844 1,878 92 42 Rajshahye ... ... 1,240 683 557 106 1,100 34 124 1,116 1,035 173 32 Dinagepore ... ... 3,227 1,791 1,436 1,899 1,328 ...... 42 3,185 2,817 211 199 TOTAL ... 11,229 6,266 4,963 5,220 5,147 862 1,074 10,155 9,979 762 488 T. MATHEW, M. B., Supdt. of Darjeeling Vaccination Circle. 10
xxxviii DARJEELING CIRCLE. TABLE No. VI. RETURN of Vaccination, Darjeeling Circle, Season 1868-69. FEBRUARY 1869. Names of Districts. Total Vaccinated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. REMARKS. Male. Female. Hindoo. Mussul- man. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Tarai and Doars ... 2,022 1,106 916 780 442 800 328 1,694 1,799 131 92 Rungpore ...... ... 2,501 1,588 913 1,524 866 111 526 1,975 2,270 106 125 Bograh ... ... 2,108 1,115 993 336 1,753 19 271 1,837 1,940 117 51 Rajshahye ... ... 1,591 910 681 284 1,307 ... 126 1,465 1,387 163 41 Dinagepore ... ... 2,758 1,590 1,168 1,632 1,126 ... 21 2,737 2,412 188 158 TOTAL ... 10,980 6,309 4,671 4,556 5,494 930 1,272 9,708 9,808 705 467 T. MATHEW, M. B., Supdt. of Darjeeling Vaccination Circle.
DARJEELING CIRCLE. xxxix TABLE No. VII. RETURN of Vaccination, Darjeeling Circle, Season 1868-69. MARCH 1869. Names of Districts. Total Vaccinated. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. REMARKS. Male. Female. Hindoo. Mussul- man. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Tarai and Doars ... 1,515 873 642 939 299 277 138 1,377 1,277 110 128 Runpgore ... ... 1,688 1,141 547 815 861 12 406 1,282 1,551 54 83 Bograh ...... .... 1,906 1,023 883 194 1,638 74 254 1,652 1,744 145 17 Rajshahye ... ... 1,587 870 717 389 968 230 123 1,464 1,418 120 49 Dinagepore ... ... 2,150 1,168 982 1,564 586 ... 17 2,133 1,917 127 106 TOTAL ... 8,846 5,075 3,771 3,901 4,352 593 938 7,908 7,907 556 383 T. MATHEW, M. B., Supdt of Darjeeling Vaccination Circle.
xl DARJEELING CIRCLE. TABLE No. VIII. RETURN of Vaccination at Thannah Kudwah, Zillah Purneah, for January 1869. Names of Thannah and Zillah. Total Vacci- nated. Male. Female Hindoo. Mussulman. Other castes Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful Doubtful. REMARKS. Kudwah, Purneah ... ... 85 49 36 85 ... ... ... 85 70 6 9 TOTAL ... 85 49 36 85 ... ... ... 85 70 6 9 TABLE No. IX. RETURN of Vaccination at Thannah Kudwah, Zillah Purneah, for February 1869. Names of Thannah and Zillah. Total Vacci- nated. Male. Female. Hindoo. Mussulman. Other castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Doubtful. Unsuccessful. REMARKS. Kudwah, Purneah ... ... 220 95 125 208 12 ... 1 219 199 11 10 TOTAL ... 220 95 125 208 12 ... 1 219 199 11 10 T. MATHEW, M. B., Supdt. of Darjeeling Vaccination Circle.
No. 189. FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION, RANCHEE CIRCLE. To THE DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE, DINAPORE CIRCLE. Dated Ranchee, the 19th May 1869. SIR, I have the honor to submit herewith the Annual Return of Vaccination in this circle for the past (being the second) season, 1868-69, drawn up in the new form prescribed by the Inspector General of Hospitals, Lower Provinces. 2. Up till the end of last (the first) season, no native superintendents had been appoint- ed, owing to the want of suitable men; in the recess, numerous enquiries and attempts were made to obtain such men within the circle, but none could be found. Considerable quali- fications are necessary for the post; good health and energy, tact and education, thorough trustworthiness, and a complete knowledge of the practical working details, and of the system of supervision to be carried out. At last application was made to Dr. Pearson, Super- intendent General of Vaccination in the North-Western Provinces, at whose request Dr. Watson, Superintendent of the Allahabad and Jhansi Circle, was kind enough to send down three of his best vaccinators whom he could recommend and was anxious to promote. These men joined me as native superintendents at the end of October, two of them, Mahomed Ishak Khan and Shaikh Ellabee Bux, have rendered most valuable assistance; they understand the work extremely well and have shown much zeal and activity. I have a high opinion of them. The third, Meer Mendhie Hossein, also knew the work well, but in other ways his appointment has not proved so successful. 3. There were many vacancies also among the sanctioned staff of twenty vaccinators; some had been discharged as unsuitable and others resigned as soon as they found that they would be required to work in any part of the circle wherever it might be necessary to send them. It was desired to fill these vacancies with local men, as being likely to have some influence with the people, and especially with some of the local inoculators, who otherwise would certainly be most active opponents. Moreover, other candidates, of fair education and really desirable men, were hard to find in sufficient number locally; I was therefore glad to fall back on the Sindooriahs, to whose employment, however, it is a great drawback, that they are quite uneducated and totally unable to keep up the necessary records. A few of them had been employed in the previous season with some success, and now ten more were engaged, so that eventually out of our twenty vaccinators, thirteen were Sindooriahs. 4. As, however, was the case in the Darjeeling Circle, in the season 1867-68 (Dr. Mathew's Report), it has been found here too that the local inoculators are, as a rule, not a very desirable class of men to turn into vaccinators, if other and better candidates could be found. Many of them are lazy and deceitful, apt to absent themselves from their work without leave, and to make false reports of their work; being altogether unsatisfactory and not to be trusted. Instances have been found of their taking bribes from villagers not to vaccinate and to go away without teazing them, reporting of course that, owing to the prejudice of the people, no work could be done, when really they had made little or no efforts at persuasion, though at the same time the fact of the villagers being willing to pay for exemption from vaccination sufficiently proves the reality of their dislike. It has been necessary to dismiss five of the Sindooriah vaccinators for gross misconduct. Four of them, however, have really worked energetically and taken much pains. The remaining four Sindooriahs have done more or less fairly only. 11
xlii RANCHEE CIRCLE. 5. They undoubtedly have influence with the people within their former special beats as inoculators; but it is impossible so to arrange the parties that every man shall work in his own former beat; and out of their own limits they seem to have no greater influence than other people. Moreover, under such circumstances they are apt to be sulky, and to make no effort to get cases. 6. Under instructions from the Inspector General, it was determined to occupy only one zillah, at first at any rate ; the circle being too extensive for supervision to be kept up in all the zillahs at once. Hazareebagh seemed to me the best district to begin with, because all the Sindooriahs engaged belonged to it and thus whatever influence they had would be made useful. Moreover, they were not likely to work contentedly if sent far from their homes ; remembering, as I did, that they could leave at any moment and revert to inoculation (which there was no legal means of stopping) if disgusted with their new service. 7. Leaving Ranchee on the 26th October, my camp reached Hazareebagh on the 30th,- where the three native superintendents had just arrived, and all the vaccinators now assem- bled. Some days were spent in distributing the men into parties, teaching the new hands, procuring various articles of equipment necessary for the men according to the plan followed in the North-Western Provinces, with which the native superintendents were familiar, also preliminary arrangements concerning the remittance of pay, &c., &c. Vaccination was begun at the mission, and among certain Christian villages, a little way from Hazareebagh, with some English lymph sent up from the Inspector General's Office in Calcutta, in September. When received, the weather was extremely hot, and doubtless the lymph had got spoilt on the road, for though kept with all the care possible it was now found to fail completely. Meanwhile, some fresh supplies came from Almorah, for which, in case of such accidents, application had been made to Dr. Pearson, and these as well as the supplies sent subsequently proved excellent. A small supply was also received from time to time from Dr. Charles, Superintendent General of Vaccination, Lower Provinces, nearly all of which answered well. 8. The men being distributed in three parties, one party under Native Superintendent Ellahee Bux was set to work a few miles east of Hazareebagh round Bohrunpoor ; another party under Native Superintendent Mendhie Hossein was sent north to Pergunnah Koderma ; and the third under Native Superintendent Ishak Khan to the north-east to Pergunnah Khurruckdiha. 9. The system of registers and records adopted was as nearly as possible that fol- lowed in the North-West, but with one important difference. Very few of our men can read or write, it being impossible therefore for each vaccinator to keep up his own registers ; it was necessary that each party should work together, and should contain one man (or more) of education who could write for all. Of course by so doing, his own opportunities of vac- cinating would be much lessened, but this could not be helped. 10. At first I remained among Ellahee Bux's party and work was beginning to go on better, when at the end of November an outbreak of small-pox, said to be very fatal, was reported by the Police and Civil authorities to have occurred at Etkhoree, some 30 miles west of Hazareebagh. Arrangements were at once made for Ellahee Bux's party, being the nearest, to proceed there, some men going forward at once, others following after taking lymph from cases in progress. My own camp reached Etkhooree on 4th December, when I found that no small-pox had occurred, after every enquiry. Attempts to vaccinate here were most unsuccessful. With all the aid of the Rajah, who did his utmost, only two children were done successfully, and a long time after I heard that people still visited the children daily to see how soon they would die. Some of the people had told me when there, that any illness occurring within two years or even within many years would be attributed to the vaccination, others more reasonable thought that perhaps twelve months probation would be sufficient. All were most fearful and suspicious. After much waste of time by this false alarm, the party moved back to their former neighbourhood, and a request was made to the Police authorities to guard against such false reports from their subordinates in future. 11. My own camp now moved to the north-east in search of Mendhie Hossein's part, whom I found at Domchach, whither he had moved them from Koderma, where no work
RANCHEE CIRCLE. xliii could be got. On the road I saw certain zemindars (including the Rajah of Rampore) who, however, in spite of every argument, could not, or would not, promise any effectual aid to the work. There was often also very great difficulty in obtaining the barest necessaries of life, the people often refusing supplies altogether even though ample payment was offered ; at one time it seemed quite likely that my camp and myself would be starved out of the district and have to throw up the work. Even with every aid from the Civil authorities, similar difficulty several times recurred afterwards; though usually the zemindars did not openly refuse assistance, but secretly obstructed to the utmost, not only in the matter of getting supplies, but as regards vaccination, in fact I believe they often put difficulties in the way of the former in the hope of driving my camp away and avoiding thereby the infliction of the latter. 12. With this party, I staid some little time, and, notwithstanding great reluctance of the people to let their children be seen, several villages were inspected, and the work done for begginners found to be satisfactory. The native superintendents also, though in much less degree than myself, were very unwelcome visitors in the villages, and often vesicles were purposely damaged, and crusts torn off before inspection, to prevent my men from taking vaccine. 13. While with this party my own health, which had long been weak, became very unsatisfactory, and continued so up to nearly the end of the season. The constant march- ing over often difficult country, the continual opposition met with, and the daily difficulties in making the various strings pull together, were very harrassing; this ill-health made it impossible for me to move about so rapidly or to do so much inspection work as I should have otherwise wished, I should even have reported sick, but that I knew it would be a matter of great difficulty to relieve me, and that, if relieved, it would be hard, at first, for a new comer in the middle of the working season to pick up the threads of the various local arrangements. I therefore thought it right to remain at my post, and to keep the work going to the best of my power. 14. Leaving Mendhie Hossein's party on December 23rd, my camp moved eastward to Ishak Khan's party in Pergunnah Khurruckdiha, with whom I came up at Ghorrunjce, taking every opportunity on the road (as I did throughout the tour) of seeing the principal native gentlemen, zemindars, &c, and endeavoring to interest them in the work, but with usually, I fear, but very poor success. Indeed I have reason to think that often my personal efforts in this way did more harm than good; the influential non-official natives seem to dislike having anything to do with European officers, and to be anxious to do nothing (such as affording aid to vaccination) which might encourage such visits being repeated. My men were often told in villages the more friendly to vaccination that they might operate provided they did not bring any Sahib afterwards to look at the cases and bother them, but that if any Sahib was likely to come, they should not vaccinate. In every case it was found that, without the countenance and active aid of the zemin- dar or his agent, all attempts to argue with the villagers themselves and to persuade them to accept vaccination were a perfect waste of time. Sometimes the influential natives, though declining to assist actively, yet said that they would not oppose the work ; the ryots might accept it if they liked, in such cases the village people invariably refused. 15. At Ghorrunjee the tekait (in whose villages were some 600 to 800 children un- inoculated I was told) appeared most friendly, and gave me much aid in every way, declared it was his earnest wish to encourage a thing which he saw well the Government desired so much, promised that he would smooth every difficulty at once, and fixed a day in the follow- ing week for two of the larger villages to be vaccinated, whose example the others would at once follow, and I knew too that several other tekaits would follow the action of this man, whose example therefore was most important. 16. This arrangement being happily made, I proceeded to inspect work of Ishak Khan's men to the southwards ; their work had been too much spread out, over some 50 miles or more of country, a most inconvenient plan, but often impossible to avoid. The villages, however well disposed, will not have vaccination done except at the times con- venient to themselves and to their tillage and pooja arrangements. Often a group being done, one or two villages stand out for two or three weeks' delay till their lucky day arrives, and the vaccinators must meantime go a long way perhaps to get work, and afterwards come back to finish the recusants, or else leave them altogether. Often several villages, widely remote from each other, fix on the same day or on two days so near together that it is impossible for the men to
xliv RANCHEE CIRCLE. get from one to the other by the time fixed. Thus I went down towards Kurhurballee on the branch of the new chord line of railway, seeing work on the road, and found the men's work on the whole successful, some of the cases being extremely good, especially in villages round Pachamba, and some places near Bhundareedeeh, nine miles east thereof, close to the new railway. Here the resident Railway Engineer had rendered much assistance by the influence he possessed with the people round. Some of the villages seemed never to have been visited by inoculators. 17. Turning northwards again from Bhundareedeeh, I had intended to have gone back to Mendhie Hossein's party, but news reached me that the Tekait of Ghorrunjee had, directly my back was turned, broken his promises and refused all aid to vaccination, which consequently had not been carried out. I determined, therefore, to go back to him again and see if anything could be done; taking a somewhat different route, I was able to take in on the road some more villages which had been done by Ishak Khan's men, and on the way camped one day near a large village called Mirzagunge; here the people were most hostile. A man belonging to my camp passing quietly through the bazaar heard some one call outRANCHEE CIRCLE. xlv to finish the inspections left necessarily by Mendhie Hossein incomplete. Meanwhile I was anxious to see some of the villages done since my previous visit, but was deterred from doing so by the assurance that it would at once put a stop to all work. It was obvious that this might be a pretext on the part of the men to prevent imposture on their part being detected, but I was aware from my own knowledge that my previous visit had had the effect in several places of stopping the continuance of work then in progress, and both then and subsequently the assertion was confirmed by information from many independent sources, native gentlemen, both official and non-official, as well as the native superintendents, indeed long before I had been warned that this might probably occur by Dr. Delpratt, the experienced Civil Surgeon of Hazareebagh. Subsequently it was found that three of the men of this party made grossly false returns, and they have been fined and dismissed. The other reports of work done were found to be accurate. 21. Being thus foiled near Domchah I thought it best to work to the south-eastwards so as to join Ishak Khan's party again at Khurruckdiha, thinking that with them inspection might be less difficult. Here I may mention that having occasion to send an urgent message to Ishak Khan, the special messenger (a kahar) was questioned on his way as to his business, and whence he came; at several places as soon as the villagers found that he was from my camp they were most uncivil to him, and in some he was driven out of the village, fire and food refused to him, and he had to lie out in the fields with nothing to eat but uncooked rice. It is not surprising that my men positively refused to be employed on such special messages in future. 22. On the road an instance occurred of a tekait openly ordering his bunniahs not to furnish any supplies; and in another instance they hid themselves away and nothing could be got, doubtless by their tekait's direction, though he and his karpardaz denied it. This opposition occurred often, it would be tedious to mention every instance, so I only allude it now to show the general feeling of the people. 23. February 9th, on leaving camp Khesmee a report reached me of outbreak of small- pox near Semeria, to the south-west of Hazareebagh. From comparing dates the disease must have existed for some time previous, probably fourteen days or more. Throughout the tour, I may mention, the greatest difficulty was found in maintaining regular dâk communication with the native superintendents and others. Their reports often took many weeks on the road, and one of my letters to the Deputy Commissioner even did not reach him till nearly seven weeks had elapsed, and the contents had become useless. Orders were at once sent to Mendhie Hossein (who it was supposed must about then have joined the party at Ramgurh), being the nearest, to move up his men without delay to the infected place. 24. My camp reached Khurruckdiha on February 12th, here I found Ishak Khan, who had by great exertion succeeded in inducing the people of that considerable town to accept vaccination, which had (unknown to me of course) been fixed for the very day of my arrival. My disappointment therefore may be imagined at finding that, on hearing of the approach of my camp, the people had changed their minds and now refused entirely. The absurd story from Mirzagunge had frightened them, and they were encouraged to refuse by the successful resistance of the tekait of Ghorrunjee. The news of my return at once confirmed the waverers in their objections, and notwith- standing every aid of the Inspector of Police, who took opportunities of explaining to the people the groundlessness of their fears, and of the Moonsiff who did the same publicly in the kutcherry, nothing could be done. 25. It now was reported to me that some of my men, whose homes were on the Ghorrunjee tekait's estate, had been threatened by him that he would turn them out of his illaqua altogether if they continued vaccinating as Government servants. This was duly reported by me to the Deputy Commissioner. 26. Every effort to get vaccination done here being exhausted in vain, I was anxious to inspect some more of the villages that had been already done. Here however the same objections were raised as near Domchah. 12
lxvi RANCHEE CIRCLE. I had no doubt of their truth for the reasons already given; and moreover the same men had not in any way endeavored to escape inspection during my former stay with the party, but on the contrary courted it. Yielding therefore to what seemed to be necessity, I deter- mined to forego seeing the villages now, hoping to visit them again at the end of the season. I was fully conscious that it could not be expected that the Sindooriahs would omit to take advantage of such opportunity for imposition if they found that their reports were accepted without inspection. It was therefore insisted that, at every sacrifice, even though work should be stopped entirely, every case entered must be actually seen by the native superintendents, or it would be excluded from my returns. The people made difficulties about them too to a very great extent, but were much less averse to them than to Europeans. The native superintendents could never tell where or when I should reappear, and consequently the villages taken at random and seen by me may be considered fair specimens of the work of the respective parties. The native superintendents' returns were found by me in every instance to agree strictly with the work inspected. Eventually it was found that two Sindooriahs of this party did make false returns; and they were fined and dismissed accordingly. 27. Leaving Khurruckdiha therefore my camp moved towards Semeria at the opposite corner of the district to the south-west. On the road I saw the Manager of the Dhunwar Rajah's estate (which is under the Court of Wards), and enlisted the aid of his influence at Khurruckdiha which is in the Dhunwar illaqua, this he readily gave, and eventually the consent of the people was again obtained by Ishak Khan, and though the weather was then so hot that it was not thought advisable to vaccinate generally, a few were done, just to show the people by the result that no harm was intended to them, and the rest left till next season, the reason being explained to them. 28. My camp reached Semeria on 2nd March ; I found that some of Mendhie Hossein's vaccinators had reached that place on February 22nd. It appeared that some eight or nine deaths had occurred in village Kemtia. On their coming all those unprotected in that village, and in one other village near, were vaccinated, and no more cases of small-pox occurred. The people in those two villages were rendered more willing, probably by fear of the disease, and their zemindar was friendly. All the neighbourhood around, however, obstinately refused, though several days were spent in endeavoring to persuade them. 29. Mendhie Hossein's party were instructed to move back to Chitterpore, beyond Ramgurh, where work still could be got probably, and meantime on March 6th, I started north-eastwards towards Jynuggur to see the work of Ellahee Bux's (new) party. On arrival there some delay occurred in collecting the men who had from circumstances been too widely scattered, which caused much inconvenience. The work of this party was brought to an end, owing to the heat, on the 19th of March. That in the other two parties unfortunately went on a few days longer; indeed it should have been stopped sooner in all three, but owing to the difficulty about the dâks the instruc- tions to the native superintendents did not reach them in time. Towards the end nearly all the cases failed or were doubtful, thus bringing down the percentage of success considerably. The heat had also interfered with success in a part of February, though afterwards some storms had cooled the ail again ; and recourse was largely had to crusts from Almorah. 30. A number of villages done by the Jynuggur party were examined, and the camp moved southwards on March 26th, more villages being inspected on the road. Jynuggur was one of the places where cordial assistance was rendered by Dowlut Singh, the Agent of the Rajah, and Akbar Ally Khan, the Illaquadar ; the people therefore made but little difficulty. 31. Below Hazareebagh I again met the work of the Ramgurh party (now under Mendhie Hossein) and several of the villages were inspected, after which the camp moved towards Ranchee (the hot wind having now for some time been blowing fiercely), which I reached early in April. This party had received very great assistance from Golam Rusool, the Zemindar of Chitterpore, whose aid was most valuable. 32. On reviewing the proceedings of the season it was evident that Mendhie Hossein's conduct had shown decided apathy in the work, and that his general management of his men was by no means successful. The affair at Domchah too caused misgiving in my mind as to his honesty in money matters.
RANCHEE CIRCLE. xlvii It seemed clear that he was not a fit man to have charge of a party, and that keeping him on would cause much future difficulty, and hinder the progress of the work. After consult- ing, therefore, the officer who sent him down, and who took the same view, he has been dis- charged, application will be made to Dr. Watson for a fit man to succeed him. 33. The return shows a total of 7,904 cases, against 6,447 last year, being an increase of 1,457, and considering the decidedly unfavorable attitude of the people at large in the Hazareebagh zillah this result seems to be not unpromising. The cases known to be &quot; successful&quot; number 4,618, being a percentage of 58.42 on the total number ; but in a number of cases, viz., 763, from unavoidable circumstances (such as the sudden move of Ellahee Bux's party to Etkhooree, many of the Christians at Christmas returning at once to their widely scattered homes, the mothers often running off into the jungle to hide their children from inspection, &c.,) the result could not be ascertained, though no doubt many of them too were &quot; successful.&quot; 34. If we exclude these &quot; not ascertained&quot; the &quot; successful&quot; will form 64.66 per cent. of those (7,141) whose result is known. This percentage of success is less than that in the return of last year, but in explanation of this should be considered the unfavorable effect of the unusually hot season (see para. 29 above), and the fact that many of the vaccinators were quite ignorant men and new to their work, Also last year the circle was still worked in two of the zillahs on the old dispensary system ; so that, I believe, it was impossible for more than few of the cases there to have been verified, and probably had they all been seen, the last year's percentage of success would have been lessened. It is impossible there- fore to place the two seasons' results on equal terms for the purpose of comparison. Assuming then, as we may fairly do, that a similar proportion were &quot; successful&quot; out of those &quot; not ascertained,&quot; as in the case of those whose result is known, we shall have to add on 493 to the &quot; successful,&quot; which would bring the total &quot; successful&quot; up to 5,111, (out of 7,904, the total number of cases). I think that in assuming such a proportion of those &quot; not ascertained&quot; to be successful we shall probably not exceed the mark, as many of the unknown results were among Christians who had been vaccinated &quot; from arm to arm&quot; and the results therefore probably were much more successful than the general average of the whole work of the season. 35. &quot; Arm to arm&quot; vaccination was also attempted among other classes at different times, but, (with one exception, in a village near Pachamba, where the people seemed to know nothing of either vaccination or inoculation),. such an outcry was invariably raised, and even violence threatened to the men, that it could not be carried out. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, E. J. HOSKINS, M. D., Supdt. of Vaccination, Ranchee Circle.
xlviii RANCHEE CIRCLE. TABLE No. I. VACCINATION UNDER SUPERINTENDENTS IN BRITISH TERRITORY. TABLE showing the Number and Names of the Circles, and their Superintendents the number of Vaccinators employed; the total vaccinations performed and compared with those of last year; the total number arranged according to Sex, Caste, Age, and Result; the ratio of successful to total vaccinated, and the average number of operations performed by each Vaccinator, for the year 1868-69. Number. Districts. Names of the Medical Officers, Superintendents of Vaccination. Period. Number of Native Vaccinators attached. Total Number Vaccinated. COMPARES WITH LAST YEAR. TABLE NUMBER VACCINATED, ARRANGED ACCORDING TO Ratio per cent. of successful to number vaccinated. Average number of persons vaccinated by each Vaccinator. SEX. CASTE. AGE. RESULT. 1867-68 Increase. Decrease. Males. Females. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Christians. Parsees. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Not ascertained. 1 Ranchee Circle. E. J. Hoskins, M. D., Assistant Surgeon. From 1st November 1868 to 1st April 1869. 20 7,904 6,447 1,457 ... 3,963 3,941 7,103 605 196 ... ... 368 7,536 *4,618 1,469 1,054 763 *58.42,&c. 39 * See explanatory remarks in paras. 33 and 34 of the Report. RANCHEE; E J. HOSKINS, M. D., The 19th May 1869. Supdt. of Vaccination, Ranchee Circle.
xlix FROM THE LATE OFFG. DEPY. SUPDT. OF VACCINATION, SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. To THE DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, DINAPORE CIRCLE. Dated Rajmehal, the 25th May 1869. SIR, In submitting the vaccine report of the Sonthal Pergunnahs for the season 1868-69, I beg to state that I cannot give a full report as required, owing to a late period at which I joined my appointment and my total inexperience in the Department. I joined my appointment in the middle of March when the working season was about to expire. I at once began to inspect the workings of the vaccinators and to induce the heads-of villages to _adopt vaccination in the district of Deogurh. I had not been a fortnight there when I was called upon in the district of Godda to check an epidemic of small-pox which broke out at that time. I joined the scene of operation on the 7th April with my whole staff, but could not commence the operations until a few days later. No vaccination has ever been performed on these people before. One vaccinator was sent last year to try vaccination on them, and in his attempt he fell into such a dangerous position that his life was even threatened, and he was obliged to return unsuccessful. Hence the difficulty I encountered on the onset may easily be conceived. The principal objections existing amongst the Sonthals is their superstitious impressions of the existence of witches (phookshins) to which they attribute the present outbreak of small- pox. They believe that these devils by some unnatural power transmit the contagion from one person to another, and it is their firm belief that inoculators only possess the power of remedying this evil. These objections, untenable as they are, were soon overcome, and their superstitious fears were dispelled off by mere persuasion. The people were so much alarmed at the progress the disease was making, and the dreadful result arising from inoculation that they at last submit- ted to the operation. The vaccinators were then distributed to different directions, and thus within a few days I was able to put a stop to the epidemic. The success resulting from the first few operations removed all their fears and contributed to establish a faith amongst the Sonthals, and thus opened the field for the ensuing year. Village after village was operated on ; no difficulty was experienced in procuring lymph and in carrying on the arm-to-arm operations and we were permitted to re-vaccinate the unsuccessful punctures. The cases were brought up for inspec- tion readily ; the villagers were friendly with the vaccinators and the vaccinators worked willingly and cheerfully. Hundreds flocked to the bungalow for medical advice and treatment. Thus our work throve prosperously for a few days only. At the end of the month, the heat became so excessive that the result of the operation was in most cases either unsuccessful or doubtful, and the appearance of diarrh1 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. Of the five vaccinators attached to the department one was quite unfit for the post, and was therefore dismissed at the end of the season ; the other, a Hindoostanee behaved very im- pertinently. He was very negligent to his duty. An especial report against him was forwarded. A general feeling of discontent and murmurs were displayed by the vaccinators as to the insufficiency of their pay; their batta and travelling allowances having been discontinued since the last year. Their scale of pay varies from Rs. 8 to 12 a month, which is quite insufficient when compared with the nature of the duty they have to undergo. There is no prospect to serve as stimulus to their exertions. Under such circumstances the services of the best and most experienced of the vaccinators are not expected to continue.' In conclusion I beg to tender my best thanks to Mr. Blumherdt, the Assistant Com- missioner of Goddab for the assistance I received at his hands. Vaccine Return for the Season 1868-69. SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. YEAR 1868-69. TOTAL. CASTS. RESULT. Re-vaccinated. Hindoo. Mahomedan. Sonthal. Pahariah Successful Unsuccessful Doubtful Unknown. November... 278 274 4 ... ... 236 42 ... ... 112 December... 1,029 973 56 ... ... 804 211 ... 14 125 January... 745 600 82 63 ... 733 1 ... 11 78 February... 652 459 26 167 ... 634 11 7 ... 74 March... 475 394 10 71 ... 472 3 ... ... 48 April... 752 47 49 649 7 642 82 13 15 261 GRAND TOTAL ... 3,931 2,747 227 950 7 3,521 350 20 40 698 I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, GOPAUL CHUNDER DEY, Sub-Assistant Surgeon, Late Offg. Depy. Supdt. Vaccination, S. P. RAJMEHAL; The 25th May 1869. N. B.Table A. MMARY OF VACCINATION PERFORMED BY THE GENERAL VACCINE ESTABLISHMENT AND VAC- CINATION CIRCLES UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL, AND BY THE ESTABLISHMENT ATTACHED TO CIVIL STATIONS OR DISPENSARIES: FROM 1ST APRIL 1868 TO 31ST MARCH 1869. STATION OR CIRCLE. Parts composed in the Station or Circle. Total Number vaccinated. Number of successful Cases. Number of Cases unsuc- cessful, doubt- ful, or not ascertained. Ratio per cent. of successful Cases. PERIOD FOR WHICH RETURNS ARE FURNISHED. vringhee Depôt... ... In Calcutta... 869 852 17 98.0 During the year ending 31st March. Street Dispensary... ... Ditto ... ... 42 42 ... 100.0 ieal College Dispensary... ... Ditto ... ... 107 55 52 51.4 Division... ... Of the town, sub- urbs, and near country, up to 30th September : after- wards, only the town and suburbs. 7,542 7,192 350 95.3 Division... ... 14,308 5,562 8,746 38.8 Division... ... 12,567 11,564 1,003 92.0 Metropolitan Circle... ... Nuddea, Burdwan parts of Hooghly District. 30,778 29,976 802 97.3 From 1st October to 31st of March. Metropolitan Circle Parts of the 24- Pergunnahs. 24,880 24,788 92 99.6 Metropolitan Circle... ... Parts of 24-Pergun- nahs and southern parts of Hooghly District. 66,835 66,571 264 99.6 TOTAL OF CALCUTTA VACCINATIONS... 157,928 146,602 11,326 92.8 sidency... ... ... Civil Stations or Dispensaries in this Circle of Me- dical Superintend- ence. 22,665 20,163 2,502 88.9 During the year ending 31st March. ca ... ... ... 11,635 8,719 2,916 74.9 mpore... ... ... 13,945 11,842 2,103 84.9 TOTAL OF DISPENSARY VACCINATION. 48,245 40,724 7,521 84.4 jeeling Circle of Vaccination... Vide Table on page 5 of Report. 44,533 39,363 5,170 88.0 Year ending 31st March. ichee Circle of Vaccination... 7,904 4,618 3,286 58.4 thal Pergunnahs... ... 3,931 3,521 410 89.5 Year ending 30th April. TOTAL OF THESE CIRCLES... 56,368 47,502 8,866 84.2 TOTAL OF ALL... 262,541 234,828 27,713 89.4 B.Table RETURN OF ALL PERSONS VACCINATED IN AND NEAR CALCUTTA BY THE STATIONS OF CIRCLES. PARTS INCLUDED IN THESE CIR- CLES OR STATIONS. NAMES OF THE SUPERINTEND- ENTS. AVERAGE NUMBER OF VAC- CINATORS EMPLOYED. MONTHLY PAY OF EACH. APRIL 1868. MAY 1868. JUNE 1868. JULY 1868. AUGUST 1869 Successful. Unsuccessful, Doubtful, or not ascertained. Successful. Unsuccessful, Doubtful, or not ascertained. Successful. Unsuccessful, Doubtful, or not ascertained. Successful. Unsuccessful, Doubtful, or not ascertained. Successful. Unsuccessful, Doubtful, or not ascertained. Chowringhee Depôt ... ... Surgeon T. E. Charles, M. D. 1 Vaccinator ... At Rs. 10 ... 17 1 12 1 7 .. 7 .. 8 Park Street Dispensary ... ... E. George, Esq.... 1 Vaccinator at- tends every day in the season and twice a week in the non- season. 3 Head, at Rs 15 each. 3 at B. GENERAL VACCINE DEPARTMENT FROM 1ST APRIL 1868 TO 31ST MARCH 1869. SEPTEMBER 1868. OCTOBER 1868. NOVEMBER 1868. DECEMBER 1868. JANUARY 1869. FEBRUARY 1869. MARCH 1869. TOTAL VACCINATED FROM 1ST APRIL 1868 TO 31ST MARCH 1869. RATIO PER CENT OF SUCCESS- FUL CASES TO THE TOTAL NUM- BER VACCINATEDTable STATIONS. NUMBER OF VACCINATION EM- PLOYED. VACCINATIONS OF EACH MONTH APRIL. MAY. JUNE. JULY. AUGUST. SEPTEMBER. OCTOBER. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE OF MEDICAL ADMINISTRATION,Table D. RETURN OF THE DARJEELING CIRCLE OF VACCINATION FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1869. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND RESULTS IN EACH MONTH. OPERATIONS AND RESULTS FOR THE SEASON. RATIO PER CENT. OF SUCCESSFUL CASES TO THE TOTAL NUMBER VACCINATED. NOVEMBER DECEMBER. JANUARY. FEBRUARY. MARCH Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Total. Western Dooars and Terai. . . . .. . . .. 380 219 16 615 1,128 280 41 1,449 2,071 202 78 2,351 1,799 131 92 2,022 1,277 110 128 1,515 6,655 942 355 7,952 83.64 Dinagepore... .. .. .. .. .. ... ... 625 153 51 829 3,292 245 153 3,690 2,817 211 199 3,227 2,412 188 158 2,758 1,917 127 106 2,150 11,063 924 667 12,654 87.43 Rungpore. . . . .. ... . . .. ... 1,361 91 31 1,483 2,025 16 94 2,135 2,178 84 137 2,399 2,270 106 125 2,501 1,551 54 83 1,688 9,385 351 470 10,206 91.95 Bogra... ... ... ... ... ... 589 121 38 748 1,473 68 42 1,583 1,878 92 42 2,012 1,940 117 51 2,108 1,744 145 17 1,906 7,624 543 190 8,357 91.23 Rajshahye.. . .. .... . .. . . . .. 76 3 6 85 451 81 24 556 1,035 173 32 1,240 1,387 163 41 1,591 1,418 120 49 1,587 4,367 540 152 5,059 86.32 Kudwah (Purneah)... ... ... ... .. . .. ... ... ... ... ... 70 6 9 85 199 10 11 220 . ... 269 16 20 305 88.1 TOTAL... 3,031 587 142 3,760 8,369 690 354 9,413 10,049 768 497 11,314 10,007 715 478 11,200 7,907 556 383 8,846 39,363 3,316 1,854 44,533 88.39 Table E. RETURN OF VACCINATION IN THE SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS FOR THE SEASON 1868-69. DISTRICT. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND THE RESULTS IN EACH MONTH. OPERATIONS AND RESULTS FOR THE SEASON. RATIO PER CENT. OF SUCCESSFUL CASES TO THE TOTAL NUMBER VACCINATED. NOVEMBER. DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY. MARCH. APRIL Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown. Revaccinated. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown. Revaccinated. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown. Revaccinated. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown Revaccinated Total. Successful. Unsuccessful Doubtful. Unknown. Revaccinated Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown Revaccinated. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown. Revaccinated Total. Sonthal Pergunnahs... ... ... ... 236 42 ... 112 390 804 211 . 14 125 1,154 733 1 . 11 78 823 634 11 7 74 726 472 3 . . 48 523 642 82 13 15 261 1,013 3,521 350 20 40 698 4,629 76.06 Table F. RETURN OF THE RANCHEE CIRCLE OF VACCINATION FOR THE SEASON 1868-69. CIRCLE. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS AND RESULTS FROM 1ST NOVEMBER 1868 TO 1ST APRIL 1869. Ratio per cent of successful cases to the total number vaccinated. Number of Vaccinators employed. Successful. Unsuccessful. Doubtful. Unknown. Total. COMPARED WITH LAST YEAR. 1867-68. Increase Decrease. Ranchee Circle... ... ... 20 4,618 1,469 1,054 763 7,904 6,447 1,457 58.42 J. T. C. ROSS, F. R, C. S., Surgeon Major, Offg secy Inspr. Gens. of Hospitals,
REPORT ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEONS AS SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION. Reasons for submitting the report. 1. From time to time Sub-Assistant Surgeons have been employed in various capacities in the Vaccine Establishment under different grades, and on various occasions opinions adverse to their employment have been put on record. Repeatedly it has been brought to the notice of the Government of Bengal that the Sub-Assistant Surgeons employed in the Presidency Vaccine Establishment have discharged their duties as Superintendents of Vaccination not only faithfully, but with energy and ability, and three of those at present in the establishment have received the thanks of Government for the efficient manner in which they have discharged their duties. Sub-Assistant Surgeons have also been employed in vaccinating in Bengal who have not been attached to the Gen- eral Vaccine Establishment, and they have failed, more or less, to perform what has been ex- pected of them. As it is judged to be of considerable importance that this class of officers should be employed as Superintendents of Vaccination, the following report is presented with the view of assisting the Government under these complicating circumstances to arrive at somewhat definite conclusions. Nature of the duties of a Superintendent of Vaccination. 2. The duties to be performed by these Superintendents are by no means easy ones. They are sent among a population who know nothing of vaccination and are told to vaccinate them. The people among whom they are to work hold very fixed beliefs regarding protection from small-pox, one portion of the population for long ages having been accustomed to protect themselves by means of inoculation, while the other have been accustomed to refuse such protection. Among a simply indifferent population rapid progress might possibly be made without great difficulty by only making known the benefits to be de- rived from the practice of vaccination. Among a rigidly prejudiced population the case is far different, and difficulties are met with in each separate village, in some cases in every hut even in the village. Those who inoculate refuse vaccination, as they have every confidence in their own form of protection, and as they have been accustomed to employ certain religious rites in connection with the practice, they find it all the more difficult to adopt another form of protection. Though in itself inoculation is not a religious act, yet its performance has always been so much mixed up with religious ceremonies as not to render it easy for them altogether to disassociate it in their minds from the idea of religious observance. Then, again, those who have determined not to practise inoculation, but have on system resolved to trust to the goddess of small-pox sending them a spontaneous attack in a mild form, also have religious feelings brought into play when they are asked to avail themselves of the alterna- tive protection afforded by vaccination, and oppose those attempting to overcome their scruples with a tenacity which is most surprising. When these two classes have been persuaded one by one, or village by village, as the case may be, very many of those who were most energetic in refusing vaccination will doubtless from the force of habit be just as zealous in seeking for vaccination when it is placed within their reach, but even among these there is a class, and a very large one, by whom great trouble will be occasioned when nothing more than apathy prevents their coming forward 15
lviii SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEONS AS SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION. readily. This mere indifference is one of the most difficult forms of opposition to overcome, and to combat it successfully a thorough knowledge of the people, perseverance, and firmness are requisite. Besides this, on the Superintendent devolves the management of considerable numbers of vaccinators, and the task of keeping them all contented and providing that each of them gives a full quantity of work, requires the exercise of the powers of a mind trained to business habits. The duties of a Superintendent necessitate his being constantly on the move. He is unable to have any fixed residence, and cannot even for a week take a lodging in any village in which the vaccinators are working. As soon as the week's work of one gang of vaccinators has been inspected, he has work waiting for him among another gang, and two or three days at most are all that can be spent in any one place. This perpetual movement, entailing, as it does, absence from their families and separation from their friends, is necessarily most distaste- ful and in many cases proves so unbearable as to lead those thus employed to throw up the public service, rather than submit to the life to which they are subjected by remaining in it. Young men unable to perform such duties. 3. Considering the onerous nature of the duties required of them, it does not seem difficult to understand how young Sub-Assistant Sur- geons find themselves quite unable to overcome the obstacles they every day meet with, and are lost in despair at finding they have been sent to persuade people to be vaccinated who will not listen to them ; that the vaccinators placed under them are unruly and that they cannot exercise an effective control over them ; while the life of isolation and hardship is one which is quite unendurable to them. Superintendents should have been some time in the public service. 4. The decision of character and powers of persuasion necessary to constitute a Sub- Assistant Surgeon a successful Superintendent of Vaccination are rarely met with in any one under thirty years of age. A youth fresh from college, however able he may be in answering examination papers, is so ignorant of how to transact any business matter, that he is unfit for the responsibilities of a Vaccine Superintendent. By the experience of the world gained while in the junior grades of the public service, he improves much, and the general training he receives while thus serving assists him mate- rially should he ever be required to take charge of a Vaccine Establishment. It is difficult to judge how a young man will turn out after leaving college and whether he will be possessed of the steady application to his duties, without which he will prove worthless as a Superintendent of Vaccination, while after having been under observation for a few years his capacity for real work can be more correctly estimated. While making a requisition on the Head of the Medical Department for Sub-Assistant Surgeons to fill up vacancies in the Vaccine Department, it is stipulated that those he nominates, besides being men of known character, should belong to the second grade, and thus be between seven and fourteen years' service, and that they should have served in the Punjab. To the last require- ment considerable importance is attached, as absence from Bengal and employment at a dis- tance from their houses is found to give an amount of self-reliance and a power of putting up with much that is not pleasant which it is difficult to obtain in those who have never left their native province. Superintendents should receive special staff pay. 5. A great mistake has been made and is still sometimes committed in supposing that any Sub-Assistant Surgeon will accept the bare pay of his rank for performing the duties required of him as a Superintendent of Vaccination. The work which he is obliged to perform is many times harder than that required of him while serving in any other position, while the dis- heartening effect of a never ending dealing with people who throw obstacles in his way, has no equivalent in any other appointment which he could hold. The self abnegation required of separation from family and friends which is not neces- sitated to the same degree in the other appointments open to him, and the discomfort of hav- ing always to be on the move, must also be met by sufficient remuneration. Besides all of these, however, there is another element which must always be borne in mind and which also in itself necessitates increased allowances. Duties of whatever nature which call for the exercise of individual energy, individual judgment and individual discretion,
SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEONS AS SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION. lix and in the discharge of which much is necessarily left to the trustworthiness of the agents dis- charging them owing to the limited nature of any controlling power, are those for which special remuneration must be made, with the view of being able to command the services of such persons as those to whom alone such duties can be with safety entrusted. Resume of circumstances under which success or failure will be met with. 6. It may be almost predicted beforehand under what circumstances this class of Govern- ment servants will fail as Superintendents of Vac- cination and when, on the contrary, they will turn out useful agents of the Government. Select a Sub-Assistant Surgeon who has been some years in the service when he has become more or less trained to business habits, when his powers of mind have become deve- loped, and when by a separation from home and experience of a world beyond Bengal he has gained a fair share of self-reliance and become somewhat indifferent to the discomforts of leaving his home, and after having thus selected such a person on account of these qualities and in consideration of his being a trustworthy agent and one who has proved that he can work well, avoid the mistake of expecting him to discharge faithfully and zealously the duties of a difficult and distasteful appointment for the same amount of remuneration that he would receive while performing those far more easy and of a more genial kind, and it may be expected that a Sub-Assistant Surgeon so selected and so paid will turn out a good Superintendent of Vaccination. On the other hand, take a young lad fresh from college, unused to the business of life, untrained in dealing with other men, ignorant of everything save the elements of professional study, his mind fixed constantly on the wrong he has to endure in being forced to leave his home, and ready to brood with melancholy on every little discomfort he is called on to endure, and on each difficulty which it is his duty to overcomelx SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEONS AS SUPERINTENDENTS OF VACCINATION. available. A European, unless in exceptional instances, cannot be taken into the houses of the Natives, whereas with a little management an inhabitant of this country can readily obtain food and shelter in, or at least near, any village in which his presence may be necessary. Considering the fitness that Sub-Assistant Surgeons have shown under the &quot;Calcutta system&quot; to perform the duties of Superintendents of Vaccination, and the disabilities under which European officers have to labor when they have to discharge similar functions, it seems to be a matter of considerable moment that all known facts in connection with the case should be brought clearly forward to enable the Bengal Government to act without hesitation, in spite of the want of success which has been met with under other Governments, in employing this class of agents to perform such duties.
REPORT ON THE UNSATISFACTORY STATE OF THE ARRANGEMENTS FOR VACCINATION AS PRACTISED UNDER THE MUNICIPALITIES OTHER THAN THOSE OF THE TOWN AND SUBURBS OF CALCUTTA. Inefficiency of Municipality Vaccinators. 1. Under recent arrangements the various newly formed municipalities have under- taken the support of one or more vaccinators. The great difficulty in the way of the successful working of public vaccination through small municipalities, consists in making efficient provision for the professional supervision of the work done by the vaccinators. It is exactly of the same kind as that which has been long felt in the case of the vaccinators who used to be attached to the various Government Dispensaries. The municipality can pay the vaccinators, and they can supply them with lancets, but they cannot insure that protection from small-pox is provided to the people who are operated on. The consequences of any system of vaccination which falls short of fulfilling this requirement are most fatal to the ultimate acceptance of vaccination by the people as a prophylactic against small-pox. They cannot appreciate the difference between a pimple or other form of irrita- tion caused by a vaccinator and the true vaccine vesicle which alone protects from small-pox. Having been operated on by a vaccinator constitutes, in their minds, vaccination, and any person who has been so operated on and subsequently dies of small-pox furnishes to their minds only another instance of the inefficiency of vaccination to protect against small-pox. Two causes, leading to this. 2. There are two circumstances which go far to explain how it is that worthless vaccina- tion is so often met with when performed by vacci- nators working independently of control. On the one hand, the difficulty of finding men who have been carefully taught to vaccinate, or of teaching them thoroughly, is a great one, and ignorance regarding vaccination is a fruitful source of the failure to protect by such vaccinators. On the other hand, while working away from close supervision, the vaccinators grow careless, and whenever they know that their work will not be subjected to close inspection, they almost invariably become lax and indifferent as to the character of the vaccinations which they practise, and a large amount of unprotective vaccination thus results. Instruction of Municipal Vaccinators. 3. The difficulty as regards careful teaching would be in part got over if the various municipalities could be induced to send their vaccinators to Calcutta to be instructed in the work. As this could be done without any additional expense, beyond the cost of travelling, being incurred, the proposal seems to be one which might be carried out without much difficulty. During the months of June, July, and August the municipal vaccinators remain at present idle, and if they were sent to Calcutta arrangements could be made for their instruction by one of the Superintendents of Vaccination in the town. Their education would not be merely of a theoretical nature, but as vaccination is always being carried on in some of the emigrant depôts, they could have opportunities also of receiving practical instruction. By being year by year subjected to such a training, it might justly be expected that not only would they become more efficient at the time, but be kept up year by year to an advanced standard. Supervision over Municipal Vaccinators. 4. It seems hopeless to attempt for the present to introduce the requisite amount of supervision over this class of municipality vacci- nators, as they are so scattered that the greater part of the time of any Superintendent who might be appointed to this duty would so much be occupied in moving from one municipality to another that but a small part of his time could be devoted to the duty of inspection. 16
lxii REPORT. It will be impossible for the present staff of Superintendents to undertake the duty of superintending these vaccinators in the sense in which they do when they are held responsible for the work done by the vaccinators on the Government establishment. It is of importance that an effort should be made to meet the difficulty under consideration, and while pointing out the imperfect degree of supervision which can be provided, it is thought right that the following proposal should be brought forward. Should the Government approve of it, the Superintendent General of Vaccination will communicate with the Chairmen of the various municipalities, and have the vaccinators brought so far under his control that he can direct their work to be supervised in any way that he may be able from time to time to make arrangements for. For the present it is believed that the vaccinators at Ooterparrah, Balli, and Conenugger might be inspected once a month by one of the Superintendents for the town of Calcutta. While in the event of any of the other Superintendents working in the neighbourhood of any of the other municipalities, they would be directed to take any opportunity of seeing the work done by municipality vaccinators. When these vaccinators have been made to keep daily registers of their operations similar to those in use in the department, by verifying these records, a certain amount of wholesome check could be exercised. The above proposal is made with considerable confidence, as even though it embodies a very defective arrangement, a certain amount of exact information regarding the working of the municipality vaccinators will soon become available which is an important desidera- tum at present. Ultimate disposal of these Municipality Vac- cinators. 5. It does not seem difficult to foresee that ultimately some more permanent arrange- ment will require to be made with regard to these vaccinators employed by municipalities. While the whole country around them is efficiently protected by a thoroughly organized system of vaccination, the isolated portions possessed of municipal institutions cannot be left in a more than doubtful state as regards safety from small-pox. Two alternatives seem to present themselves as feasible under the circumstances above referred to. 1st.REPORT ON THE NECESSITY FOR REGULATING THE PRACTICE OF SMALL-POX INOCULATION IN BENGAL, WHERE IT IS NOT PROHIBITED. CHAPTER I. General considerations regarding Inoculation and Vaccination. The mortality resulting from small-pox inoculation, is of a two-fold nature, direct and indirect. 1. IT is shewn by various reports and public letters in the possession of Government, that the practice of small-pox inoculation in Bengal is accompanied by a considerable mortality. Such mortality may be said to be attributable to a two-fold cause: on the one hand there is always a certain number of deaths amongst those who are the subjects of variolation; and on the other, natural small-pox is frequently communicated, from those who have artificially received the disease, to those around them, and thus epidemics of small-pox arise, during which great loss of life sometimes occurs. The per centage of direct mortality. 2. At present there exists no facility for estimating the percentage of the mortality which occurs amongst inoculated persons. That it varies however, within very wide limits, is certain. Instances have been published by Government in which the percentage has reached a very high figure. Dr. Sheridan, Civil Surgeon of Serampore, reported that one inoculator admitted that during the season he had operated on 400 individuals, of whom 200 or 50 per cent. died; in the case reported by Pundit Goury Sunkur Bhuttacharjee of 1000 people who had been inoculated at Hooghly in 1850, the mortality was 30 per cent. In the same year 66 inoculators reported having inoculated 2,586 persons in the suburbs of Calcutta, of whom they said only 19 died, the percentage being 0.73. Some doubt, however, was cast at the time, on the truthfulness of this latter report. One native gentleman alone knew of 14 deaths from inoculation in the suburbs that year, and the probability therefore of more than 19 deaths having occurred was very great. It seems also a fair assumption, that the suburbs of the Metropolis would attract more skilful operators, and if their work was attended with such a mortality, the less favored districts at a distance from Calcutta, must probably have suffered in a much higher ratio. At Sankeberriah, in March 1867, out of about 200 persons inoculated, eight died ; the rate of mortality being about 4 per cent. It is also certain, however, that the practice of inoculation, if properly conducted, need not of necessity involve a high rate of mortality. From a recent investigation made by Dr. Wise, late Civil Surgeon of Chittagong, it appeared that in that district the percentage of mortality was 0.50 per cent. In the practice of old and experienced inoculators, even this low figure possibly represents an unusually high death-rate; thus Mr. Bedford, while Civil Surgeon at Rampore Bauleah, saw 79 persons inoculated, amongst whom not a single death occurred from the operation, and I have been assured that this is no unusual occurrence. Danger of indirect mortality. 3. On enquiry, regarding the mortality which results amongst those who are infected with the disease by inoculated persons, or indirectly from others who have received the disease in this way, there appears to be an equally great range in the results. In some cases the most cala- mitous results are said to follow, whilst in others the evil is apparently reduced to a minimum. As an individual example, I may take the instance brought forward by Baboo Issur Chunder Sing, who states that in his own family three persons contracted the disease from a case of inoculated small-pox, two of whom died. Again, in the report regarding the outbreak of small-pox at Sankeberriah, which was clearly traced to infection received from those inocu- lated in March 1867, it is stated that 35 died, out of 149 who were attacked in direct succes- sion. Just before the season in which we should naturally have expected that this outbreak would have attained to epidemic proportions, extensive vaccination practised on all sides of those who were affected with small-pox put an immediate stop to the disease. Otherwise within the next three months, a very heavy death-rate would most certainly have been recorded. Numerous documents exist bearing on the almost incalculable mischief which inoculators do by spreading
( 2 ) the disease in this way. In most of them, however, there is no absolute proof that the disease actually originated from inoculation; and further, exact statistics of the mortality occasioned, have not been systematically collected. For the purposes of this communication this is but a remote drawback, as the evidence of the Medical men who report is full and conclusive. Not only does inoculation, as at present conducted, not unfrequently originate small-pox epidemics, but even when it falls short of such untoward results, it acts injuriously, in a manner apparent to all, by disseminating the disease with rapidity in different directions. While variolation may, under certain circumstances, thus diffuse small-pox, it must be allowed that the converse is also true, viz., that inoculation may be conducted without small- pox spreading as a necessary consequence. In the report of the Small-pox Commissioners in 1850, numerous individuals bear evidence to the fact, that they have never seen any instance of small-pox communicated by those who had received it by inoculation; all these persons had, from their infancy, been living amongst those who were inoculated yearly, and their negative evidence, though devoid of precision, has, so far as it goes, a distinct and reliable value. As the result of my own enquiries amongst those who must have had good opportu- nities of witnessing such results, had they been frequent, I may state that very many not only have never seen small-pox so propagated, but look on such an occurrence as rare. For years I have been on the look out for such results, and though, as already stated, some examples have been reported to me, it so happens, that out of a very considerable number of children whom I have inspected, while undergoing inoculation, or soon afterwards, I have, within my own personal experience, not a single instance to bring forward of small-pox having been so communicated. Legislators must provide for two very opposite series of facts. 4. It will be evident from the perusal of the last two paragraphs, that in the event of any fresh legislation occurring with regard to this matter, two very opposite sets of facts bearing on inoculation must be provided for. We have in evidence that the practice can be conducted with slight risk to the individual, and little danger to the community ; while it is proved also that as many as one in two lives may be sacrificed in its performance; and further, that small-pox epidemics carrying death to hundreds may be originated and increased in intensity by this practice. Great importance of this question. 5. The question here involved is one of great magnitude. Perhaps no single consi- deration bearing on the decrease of preventable mortality in Bengal, is of greater public importance. The proportion of inoculated persons to the general population. The exact extent to which variolation is prac- tised in the Lower Provinces of the Presidency, is for the present unknown. An attempt has been made to estimate this by counting the numbers of inoculated persons in the Jails and among those frequenting public Dispensaries. It will be seen from the following table that above 80 per cent. of the people examined were protected from small-pox by inoculation. A fractionally small number only, had suffered from natural small-pox:( 3 ) Allowing a margin in such an estimate, for the possibility of the reporters having made their enquiries in exceptionally well-protected districts, and to provide for the fact that the adult population only were reported on, it still seems to follow that the great mass of the people do avail themselves of the protection afforded by inoculation. Any interference therefore with the operation must affect very extended interests, and any evil attendant on its practice is of very widely spread significance. Is vaccination in India protective ? 6. On the very threshold of any enquiry relating to legislation in the matter of inocu- lation, the question of the comparative merits and practicability of vaccination at once presents itself. There has always been a disbelief in the minds of medical men as to the efficiency of vaccination performed in India. In the native mind a distrust arose so strong as to consti- tute a formidable difficulty, when attempting to spread vaccination. They had seen persons operated on by a vaccinator who when exposed to the contagion of small-pox, die just as it they had received no protection. They therefore refused to receive the English prophy- lactic, because a thing which had been palmed off on them as such, through the accredited agents of the Government, had to them proved only a source of bitter disappoint- ment and regret. This spurious vaccination is not confined to the lower orders. The children of European parents have shared in the same delusive protection. Mr. Marson, of the Small-pox Hospital in London, while I was on a visit to that institution some three years ago, remarked to me, &quot; vaccination in India is the most worthless I have seen, most of the children who come home from India are not protected by their vaccination.&quot; As Mr. Marson is one of the greatest authorities in Great Britain on all such matters his observation is of importance. As an example of vaccination in India not protective against small-pox, let me relate what is recorded in the annual report of the Civil Surgeon of Bassein in Burmah, which that officer published in the pages of the Indian Medical Gazette. He examined into the results of the vaccination which had been conducted during the previous season, and found that &quot; sixty of these cases suffered from small-pox, and no less than twenty-three of them had died from it within the year.&quot; Such a record may well excite feelings of indignation. It may be presumed that no one would attempt to defend the cruelty of a deception which was followed by the disastrous results above narrated. Any one with an experience such as the above may well justify himself in the belief that vaccination in India is worthless. If the term vaccination is only used as a general one, to include all the operations performed by the ignorant men who draw a monthly salary as vaccinators, I should feel myself compelled to join in the general outcry against the efficacy of Indian vaccination. No terms are sufficiently strong to express the worthlessness of such vaccination. Vaccinia has no relation to the pimples, pustules, ulcers, and other non-specific irritative manifestations by which such operations are characterised. It is only by an abuse of terms that any one who has undergone such an operation can be said to be vaccinated. Though he has been operated on. by a vaccinator he is in no way protected. On exposure to small-pox he is as much liable to contract the disease, and to die from it, as any other unprotected person. To quote only one more such instance; the Superintendent-General of Vaccination in the Central Provinces reports, that &quot; at the village of Kamthee and in its neighbourhood the disease had been spreading for some time, and a Municipal Vaccinator sent by the Civil Surgeon had been working, as he reported, successfully. On my visiting the place, the Kamdar, who was most anxious on the subject, having lost some members of his own family, brought up numbers of children who had been, as it was reported, successfully vaccinated, and yet subsequently contracted small-pox. Several exhibited old cicatrices on the arms, as well as the marks about the face and body of quite recent small-pox; but the larger number had, in the place of the old cicatrices, ulcers in various stages. I examined about 150 persons who had been operated upon by the Municipal Vaccinator, and found that he had been using purulent matter instead of proper vaccine lymph, and had not produced a single Cow-pox vesicle. The people, uninstructed as to the proper appearance, and probably measuring the success by the sores and inconvenience inflicted, were necessarily disappointed by the apparent failure.&quot; Could any thing be more certain than such an occurrence to make people doubt the efficacy of Indian vaccination ? Still, in spite of instance after instance of a similar revelation having come to light, the same &quot; impossible system&quot; is more or less carried on in different parts of India. It is to be observed that these two examples have not been searched out from
( 4 ) among records of old date, but represent occurrences which have taken place, one during the vaccinating season just passed, and the other in the preceding one. They represent not what was in India in times past, but what exists at the present day. Is vaccinia in India protective ? 7. We may consider now the question in a narrower form, and enquire whether vaccinia is really protective in India. It is as yet impossible to adduce proof in a statistical form in support of vaccinia being protective. During the small-pox epidemic in Calcutta in 1864 as well as on previous occasions, the fact that numbers who had been vaccinated had been exposed in the most prolonged and careless manner to contagion, without contracting the disease, is however a very striking one. Under these circumstances, large numbers were found to be exempted from small-pox by previous vaccination, and when they did contract the disease in the great majority of instances they had it in a mild form. Even when the eruption was abundant, the danger to life from post- vaccinal small-pox was found to be very slight indeed. The exact degree in which failure of protection existed may be judged of by the revaccination test to be presently detailed, and is in no way the fault of the vaccinia. During the months in which the epidemic was at its height, thirteen thousand re-vaccinations were practised. Had there been any imperfection in the protective power of the virus, many of these cases would have been found to contract small-pox in spite of the use of the prophylactic. In some the disease was incubating before the vaccination was practised, and these got the disease modified or not by the vaccination, according to the length of time which had elapsed between the reception of the contagion and the vaccination. After the vaccination had run its course, I do not know an instance of one single individual having been attacked by small-pox. After children had been vaccinated, they have been subjected to the test of inoculation; I do not know of a single case in which it was possible to infect them under these circumstances. Is vaccinia in India as protective against small- pox as inoculation is ? 8. It is not sufficient simply to establish the fact that vaccination is protective, but it must be shewn to be as efficacious as inoculation against small-pox. The immunity enjoyed by those who have gone through one attack of small-pox from a repetition of the disease is relative and not absolute. In certain races, such as the Goorkhas and other Hill tribes, instances of severe attacks of small-pox for a second or third time are much more common than among European nations. The exact liability of the Bengallee to such subsequent attacks of small-pox is not known, though the fact that they are liable is certain. It is extremely difficult to collect statistical data on this point. A similar difficulty exists when an attempt is made to obtain precise information regarding the liability to small- pox after inoculation and vaccination. Vaccinia is only a modified small-pox, which results on the use of that cultivated small-pox virus which is called vaccine. By applying the test of vaccination, the exact amount of liability to small-pox can be ascertained. The test is a more searching one than mere exposure to infection, and hence the protection found defective by vaccination might still have served to guard against the lesser degrees of contagion consequent on simple exposure to the influence of a case of small-pox. In 1864 this test was applied to large numbers of persons in Calcutta; persons who had previously suffered from small-pox, those who had been already inoculated, and those who had been vaccinated, were subjected to the test. In each of the three classes the results obtained from the vaccination were surprisingly uniform. The deduction was irresistible, that the protection afforded by the previous attack was the same, whether it had been of spontaneous origin, had followed on inoculation, or had been communicated in the form of vaccinia. Question of vaccination versus inoculation. 9. When the result has been arrived at, that vaccination is as protective as inoculation, the question of the respective merits of the two is a very simple one indeed. Connected with the practice of small-pox inoculation, there is the direct as well as the indirect mortality already considered, which though it may be small still always exists; when the disease has been produced in a severe form, you have besides this all the suffering connected with a spontaneous attack of small-pox, as well as disfigurement, lameness and blindness, which may also ensue; and besides, those undergoing inoculation have to subject themselves besides to several restrictions. With the practice of vaccination no such drawbacks and disadvantages as those above enumerated are associated.
( 5 ) The immense superiority of vaccination over inoculation, as a means of preserving public health, may be accepted as a dogma at which no one can reasonably cavil. In now having to bring forward the question of the regulation of inoculation, I would carefully guard against being misunderstood on this point. I conceive it to be the duty of the Government to spend every thousand Rupees that can possibly be secured on vaccination, and by every means to encourage the adoption of this method of protection. But when all this has been done there yet remains much undone, and hence further action of some sort is necessary. Question of Vaccinating Bengal. 10. The Government have already before them a scheme which I proposed, for ultimately- furnishing vaccination to the districts surrounding Calcutta. The fixed annual cost of the establishment proposed was Rupees 25,380 per annum. Besides this, other expenses would have to be incurred. The population of these districts may be estimated at five millions. With the establishment asked for, this entire population could never be effectually overtaken. If the population of Bengal be estimated at 40 millions, eight times such an Establish- ment would in like manner never be able completely to vaccinate Bengal, and keep it protected; and it may be confidently affirmed that an annual expenditure of Rupees 2,03,040 would not suffice to provide vaccination for Bengal. It is open to question whether, with such an expenditure, even a remote approach to the amount of protection from small-pox due to inocu- lation already existing in Bengal would ever be attained through vaccination. In the course of time very large tracts of Bengal could not only be vaccinated, but be made to pay for their vaccination, even when conducted by public establishments. Before, how- ever, any population can be made to defray such a charge, it must be taught to become familiar with vaccination; to have confidence in its protection; and to feel that it is worth paying for. Such an education is a work which can only be accomplished by time. The difficulties in the way are real ones, and though by energy and determination they may be overcome, many decades will have passed by before the result is achieved. The real commencement of this work has not been begun, and unless it is quickly undertaken, on a large scale, the first ten years of the next century, will find but little advance made over the corresponding period of this one; a hundred years will not have sufficed to accomplish anything towards making Bengal a vaccinated country. CHAPTER II. Arguments for and against Inoculation. One-sided nature of the arguments in favor of a universal abolition of inoculation. 11. A very simple plan of dealing with the question of inoculation has been advocated, and very many well meaning members of the Civil and Medical Services have urged on Government the necessity for abolishing the practice of inoculation altogether. To any one possessed of more than a superficial knowledge of the subject, and especially to those who are personally familiar with instances of the more successfully con- ducted operations of inoculators, the arguments of such writers must always seem one sided, and as such open to grave objection. The devastations caused by small-pox amongst large populations are alone before the eyes of the reporters while they make such representa- tions ; and conscious of the fact, that in individual cases within their cognizance, inoculators had done much mischief, they write with warmth and energy. To get rid of the evils of the practice, they would prohibit that the good which may be derived from it should continue to be enjoyed by those among whom no evil results have been brought to light. Arguments deducible from the experience of inoculation in Great Britain. 12. In support of such a prohibition of inoculation, it has been argued that in Great Britain the mortality from small-pox was in no way lessened, but rather increased by the practice of inocu- lation. So far as I can gather, the direct mortality in Britain among those inoculated, seems to have exceeded a quarter per cent., but to have been much under a half per cent. With proper precautions I believe an equally favor- able result may be attained in Bengal. That inoculation did not succeed in diminishing the mortality in England is not to be wondered at, considering the open violation of every element of safety involved in the manner in which it was conducted.
( 6 ) Thus in 1807, in a Parliamentary report, the Royal College of Physicians of London, put it in evidence, that even at that date( 7 ) Freedom from danger of inoculation seen by Mr. Bedford. 17. In February 1852, Mr. Bedford, while Civil Surgeon of Rampore Bauleah, person- ally inspected seventy-nine persons who had been inoculated, and placed on record their names, and some particulars with regard to the operation in each case. From these cases we have to exclude three, as from the tabular statement it is evident that in them the inoculation failed to infect the system. Seventy-six remain, in whom small-pox appeared in the very mild form in which it is expected to appear after inoculation. None of these children died. Besides this, no death from small-pox in February or March was to be found in the death Registers of the two Mohullahs in which inoculation was practised, and we are almost justified in concluding that the small-pox did not spread from these centres of contagion, which were by no means small. Explanation of the slight tendency which the disease has to spread, when the inoculation has been of a favorable nature. 18. It is an unquestioned fact, that a case of inoculated small-pox can communicate the disease, as certainly and in as severe a form as one of natural small-pox. But any one who has personal knowledge of inoculation as practised in the neigh- bourhood of Calcutta, cannot fail to be struck with the fact, that contagion from such a source is by no means so common as he would, from mere abstract reasoning, be led to suppose. We have not far to go for the explanation of this fact. The most dangerous period for contagion from small-pox exists during the process of shed- ding the crusts; and in many cases of inoculated small-pox this stage is either wholly or in great part absent. The whole eruption, consisting of half a dozen of papules, without going to form vesicles and pustules, may simply fade and die away. In such a case, the contagious properties of the disease are reduced to a minimum. Even when advance is made to the formation of pustules and crusts, the infecting properties of such cases compared with that of an ordinary case of unmodified small-pox, are still so infinitely small as to merit marked attention. Out of the seventy-six cases recorded by Mr. Bedford, in more than one-half, the elements of the eruption were limited in number to five or less. In seventeen cases the eruption reached to one dozen, and in only seven of these did it amount to two dozen. The maximum number reached in any case was 125 in one instance, and in only two other cases 100 pustules are recorded as having been present. With such a sparse modified eruption, the danger of spreading is robbed of much of its terrors, while we have another element operating still further to limit the danger, in the fact that the inoculations are conducted among a protected circle of friends and attendants, and that thus, from want of pabulum to infect, the disease is confined to the individuals who have been inoculated, and does not spread to the protected community. The strict sanitary code of the Hindoos lessens the danger of contagion. 19. Besides the truth, that among a protected population, the majority of cases of inoculated small-pox, have, in ordinary seasons, little tendency to spread from the individuals inoculated, (everywhere in the neighbourhood of Calcutta at least) ancient custom and religious prejudice unite in making the people conform to rules, which, if carried out with moderate strictness, afford most material safeguards against the spread of small-pox. Thus, no inoculation is allowed in a village unless the majority of the unprotected persons can be inoculated; and the influential majority generally succeed in coercing the minority to compliance, so that practically almost all come to subject themselves to inoculation. Not only so, but it is the custom for all the unpro- tected in the village to be operated on, on the same day; while unprotected pregnant women, or others who cannot, from one cause or another, submit to the ordeal on the day fixed, in many instances seek safety from contagion, by isolating themselves in the houses of relations in other villages, until the danger has gone by. Clothes are usually not sent to the washerman till the inoculation is completed. The accumulation of twenty-one days is in most instances twice subjected to the influence of boiling water, and as it is sufficient to require a special washing day for itself, the result is, that such clothes are seldom washed at the same time as the clothes from uninfected houses. Again, Hindoos are prohibited by their religion from giving alms or food to the poor, while inoculation is going on. They are not allowed to eat fish, and are interdicted from shaving. A friend may not enter the house with his ordinary clothes, but is specially required to have a clean suit on ; while any member of an inoculated household, who has intercourse with the outside world, is thereby rendered unclean, and has to change his clothes and bathe, before he can again enter the sick chamber.
( 8 ) To the guardian of public health, such restrictions imply household quarantine of a very strict character, a quarantine rendered imperative by the sanctity of religious observance. The original framers of this Hindoo ceremonial code had evidently the danger of contagion prominently before their eyes, and fenced the affairs of every-day life in such a way as to attain their end most effectually. With a rare perception of the philosophy of human action, they put their restrictions on the ground of self-interest, and not on that of public safety. It was provided that beggars should be prevented from coming to the house, not because they might receive and communi- cate contagion to other benevolent persons, but in case they might injure those inoculated. The barber might not pursue his calling in such a house, not lest he should endanger his next customer, but in case the inoculation should be harmed. Fish being the only important article of diet requiring to be procured daily, was interdicted, not lest those going to market for it should endanger public health, but because its presence in the house was prejudicial to those concerned. A person in an infected household was prevented from associating with unprotected persons, not to save such from danger, but in case their uncleanness might prove dangerous to the inoculated; the restriction imposed being of such a harassing nature as to lead those whose avocations might tend to a frequent breaking of the rule to renounce for the time any such business, it being shrewdly surmised, that without very cogent reasons no person would subject himself to an unusual succession of baths and changes of raiment. The casual acquaintance from another village must not enter such a sick room, not to save himself from carrying the disease to his own house, but lest he should anger Siltolah, and bring down her wrath on the infected person: a special clean suit of clothes was not at his disposal, and without it, his merely passing the threshold of the sick room was declared profanation. Alternative results, should inoculation be pro- hibited. 20. There are two alternatives which roust present themselves, should variolation be prohibited ; either the Government must come for- ward and by means of large and perfectly organized establishments provide vaccination, and supply it to every district; or the country must be left unprotected and liable to be continually devastated by small-pox: either alternative is, in the present day, impossible. Question of leaving the population without any means of protection from small-pox. 21. The latter cannot be thought of in the face of the facts which have occurred even during the present century; with the details before them, of events leading to whole communities being all but swept off the face of the earth, by the ravages of unrestricted small-pox, no Government could maturely arrive at the decision, that the people should be forced to subject themselves to the not remote danger of becoming annihilated by this disease. Besides this, although, in the most turbulent times, a Brigade of English troops could march through the length and breadth of Bengal, it is open to question whe- ther the whole of the troops in the pay of Great Britain would be numerous enough to sup- press the practice of inoculation in Bengal. The people know too well the great advantage which, as individuals, they can derive from inoculation, and however stringent may be the measures intended for its prevention they will clandestinely protect themselves from small- pox, in spite of every prohibition. Question of providing vaccination for the whole of Bengal. 22. The only other alternative is, that the Government should accept the obli- gation of providing vaccination to every one deprived of the power of protecting himself by inoculation. Vaccination in India differs from vaccination in Europe in two very important respects; in the first place, the population is quite unprovided with Medical men who can vaccinate, and again, the climate for half the year is so inimical to the success of vaccination that private enterprise can never be expected to be able to keep up a continuation of effective virus, during the hot and rainy months. Even if in succeeding centuries, medical aid such as is to be found in Europe, should be provided for the people, while the temperature in the unfavorable months remains the same, the practice of vaccination will always continue to be practically impossible through private agency. Vacci- nation in this country is essentially an exotic. In a Hill climate or during the cold months in the plains it flourishes with a vigour and facility of propagation seldom equalled, and nowhere sur- passed.When the weather becomes warmer a change ensues. Superinduced inflammatory results, from trivial causes, interfere with success. The virus degenerates, an inflammatory sore and not
( 9 ) a protective vaccination is liable to follow the operation, and in this way the supply of virus is apt suddenly to be brought to an end. In temperate countries such a result matters little, because the virus, if not procurable in the neighbourhood, can be easily obtained at once from a central source. It is true that during any day of the year, virus in an active state can be des- patched from Calcutta, but a memorandum accompanies each despatch, pointing out the possibility of the virus losing its virtue before arrival at its destination ; so that a great practical difficulty exists during the hot season in India, which has no existence in Europe at any time of the year. Theoretically it would no doubt be possible in ,a long course of years to make Bengal a vaccinated country, but in reality the expense entailed on the Government would be so enormous as practically to negative any such proposition. CHAPTER III. Regulation of Inoculation. Additional restrictive measures falling on indivi- duals and not on communities. 23. Such sanitary regulations as those detailed in paragraph 19 have taken firm root in the minds of the Hindoos. They are arbitrary and vexatious to such an extent that a temporal power could hardly expect to be able to ensure compliance with them, though superstition has succeeded in having them carried out among large com- munities, with surprising strictness. In the course of a careful supervision of the practical work- ing of inoculation, it may be found necessary to add to such rules, or even in certain districts to enforce compliance with measures having a similar tendency, but falling less lightly on those who are to observe them. Any such further restrictions, however, that may be found necessary, will probably be required to coerce certain dangerous individuals, and will not fall at all heavily on the community. Special information regarding the Mahomedan population will require to be collected. It is believed that in most places they conform closely to the Hindoo customs, and as they comply with the sanitary restrictions of the ceremonial code already in existence, it seems probable that they will not form an exception to the above observations. They are operated on by Hindoo Inoculators, who guide them in all matters connected with the practice. I have not heard of any occasions of the Mahomedans worshiping Sittolah, but I believe that they go so far as sometimes to procure Ganges water; it is usual for them to place votive offerings on the &quot; Ghâtt&quot; in an orthodox manner, so that prayers may be offered up to Sittolah by the Hindoo operators. Advantage of making known certain precautions proper to observe. 24. There is not, for the present, evidence to shew that any compulsory measure is needed. It might be well, however, to make known extensively, the great advantage to be derived from certain precautions. The sense of self-preservation alone, would lead to their adoption in most cases, and accomplish a certain amount of good, without proving irksome, or causing any possible hardship. As instances of what has now been alluded to, the following may be enumerated. The head of the village should be directed to use his influence to reconcile contending parties, and secure the whole village being inoculated at once. He should advise those who would not or could not join thus, to leave the village for a short time, or to seclude themselves as much as possible, from mingling with those from infected houses. He should encourage all the villagers, before the inoculation, to lay in any necessary articles they were likely to require during such period, as well as to dispose of any of their possessions, which it might be necessary to sell at that particular time, before the inoculation was commenced. In general terms he should point out to the villagers the propriety of their confining themselves to their own village, and not frequenting places of public resort, as háts, &c., till the danger of their spreading small-pox is at an end. Following out the same principle, he might be asked to give the heads of the neighbour- ing villages notice, that inoculation was going to take place, so that they may give warning in their own villages that the infected locality should be avoided. Any such notification should embrace the fewest possible points, and be embodied in a few familiar words, to prevent all possibility of misapprehension. Registration of Inoculators. Returns to be required of them. 25. The first step in the regulation of inoculation consists in having every inoculator's name registered, and obliging each man to report his operations. In this way the executive would be in a position to know of the exact amount of safety with which each inoculator could operate, and be in a position to suspend him or otherwise punish
( 10 ) him, should the loss of life resulting from his practising as an inoculator, render such a measure necessary. For the purpose of being registered, he might be required to appear annually at the Police Station nearest to the villages in which he proposes to work, and have his name enrolled on a Register kept for this purpose, making known his habitual place of residence to the Police; his personal description and recognizable marks being noted at the same time, so that he might less readily evade pursuit, if he did not comply with the law. This registration would involve little else than the necessity for supplying Returns of his operations with their results. Probably in after-years the mere statement that he had inocu- lated so many people, of whom so many had died, would suffice; but for the present it seems in the highest degree desirable that he should be made to provide a nominal return of all cases, so that such might be checked, in every instance in which the necessity arose, and such deception as unreported deaths be rendered more difficult. Many of the inoculators cannot write, but this objection loses much of its weight, when we consider that most of them being Brahmins or Acharjees, have only to ask any Sudra in the village, to do them such a service as filling in a return, to have it performed at once, while Mallees and Coomars are' also very favorably circumstanced in this respect. Responsibilities of Head men, Zemindar's Agents, and Chowkeedars. 26. The head man of each village, the Mundalls, Putwarrees, or similar persons where such can be found, and the Zemindar's Agents might be held responsible for this return being correct. To insist on their being personally responsible for every name and figure would prove a burden to them, but in the matter of an unreported death, they might be held liable to a heavy fine, as in these small village communities they are always personally cognisant of such occurrences, and nothing but deliberate intention to deceive could lead to such false reports on their part. In rural districts the same agency should be held responsible that every case of small- pox as well as of deaths resulting therefrom, occurring in the village within two months of the inoculation being practised, should be reported to the Police through the village Chowkee- dars; and in Towns, the Municipality or Punchayet might be held responsible for this duty. In this way the danger of contagion may soon be correctly estimated, and data will be available for preparing any further rules that may be required. Returns to be collected, and abstracts prepared, and reviewed. 27. The nominal returns collected at the Police Stations might be forwarded in abstract, to the District Officers, who might be requested to forward them all when collected to the Commissioner of the Division, together with a general summary of the results reported in the whole District. The Commissioner might deal in the same way with the general summaries collected from the several Districts; and when the reports from each Division had been received, they might be compiled in the Bengal Office. When so prepared, if submitted to the Head of the Medical Department, to the Sanitary Commissioner for Bengal, to the Superintendent-General of Vaccination, or any other Officer, on whose judgment, and personal familiarity with detail, the Government are prepared to place confidence, a mass of material, more or less fitted to guide to a more perfect appreciation of the exact advantages and drawbacks connected with the practice of small-pox inoculation in Bengal, would be available for analysis and criticism. Value of data so procured. 28. It is not pretended that such a document would be reliable in the sense of very strict scientific accuracy. Negligence, fraud, and other causes, might very possibly combine to prevent it from being a trustworthy record, in this respect. With the aid, however, of an intelligent criticism, much error would be excluded, and subsequent enquiries on any reports, which seemed suspicious, would assist in still further narrowing the risks of mistake. A record would thus be provided on a basis of a sufficiently trustworthy nature, to guide to further action in a matter so important and at the same time so difficult. Results to be expected from such registration. 29. It will thus be seen that the proposed amount of regulation of the inoculation taking place in Bengal, will serve on the one hand to ensure caution on the part of the operators, while it will also serve to collect statistical information bearing on the general subject. While it is not pretended that either indication will be fulfilled in a very perfect or absolute manner, yet it may confidently be affirmed that very satisfactory results will be obtained, which will well repay the trouble involved in the measure.
( 11 ) Not advisable for the present to interfere with the procedure of the Inoculators. Heavy mortality in- explicable 30. It will be seen that the subject of interference with the procedure, of inoculation has been studiously avoided. It is possible that in some parts of the country it may be found advisable to furnish the inoculators with short rules, which they should be invited to follow, with precautions which they should keep in mind, as well as with hints on the general mode of conducting their work. For the present, any such measure would be hazardous, and would be much more efficiently had recourse to, when we are acquainted with special faults or shortcomings, which it would be desirable to guard them against. The question has been carefully considered of requiring the inoculators to note by means of witnesses, the source from which their virus has been derived, whether taken by themselves or bought from a vendor of it, with the view of punishing them for ill consequences, in the event of their being proved to have taken it from a case of small-pox known to have been an unfavorable one for the purpose. It seems, however, for the present, better not to take action in this way, but to wait to see whether the mere knowledge that their operations are watched by the Government, will not ensure all the necessary care on their part. It may be right while on this subject, to point out to Government, that a careful selection of the small-pox cases from which to inoculate, may influence the result to the extent of a few individual deaths per cent.; but when the mortality reaches to the heavy ratio of 30 or 50 per cent., as in the cases cited in paragraph 2, the result in the present state of our knowledge seems quite inexplicable. The mortality from small-pox among large numbers of persons who have been vaccinated, is very much the same every where; in the same way, small-pox, among unprotected persons, has a death-rate, which though influenced by climate and race is surprisingly regular ; inoculated small-pox also obeys the rule of its death-rate being a fractionally small one. That only a certain small number of persons out of every thousand should die after being inoculated with the virus chosen from a slight case of small-pox, is as much a law of nature, as any of which we have cognisance within the limits of Medical experience. Allowing this to be the case, it is a matter for very great regret, that at the time when such extravagant and incredible assertions were made, as that a third or half of those operated on died in any given instances, a searching enquiry should not have been at once instituted, to verify or disprove alleged facts, which it is difficult to believe, seeing they are so much at variance with the well ascertained and carefully matured knowledge on the subject. Time for commencing such regulation. 31. It is of importance that the results collected, should contain as much information as possible extending over the whole of the next inoculating season. In the neighbourhood of Calcutta, this would be attained, and abundance of time for preparation would be allowed, if the regulation were to come into operation on the 1st of January 1869. CHAPTER IV. Further investigation concerning Inoculation necessary. Exact information regarding the proportion of pro- tected persons to the population is necessary. 32. When the scantiness of the available data on which to estimate the degree of pro- tection which exists in the country against small-pox is considered, the conviction will doubtless be felt, that though it is conclusive so far as it goes, it is of too meagre a description to found very active or sweeping measures on. To remedy the restricted nature of such data is a desideratum of the first importance. With exact information regarding the percentage of protection against small-pox which exists in each particular district, the question of preventing the ravages of small-pox in it will be much simplified. The enquiry ought to embrace all the three sources of protection, and include, under distinct headings, the number protected by previous attacks of small-pox, by inoculation and by vaccination, as well as the numbers devoid of all protection. Proposal for ascertaining the ratio of protected persons. 33. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of protection against small-pox, any general census must be excluded from the means at our command, as independently of the magnitude of the task any agency available for such a purpose would be quite untrustworthy.
( 12 ) Prisoners, Police and Dispensary patients, furnish three sources however, which would provide reliable data, and with obvious restrictions would serve to supply the want. If, there- fore, every person coming for advice to any Government Dispensary were examined and report- ed on, as regards this particular, on a given day, and the state of the Police down to the village Chowkeedars was also so reported on, much valuable information on important pdints could be gained. As regards prisoners, if a similar examination were required, it might be instituted. It is believed that a record has for some time been kept in every Jail in Bengal which will serve to furnish most valuable evidence on the point. It is most desirable that, from this record, a statement should be furnished, prepared in a tabular form, and including the results available for each year, up to the end of 1868. In the case of prisoners and Dispensary patients, Medical agency could be secured for this investigation, and the data collected would be of a reliable nature. Exact information regarding both the direct and indirect mortality from inoculation, and more pre- cise particulars regarding the practice is desirable. 34. The information we possess regarding the practice of small-pox inoculation in Bengal is not only very scanty, but it is at the same time very defective in several important particulars : exact statistical information is much wanted. With- out such guidance, very much uncertainty regarding its fitness, must be inseparably connected with every measure which may be proposed, to place the population on a better footing as regards small-pox. Reliable information regarding the percentage of direct mortality among inoculated persons, in different parts of the country, should be at once collected. The investigation should also embrace an enquiry into various other particulars, regard- ing the practice of inoculation; as for instance into the subject of the usual characters which the secondary eruption presents, and the course that it most commonly runs. An attempt should also be made, with care, to discover the frequency or otherwise with which small-pox spreads from inoculated persons in the different districts. Proposal for a Medical Commission to collect precise information regarding inoculation. 35. As the data collected about the practice of inoculating, with regard to occurrences taking place during the course of its performance, would be confessedly defective as regards trustworthi- ness, when culled from the reports of the inoculators, it would be highly advantageous to supplement such information on a small scale, by evidence collected in an irreproachable manner. A special Commission of Medical men appointed to collect the information required seems to be the simplest as well as the most reliable method of securing such evidence. Any such Commission acting as a body in one part of the country would prove to be expensive and cumbersome. It is proposed, therefore, that half a dozen districts should be chosen, and the Civil Surgeons be invited to become Members of such a Commission, to watch the inoculation which takes place nearest to them. The selected stations should be at considerable' distances one from the other; so that the results arrived at may be taken to represent fairly the general average throughout Bengal. That such Commissioners could watch the whole of the inocula- tions in the neighbourhood of their stations for the whole season is not to be expected. A few hundreds, carefully tabulated, would suffice, and the general aggregate would be large enough to serve as a trustworthy guide. If each Civil Surgeon who was chosen were to devote a week to the enquiry, the days in which he was thus employed being scattered over a longer period, the information required could be obtained. General mode of working which such a Commission should pursue. 36. The general mode in which such a commission might work would be as follows: two or three inoculators who were about to conduct their operations within a few miles of the Civil Surgeon's residence, would require to be gained over, and their assistance secured for the purposes of the enquiry. A Native Doctor, or other subordinate, who could write the Vernacular, would be sent with the inoculator to fill in the names and other particulars, into a form provided for the purpose. When the inoculation was at its height, the Civil Surgeon might compare the names and results tabulated for him, with such inoculated persons, and thus satisfy himself of its correctness. After some days he might again inspect each individual, to satisfy himself of the general condition of the survivors, and to make sure that no deaths in excess of those reported by the Native Doctor had taken place. Besides this, he would have to take measures, to keep himself informed regarding any cases of spontaneous small-pox which might occur afterwards. With such data each Member of the Commission could furnish a report on the inoculation he had witnessed, and the President might furnish a general summary of the whole, with a report, embracing the various points brought out by such enquiry, for the Government.
( 13 ) Time at which the Commission should conduct the investigation. 37. Were it determined to organize such a Commission as that now recommended a suitable time for the necessary observations would be in the month of February 1870. Since before the investigation could be commenced, several preliminary arrangements requiring correspondence, and involving some time for their completion, would have to be made, an early expression of the wishes of the Government on the subject is desirable.
(RESOLUTION.) JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. Medical. Fort William, the 7th January 1870. THIS report was originally forwarded to Government on the 20th of September, and was even then long after date. The tabular statements proved, however, on examination to be both inaccurate and incomplete, and it was not till the 30th of November that correct copies of the report were sub- mitted for orders. The Lieutenant-Governor hopes that this may not occur again, and that the form which has been adopted in Table A. seq. may be carefully followed in future; but with separate sub-totals for the operations in Calcutta with its Suburbs and in the Metropolitan Circles. 2. The following table exhibits the result of vaccine operations throughout Bengal during the year 1868-69 :( 2 ) be discovered is open to no suspicion and proves on the whole effectual. The Lieutenant-Governor sees no objection to the issue of stringent orders to the police to report at once to the Vaccine Superintendent the occurrence of any case of small-pox within the city or suburbs. This will enable the vaccinators to direct their operations to infected localities. It would also perhaps, in the event of a threatening of epidemic, be advisable to direct the Superintendent of vaccination to prosecute, under Section 269 of the Indian Penal Code, any person who might be discovered unlawfully or negligently spreading infection. The following note upon the section by Messrs. Morgan and Macpherson will show how far it is applicable :( 3 ) already made in regard to the appointment of a separate Superintendent- General on an enhanced salary. 13. The suggestion made by Dr. Charles in his second report, that municipal vaccinators should be sent down to Calcutta in the recess, for training, appears to the Lieutenant-Governor worthy of adoption. Dr. Charles' is at liberty to communicate on this matter with the Chairmen of those municipa- lities which entertain vaccinators, all expense being of course borne by the municipalities. The question of the ultimate disposal of municipal vaccinators does not at present arise. 14. The third of the special reports submitted, deals with the question of regulating inoculation where it cannot be entirely suppressed. Briefly stated Dr. Charles's argument is this. It is impossible for Government, save at a cost which cannot now be contemplated, to provide vaccination for the whole of the people of Bengal. Properly effected vaccination, even in India, is a protection against small-pox, while it is not attended with those dangers to the individual and the community which accompany inoculation. On the other hand, inocu- lation, when practised under proper conditions, is not so destructive to life, as it is usually supposed to be by English practitioners, while its prophylactic effects are recognised popularly throughout India by natives of all classes. In default of a complete vaccine system it is suggested that it would be wise not to prohibit, but to regulate inoculation. To this end it is proposed that heads of villages should use their influence to secure the inoculation of all the unprotected inhabitants at one and the same time; and to prevent the associ- ation of the inoculated with the unprotected during the period of affection. Inoculators should, it is further suggested, be registered and compelled to report their cases and results ; Zemindars and such like being responsible for this being done. For the purpose of ascertaining what amount of protection from small-pox is afforded by inoculation, and what its effects are, it is then proposed that statistics from Jails, the Police, and Dispensaries should be obtained; and that Civil Surgeons of several selected districts be directed to enquire systematically into, and to observe the results of inoculation in their immediate neighbourhood. 15. The general remark made upon Dr. Charles's propositions by the Inspector-General of Hospitals, in paragraph 28 of his covering report, does not lead the Lieutenant-Governor to the conclusion that the Inspector-General has given as much consideration to these suggestions as they seem to deserve. It is desirable that no doubt should exist on a point of such vital importance to the country as that raised by Dr. Charles. It is questionable indeed, if his conclu- sions be correct, whether the tendency of Government legislation and of the executive action taken upon that legislation has been altogether correct. Commissioners will now be requested to report on the subject after consulting Magistrates and Civil Surgeons, and, on receipt of their replies, the Inspector- General of Hospitals will be requested to reconsider the matter and submit, for the information of Government, the views which he may form in the light of the opinions so collated. 16. Darjeeling Circle.( 4 ) 17. Ranchee Circle.REPORT ON VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS THROUGHOUT THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL WITH AN APPENDIX FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1869. BY J. MURRAY, ESQ., M. D., INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, 1869.
REPORT ON THE VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1870. BY J. MURRAY, ESQ., M.D., Inspector Genaral of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. Calcutta: PRINTED AT THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT OFFICE. 1870.
REPORT OF THE VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1870. BY J. MURRAY, ESQ., M.D., Inspector General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. Calcutta: PRINTED AT THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT OFFICE. 1870.
INDEX. Page. INSPECTOR GENERAL'S REPORT TO GOVERNMENT ON VACCINATION ... ... ... 1 VACCINATION IN CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS, BY DR. CHARLES ... ... ... 1 REPORT FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION, METROPOLITAN CIRCLES ... 4 DITTO DITTO DITTO, DARJEELING CIRCLE ... ... 10 DITTO DITTO DITTO, RANCHEE CIRCLE ... ... 14 REPORT FROM THE SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEON OF VACCINATION, SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS ... 16 TABLE A ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 STATEMENTNo. 809A. FROM THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL. Fort William, the 11th October 1870. SIR, I HAVE the honor to forward the reports of the officers in charge of the several vaccination circles and districts under your Government for the year ending 31st March 1870, with my remarks. Total number vaccinated. Ratio per cent of successful cases. 1868-69 1869-70 1868-69 1869-70. Calcutta and Suburbs .. 35,435 22,283 71.30 72.20 Metropolitan Circles ... 122,493 155,825 99.05 99.67 Darjeeling Circle .. 44,533 81,441 88.38 92.05 Ranchee Circle ... 7,904 19,101 58.42 84.15 Sonthai Pergunnahs ... 3,931 6,339 89.55 79.31 Dispensary Vaccination... 48,245 55,058 84.41 85.51 Total ... 262,541 340,050 89.44 92.64 2. The table in the margin shows the whole work during the year, with the numbers for 1868-69 placed for the sake of compari- son. Calcutta and suburbs show a decrease of 13,152 cases. The Metropolitan circles show an increase of 33,332 cases; Darjeeling circle of 36,911; Ranchee circle of 11,197; Sonthal Pergunnahs of 2,408; and vaccina- tion at dispensaries of 6,813, as compared with the returns of the preceding year; a total increase of 77,509. The percentage of successful cases has considerably increased in the operations of the Darjeeling and Ranchee circles. All the ratios of successful cases are calculated, including unknown cases in the total. The table includes re-vaccinations in the totals. The increase in the number vaccinated in dispensaries may be accounted for in the operations of 28 institutions, returns from which did not appear in the report for 1868-69. Former reports accounted only for vaccinations performed at stations to which vaccinators were attached. They now include all operations performed, excepting the sub-division of Durbunga, whence returns have not been forwarded. 3. Table A, preceding the statement in the forms directed by the Government of India,ii REPORT. return for 1868-69, or 37.11 per cent. This may be accounted for by the separation of the Metropolitan circles from the presidency vaccine establishment in October 1868. The oper- ations performed near Calcutta previous to that month were then included in the return of that establishment; not so for the year under report. There has been a marked decrease, however, in the number of persons vaccinated in the Chowringhee Depôt, Park Street Dispen- sary, and Medical College Hospital, which is to be regretted. When a dispensary has been long established, and the benefits of vaccination known and appreciated, there should be no difficulty in the results of the operations being ascertained. 5. The high rate of success is calculated &quot; on the cases which had not been previously protected, or in which the result had not been ascertained ; and excluding the work done in the emigration depôts.&quot; As this process of elimination is not generally employed in ordinary vaccine returns, the present ratios cannot be compared with them. 6. I am no advocate for continuing vaccination during the hot and rainy seasons; for while a few cases may, through extraordinary precautions, escape the ulcerations and eruptions which are so frequently the result of the operations in those seasons, the cases in which they happen destroy confidence in vaccination. 7. There was the usual occurrence of small-pox in the cold season in the city. Dr. Charles traced it to importation in two instances, and in several to inoculation; whilst in others there was no traceable cause. As this disease is equally dangerous and diffusible over the community, whether originating in contagion or inoculation, the latter practice should be carefully watched; for though a mild attack may by proper care be communicated to an individual, the danger of its spreading to the community indicates the general advantage of stopping the practice. The proportion of deaths, five in eight cases, among subjects of inoculation is very high; and Dr. Powell, in his present report on the metropolitan circles, states that 20 out of 33 outbreaks of small-pox originated from inoculated cases. 8. Metropolitan Circles.report. iii 14. The extension of the Act prohibiting inoculation to all the villages comprehended in the three Metropolitan vaccine districts, paragraph 29, is worthy of attention. 15. The Deputy Superintendents and establishment are most favorably reported on; they have worked diligently and well. 16. Darjeeling Circle.iv REPORT. 26. The reports alluded to in the concluding sentence of paragraph 15 of Resolution of 7th January last, concerning the regulation of inoculation where financial and other reasons will not allow of it being entirely suppressed, have not been received. 27. The extension of vaccination, alluded to in paragraphs 17 and 20 of my report for 1868-69, has not progressed. 28. A report will be submitted regarding the present cost of the establishment of the metropolitan circles. With the presence of a superintending medical officer, actively engaged on the work, the existing expensive native superintendence might be reduced. 29. I regret the delay which has occurred in forwarding this report. The reports from the several circles were received in good time, as also were the returns of vaccination from the Presidency and Dacca circles of medical administration. Owing to a misapprehension, the returns from the Dinapore circle were long delayed. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, JOHN MURRAY, M.D., Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department.
Extracts from the Report of the Presidency Vaccine Establishment by SURGEON T. E. CHARLES, M.D., Superintendent-General, for the year ending 31st March 1870. * Sub-Assistant Surgeons. Progress of vaccination.2 CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. this year continues, a higher ratio of success will next year be attained to than has ever yet been reached in Calcutta. Vaccination in the dispensaries.CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. 3 coerced into isolating themselves, and for its being rendered compulsory that each case of small-pox should be reported to the police. The Government declined to put in force my recommendation with regard to isolation of affected persons. I do not consider myself justi- fied in pressing for a reconsideration of this question; but as in the course of years data will be collected bearing on this point, at a future time I hope to be able to demonstrate not only how necessary the proposal is, but how easily it can be carried out. * * Neither in Calcutta nor the suburbs are the police en rapport with the population, and do not seem to hear more about small-pox than the scavengers or the casual passers-by. The people are already accustomed to report deaths in Calcutta, and could soon be taught under a compulsory law to report attacks of small-pox. These reports will now be so few in number in any given month as to constitute but little hardship; and as the mere existence of the law will lead to most persons complying with its requirements, and if prosecutions were rendered permissive and not compulsory, a large amount of good would be done without perhaps the penal clauses of the Act being once put into operation. I may instance, in confirmation of the above view, that I do not know of a single prosecution having been instituted in Calcutta under the Act prohibiting inoculation, and yet inoculation is never now practised. The order also prohibiting public con- veyances from being used by persons suffering from small-pox has been productive of much good, and I have not heard of a single punishment having been required to enforce it. In the same way, when persons know that the law requires them to report attacks of small-pox a maximum of good will result with a minimum of evil. * * * * The Nuddea Pundits' declaration.4 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. One point of great importance which he calls attention to is the fact, now established, that vaccination can be maintained throughout the year amongst the native population. I am inclined to doubt, however, if vaccination is a safe operation after the month of March for children of European parentage. * * * * * I differ from Dr. Charles in thinking that more restrictive measures are required to ensure complete segregation of small-pox cases when that disease is prevalent in Calcutta, for the reasons adverted to in Bengal Government resolution of 7th January 1870; but I do think that every possible inducement should be held out to those who have not the means of isolating small-pox cases in their own homes or homesteads to send all such cases to the hospital at Sealdah. A most important question connected with the extension of vaccination is that of making it self-supporting. As far as I can see, the only bar to the universal introduction of vaccina- tion as a substitute for inoculation is the great expense which would attend the measure. Our efforts therefore should be directed to the establishment, in those districts where vaccination has been for some years carried on, of a system whereby all families bene- fitting by the labors of the vaccine department (except the very poor) should be called upon to pay a small charge for the vaccine operation. Inoculators working in Bengal are always paid for their labor, and as soon as vaccination is recognised by the masses as an effectual protection against small-pox, I see no reason why the Superintendent-General should not be authorized to instruct his vaccinators to demand a small fee, say four annas. Assuredly no Government will be able to extend the benefits derivable from vaccination throughout the country unless it not only is universally accepted as a benefit, but is sought and paid for. I am afraid the Government will consider that Dr. Charles's report is too diffuse, seeing that this point was strongly commented on in paragraph 20 of the Government resolution above adverted to. * * * * * Annual Report of the Metropolitan Circles of Vaccination for the year ending 31st March 1870, by SURGEON F. POWELL, M.B., Superintendent. 1. THE three metropolitan circles of vaccination remained under the general superin- tendence of the Superintendent-General at Calcutta until the 4th of December, on which date I received charge of the same from Dr. Charles. 2. The three deputy superintendents employed previously in these circles have con- tinued in officeTHE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 5 Kishengunge, Jeebunnugger, Santipore, Ranaghat, Chogdoho, and Jagoolee, a tract of country some forty miles from north to south and twenty from east to west, approximating 800 square miles. In this the vaccinators worked systematically in 926 villages, besides vaccinat- ing in several scattered villages, to arrest the spread of small-pox in places beyond these eight thannahs. The portion protected this year by the vaccinators of the second circle is contiguous to that overtaken by the first circle, extending the protected tract of country more to the north, and being contiguous to the river and Eastern Bengal Railway. 8. Third metropolitan circle.6 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. their work. Removing the vaccinators from their systematic work to stamp out small-pox, which was frequently necessary in this as in the other circles, interrupted the systematic work. 17. The area vaccinated.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 7 23. In my notes of subsequent inspections I have been more precise as to the date on which inspections were made than in these earlier tours: the several tours can therefore be thrown together into a table, which I subjoin. Seen subsequent to the 12th day. Vaccinated in 4 points, of which these were successful. Vaccinated in 2 points, of which these were successful. Doubtful Sore arms. Compared with regis- ters. Total number seen. Absent accounted for. Total number vaccinat- ed in the villages inspected. 4 3 2 1 Failed. 2 1 Failed. 1st circle in January ... ... ... 4,349 31 7 3 3 22 2 ... ... 65 3,421 4,482 301 4,783 2nd circle in February ... ... ... 3,992 51 8 4 5 42 2 ... ... 39 3,965 4,113 606 4,749 1st circle in March ... ... ... 434 1 ... ... ... 16 ... ... ... 7 458 458 56 514 3rd circle in March ... ... ... ... 189 2 1 ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 194 194 37 231 1st circle in March ... ... ... 591 5 ... ... 5 6 1 ... ... 6 614 614 43 657 Total ... ... ... 9,555 90 16 7 13 87 6 ... ... 117 8,652 9,891 1,043 10,934 Seen from 9th to 12th clay. 1st circle in January ... ... 216 5 ... ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 213 225 13 238 2nd circle in February ... ... 906 6 1 ... 1 3 ... ... ... 4 921 921 40 961 1st circle in March ... ... ... 209 2 ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 214 214 29 243 3rd circle in March ... ... ... 183 1 1 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... 189 189 18 207 1st circle in March ... ... ... 116 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 ... 121 121 5 126 Total ... ... ... 1,630 16 2 ... 1 16 ... ... 1 4 1,658 1,670 105 1,775 Seen from 5th to 8th clay. 1st circle in January ... ... ... 285 9 1 1 2 1 ... ... ... 2 301 301 24 325 2nd circle in February ... ... ... 1,394 46 7 3 7 2 ... ... ... 7 1,466 1,466 75 1,541 1st circle in March ... ... ... 335 7 ... ... ... 4 ... ... 2 ... 348 348 12 360 3rd circle in March ... ... ... 393 15 5 3 1 4 ... ... 1 ... 422 422 14 436 1st circle in March ... ... ... 126 7 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 ... 137 137 2 139 Total ... ... 2,533 84 13 7 10 13 ... ... 5 9 2,674 2,674 127 2,801 Seen from 1st to 4th day Vaccinated in 4 points. Vaccinated in 2 points. Compared with registers. Total number seen. Absent accounted for. Total number vaccinated in the villages inspected. REMARKS. 1st circle in January ... 155 ... 155 155 13 167 These cases were too recent to be able to judge of the result. 2nd circle in February ... 194 ... 194 194 17 211 1st circle in March ... 146 1 147 147 15 162 3rd circle in march ... 157 2 159 159 11 170 1st circle in March ... ... 12 ... 12 12 ... 12 Total ..... 664 3 667 667 55 722 Summary. Vaccinated in 4 points, of which these were successful. Vaccinated in 2 points, of which these were successful. Doubtful. Sore arms. Compared with registers. Total number seen. 4 3 2 1 Failed. 2 1 Failed. Seen after 12 days ... ... ... 9,555 90 16 7 13 87 6 ... ... 117 8,652 9,891 Ditto from 9th to 12th day ... 1,630 16 2 ... 1 16 ... ... 1 4 1,698 1,670 Ditto 5th to 8th day 2,533 84 13 7 10 13 ... ... 5 9 2,674 2,674 Ditto 5th day and after in Amptah, &c. ... 6,617 34 12 2 3 88 5 ... 3 1,615 6,764 Cases seen before 4th day ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 667 667 Total ... 20,335 224 43 16 27 204 11 ... 9 130 15,270 21,666 24. The cases noted as having sore arms are those in which either from violence or some skin disease the vesicle has been so much injured and destroyed as to render it difficult or impossible at the time I saw the case to decide on the success or otherwise of the
8 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. operation. I should feel disposed to include the cases which occur early amongst the doubt- ful cases, thus raising this class from 9 to 22, and exclude the 117 cases altogether from the calculation; as, had they been seen earlier, the success of the operation might have been determined; the protective power of vaccinia is not annulled by injury after the twelfth day. Excluding these 117 cases we haveTHE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 9 mild attacks of small-pox. One child was, however, reported to have died. In another village they had inoculated in one parah during the night, the other parah was vaccinated some short time after. In the inoculated parah two had died from inoculated small-pox. I saw three who were permanently much disfigured as in natural small-pox. Several others were less severely affected; but in consequence of the introduction of small-pox by inoculation, one man previously inoculated had confluent small-pox, and was, when I saw him, in great danger, and a bad child, considered too young for inoculation, was suffering from small-pox. &quot; They had taken the poison with their own hands,&quot; they said, &quot; and must abide the result.&quot; On inquiry why they did not adopt our English system, they said they did not know of it, did not understand it, they would do so in future; showing no hostility to the practice, but they had acted partly from ignorance, and partly, no doubt, from following in the steps of their forefathers. 29. The precautions which are described in Dr. Charles's report of last year as usually adopted in villages where inoculation has been practised are well calculated to prevent the spread of the small-pox; but these precautions are not always strictly observed. One infringe- ment of the rules, by which intercourse between the infected and non-infected villages is restricted, is permitted in the cases of near relatives, who are permitted to visit their friends suffering from small-pox, induced either by inoculation or naturally, and then return to their own residence. The infection is therefore not confined to the spot, but spreads far and near; every inoculated village becomes a focus of small-pox infection, from which the disease spreads, and then this department is called on to stamp it out. I think it well worthy of consideration if the Act which prohibits inoculation in Calcutta and some few adjacent places might not be much more widely extended, even if it were not made co-extensive with the metropolitan circles. 30. Attitude of the people.10 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. The gossains of Khurdah and the gooroos of Bhatparrah, notwithstanding having seen the benefits of vaccination when practised in their neighbourhood year after year, obstinately refused to take the prophylactic heretofore. However it affords me a great satisfaction to report that after several meetings amongst themselves, and arguments with me and others who could enlighten them on the superior efficacy of vaccination over inoculation as a preventive of small-pox, they have given in; but I am sorry to say that as they consented to have their children vaccinated on the very eve of our working season, I could not protect them to a man, as I wished.&quot; 34. The following extracts from the report of Deputy Superintendent Ram Soonder Ghose possess great interest:DARJEELING CIRCLE. 11 Vaccination in the hills during February and March 1870 has not, however, given me satisfaction. I regret to be obliged to report that one of the Lepchas employed absented himself during the whole two months, and a fitting substitute could not be found till April. A Nepalese, who has been employed before, and who was favorably reported on by my predecessor, has been entertained in his stead. The other two hill vaccinators are Lepchas; and in February, when the weather was cool, they were instructed to operate at Pankabaree and Kurseong on the direct route from the Terai sub-division, where a few cases of small-pox had occurred. They left these stations on the plea that the lymph sent them had failed, and when supplied with a fresh stock they continued to reside in Darjeeling and work in the neighbouring tea gardens. After my arrival at Darjeeling, on the 22nd March, being attacked by a severe fever, I could not get out for some weeks to make inspections. My illness was taken advantage of by the vaccinators to be very idle, and an examination of their cases shows a result very inferior to that of the ordinary vaccinators in the plains. The Lepcha vaccinators, however, I find have to work among a remarkably dirty class of people, and are themselves by no means cleanly. They are so remarkably low in the scale of civilization, that it is excessively difficult to get them to pay proper attention to the instructions given them. The vaccinations in the hills during April, May, June, September, and October 1869, and February and March 1870, amount to 1,856. No operations took place in July and August, it having been found that the constant rain in these months had the effect of producing an inferior vesicle and interfered seriously with both the work and its inspection. This proceeding is authorised by the Inspector-General of Hospitals. The Nepalese employed in the tea gardens do not appear to like vaccination, and frequently decline it. The Lepchas accept it more freely. The objection of the former does not apparently arise from any caste prejudice, but from a disinclination to submit to any inconvenience when there is no immediate danger of small-pox. 3. On arrival at Julpigooree, on the 18th November 1869, I found that a genuine vesicle had been established in a few cases only, the first trials of lymph having failed; from these the vaccinators of Julpigooree and the Western Dooars were supplied with lymph. To avoid delay in this district I proceeded to Fallacotta, in the &quot;Western Dooars, and saw the work well commenced there in some Mech villages. The road to the east from the sub-division station of Fallacotta having apparently been abandoned, inspection in the country lying between it and Haldebaree will in future be almost impracticable without elephants. The work of the vaccinators in Julpigooree and the Western Dooars was seen in February and March, and though under the especial supervision of the deputy superintendents, was neither so successful in results or numbers as might have been expected under an officer of such experience. Three men had let their supply of lymph die out in February, and were using crusts. They were heavily fined. The Julpigoree district includes the Terai sub-division of Darjeeling, and here in February an outbreak of small-pox was reported by the police. The deputy superintendent and a vaccinator were immediately deputed to visit the villages affected, and the disease, as was the case the year before, turned out to be measles. Careful inquiry, however, discovered nine cases of small-pox in one village, which had been introduced from the neighbourhood of Titalyah, where it had been established by inoculation. Vaccina- tion prevented the disease spreading. Another case was reported in this sub-division early in April, and a vaccinator was again sent; but the people generally declined to be operated on account of the heat of the weather. No more cases were reported. Early in February I visited the village near Titalyah, where small-pox had followed inoculation, and found that an inoculator had begun work early in November in the Purneah district, and continued his operations towards the south throughout the cold season. In the village above referred to there was a family of Mussulmans who objected to inoculation, and received the con- tagion of small-pox from those operated on. One had died. Those who had not suffered submitted to vaccination after its benefits had been sufficiently explained to them, though they had declined it at first. Krisna Prosad, the vaccinator, here exerted himself so well during the time when small-pox might have spread, that his conduct contrasts favorably with that of the other men in the district. Cooch Behar. 4. Vaccination operations were commenced this year for the first time in the state of Cooch Behar, an establishment of one native superintendent and five vaccinators being employed. The native superintendent was taken ill immediately after arriving at the station, and died in December. On the 28th November I found that there had been no failure of lymph here, and the work had been pro- gressing since the beginning of the month. The vaccinators had not been despatched sufficiently early to their stations; one of them arriving at his on the 30th November, one day before I did. In spite of these drawbacks I am glad to be able to report that vaccination made good progress for its first season, and that a report in January from the deputy superintendent, who visited the station, of every vaccination was uniformly favorable. In March I returned to the western part of the state, visiting Mechligunge and
12 DARJEELING CIRCLE. its neighbourhood, and was perfectly satisfied with the vaccine operations both as to quality and number. An outbreak of small-pox in the end of February at Chengrabanda, on the Julpigoree and Cooch Behar road, having been brought to my notice by the deputy commissioner, my inquiries could elicit no information of the source to which the disease could be traced. The people at first declined vaccination on the plea that many of them had been vaccinated the year before by a native doctor from Cooch Behar, and had suffered from small-pox equally with those who had not accepted the operation. An examination of the arms of a large number failed to' show a single vaccine cicatrix of any kind. Opera- tions of this nature tend to bring vaccination into the worst repute with the people, and I had great trouble in impressing upon them that they had been imposed upon, and in getting them to agree to be operated on again. The disease did not spread. A few cases afterwards occurred in other parts of the state, and an epidemic of chicken-pox. No serious outbreak of small-pox, so far as I could learn, was afterwards anywhere observed. The total opera- tions in this state during the season were 7,501. Rungpoor. 5. The district of Rungpoor was the next visited. Here I have the assistance of a native superintendent trained under Dr. Pearson in Rohilkund, and every where I found his work well attended to, and the character of the vesicle exceedingly good. In the English native and girls' schools at Rungpoor opera- tions had been performed, and the children of some of the court amlah had been vaccinated. In only one part of the district, in a jaghire belonging to the Cooch Behar rajah, was it reported that the people rejected vaccination, most of the wealthy zemindars accepting it for their families. There was small-pox in this district in the neighbourhood of Peergunge thannah, produced by inoculation, the native superintendent stated; but on the arrival of a vaccinator the inoculator appears to have left the place, and the disease did not spread. Small-pox broke out at Kakeena, on the Teesta, in the month of January, and was checked by vaccination. In the beginning of April it re-appeared in two places in the district; but on account of the heat, and cholera being prevalent, the people declined vaccination. Bograh. 6. Small-pox was reported in the jurisdiction of the Suryakandee police sub-division, in the Bograh district, in the end of the month of November, and a vaccinator had been working there since the beginning of the season, and I found on examination that wherever a case was reported to him he had vaccinated all the unprotected people in the village with the result of checking the disease in four or five different places. In only one village had the disease been concealed, and when I visited it there were nine persons suffering from small-pox. The vaccinator had several times passed this village, but no information had been given him. It was not till several fatal cases had occurred, and the chowkeedar had been obliged to report them to the police, that the matter was known. After talking the subject of vaccination over with some of the head men the people generally accepted it, and no more cases of small-pox occurred in the village. The origin of this general appearance of small-pox over a considerable area I was unable to discover. In February and March, however, the magistrate of the district reported a general use of inoculation, especially in the jurisdiction of thannah Modhoopoor, and the consequent spread of small-pox in an epidemic form not only in that sub-division but several others. No measure was taken to put a stop to the work of the inoculators, who appear not to have taken the usual precautions to prevent the spread of small-pox after inoculation. All the strength of the vaccine establishment in the Bograh district was brought to bear on this epidemic, and continued its efforts up to the 15th April, when the native superintendent reported that, from the heat, vaccination was followed by so much inflammation that the people were most unwilling to submit to the operation. The last report was that the disease was abating, as it usually does with the appearance of the dry west winds. If this outbreak was not produced in the first instance by inoculation, it certainly owed the epidemic character it afterwards assumed to it. Inoculation was clearly unnecessary, as there were five Government vaccinators in the district, and the people were being vaccinated freely. In such cases I submit that magistrates should have some authority to control the operations of inoculators, which are being clearly followed by small-pox. I am aware that it would be a great hardship to the people to forbid inoculation entirely where Government has not established vaccination; but some provision of law, under which magis- trates might act when its results are obviously mischievous, would be most useful. Vaccina- tion has made better progress in the district of Bograh than in any other, the native superintendent, Tugmul Hossen, having introduced arm-to-arm vaccination ; ivory slips being rarely used by his subordinates except in cases where lymph has to be carried to considera- ble distances. I beg to bring the excellent services of this man prominently to the notice of the Inspector-General of Hospitals. He is one of the most hard-working and conscientious natives whom I ever met. He had to conduct the superintendence of the Bograh and Rajshahye districts, in both of which there was small-pox during last cold season. For this double duty he has only received the pay of the other native superintendents. He is well
DARJEELING CIRCLE. 13 worthy of some gratuity from the local Government, as the work has been very arduous and has been performed with zeal. Rajshahye. 7. There are five vaccinators employed in the Rajshahye district, two of them in and about the town of Rampore Beauleah, one in the large native town Nattore, and the other two at district thannahs. Three vaccinators are supported by the local funds of Nattore, and two of them did good work during the season. I supplied them with instruments and had their returns made in the prescribed forms. The Government vaccinator at Nattore was the first whose work was visited. He is the old dispensary vaccinator, having been employed there for about twelve years. In many of the small villages composing the outskirts of the town only two or three cases could be shown, the rest of the inhabitants having been protected in previous years. Some men who had been vaccinated in their youth could show good cicatrices. Further from the town numerous cases were found. There seemed to have been little inoculation here for some; time but near Lallpore thannah, twenty miles to the south of Nattore, the majority of the people had been protected in this way, the vaccinator having few cases of operation over three years of age. In and about Rampore Beauleah there was small-pox throughout most of the cold season; in some cases introduced from other districts, in others the result of inoculation. It was kept in check by vaccination, and Inever learned that it really became epidemic. There was an inoculator in this district who tried to discredit vaccination by informing the people that its good effects lasted only for three years. In the neighbourhood of his village, however, vaccination was going on, but the people inquired of me the truth as to his state- ments, evidently not quite satisfied about the real protective nature of vaccination. Dinagepore. 8. In the Dinagepore district there are six vaccinators under a Hindoo native superintendent, one of the three trained in Rohilkund under Dr. Pearson. This man has a thorough acquaintance with his work, but I do not find him so trustworthy or zealous as the other two. All the men under him are Hindoos and formerly inoculators, and are fond of following their old irregular practice of visiting a village here and there at pleasure instead of following the systematic plan of vaccinating from village to village without passing over any, and so efficiently protecting one part of a district before passing to another. I find that inoculators do not appear to have the same standing among the people when employed as vaccinators as men who have never been inoculators. There is much greater difficulty in getting the people to show those vaccinated by old inocu- lators than by the ordinary men of the department. The inoculators, too, usually seem to sneak into the villages, not walking openly in and asking the people to produce those vaccinated for my inspection. The practice of giving service to inoculators as vaccinators may have served the purpose of checking the custom of inoculation in places, but I think the department is entitled to look for more worthy and respectable subordinates than are usually found among the inoculator class. Small-pox appeared in two sub-divisions of the Dinagepore district during the cold season. In Gungarampore, about twenty miles to the south of the sudder station, the people openly ascribed the outbreak to contagion, introduced from villages farther south, where an inoculator had been working. It was stamped out by vaccination The civil surgeon of Dinagepore, immediately he knew of it, sent one of his subordinates supplied with lymph to the neighbourhood. A vaccinator was also removed from his station, and remained work- ing in the sub-division for the rest of the season. The other outbreak of small-pox was a much more severe one, beginning early in the cold season and continuing to spread slowly from village to village over the district lying between the Kalligunge and Hemtabad thannahs, to the west of Dinagepore. The space affected was about seven to eight miles from east to west, and twelve miles to the south of the road connecting the two thannahs. From December to the beginning of February two vaccinators were working near Kalligunge and among the affected villages. A better result would have been brought about if they had remained in the latter; but after operating on the people of the village where small-pox actually was, they returned to the vicinity of the thannah and recommenced there. The villages being close to one another, and the people in daily communication, a reappearance of the disease was constantly occurring. In this matter the conduct of the native superintend- ent is worthy of disapproval. He seemed more desirous of having a large number of cases of vaccination to show, than to suppress small-pox. Two more vaccinators were removed from other stations to assist, and the spread of the disease was reported as being controlled by the end of February. It had, however, affected such a large district of country, that a fresh outbreak of it in another sub-division was brought under my notice by the magistrate early in the month of May. The origin of the disease was not clear. It appeared to have travelled northwards from the Maldah district. The villagers were most anxious for vaccination, and frequently came considerable distances, eagerly requesting that vaccinators might be sent to them. As the civil surgeon was apprehensive that small-pox might be introduced into Dinagepore, he was enthusiastic in his efforts in vaccinating in the native town. d
14 RANCHEE CIRCLE. 9. The population of the Darjeeling circle of superintendence is at present estimated at 2,997,298. The successful vaccinations during the year 1869-70 were 73.743 (sic), so that to protect all the people with the present establishment would occupy 40.64 years. A large deduction, however, would require to be made from this on account of the numbers already inoculated, or who have been the subjects of small-pox. Any calculation as to this number, however, would rest on such a basis of conjecture that I declined making it, to avoid originating incorrect ideas of the amount of work remaining to be accomplished by the department. Still it will be evident that the present vaccine establishment is insufficient for the complete protection of the people, but that it has done much in a few years to popularize vaccination, and may in the end induce the people to pay for it as they do at present for inoculation. Report of the Ranchee Circle of Vaccination by ASSISTANT SURGEON J. J. WOOD, M.B., Superin- tendent, for the year ending 31st March 1870. THE total number of persons vaccinated is 19,101, showing, as compared with last year, an increase of 11,197 cases. The percentage successful is also higher. The following is an account of the year's work. 2. On the 1st September I took over charge of this circle from assistant surgeon E. J. Hoskins, M.D. A new native superintendent, who had been sent from Allahabad by Dr. Watson, Superintendent of Vaccination, was appointed by Dr. Hoskins in July 1869. Some changes were also made among the vaccinators. 3. In November operations were begun in two of the four districts, viz., in Loharduggah and Hazareebaugh. In Loharduggah were two parties under two native superintendents, Elahee Bux and Mukhun Loll; the third, native superintendent Mahomed Ishak, with his party, were placed at Hazareebaugh. I was by this disposition able to set two parties going under my own direct observation, and, by beginning upon the high land of the Chota Nagpore plateau, to ensure better results during the comparatively warm weather of November. 4. In the beginning of December, when work had fairly commenced, native superin- tendent Mukhun Loll and his party were sent to Maunbhoom district, which is off the plateau, and the Loharduggah party were directed to move southwards, so as to be able to send vaccinators into Chyebassa district when required. 5. I was aware while making this distribution that it would render my duty more difficult, but the native superintendents were well-trained men, and two of them had been found trustworthy and good workers by my predecessor. During the season I visited each of the working parties twice, staying a considerable time with each and verifying the work done in my absence. There did not appear to be such unwillingness on the part of the villagers to allow the vaccinated children to be inspected as there had been in previous years. 6. I.RANCHEE CIRCLE. 15 forward with their children to be vaccinated. Two of the inoculators were apprehended, and two absconded. The arrested men were sent up for trial at Loharduggah, but through some mistake were ultimately released. 10. In the end of December another outbreak was reported to have occurred at village Doyra, in Chyebassa district, and on 1st January two vaccinators were despatched thither from the Loharduggah party, and vaccinated a considerable number of people; but as it was found impracticable to inspect these cases, they do not appear in the returns. They met with fair success in Chyebassa, but one man was said to be objected to on account of caste. I have since had to discharge him for insubordination. 11. Altogether eight men were convicted of inoculating and sentenced to small fines, and warned by the deputy commissioner of Loharduggah. During the month of March some of the men had been working near Sillee, 35 miles east of Ranchee, and others near Palkot, 60 miles to the south-west. No outbreak of small-pox has been reported from Palkot, but from Sillee the disease was reported epidemic on 14th March. Vaccinators were repeatedly sent, and although the people were unwilling to be vaccinated on the first occasion, they have since allowed, and even requested, vaccinators to work there. 12. II.16 RANCHEE CIRCLE. as engaging inoculators on the Government establishment was concerned. There were no convictions for breach of Act IV. of 1865 in Chyebassa during the season. 19. On the 11th February, 1870 Colonel Dalton,-the commissioner of Chota Nagpore, wrote to me telling me that the rajahs of Juspore and Sirgoojah had been disgusted with inoculators in their territories, and were desirous to have vaccination extended to their part of the country. At that late time of the season it would not have been judicious to send vaccinators even if it had been in my power, but the limits of this circle do not embrace Juspore or Sirgoojah. 20. The commissioner expressed a hope that these territories might be included in next season's field of operations. Juspore and Sirgoojah are two large estates on the south- west frontier, and it would make this already large circle unwieldy to embrace them mean- while. Nevertheless the spontaneous expression of two large native proprietors is a good omen, and in my reply to Colonel Dalton I expressed the intention of doing what I could to afford them what they want. I would accordingly propose to give each of the rajahs the services of a trustworthy, intelligent, and trained native superintendent, who could instruct subordinates in vaccinating and superintend their work; these native superintendents to be paid by the rajahs, and the vaccinators to be paid by the people they vaccinate at the rate formerly charged by inoculators for their work. This arrangement would afford a substitute, more or less satisfactory, for inoculation, with which the rajahs have become dissatisfied. In the case of vaccinators employed within the present limits of the circle a similar plan might be adopted, the native superintendents being paid out of local funds. 21. With regard to the circle itself as it at present stands, a superintendent is quite unable with the present staff of vaccinators to undertake more. Indeed, until more intelli- gent men can be found, who are able to keep their own records, it will not be possible to spread operations even to the extent of last season's work, for such extension is incompatible with the close supervision that is required. Some of the divisional officers complained that the vaccinators were not employed in their particular districts; but the fullest benefit of the present establishment can, I am persuaded, only be obtained by keeping them (the vaccinators) near one another. This mode of working is advocated by Dr. Charles, and my own experience is strongly in the same direction, where the vaccinators are such as I have under me at present. 22. The employment of inoculators as vaccinators has been urged from time to time by medical and other officers within this circle. Apart from their individual fitness and intelligence, I do not consider it for the advantage of the Government scheme to employ them; and to furnish them with materials for prosecuting vaccination is only to bring discredit upon it, unless the work of the men is correctly supervised. Where their work is properly looked after there is not so much objection to be offered. 23. The present system of giving all the vaccinators the same pay, viz. Rs. 6 a month from April to October, and Rs. 10 a month from November to March, is capable of improve- ment. It would be a much better plan to pay the men according to their merits, and have a graduated scale of pay from Rs. 4 to 8 out of the season, and Rs. 8 to 12 while working in the field. This would, I think, attract a better class of men, and those who are lazy or inferior vaccinators would be proportionately remunerated. 24. I would strongly urge the necessity of increasing the salary of this office clerk to Rs. 25. He needs to be well acquainted with English, Hindee, and Urdoo, and the small sum of Rs. 15 a month at present allowed is not sufficient to enable me to retain the services of an efficient clerk. The cutchery clerks here are paid Rs. 30 a month and upwards. The annual returns, according to the new forms, Nos. I, II, III, and IV, are appended. P. S.SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 17 the year were carried on partly at Deoghur, under the immediate supervision of the civil surgeon of the Sonthal Pergunnahs, and partly at Rajmehal under myself. 3. Before taking charge of my present duty there was one vaccinator placed at Raj- mehal. when I was in medical charge of the sub-division. Immediately on my joining the new appointment, on the 14th of December last, I reported to the civil surgeon the fact of the willingness of the Rajmehal Sonthals to receive vaccination, and I requested him either to send down the vaccinators from Deoghur, or to allow me to go thither with the vaccinator who was then with me. But unfortunately no reply was received (the civil surgeon being absent on leave) until the end of the month. Meanwhile reports of outbreak of small-pox were received from the district of Pakour, but I could do nothing towards checking its pro- gress for want of vaccinators. At last the civil surgeon, after much consideration, sent down four vaccinators, three of whom reached me about the middle of January (one having absconded in the way), and when I reached the infected villages I was too late to introduce vaccination. The people took to inoculation; persuasions to receive vaccination were of no avail. On my return I had another outbreak of small-pox in the district of Rajmehal to contend with; the disease was very severe and malignant in its nature: almost all the unprotected people affected with it died. The people knew me before, and they were very glad to receive vacci- nation ; but some difficulty was experienced in re-vaccinating those who were operated on two years previously. The vaccinators who then worked there rather over-estimated the value of their operations, inasmuch as they promised them that those who were once vaccinated would never catch small-pox during their life. I took hold of some old men who were then under the influence of small-pox, although previously protected by inoculation, and convinced the manjdees, the heads of villages, that both inoculation and vaccination do not afford pro- tection from small-pox for life-time. The repetition of the former is very troublesome and not out of danger, whilst that of the latter is very easy. and without any ill consequences. They at last yielded, and their children who were once vaccinated were allowed to be stamped. Out of thirty-five children seven had well-marked scars, they were therefore placed under the head of re-vaccination; the rest I supposed as unsuccessful cases at first, were entered in the column of primary vaccination. All the infected villages were within a few days vaccinated, and although many of them were ill with small-pox during the course of our operation, only two deaths were recorded. The progress of spontaneous small-pox ceased shortly. 4. Several other outbreaks of small-pox were made known to me in the district of Rajmehal, and the progress of all of them was cut short within as little a time as practicable. A few of these outbreaks were about the neighbourhood of Rajmehal, on the western side of the rail line that runs through the district, others were far away from it, whilst a third set were found in the most inaccessible parts of the Sonthal hills. My vaccinators were there- fore not stationed with a view convenient for inspection, but to check the isolated outbreaks of small-pox wherever it occurred. 5. The four vaccinators before mentioned, and another who was sent from Deoghur about the end of February, were all unskilled in their work, and although two of them were old and experienced, I had to teach every one of them more or less. Their mode of operating was very peculiar: a single deep puncture, freely bleeding, was made in two points on the upper arm, in which virus was inserted with the point of a lancet, thrusting again and again into the wound at first made. The vaccine matter was taken indiscriminately from all crusts, and the character of a good crust was not known to them. If vaccination was performed from arm to arm, the lymph was taken from vesicles whether they were entire or broken. The consequence of all this was, that they never could vaccinate successfully by the first attempt; and I am sorry to say that most of them (although taught previously to my receiving them) could hardly obtain five successful cases in 100. They had therefore to vaccinate over and over to the highest dissatisfaction of the heads of villages, who could hardly be persuaded that their children were protected, and the time occupied in vaccinating a single village was more than that required for four. 6. I first attempted to teach them the proper mode of vaccinating. I showed them with my own hand that no bleeding should occur during vaccination. I then impressed on them that a good crust (obtained from a native) is known by its being of a deep brown colour, having a convex superior surface with a well-marked depression in the centre and concave at its attached side; that a crust that has any concretions on it, or in any way broken during maturation, should never be used for operation. That arm-to-arm vaccination is more prefer- able, and for this I cautioned them not to use virus from any unhealthy children, or from adult men or women; not to use virus from broken vesicles, or from those that have thick purulent matter; not to break vesicles too early, on the fifth day, or too late, on or after the tenth; and no virus should be taken from a round convex vesicle without any depression in the centre. e
18 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 7. I visited them twice a month, but found them more than once forgetful of my instructions. It was a general notion amongst them all, that because the Sonthal children are very dirty, sleep on a charpoy or cot without any bedding, their vesicles are easily broken. I told them repeatedly that a true vaccine vesicle or pustule should never break of itself, unless it is punctured by the point of a lancet, and it seldom creates any itching sensation from the fifth day, and is not liable to be scratched by a silly child. 8. With vaccinators like those above described, the percentage of success in their work can easily be imagined; and had I not been fortunate to have the services of one old vaccina- tor, who became a very useful hand after a little correction, the percentage of success, as well as the amount of vaccination for the season, would have been considerably lower than that stated in the enclosed tables. This vaccinator alone, although unfortunately ill during the best part of the vaccine season, vaccinated 2,777 cases with a success of about 90 per cent. 9. My monthly returns were submitted after carefully inspecting each case, and my column &quot; successful&quot; in them denotes operations which were truly genuine in their nature, and in which the vesicles pursued a fixed, regular course, slightest deviations from which I have entered in the column of &quot; doubt;&quot; and although I have not tested any case by inoculating small-pox matter, I can so far say that my successful cases remained safe amongst a crowd of people infected with small-pox. 10. Lymph was obtained from the Superintendent-General of Vaccination of Calcutta ; crusts were more freely used than any thing else; arm-to-arm vaccination was found generally impracticable, as the vaccinators had to run from the place they at first began their work to another, at a great distance, wherever small-pox occurred. This was an additional cause of the lower percentage of success; but I hope that if the vaccinators remain in service for the coming year a higher rate of success will be gained. 11. From my experience in the vaccine operations during the season I inferred that generally the Sonthals in the Rajmehal district were not opposed to vaccination. The few instances in which any difficulty was found was obviated by the timely assistance of the district magistrate, for which I am much indebted to him. The prejudices of the people in other sub-districts, I am sorry to remark, were great. They seemed to me not at all prepared to receive this innovation. I cannot, however, confidently assert this, as I had very few opportunities of being among them. 12. In conclusion, I beg to point out certain inconveniences and wants for which I suppose the Sonthal Pergunnahs vaccine circle, although established for the last three years, has not obtained credit like other circles of the Bengal presidency. 1st.STATISTICAL TABLES.
VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1869. 21 TABLE A. Summary of Vaccination performed by the General Vaccine Establishment and Vaccination Circles under the Government of Bengal, and by the Establishment attached to the Civil Stations or Dispensaries, from 1st April 1869 to 31st March 1870. Circle. Parts composed in the Circle. TOTAL NUMBER OF PER- SONS VACCINATED. PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. RE-VACCINATIONS. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESSFUL CASES EXCLUDING THOSE UNKNOWN FROM THE TOTAL Paid by the state. Paid from other sources. Total cost. Cost of each successful case. Primary vaccina- tions. Re-vaccinations. Total Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those &quot; doubtful.&quot; Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown. In primary In secondary Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Chowringhee Depôt Calcutta ... 448 11 a 459 435 13 ... 2 9 ..... 97.09 18.18 .... .... .... .... Park Street Dispensary Ditto .. .. 24 5 a 29 24 .. .. 3 2 .... 100.00 60.00 .... .... .... .... Medical College 22 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in each division of superin- 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 CIRCLE. Name and rank of superintendent. Number of native superinten- dents, head vaccinators. Number of vaccinators. Total number of persons vaccinated. Collectorate, political agency, or native state in which vaccinations were performed during the year. Population in area included in last column. Name of portion of district or of town. 1869-70. 1868-69. 1869-70. 1868-69. 1869-70. 1868-69. NORTH DIVISION Surgeon T. E. Charles, M.D., Super- intendent-General. Town 3 3 5 27 2,333 1,502 In the town and suburbs of Calcutta. North division Suburbs .. 4 1,693 1,430 Total ... 3 3 9 4,026 2,932 MIDDLE DIVISION. Town 3 3 5 1,686 1,299 Calcutta, 430,000 Middle division. Suburbs 2 1,530 1,036 Suburbs, 250,000 Cooly depôts ... ... ... ... 6,408 11,558 Total ... 3 3 7 b. 9,624 13,893 SOUTH DIVISION. Town 3 3 3 1,444 1,253 South division. Suburbs 6 4,217 3,429 Cooly depôts ... ... ... 2,972 2,686 Total 3 3 9 c. 8,633 7,368 Grand Total 9 9 25 27 22,283 24,193 a 11,242 35,435 Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in the 1st circle ... ... Surgeon F Powell, M B , superin- tendent 1 1 23 24 33,672 30,778 24-Pergunnahs. VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1869. 23 No. I. tendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, during the year 1869-70. 9 10 11 12 Primary vaccinations. Re-vaccinations. Percentage of successful cases, ex- cluding those un- known from the total Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. A B. C. D. a. b. c. d. Sex. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Successful Unsuccessful, includ- ing those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. unsuccessful,in- cluding those &quot;doubtful&quot; Unknown. In primary vac- cination In secondary vaccination 1,164 1,036 9 1,983 208 ... 412 1,788 2,136 56 8 2,200 5 128 ... 133 97.44 3.73 466.60 930 760 5 1,018 667 ... 212 1,478 1,637 46 7 1,690 ... 3 ... 3 97.26 ... 423.25 2,094 1,796 14 3,001 875 ... 624 3,266 3,773 102 15 3,890 5 131 ... 136 97.36 3.67 447.33 862 744 124 910 572 ... 350 1,256 1,570 13 23 1,606 21 59 ... 80 99.17 26.25 337.20 817 665 76 951 455 ... 317 1,165 1,470 10 2 1,482 14 34 ... 48 99.32 29.16 3,969 * * * 911 ... ... * * 676 30 205 911 1,344 2,478 1,675 5,497 95.75 35.16 ... ... 200 2,772 1,027 ... ... ... 3,716 53 230 3,999 1,379 2,571 1,675 5,625 98.59 34.91 1,374.85 524 487 188 338 485 ... 261 750 996 14 1 1,011 66 367 3 433 98.61 15.24 481.33 2,303 1,866 22 2,164 1,983 ... 273 3,896 4,102 55 12 4,169 14 31 48 98.67 31.11 1,198.16 * * * 1,305 502 ... * * 1,760 47 ... 1,807 278 887 1,165 97.39 23.86 210 3,807 2,970 ... ... ... 6,858 116 13 6,987 358 1,285 3 1,616 98.33 21.78 959.22 424 9,580 4,872 ... 24 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. II. Statement showing the monthly number and results of the Vaccinations performed in the Northern, Middle, and Southern Divisions of Superintendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, during the year 1869-70. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of superinten- dence Months. Districts in which operations were chiefly conducted in each month. Total number vacci- nated. RESULTS. Total. Average percentage, successful, excluding those &quot; unknown.&quot; Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding &quot;doubt- ful.&quot; Unknown. 1869. NORTH DIVISION April ... Town, primary ... 91 84 5 2 91 94.38 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 163 157 6 ...... 163 96.31 May ... Town, ditto ... 34 27 7 ...... 34 79.41 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 45 39 6 ...... 45 86.66 June ... Town, ditto ... 24 19 5 ...... 24 79.16 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 18 17 1 ...... 18 94.44 July ... Town, ditto ... 25 23 2 ...... 25 92.00 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 22 21 1 ...... 22 95.45 August ... Town, ditto ... 24 22 2 ...... 24 91.66 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 16 15 1 ...... 16 93.75 September Town, ditto ... 16 14 2 ...... 16 87.50 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 19 19 .... ...... 19 100.00 October ... Town, ditto ... 34 34 ...... ...... 34 100.00 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 53 50 3 ...... 53 94.33 November ... Town, ditto ... 83 81 2 ...... 83 97.59 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 195 193 2 ...... 195 98.97 December ... Town, ditto ... 259 258 1 ...... 259 99.61 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 396 393 3 ...... 396 99.24 1870. January ... Town, ditto ... 529 516 10 3 529 98.09 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 314 293 15 6 314 95.13 February ... Town, ditto ... 749 731 16 2 749 97.85 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 116 5 111 ...... 116 4.31 ditto ... Suburb, primary ... 214 209 4 1 214 98.12 March ... Town, ditto ... 332 327 4 1 332 98.79 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 17 ...... 17 ...... 17 00.00 ditto ... Suburb, primary... 235 231 4 ...... 235 98.29 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 3 ... ... 3 ...... 3 00.00 Grand total ... Town, primary ... 2,200 2,136 56 8 2,200 97.44 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 133 5 128 ...... 133 3.75 Suburb, primary ... 1,690 1,637 46 7 1,690 97.26 Ditto, re-vaccination . 3 ... 3 ..... 3 00.00 1869. MIDDLE DIVISION. April ... Town, primary ... 69 67 1 1 69 98.52 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 50 50 ...... ..... 50 100.00 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 134 71 ...... 63 134 100.00 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 797 100 160 537 797 38.46 May ... Town, primary ... 14 14 ...... ...... 14 100.00 ditto ... Suburb, ditto ... 12 11 1 ...... 12 91.66 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 103 74 ...... 29 103 100.00 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 660 155 245 260 660 38.75 June ... Suburb, primary ... 13 13 ...... ...... 18 100.00 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 49 47 2 ...... 49 95.91 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 238 69 169 ...... 238 28.99 July ... Suburb, primary ... 22 20 2 ...... 22 90.90 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 29 26 2 1 29 92.85 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 162 45 110 7 163 29.03 August ... Suburb, primary ... 20 19 1 ...... 20 95.00 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 60 42 18 ...... 60 70.00 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 304 93 205 6 304 31.20 September ... Suburb, primary ... 15 15 ...... ...... 15 100.00 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 58 51 5 2 58 91.07 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 434 159 263 12 434 37.67 October ... Town, primary ... 51 51 ...... ...... 51 100.00 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 2 1 1 ...... 2 50.00 ditto ... Suburb, primary ... 33 33 ...... ...... 33 100.00 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 52 52 ...... ...... 52 100.00 ditto ... Ditto, re- vaccination ... 270 131 132 7 270 49.80 November ... Town, primary ... 122 121 1 ...... 122 99.18 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 2 1 1 ...... 2 50.00 ditto ... Suburb, primary ... 99 99 ...... ...... 99 100.00 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 1 ...... 1 ...... 1 ... ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary ... 46 36 ...... 10 46 100.00 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 394 111 219 64 394 33.68 December ... Town, primary ... 247 244 3 ...... 247 98.78 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 6 5 1 ...... 6 83.33 ditto ... Suburb, primary ... 219 217 2 ...... 219 99.08 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 2 1 1 ...... 2 50.00 ditto ... Cooly depôts, primary . 57 52 ...... 5 57 100.00 ditto ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 377 104 231 42 377 31.04
VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1869. 25 TABLE No. II.26 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. II.VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1869. 27 TABLE No. II.28 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. III. Statement showing expenditure of Vaccine Department in each circle of superintendence in the metropolis, Lower Provinces, Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee, and Sonthal Pergunnahs Vaccine Circles during the year 1869-70. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vacci- nated. Percentage of success, excluding those '' un- known&quot; from the total Cost of each successful case, excluding cases of modified success after re-vaccination. REMARKS. CALCUTTA AND SUBURBS Paid by Government. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Office establishment, at Rs. 102 per mensem ... ... ... 1,224 0 0 1,224 0 0 ...... ... ...... Taking the grand total of Rs.13,213-0-5 expended, the cost of each successful case has been 13 annas The same includ- ing 2,958 cases of modified success after re-vaccination is 11 annas 1½pie. 3 superintendents, at Rs. 150 each per mensem ... ... ... 5,400 0 0 *4,950 0 0 ...... ... ...... 3 vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem ... ... ... ... 360 0 0 360 0 0 ...... ... ...... Contingencies, including office rent ... ... ... ... 1,200 0 0 1,200 0 0 ...... ... ...... Travelling allowance, &c. ... 1,254 0 0 1,279 0 5 ...... ... ...... Total ... 9,438 0 0 9,013 0 5 ...... ... ...... Paid by Town Municipality. 3 head vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem ... ... 1,980 0 0 1,980 0 0 ...... ... ...... 3 vaccinators, at Rs. 12 each per mensem ... ... ... ... ...... ... ...... 6 vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem ... ... ... ... 3 vaccinators, at Rs. 8 each per mensem ... ... ... ... Contingent allowance, at Rs 18-5-4 per mensem ... ... 220 0 0 220 0 0 ...... ... ...... Total ... 2,200 0 0 2,200 0 0 ...... ... ...... Paid by Suburban Municipality. 15 vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem ... ... ... 1,800 0 0 1,800 0 0 ...... ... ...... Contingent allowance, at Rs. 16-10-8 per mensem ... ... 200 0 0 200 0 0 ...... ... ...... Total ... 2,000 0 0 2,000 0 0 ...... ... ...... 22,283 79.07 ...... Out of which primary ... ...... ...... 14,876 Deduct unknown ... ... ...... ...... 258 14,618 98.14 ...... Re-vaccination ... ... ...... ...... 7,407 Deduct unknown ... ... ...... ...... 1,678 5,729 30.40 Grand total ... 13,638 0 0 13,213 0 5 ...... ... 0 13 1½ METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Superintendent's salary, at Rs. 800 per mensem ... ... 9,600 0 0 5,551 9 9 1,55,825 99.75 0 3 1 Ditto Presidency house-rent, at Rs 100 per mensem ... ... ... 390 5 1 Taking the grand to- tal of Rs 30,156-14-10 expended, the cost of each successful case has been 3 annas and 1 pie. 3 native superintendents, at Rs. 200 each per mensem ... ... 7,200 0 0 7,200 0 0 9 head vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem ... ... 1,620 0 0 1,620 0 0 57 assistant vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem ... ... 6,840 0 0 6,840 0 0 Office establishment ... ... 1,620 0 0 1,620 0 0 Travelling allowances ... ... 7,569 0 0 5,855 0 0 Contingencies ... ... ... 1,080 0 0 1,080 0 0 Grand total ... 35,529 0 0 30,156 14 10 1,55,825 99.75 0 3 1 * Less one superintendent's pay for three months, Rs. 450, who was sent to Dacca.
VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1869. 29 TABLE No. III.30 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. IV. Statement showing the results of the year 1869-70 as compared with those of each of the previous five years, in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee, and Sonthal Pergunnahs Vaccine Circles. CIRCLE. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 year. Total number of persons vac- cinated. Number successful. Ratio per cent. successful, excluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the total NUMBER OF VACCINATORS Cost of whole vaccine establish- ment. Cost of travelling allowances and contingencies. Total cost.* Cost of each successful case, excluding cases of modified success after re-vaccination. A B C D Paid by State. Paid from other sources. Total. Number previously employed as mo- culators, or native practitioners Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Calcutta and Suburbs. 1864-65 VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1869. 31 B.32 STATISTICAL TABLES. B.VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1869. 33 DACCA CIRCLE. H. C Cuteliffe, F R C. S., Officiating Civil Surgeon. ... ... a 15 6 5,291 3,466 ...... 904,615 Dacca Mitford Hospital. 3,744 1,547 143 2,159 2,689 ... 305 4,986 4,548 516 13 5,107 111 73 ... 184 89.28 60.32 352.73 ... ... ... ... 650 ... ...... Joydebpore ... 377 273 ... 484 166 ... 28 622 626 224 ... 650 ... ... ... ... 96.30 ... 650 ... ... ... ... 1,241 ... ...... Jonsher ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 978 63 ... 1,241 ... ... ... ... 78.80 ... 620.50 ... ... ... ... 43 ... ...... Bhaggocool ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 18 ... 43 ... ... ... ... 58.13 ... 43 ... ... ... ... 10 ... ...... Mamekgunge.. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 3 ... 10 ... ... ... ... 70.00 ... 10 C. E. W. Bensley, M.D., Officiating Civil Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 908 1,020 Collectorate 1,134,432 Backergunge.. 723 185 64 689 155 ... 53 855 583 283 ... 866 42 ... ... 42 67.32 100.00 908 B. N Bose, M.D, Civil Medical Officer. ... ... 1 ... 595 286 ...... ... Fureedpore ... 435 160 2 205 388 ... 32 563 440 155 ... 595 ... ... ... ... 73.91 ... 596 J.Duncan, MD,Civil Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 3 1 1,045 1,274 Chittagongmu- nicipality dis- trict and Hill Tracts 800,000 Chittagong ... 666 372 33 80 485 440 69 969 748 290 ... 1,038 ... 7 ... 7 72.06 ... 348 H. O. Wilson, Assist- ant Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 941 1,082 Collectorate ... Not known Memensing ... 829 112 4 489 448 ... 22 919 764 177 ... 941 ... ... ... ... 81.19 ... 941 Ditto ... ... ... 1 ... 94 ... Ditto ... Ditto Sherepore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71 23 ... 94 ... ... ... ... 75.53 ... 94 J. A. Greene,Uncove- nanted Medical Offi- cer. ... ... 1 1 644 403 Tipperah 700,300 Tipperah ... 315 329 7 503 134 ... ... 614 586 58 ... 644 ... ... ... ... 90.99 ... 630 by native vaccinator 1 by the medical officer and 13 by the native doctor. ... ... 1 ... 239 5 Shillong Shillong ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 160 79 ... 239 ... ... ... ... 66.94 ... ... J. J. Monteath, Offi- ciating Civil Assist- ant Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 468 637 Cachar 152,000 Cachar ... 274 194 9 230 185 44 107 361 406 62 ... 468 ... ... ... ... 86.73 ... 468 Robert Deacon, Civil Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 205 520 Sylhet, collec- torate 1,421,401 Sylhet ... 108 17 8 27 90 20 105 90 35 ... 125 62 18 ... 80 72.00 77.50 205 Thomas Briscoe, Un- covenanted Medical Officer. ... ... b1 1 440 151 Gowalparah district. 294,4151 Gowalparah ... 292 148 5 41 392 2 62 378 372 63 ... 440 ... ... ... ... 84.54 ... 440 H. B. Purvis, Civil Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 2,061 1,263 Gowhatty 461,910 Gowhatty ... ... ... ... No records ... ... ... 1,922 139 ... 2,061 No records. ... 93.25 ... 687 0 R. O'Conor, Uncove- nanted Medical Offi- cer. ... .. 1 ... 568 ... Nowgong 239,915 Nowgong ... 205 170 11 82 94 188 102 273 355 20 ... 375 193 ... ... 193 94.66 ... 568 C. L. Fox, Apothecary. ... ... ... 1 61 9 Tezpore 210,279 Tezpore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 38 ... 61 ... ... ... ... 37.70 ... 61 M. N. Mookerjee, Un- covenanted Medical Officer. ... ... 1 1 1,362 1,147 Seebsagar col- lectorate. 214,610 Seebsagur ... 891 471 1 483 572 306 557 805 1,123 239 ... 1,362 ... ... ... ... 82.45 ... 1,346 J.B. White, Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 1 1 414 372 Deputy Com- missioner. 112,356 Debrooghur ... 303 111 8 202 131 73 150 264 298 116 ... 414 ... ... ... ... 71.98 ... 414 Total ... ... ... 31 17 17,280 11,635 ...... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14,125 2,636 13 16,771 408 98 ... 506 81.27 80.63 ... DINAPORE CIRCLE. Assistant Surgeon R. T. Wright. ... ... 1 1 317 293 Dinapore ... 10,000 Dinapore ... 119 198 8 99 200 10 85 232 283 34 ... 317 ... ... ... ... 89.27 ... 317 J. Bedford Allan, Civil Surgeon. ... ... 8 7 2,711 5,331 Patna ... 109,589 Patna ... 1,773 924 20 1,938 741 ... 717 1,982 2,441 211 17 2,699 10 2 ... 12 91.01 83.33 337.37 R. Macleod, Unco- venanted Medical Officer. ... ... 1 2 482 1,316 Chuprah ... 45,000 Chuprah ... 267 215 11 348 134 ... 59 423 430 50 2 482 ... ... ... ... 89.58 ... 482 W. Wilson, Uncove- nanted Medical Offi- cer. ... ... *2 *2 l,661 *1,932 Arrah ... ... Arrah ... 980 684 10 1,214 410 ... 418 1,216 1,422 242 ... 1,664 ... ... ... ... 85.45 ... 832 ... ... ... 243 ... Collectorate ... ... Sassaram ... 202 41 ... 89 154 ... ... 243 157 86 ... 243 ... ... ... ... 64.60 ... 243 by the native doctor. ... ... ... 540 ... ...... ... Jugdispore ... 272 268 ... 266 274 ... 72 468 351 144 26 521 3 8 8 19 70.90 27.27 540 ditto. J. C. G. Carmichael, Assistant Surgeon. ... ... 1 *1 366 *358 Collectorate ... 10,066 Buxar ... 220 146 4 232 130 ... 100 266 313 23 ... 366 ... ... ... ... 93.71 ... 366 C. Sconce, Uncove- nanted Medical Offi- cer. ... ... 1 1 965 73 Collectorate ... 918,758 Chumparun ... 603 362 180 597 188 ... 307 658 620 345 ... 965 ... ... ... ... 64.21 ... 965 E. J. Gayer, Civil Surgeon. ... ... 3 2 2,613 2,222 Collectorate ... Not known Tuhoot ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,284 329 ... 2,613 ... ... ... ... 87.40 ... 871 a.34 STATISTICAL TABLES. B.(RESOLUTION.) JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. MEDICAL. Fort William, the 14th November 1870. READ a letter dated the 11th October 1870, No. 809A, from the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department, submitting the vaccination report for the year ending 31st March 1870. * Total number of vaccinations. Ratio per cent. of successful cases. 1868-69. 1869-70. 1868-69. 1869-70. Calcutta and Suburbs ... *35,435 22,283 71.30 72.20 Metropolitan circles ... 1,22,493 1,55,835 99.05 99.67 Darjeeling ( 2 ) of which over 99 per cent. succeeded. High as this percentage is, it seems to be borne out by the tests applied by the superintendent and the deputy superintendents in person. 7. The rapid extension of vaccination round Calcutta may possibly before long justify the prohibition of inoculation in the metropolitan circles. The Commissioner and Magistrates will be consulted as to whether this measure might not in certain tracts be even now carried out. The mischief done by unregulated inoculation is represented to be great. In twenty out of thirty-three villages attacked by small-pox during the year, inoculation is stated to have originated the disease. 8. Darjeeling circle.( 3 ) result points to the conclusion that civil surgeons do not give proper attention to the supervision of this important branch of their duty. The Inspector- General should insist upon a fair outturn of vaccine operations at each dispen- sary where a vaccinator is retained. Dr. Mathew at Midnapore apparently took real interest in the work, for with 3 vaccinators he operated on 11,059 persons, and obtained successful results in 98.42 per cent. of the cases. The low percentage of success at Bancoorah, Jessore, Cuttack, Purneah, and elsewhere, is further evidence of want of proper supervision. 12. The Lieutenant-Governor will wait the reports promised by the Inspector-General on the various subjects noted by him in the conclusion of his covering letter. ORDERED, that a copy of this Resolution be forwarded to the Inspector- General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department, for information and guidance. ORDERED also, that a copy of this Resolution be forwarded to the Commissioners of the Burdwan and Presidency Divisions, with a request that they will submit the report on the question raised in paragraph 7. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, A. MACKENZIE, Offg. Junior Secy. to the Govt. of Bengal. No. 3786. COPY forwarded to the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. No. 3787. COPY forwarded to the Commissioner of Burdwan. No. 3788. COPY forwarded to the Commissioner of Presidency Division. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, A. MACKENZIE, Offg. Junior Secy. to the Govt. of Bengal. FORT WILLIAM, The 14th November 1870.
REPORT ON THE VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL, For the year ending 31st March 1871. BY J. CAMPBELL BROWN, ESQ., C.B. Inspector General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. Calcutta: PRINTED AT THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT OFFICE. 1871.
REPORT ON THE VACCINATION PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL, For the year ending 31st March 1871. BY J. CAMPBELL BROWN, ESQ., C.B. Inspector General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. PRINTED AT THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT OFFICE. 1871.
INDEX. Page. INSPECTOR-GENERAL'S REPORT TO GOVERNMENT ON VACCINATION ... ... ... ... 1 VACCINATION IN CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS, BY DR. CHARLES ... ...... ... ... 1 REPORT FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT OF VACCINATION, METROPOLITAN CIRCLES ... ... ... 6 DITTO DITTO DITTO, DARJEELING CIRCLE ... ... ... 10 DITTO DITTO DITTO, RANCHEE CIRCLE ... ... ... 15 REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS ... ... ... ... ... ... 17 TABLE A ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25 TABLE No. I ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26-27 TABLE No. II ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28 TABLE No. III ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 TABLE No. IV ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35 BNo. 641. FROM THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL. Fort William, the 28th September 1871. SIR, I HAVE the honor to submit the reports and returns of vaccination in the province of Lower Bengal during the year ending 31st March 1871. Total number vaccinated. Ratio per cent. of successful cases, excluding those unknown. Ratio per cent. of successful cases, including those unknown. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. Calcutta and Suburbs ... 22,283 19,287 79.07 77.82 72.20 72.60 Metropolitan circle ... 155,825 140,119 99.75 99.67 99.67 99.63 Darjeeling circle ... 81,444 78,772 93.11 92.66 92.65 91.88 Ranchee ii REPORT. The reasons assigned last year for the falling off in the number of operations performed at these dispensaries, namely, the spread of systematic operations through* the town, and the carrying of vaccination to the houses of the people, still hold good. The ratio of success continues to be remarkably high, and Dr. Charles is evidently satisfied of its reality. Dr. Charles has treated fully of the prevalence of small-pox last year as compared with previous years. His observations are most gratifying and important. I coincide with him in his assertion that year by year the problem of efficient protection becomes more difficult and arduous, the further removed from a general epidemic of small-pox. 5. The observations and conclusions regarding animal vaccination are interesting, and might become practically important. It is satisfactory to find that the value of the vaccin- ation already performed in the usual way has been so completely affirmed. 6. Dr. Charles does not discuss the degree of protection he is able to confer on Calcutta and its suburbs by means of his establishment by estimating the yearly accession to the town of unprotected individuals in comparison with the number of persons actually protected. He will be asked to attempt this in future reports. 7. The three Superintendents, Sub-Assistant Surgeons Bhoobun Mohun Mitter, Kally Dass Bose, and Kassy Chunder Dutt, are brought to notice as earnest and successful workers, and I quite agree with Dr. Charles in assigning to zeal and industry in a somewhat irksome and monotonous duty a high value. 8. Metropolitan Circles.REPORT. iii practice more materially by adopting vaccination as their profession. It is a fact which should not be lost sight of, that the inoculators leave a section of the population unprotected. 10. On the whole the work of the Metropolitan circles is highly satisfactory, and very creditable to Dr. Powell and all concerned. It fully justifies the wisdom of establishing them on their present footing, even although their expense to the State is, and must continue to be for some time to come, considerable. 11. Darjeeling Circle.iv REPORT. 19. Dr. Lidderdale's remarks regarding inoculation are worthy of attention. It is obvious that the spread of vaccination is seriously impeded by the number of inoculators permitted to practise, and that their practice is dangerous to the health of the community. If inoculation were prohibited in one zillah, and vaccination, systematized and prosecuted on the thorough plan of the Metropolitan circles, it would form a nucleus for a gradual extension over the circle of a sound system. Meanwhile flying parties under proper arrangements for supervision might minister, as now, in the remaining zillahs of the circle, to stamping out small-pox. I would suggest that the sense of the local authorities should be taken upon Dr. Lidderdale's remarks, and the possibility of realizing a nucleus of exhaustive and efficient vaccination. 20. I think that Dr. Lidderdale's request to have elephants placed at his disposal, if required to visit the districts of his circle during the rains, is a reasonable one, and this might be arranged for by the local authorities. 21. Ranchee Circle.REPORT. v It is worthy of particular note that nearly as much of the cost of this species of vaccination was paid from local funds as by Government, and that the cost of each successful operation is considerably lower than that performed by a vaccine establishment. The work done at Howrah, Hooghly, Serajgunge, Midnapore, Dacca, Backergunge, Seebsaugor, Patna, Bankipore, Arrah, Tirhoot, Durbungah, Monghyr, and Chyebassa, is conspicuous. The falling off at Dacca is owing to a smaller establishment, special efforts having been made to meet an outbreak of small-pox in 1869-70. The success of this species of vaccination depends entirely on the efforts of the civil medical officers, and some localties still show lamen- tably feeble results. Any thing below 1,000 operations for each regular vaccinator should not be considered a satisfactory result. It is but fair to civil surgeons, however, to state that to promote vaccination properly demands a freedom from station duties and liberty to visit the district which, while they have charge of the station jails as at present, is simplyimpossible. Onerous station duties and responsibilities are incompatible with efficient district work. 26. Regulating inoculation where vaccination cannot be introduced.vi REPORT. These proposals led to no immediate result, and the subject was allowed to drop till it was again brought up for further inquiry in the 11th paragraph of a resolution on the vaccine proceedings of the year 1868-69, dated 7th January 1870. This elicited a long report from Dr. Charles, which was submitted with a letter from this office (No. 336, dated 30th June 1870). In this report Dr. Charles propounded a scheme, one feature of which was, that a charge of two annas for each successful vaccination should be established, and levied by a separate agency on occasion of the third vaccination of a circle that had been thoroughly vaccinated twice by Government agency. Existing circles were to have extra vaccinators attached to them for the working season, so that new circles might be thrown off to occupy a fresh area yearly. Thus the rendering of vaccination self-supporting in old circles, and the extension of vaccination would go on apace. The Deputy Inspector- General of Hospitals, in forwarding this report, was of opinion that rendering vaccination compulsory was a necessary prelude to exacting payment for it. The Government (letter 2653, dated 6th August 1870) considered Dr. Charles' scheme of too radical a nature to take serious action in without further consideration, and could not entertain the proposal to make vaccination compulsory. Subsequent correspondence on this subject led to the expres- sion of a strong opinion by Surgeon F. Powell, Superintendent of the Metropolitan Circle, that levying a charge for vaccination until the area of these circles had been completely vaccinated twice would affect the progress and success of vaccination. He did not object to partial and tentative measures when vaccination was, for instance, requested for a village not lying within the season's scheme. Surgeon Powell states that with his present staff he can only visit any locality in the circle every third or fourth year. The Commissioner of Police expressed an opinion &quot; that it was quite impossible to get the people to pay for their vaccination under the present voluntarily system&quot; The issue of this correspondence is, that the question of organizing a general scheme of vaccination on a basis of gradually increasing self-support must remain in abeyance for the present, and until a firmer basis of action has been obtained and vaccination has become a more familiar and generally desired operation. 28. Ascertaining the number of inoculators in eachdi strict, and registering their names.REPORT. vii IV viii REPORT. Self-supporting vaccination has on the whole been so far demonstrated as possible in Lower Bengal as to give some assurance of ultimate success; but it must be regulated and supervised closely. It seems also a necessary preliminary to introduce the practice and form the habit of vaccination by a special establishment, and it is doubtful whether the plan will be entirely successful in any area, until inoculation has been rendered penal. I am however opposed to sweeping changes, and in favor of gradual developments. 31. Extending the Metropolitan system to other circles.REPORT. ix among the people, and one feasible method of spreading vaccination was of no avail to that end. In this opinion he was supported by the Deputy Inspector-General of the circle. Drs. Chevers, Fayrer and Charles were consulted on the subject, and it was arranged that the native teacher of medicine should give special instruction in vaccination to the vernacular classes. This important subject will not be lost sight of. Dr. Lidderdale, it will be observed, proposes a special class for instructing in vaccination at the Medical College, but I am of opinion that the duty can best be performed by Superintendents of Vaccination, who have such ample means at their command of imparting practical instruction. It is a question however, whether students of the primary and secondary classes should not be specially certified in this important matter, more particularly as to their practical knowledge of details of efficient vaccination, and their power of recognising a true vesicle. 33. Extension of vaccination.Third Annual Report on Vaccine Operations at the Presidency, by SURGEON T. E. CHARLES, M.D., Superintendent-General of Vaccination. 1. Submission.2 CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. or more been in the habit of taking vaccination, the great majority had never even seen a vaccinator, and knew no more of vaccination than the rural inhabitants in the interior of the districts round Calcutta. Very much opposition had to be overcome, and even yet there are a few houses in which the vaccinators have never been allowed to vaccinate; but I have this year to report that practically the whole of the suburbs has been brought under the influence of vaccination. Isolated communities, such as the dependants of the King of Oude, the body-guard grass-cutters, &c., will not yet willingly allow the vaccinators, even when supported by the Superintendents, to vaccinate; but when any necessity for their being vaccinated at once arises from an outbreak of small-pox, by invoking the special assistance of those who can influence them, the danger from their remaining unprotected is got over ; even among those who year by year have allowed vaccination to be practised, large numbers continue passively to resist the vaccinators. It is found that the Hindoo villages year by year give less trouble, and are more easily persuaded to have their children vaccinated, as she inhabitants remain very much the same individuals who were previously talked over. The villages, containing up-country inhabitants and populated by Muhammadans, give unceas- ing trouble, and at times great tact is required of the Superintendent to vaccinate them without coming into collision with the whole colony. Even among them, however, the almost insuper- able difficulties have been overcome; and though, especially from new-comers, more or less active opposition is encountered, it is rare for the department to leave any quarter in the suburbs not comparatively in a safe condition at the end of the vaccinating season. This year I have had more reason to be satisfied with the state of protection I have found., and doubt whether a much greater amount of safety from small-pox is attainable by means of general vaccination. From a vaccinator's point of view the suburbs are populated by a poor class of inhabit- ants, on whom a greater amount of pressure can be brought than on the inhabitants of the town, and it thus happens that I have been able to report so soon such satisfactory advance in the suburbs, as to place it in a much more favorable position as regards protection than the town itself is. 5.CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. 3 the circumstances it was impossible that it should do so. How many of the cases of small- pox which could not be traced to any source of infection caught the disease in these infected conveyances it is impossible to say, but the case is a most instructive one, as showing how easy it is for small-pox to be disseminated without any trace being left of the source of infection. 6. Deaths from small-pox in Calcutta and Bombay compared.4 CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. one large enough to cope successfully with small-poxCALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. 5 transmission, and they do not differ in the most minute particular from the vaccinations carried on from other humanized virus. At first a few more of the points of insertion seemed to fail in the case of transmissions from one of the children vaccinated from the calf, but as no such peculiarity was noticed in the case of the vaccinations from the other child, I conclude the tendency was accidental. Two children were vaccinated from crusts removed from a calf; in one the vaccination succeeded, in the other it failed. From virus shut up in tubes and used as soon as it could be carried to the houses of the children the following results were obtained :6 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. (4) That a special organization for the supply, keep, vaccination, &c., of these calves could be easily arranged for; (5) That to meet the wants of public vaccinating stations, where people voluntarily resort for vaccination, or of Europeans, or of the more enlightened section of the Native community, a very little explanation would suffice to render animal vaccination acceptable when necessity arose for its being practised; (6) Among a large section of the Hindoo community animal vaccination would be regarded with great suspicion on religious grounds. In the bazaars the popular feeling against it as an innovation would be very great, and furnish numbers with an excuse for not allowing vaccination to be practised; (7) Owing to the failures resulting from the use of tube lymph, it could not even on emergency be extensively used; (8) That for the same reason, this form of virus cannot be used for sending to the districts to commence vaccinations, and so the difficulty of inducing children to supply virus for the mofussil must still continue; (9) That in the event of animal vaccination being at any time introduced into Calcutta, a vaccinated calf could be sent to Burmah or any district within five days' distance of Calcutta where a large supply of lymph was urgently needed; (10) That no superiority has been noticed when re-vaccination was practised from the calf, and consequently during an epidemic of small-pox, except as a relief to the lymph supply, no advantage can be expected from animal vaccination. Annual report of the Metropolitan Circles of Vaccination for the year ending 31st March 1871, by SURGEON F. POWELL, M B., Superintendent. THE three metropolitan circles of vaccination have been under my superintendence during the whole of the year now to be reported on; the three deputy superintendents have been unchanged, and there have been no important changes amongst the vaccinators, none of the senior grade having been changed. 2. First Metropolitan Circle.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 7 disease. They continued to work there during the remainder of the season, and vaccinated a very large number; but owing to this removal, the thannahs Dabeepore and Gobindpore were scarcely touched, and Atchipore, which has been vaccinated in previous years, was likewise passed over. The area worked in approximated 925 square miles, in which 905 villages were protected and 82,014 operations performed. 5. Number vaccinated.8 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. yet I have no desire to detract from the credit due to Deputy Superintendent Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose and his staff of vaccinators, who have placed this circle again first on the list. In the three circles together there has been a slight falling off in the numbers vaccin- atedTHE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 9 is old, many prefer the time-honoured operation of inoculation. I would again most strongly urge on the Government the extension of Act IV (B.C.) of 1865, &quot;an Act to prohibit the practice of inoculation in the town and suburbs of Calcutta,&quot; to the whole of the Metro- politan circles; that is to say, the zillahs of Nuddea, 24-Pergunnahs, Hooghly, Howrah, and Burdwan. I am confident that with the establishment at present sanctioned, I could keep this tract of country efficiently vaccinated were inoculation made illegal The time lost in persuading the people to adopt the new, not the old preventive of small-pox, would be saved ; the interruption to the systematic vaccination of a district, caused by the necessity of sending vaccinators to stamp out small-pox, brought on in many cases by inoculation, would be avoided, and a large increase in the numbers vaccinated would result. 11. Attitude of the people.10 DARJEELING CIRCLE. for four months only in addition to Dr. Charles's extra allowance of Rs. 300 for eight months of the year. The decrease in numbers will also slightly affect the cost. The whole of the operations have been performed from arm-to-arm with the following exception. Nine capillary tubes of vaccine virus, received from England, were forwarded to me by the Superintendent-General of Vaccination, Calcutta. I gave three of these to each of the Deputy Superintendents, and requested them to vaccinate with this virus. Baboo Ram Soonder Ghose vaccinated two children, and both failed. Baboo Buddy Nath Brummoh vaccinated two children; one failed, and one was successful; but owing to the child being absent at the time when the vesicles were at their maturity, no vaccinations could be made from him : the new stock was therefore lost. Baboo Jadub Chundra Ghose vaccinated three children, and failed in all cases. 15. Behaviour of the establishment.DARJEELING CIRCLE. 11 Debeegunge, in the Boda Chukla thannah jurisdiction of Julpigoree, in December. No vaccination had ever been practised in this village before, and it was with great difficulty that the people could be prevailed upon to accept it. Debeegunge is a large bunder on the Kurtoo river, and contains people of many different castes and occupations. There were no zemindaree amlah resident to influence them. Small-pox of a mild form continued to spread from one mohulla to another during all the cold season among the people who were not vaccinated. Some mohullas, after months of refusal, consented to be vaccinated at last. A fair amount of work having been done in the neighbouring villages, the disease did not spread except into one village, where there were two cases, boys whose mother said they had been inoculated. Their brother, who was vaccinated, escaped. The two other outbreaks of small-pox in Julpi- goree were at Titalyah and Sunasikutta on the Ganges and Darjeeling road, in the month of March 1871. Early information having been given by the police, the vaccinators stamped out the disease before the end of the month. The outbreak in the Terai sub-division lasted longer, as from the great heat at the end of March the cases where vaccination failed would not submit to have the operations performed again. These persons became subjects of the disease which I traced to a village in the north of the Purneah district, where inoculation was being practised. 4. Cooch Behar.12 DARJEELING CIRCLE. prepared for the outbreak of small-pox, almost certain to take place, the sub-inspector of police at the thannah was requested to give early notice of the appearance of the disease. This he distinctly refused to do; and even when ordered by the Magistrate, who was on the spot, to do so, he allowed it to make head for weeks without affording any report. This man's conduct was brought under the notice of the Commissioner of Rajshahye, with what result I am unacquainted Its consequence has been that small-pox spread to Bhowanee- gunge, Ooleypore, Foolcomar, and Baga ChurDARJEELING CIRCLE. 13 There is little hope of vaccination becoming self-supporting if even the rich inhabitants of towns are allowed always to look to Government for it. The inoculators in Bograh, so far as I know, have almost given up their practice since the establishment of the Darjeeling- vaccination circle. How long this happy state of matters will continue is hard to say. Arm-to-arm vaccination is practised in this district, lymph never being carried on ivory slips except to a distance. I only met with one family who rejected vaccination. They were Kayeths by caste, and refused inoculation equally. This had been their custom for centuries, and they stated that they did not mean to change it, accepting the risk of small-pox. They interfered in no way with their neighbours, who were all vaccinated. 7. Rajshahye.14 DARJEELING CIRCLE. as to seriously affect the average of the whole season. Unsuccessful however as they were, they had some effect in checking small-pox in several different places; but it is hardly fair to vaccination to go on performing it at such seasons, as those in whom it failed will not be convinced they have not been protected, and if afterwards affected with small-pox, will assist in spreading reports unfavorable to vaccination, which will be only too eagerly adopted by inoculators and the large class of persons who view everything proceeding from the Govern- ment with suspicion and distrust. I visited Dinagepore in the end of September, in the hope of being able to see the cases operated on, but failed for want of elephants, the places being unapproachable by any other means. The Deputy Superintendent, who visited one of the affected places, represented his journey there as accomplished partly by walking, partly by swimming, and unsafe for one man from the number of crocodiles. At the beginning of the cold season small-pox was present in at least four different thannahs, in all of which it was suppressed by December; but it was re-introduced from the Purneah district into Hemtabad, one of the western thannahs adjoining Purneah, in February, and was again checked, only to recommence in distant parts of the same jurisdic- tion, and in Maldah. Steps were taken to meet it wherever it appeared, and the Chooramun zemindar was requested not to carry on the inoculation he was desirous of doing. So far as I learned, there was no inoculation practised in Dinagepore during the year except in two places by men from Rungpore. Getting early information of their work, the resulting small- pox was easily dealt with. I cannot state the number of inoculators in this district, but I believe they are numerous. 9. Maldah and Purneah.RANCHEE CIRCLE. 15 12. There is little hope of inoculators being induced to become vaccinators on their own account. When informed of Bengal Government resolution No. 3810 of 15th November 1870, a few presented themselves to the Civil Surgeon of Rungpore to be instructed, but I never heard that they practised vaccination after leaving the dispensary. Two inoculators of the Bograh district came to me, and I caused them to be taught; all others, about 78 in number I believe, stoutly refused to have anything to do with vaccination. In no other district did a single man come forward. From what I know of inoculators, I cannot bring myself to think that vaccination will ever become general throughout the country by their means. I believe that its systematic practice is only delayed by attempting their instruction. The worst vaccinators in my circle are old inoculators. They throw every obstacle in the way of arm-to-arm vaccination. They come to the work thinking they know it, and are always unwilling to learn. Vaccination is an operation of delicacy and importance; and the selection of lymph, a matter requiring judgment. No inoculator will believe this. The only hope I can entertain of bringing vaccination quickly within reach of the people is for Government to form special classes for teaching it in the medical colleges, and give the pupils some small means of support when under instruction. Superintendents of Vaccination have much too wandering lives for them ever to be able to conduct classes, and Civil Sugeons are not only too busy men with their many duties to have time for it, but the people object to come to charitable dispensaries to be vaccinated. A sub-assistant surgeon attached to the Medical College in Calcutta might easily turn out twenty or thirty trained vaccinators every season He might go about with his pupils, giving them all the practical instruction necessary, as well as by lectures. There is one difficulty attending this project, and that is to get a sub-assistant surgeon who would take the trouble to give the practical instruction beyond the limits of his class-room. Let inoculators be avoided: begin with pupils who have nothing else to learn. 13. I regret to say that Bengal Government circular No. 10 of the 18th January 1870 appears a dead letter in the Darjeeling circle of vaccination. 14. I beg to suggest that the Bengal Government be solicited to issue such orders as will enable me to be supplied with a sufficient number of elephants for the removal of my camp in case of my being obliged to travel in the rains. It is a useless waste of public money for me to go to sudder stations, and then to find that I can get no nearer to the interior of the districts I wish to visit. Report of the Ranchee Circle of Vaccination by ASSISTANT SURGEON J. J. WOOD, M.B., Superin- tendent of Vaccination, for the year ending 31st March 1871. COMPARED with last year there has been an increase of 4,212 in the number of persons operated on ; the percentage of sucessful cases is better, and the cost to Government much less. The history of the year's work is as follows:16 RANCHEE CIRCLE. tendent was sent out with men, and from the 6th of October work went on in this and the surrounding villages. On the 9th I saw 29 cases of small-pox in this village. One case proved fatal while I was there. There had been no small-pox in the neighbourhood, and it did not spread from the one village affected. After the vaccinators reached the village, one or two persons took small-pox, but the epidemic was put a stop to. 5. The illaquadar of Bijlia, Bolonath Misser, gave us great assistance. He helped the native Superintendent with his work in Bijha, went with him to all the villages around, and aided him in every way in his power. One vaccinator gave annoyance to his fellows here and also to the villagers, so that I had to discharge him. Operations around Bijlia as a centre went on favorably, and tended much to the success of the year. I had an opportunity of commending vaccination to the influential people about the widows of the late Maharajah of Chota Nagpore, when at Ratu, where they live. Ratu is near to Bijlia. The consequence was that work was actively carried on in villages belonging to them in that quarter. 6. In the beginning of December there was news of small-pox from Palamow, the sub-division of Lohardugga Two men were detached from the party near Bijlia to attend to it. These men began to work in Palamow on 12th December near Munka thannah. This ground was new, and the distances often great between villages where people could be found to employ the vaccinators. In January a mali, formerly engaged in inoculating, came forward at Daltongunge, the Palamow head-quarters, and offered to become a vaccin- ator. His instruction was accordingly attended to, and he was supplied with materials for working on his own account Two other men have since been similarly employed in Palamow by Mr. Forbes, the officer in charge of the sub-division, who takes great interest in vaccination. During the season vaccination was performed in 214 villages of Lohardugga district. The native Superintendent and vaccinators generally did their work creditably. Two men were convicted of inoculatingSONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 17 12. IV.18 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. As regards the amount of work done, the returns speak for themselves. Considering the smallness of the staff and the difficulties which had to be met, both the amount of work done, and the percentage of success obtained, have actually been great; and I have no hesitation in saying that they will stand a very favorable comparison with the results in other vaccine circles in Lower Bengal. Whilst the work of vaccination was thus being carried on by the whole of the Sonthal Pergunnah vaccine staff in the distant district of Rajmehal, the same kind of work was also done in the district of Deoghur under my immediate supervision, but by an altogether different kind of agency. For a long time it had been my endeavour to make vaccination an institution of the people themselves in the Sonthal Pergunnahs in the place of inoculation. The transition from the prophylactic practice of inoculation to that of vaccination appears to be an easy one; but to help this gradual progress, especially amongst a people full of prejudices strengthened by religious bigotry, requires great care and tact. It was therefore with great interest and pleasure that I watched during the last vaccine season the carrying on of the work of vaccination throughout the whole of the Deoghur district by the old Brahmin inoculators of the place, a result which I had been trying to bring about for several years past. The work was commenced in the month of January, and was pushed on with vigor till the end of April, when owing to the setting in of the hot weather, it was naturally stopped. How the various inoculators came to me one by one and took away vaccine crusts from me, and how gradually even the most bigoted classes of the people submitted to be vaccinated by their own inoculators, have been described in my dispensary report for 1870, to which therefore it is only necessary to refer to avoid repetition. Suffice it therefore to report here that no less than twenty-three Brahmin inoculators applied to me and took away vaccine crusts between January and April. By these, with the exception of three who could not start any operation owing to the lateness of the season, when they made up their minds to follow the example of the others, the work of vaccination was carried on more or less vigor- ously all over the Deoghur district. The result has been that no less than seventy-nine villages have received the blessings of this prophylactic measure, and no less than 5,322 children have been placed under its protective influence. The best feature, however, of it is that the greatest amount of work has been done in the villages and amongst the bigoted people where my advances in former years were most obstinately resisted. Thus, two Brahmins attached to the temple of Deoghur vaccinated 1,818 children in the town itself and in the villages in the immediate neighbourhood, and three others vaccinated 1,287 in the town of Rohnee and its neighbourhood. Rohnee is the head-quarter town of the talook of that name, and the work there was started, through my persuasion, by the grown-up married daughter of the GhatwalinSONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 19 Report on Vaccination in the Sonthal Pergunnahs for the year ending 31st March 1871, by SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEON KALI KRISHNA GHOSE. I TOOK charge of this department on the 12th October 1870. My predecessor, Sub- Assistant Surgeon Baboo Baney Madhub Bose, having gone down to Calcutta to do duty at the Medical College Hospital during the non-working season, the vaccinators (5 in number) were all distributed for duty in the several dispensaries of the Sonthal Pergunnahs. It having been found out on inquiry that the greater portion of the Rajmehal district was unprotected with vaccination, and that the Sonthal people generally were willing to receive it, it was thought advisable not to deprive them of the boon now that the season had already arrived. 2. With this purpose I obtained the consent of the Civil Surgeon, Sonthal Pergunnahs, to commence work at Rajmehal, and called in my vaccinators from the several dispensaries where they were at work. Three of them were very late in coming, one having arrived so late as the 15th of November. In the meantime I had commenced work with the vaccin- ator who was with me at Rajmehal, but owing to the above reason, the work was not fairly established until the latter end of November. 3. My vaccinators had each a circuit of not less than six miles assigned to him, and with this wide field at their command, they were instructed to proceed with their work in two rows, which, by their gradual convergence, were intended to complete the circle of operations comprising the whole district within its area. My object in this arrangement was at first to throw a circular line of vaccination throughout the district, so that every pergunnah might be touched at once, and be taught to feel and appreciate the boon ; and that finally, when the circle was completed, the whole district might be flooded over with vaccination. 4. This object would have been accomplished had the batch of vaccinators under me proved themselves fully equal to the task imposed upon them, and been all equally expert in their work. Far from this however, they with one or two exceptions fell very much short of what was required of them. Most of them were unskilled in the art, and deficient in the knowledge of vaccination, unacquainted with the arts of persuasion, and careless in the selection of matter for operation. As a consequence they worked at a great disadvantage, and were it not for the great pains I took in constantly inspecting their work, and repeatedly pointing out to them the true characters of a perfect vaccine vesicle with its areola of good lymph and crust, the mode of operating in such a way as to ensure success, and the necessity for securing the confidence of the people, I am sure my returns would not have shown half the number of successful cases. 5. The total number of cases operated on during the year, as shown in the returns, amounts to 6,454, with a percentage of 87 84 of successful cases. This is far from being an unsatisfactory result; a much greater progress might, however, have been made, and a higher percentage of success was no doubt attainable. But in addition to the above causes there were some other minor circumstances at work to retard the progress of our work and to interfere with its results, which must be taken into consideration. 6. In the first place the rude and barbarous Sonthals, though they were not generally resisting, would yet often have their own ways and times. Thus, during the harvest season, in the months of December and January20 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. Fourthly.SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 21 I at once deputed to the spot the vaccinator who was working with me at the dispensary with a supply of lymph received from Calcutta; but the people would not then accept his services, inoculation having already been established. This was the only instance that has come to my knowledge of the occurrence of small-pox in this district during the past year. No other instances are on record previous to my taking charge of this department. 1 am inclined to believe, however, that other instances had occurred, but which through apathy or wilful neglect on the part of the people, and the want of a regular police, they were not allowed to come to the light. I make this assertion simply from what has recently been witnessed this year. At the beginning of April, small-pox had appeared in two or three villages, chiefly as the result of inoculation; and had I depended solely upon the police, and not been myself constantly on the alert, I think I would have missed the information. The mundels and chowkeydars were extremely apathetic and indolent This fact was brought to the notice of the Assistant Commissioner, who kindly took action in the matter, and rendered it binding upon the mundels to give information immediately that any outbreak of small-pox occurred. In these villages, as well as in two others which have all recently formed the subjects of special reports, the people who are chiefly Hindoos or Mahomedans had strongly resisted all former attempts at vaccination. Two of the villages mentioned above as being the starting points of small-pox, had secretly called in inoculators from foreign districts, and had undergone inoculation. I am happy to be able to say, however, that through my exer- tions recently vaccination has been introduced in most of the villages, and the small-pox has now well nigh disappeared. It it a fact also worthy of notice that small-pox has not yet been known to make its aggression upon any of the villages which have been protected by vaccination, and I can almost confidently assert that even if it were to do so my successful cases would resist inroads most successfully. 12. The pergunnahs in greater or less portions of which vaccination has been per- formed during the year are Cheetolia, Chota Kanjiala, Burra Kanjiala, Piar, Mujhwa, Telliagooree, Jumni, and Kankjole; and the number of villages in which the work has been carried on amounts to 76. 13. It is an auspicious circumstance for the next season, that in the sub-division of Pakour, constituting in most part the zemindaree portion of the district, where the people are generally very intractable to deal with, and where vaccination has never been practised, two influential zemindars have been induced to enlist themselves on our side. I should have intro- duced the work there this year had it not been too late in the season when any sudden removal of the vaccinators from the sphere of their operations would have proved detri- mental to the progress of the work. Moreover, the paucity of my establishment, and the want of a native Superintendent, render it impracticable that two or more sub-districts should be taken up in one season. It cannot be expected that an unassisted Deputy Superintendent would be enabled to keep up the necessary amount of control and close supervision if the work is spread out too much, especially over a rugged tract of country like this, where the difficulties and inconveniences of travelling and so forth are so immensely great. As it is however very desirable and necessary for the progress of the work that two or more Sub-districts should be taken up at once, 1 humbly beg to solicit the sanction of a native Superintendent for this circle. The amount of work that might then be overtaken would more than counterbalance the small outlay that would be incurred. 14. In conclusion, I think it but justice to mention that one of my vaccinators among the rest, the oldest one of the batch, whom I have taken occasion to mention above, has shone very conspicuously during the season. He has vaccinated a total number of 2,976 cases, out of which 2,843 have turned out successful. His work was always subjected to a rigid scrutiny and he has acquitted himself most creditably. This man is also very popular among the Sonthals, and I think that if, what is earnestly prayed for, a native Superintendent, or at least a head vaccinator, were sanctioned for this department, his services might be turned to infinitely better account. In fact, to give him a little encouragement would be in a manner to secure the permanent interests of this department. Memorandum from C. R. FRANCIS, ESQ., M.B., Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, Dinapore Circle, to the Secretary to the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department,STATISTICAL TABLES.
VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1870. 25 TABLE A. Summary of Vaccination performed by the General Vaccine Establishment and Vaccination Circles, under the Government of Bengal and by the Establishments attached to Civil Stations or Dispensaries, from 1st April 1870 to 31st March 1871. CIRCLE. Parts comprised in the circle. Total number of persons vaccinated. Primary vaccinations. Re-vaccinations. Percentage of suc- cessful cases, ex- cluding those un- known from the total Paid by the state. Paid from other sources. Total cost. Cost of each successful case. Preminary vaccin- ation. Re-vaccination. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. In Primary. In Secondary. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Chowringhee Depôt ... Calcutta ... ... ... ... 418 2 a 420 409 9 ...... 1 1 ...... 97.84 50 8,974 0 0 3,804 0 0 12,778 0 0 0 14 6¾ Park Street Dispensary ... Ditto ... ... ... ... 23 ...... a 23 23 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 100 ...... Medical College ... Ditto... ... ... ... 37 4 b 41 21 1 15 1 ...... 3 95.15 100 North Division ... In the town and Suburbs of Calcutta 3,857 197 4,054 c 3,817 c 44 9 3 194 ...... 98.86 1.52 Middle 26 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in each division of superin- 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 CIRCLE. Name and rank of superintendent. Number of native superinten- dents, head vaccinators. Number of vaccinators. Total number of persons vaccinated. Collectorate, political agency, or native state in which vaccinations were performed during the year. Population in area included in last column. Name of portion of district or of town. 1870-71. 1869-70. 1870-71. 1869-70 1870-71. 1869-70. NORTH DIVISION . Town ... Surgeon T E Charles, M.D , Super- intendent-General. 1 1 5 5 2,535 2,333 In the town and suburbs of Calcutta. North division. Suburbs 1 1 3 4 1,519 1,693 Total ... 2 2 8 9 4,054 4,026 MIDDLE DIVISION Town ... 1 1 4 5 1,497 1,686 Calcutta, 430,000 Middle division. Suburbs ... 1 1 2 2 1,599 1,530 Cooly depôts ... ... ... ... ... 5,163 6,408 Suburbs, 250,000 Total .. 2 2 6 7 8,259 9,624 SOUTH DIVISION. South division. Town ... 1 1 3 3 1,358 1,444 Suburbs ... 1 1 5 6 3,906 4,217 Cooly depôts .. 1,710 2,972 Total ... 2 2 8 9 6,974 8,633 Grand total .. 6 6 22 25 19,287 22,283 Statement shotting particulars of Vaccination in the 1st circle..... ... Surgeon P.Powell, M.B , Superin- tendent . 1 1 22 23 27,028 33,672 24-Pergunnahs. 143,291 7 thannahs in 24-Pergun- nahs 2ndVACCINATION REPORT FOR 1870. 27 No. I. tendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, during the year 1870-71. 9 10 11 12 Primary vaccinations. Re-vaccinations. Percentage of successful cases, ex- cluding those un- known from the total Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator A. B. C D. a b. c. d. Sex. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those &quot;doubtful.&quot; Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful,in- cluding those &quot; doubtful&quot; Unknown. In primary vac- cination. In secondary vaccination 1,208 1,151 12 2,059 288 ... 765 1,594 2,337 21 1 2,359 3 179 ... 182 99.10 1.64 507 760 751 1 1,068 442 ... 376 1,135 1,480 23 8 1,511 ... 15 ... 15 98.46 ... 506 1,968 1,902 13 3,127 730 ... 1,141 2,729 3,817 44 9 a 3,870 3 194 ... 197 98.86 1.52 506.75 749 671 80 888 452 ... 452 968 1,382 22 16 1,420 16 65 4 85 98.43 19.75 374.25 726 729 64 832 559 ... 337 1,118 1,437 18 ... 1,455 20 126 ... 146 98.76 13.69 799.50 337 199 ... 531 5 ... 168 368 425 2 109 536 1,356 2,138 1,133 4,627 99.53 38.80 ...... 1,812 1,599 144 2,251 1,016 ... 957 2,454 3,244 42 125 b 3,411 1,392 2,329 1,137 4,858 98.72 37.40 516 573 563 234 394 508 ... 353 783 1,123 13 ... 1,136 30 192 ... 222 98.85 13.51 452.66 2,067 1,816 34 2,698 1,151 ... 470 3,413 3,871 10 2 3,883 1 22 ... 23 99.74 4.34 781.20 127 94 ... 132 89 ... 14 207 221 ... ... 221 318 1,171 ... 1,489 100 21.35 ...... 2,767 2,473 268 3,224 1,748 ... 837 4,403 5,215 23 2 5,240 349 1,385 ... 1,734 99.56 20.12 658 6,547 5,974 425 8,602 3,494 ... 2,935 9,586 12,276 109 136 *12,521 1,744 3,908 1,137 6,789 99.11 30.85 564.27 Metropolitan Vaccine Circles during the year 1870-71. 13,948 13,064 2 16,358 10,652 ... 1,959 25,053 26,925 69 18 27,012 5 11 ... 16 99.74 31.25 1,228.54 15,906 15,187 6 13,488 17,599 ... 4,067 27,026 30,847 224 22 31,093 2 12 ... 14 99.27 14.28 1,413.95 42,887 39,122 155 11,164 70,690 ... 6,132 75,877 81,855 133 21 28 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. II. Statement showing the monthly number and results of the vaccinations performed in the Northern, Middle, and Southern Divisions of Superintendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, during the year 1870-71. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of superinten- dence. Months. Districts in which oper- ations were chiefly conducted in each month. Total number vaccin- ated. RESULTS. Total. Average percentage successful, excluding those &quot; unknown.&quot; Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding doubt- ful. Unknown. 1870. NORTH DIVISION April ... ... Town, primary ... ... 109 107 2 ... 109 98.16 Ditto, repetition . ... 1 ...... 1 ... 1 ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 1 ...... 1 ... 1 ... Suburb, primary... ... 63 62 1 ...... 63 98.41 May .. .. Town, primary ...... 49 46 3 49 93 87 Ditto, re-vaccination 2 2 ... 2 ... Suburb, primary ... ... 25 24 1 ..... 25 96 June... ... Town, primary ... 15 15 ... ... 15 100 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 1 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... Suburb, primary... ... 17 15 2 ... 17 88.23 July ... ... Town, primary ... ... 18 17 1 ... 18 94.44 Suburb, ditto ... ... 22 22 ... ... 22 100 August ... Town, primary ... ... 16 16 ...... ... 16 100 Suburb, ditto .... 8 8 ...... ... 8 100 September ... Town, primary ... ... 17 16 1 ... 17 94.11 October .. Town, primary ... 40 40 ...... ...... 40 100 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 1 ...... 1 ...... 1 Suburb, primary ... ... 51 50 1 ...... 51 98.03 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 1 ...... 1 ...... 1 ... November . Town, primary ... ... 133 132 1 ...... 133 99.24 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 1 ... 1 ...... 1 ... Suburb, primary... ... 145 145 ... ...... 145 100 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 5 ...... 5 ...... 5 ...... December ... Town, primary ... .. 333 332 1 ...... 333 99.69 Ditto, repetition ... ... 1 1 .... ...... 1 100 Ditto, re-vaccination ... ... 10 ...... 10 ... 10 ... Suburb, primary ... ... 267 255 8 4 267 96.95 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 4 ...... 4 ...... 4 ...... 1871. January .. Town, primary ... ... 399 397 2 ...... 399 99.49 Ditto, repetition..... 1 ...... 1 ...... 1 ...... Ditto, re-vaccination ... ... 44 1 43 ..... 44 2.27 Suburb, primary ... ... 292 288 2 2 292 99.31 Ditto, repetition ... ... 4 4 ...... ... 4 100 February ... Town, primary ... ... 738 736 2 ...... 738 99.72 Ditto, repetition ... ... 1 1 ...... ...... 1 100 Ditto, re-vaccination ... ... 81 2 79 ...... 81 2.46 Suburb, primary ... ... 364 359 3 2 364 99.17 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 5 ...... 6 ...... 5 March Town, primary ... ... 486 479 6 1 486 98.76 Ditto, repetition ... ... 2 2 .... ..... 2 100 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 41 ... 41 ...... 41 ...... Suburb, primary ... ... 250 245 5 ...... 250 98 Ditto, repetition ... ... 3 3 ...... ...... 3 100 Total ... Town, primary ...... 2,353 2,333 19 1 2,353 99.19 Ditto, repetition...... 6 4 2 6 66.66 Ditto, re-vaccination 182 3 179 182 1.64 Suburb, primary .. 1,504 1,473 23 8 1,501 98 46 Ditto, repetition ... 7 7 ...... ...... 7 100 Ditto, re-vaccmation ... 15 ...... 15 ...... 15 .... MIDDLE DIVISION . April... . Town, primary ... ... 50 46 2 2 50 95.83 Ditto, repetition ... ... 1 .... 1 ...... 1 ... Ditto, re-vaccination ... 3 ..... 3 ...... 3 ... Suburb, primary... ... 64 62 2 ... 64 96.87 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 15 10 5 ..... 15 66.66 Cooly depôts, primary ... 87 57 ...... 30 87 100 Ditto, re-vaccination ... 493 117 240 136 493 32.77
VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1870. 29 TABLE No. II.30 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. II.VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1870. 31 TABLE No. II.32 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. II.VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1870. 33 TABLE No. III. Statement showing expenditure of Vaccine Department in each circle of superintendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee and Sonthal Pergunnahs Vaccine circles during the year 1870-71. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinat- ed. Percentage of success- ful, excluding those unknown from the total. Cost of each successful case, excluding cases of modified success after re-vaccination. REMARKS. Paid by Government. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. CALCUTTA AND SUBURBS. Office establishment, at Rs. 102 per mensem . . 1,224 0 0 1,224 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Taking the grand total of Rs.12,778 expended, the cost of each suc- cessful case has been 114 annas, 6¾ pie. The same, including 2,916 cases of modified success after re- vaccination, is 12 annas 6/7 pie. 3 Superintendents, at Rs. 150 each per mensem .. 5,400 0 0 *5,290 0 0 ...... ...... ...... 3 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem 360 0 0 360 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Contingencies including office rent ... 1,200 0 0 1,200 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Travelling allowance, &c. ... 1,254 0 0 900 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Total ... 9,438 0 0 8,974 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Paid by Town Municipality. 3 Head Vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem ... 1,980 0 0 1,620 0 0 ...... ...... ..... 3 Vaccinators, at Rs. 12 each per mensem ... ... 6 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem .. ... ... 3 Vaccinators, at Rs. 8 each per mensem ... ... Contingencies, at Rs. 18-5-4 per mensem ... ... ... 220 0 0 220 0 0 ...... ...... ..... Total ... 2,200 0 0 1,840 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Paid by Suburban Municipa- lity. 3 Head Vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem ... 1,764 0 0 1,764 0 0 ...... ...... ...... 2 Vaccinators, at Rs. 12 each per mensem . ... 7 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem . ... 1 Vaccinator, at Rs. 8 per men- sem ... ... ... Contingencies, at Rs. 16-10-8 per mensem . ... ... 200 0 0 200 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Total ... 1,964 0 0 1,964 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Grand total ... 13,602 0 0 12,778 0 0 19,287 77.82 0 14 6¾ METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Superintendent's salary, at Rs. 800 per mensem ... ... 9,600 0 0 9,600 0 0 1,40,119 99.67 0 4 ¼ Superintendent's Presidency house-rent, at Rs. 100 per mensem ... ... ......... 1,200 0 0 3 Native Superintendents, at Rs 200 each per mensem 7,200 0 0 7,200 0 0 9 Head Vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem .. ... 1,620 0 0 1,620 0 0 57 Assistant vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem ... 6,840 0 0 6,840 0 0 Office establishment ... ... 1,620 0 0 1,620 0 0 Travelling allowance ... ... 7,569 0 0 6,075 0 0 Contingencies ... ... ... 1,080 0 0 1,080 0 0 Total ... 35,529 0 0 35,235 0 0 1,40,119 99.67 0 4 ¼ * One Superintendent rejoined on the 22nd April 1870. L
34 STATISTICAL TABLES. TABLE No. III.VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1270. 35 TABLE No. IV. Statement showing the results of the year 1870-71, as compared with those of each of the previous five years, in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee and Sonthal Pergunnahs Vaccine Circles. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Circle. YEAR. Total number of persons vac- cinated. Number successful. Ratio per cent, successful, ex- cluding those &quot;unknown&quot; from the total. NUMBER OF VACCINATORS Cost of whole vaccine esta- blishment. Cost of travelling allowances and contingencies. Total cost. Cost of each successful case, excluding cases of modified success after re-vaccination. A. B C. D. Paid by State. Paid from other sources. Total. Number previous- ly employed as inoculators or na- tive practitioners Rs.. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Calcutta and Suburbs. 1865-66... * 1866-67 ... 1867-68 ... 1868-69 ... 1869-70 .. 22,283 16,089 79.07 3 30 33 10 10,314 0 0 2,899 0 5 13,213 0 5 0 13 1½ 1870-71 .. 19,287 14,020 77.83 3 25 28 10 10,258 0 0 2,520 0 0 12,778 0 0 0 14 6¾ Metropoli- tan circle. 1868-69... 122,493 121,335 99.42 68 ... 68 ... No information kept. .... 0 4 1 1869-70 ... 155,825 155,315 99.75 68 ... 68 11 22,831 9 9 7,325 5 136 STATISTICAL TABLES. B.VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1870. 37 VACCINATION. of medical superintendence in the province of Bengal, during the year 1870-71. 9 10 11 12 Primary vaccinations. Re-vaccinations. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, including those &quot;doubtful.&quot; Unknown. Total. Christians. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Other castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. In primary vaccina- tion. In secondary vacci- nation. 97 1,338 1,203 .. 566 2,072 2,555 83 .. 2,638 ... ... ... ... 96.85 ... 2,638 11 1,485 564 .. 644 1,416 1,989 71 .. 2,060 ... ... ... ... 96.55 ... 2,060 15 323 28 .. 23 343 347 19 .. 366 ... ... ... ... 94.80 ... 366 73 1,641 386 ... 835 1,265 1,923 165 12 2,100 59 139 2 200 92.09 29.79 2,300 2 213 69 ... ... 284 260 24 ... 284 ... ... ... ... 91.54 ... 142 2 337 10 ... 10 339 160 189 ... 349 ... ... ... ... 45.84 ... 349 2 By civil medical officer. 233 38 STATISTICAL TABLES. B.VACCINATION REPORT FOR 1870. 39 VACCINATION.(RESOLUTION.) JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. MEDICAL. Fort William, the 28th November 1871. READ( 2 ) 3. Calcutta and Suburbs.( 3 ) 10. Dr. Lidderdale expresses little hope of inducing inoculators to become vaccinators on their own account; but the plan has met with a fair amount of success in Chota Nagpore and elsewhere, and there is no reason why, if proper instruction is given, and if the superintendent exercises tact and discretion in the matter, it should not succeed also in this circle. 11. The Lieutenant-Governor observes that there is no statement of the amount of inspection performed by superintendents, and he has had reason during the year to doubt if the duty of personal supervision was sufficiently attended to by Dr. Lidderdale. That gentleman now, at the end of an unseemly and disputatiously written report, asks that he may be allowed elephants for the purpose of moving about in the rains. As in the plains scarcely any vaccination goes on in the rainy season, it is difficult to understand the necessity of this, especially as no district or inspecting officers in those divisions are allowed elephants by Government. If they require elephants they hire them, and Dr. Lidderdale can do the same. Lobardugga. Maunbhoom. Hazarecbaugh. Singbhoom. 12. Ranchee Circle.( 4 ) very fully concurs in the summary of the principles laid down by the Inspector- General for the conduct of vaccine operations, and especially in regard to the necessity of restricted areas and close supervision. ORDERED that a copy of this resolution be forwarded to the Inspector- General of Hospitals for information and guidance, and for communication to the subordinate officers concerned. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, S. C. BAYLEY, Offg. Secretary to the Govt. of Bengal. No. 3865. COPY forwarded to Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Depart- ment, for information and guidance. Circular No. 64. EXTRACT (paragraph 8) from the above resolution, with extract (paragraph 19) of the Inspector-General's report, forwarded to all Commmissioners for report. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, A. MACKENZIE, Junior Secretary to the Govt. of Bengal. FORT WILLIAM : The 28th November 1871.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PROVINCE OF BENGAL FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1872. BY J. CAMPBELL BROWN, ESQ., C.B., Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. Calcutta: PRINTED AT THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT PRESS. 1872.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PROVINCE OF BENGAL FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1872. BY J. CAMPBELL BROWN, ESQ., C.B., Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. Calcutta : PRINTED AT THE BENGAL SECRETARIAT PRESS. 1872.
INDEX. PAGE. General Report ... ... ... ... ... ... ... i to xvi Fourth Annual Report of the Presidency Vaccine Department... ... ... ...... 1 to 8 Fourth Annual Report of the Metropolitan Circles ... ... ... ... ... 9 to 20 Sixth Annual Report of the Darjeeling Circle ... ... ... ... ...... 21 to 26 Fifth Annual Report of the Ranchee Circle ... ... ... ... ... ... 27 to 32 Fifth Annual Report of Vaccination in the Sonthal Pergunnahs ... ... ...... 33 to 42 Circular Instructions regarding preparation of reports ... ... ... ... ... 43 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONSNo. 583. FROM THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL. Fort William, the 23rd August 1872. SIR, I HAVE the honor to submit reports and returns of vaccination in the province of Lower Bengal for the year ending 31st March 1872. General results. STATEMENT No. I. Total number vaccinated. RATIO PER CENT, OF SUCCESSFUL CASES EXCLUDING THOSE UNKNOWN. In primary vaccin- ation. In secondary vaccination. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. Calcutta and Suburbs ... 19,287 20,535 99.11 99.58 30.85 25.90 Metropolitan Circles ... 140,119 91,516 99.69 99.58 34.28 14.28 Darjeeling ii REPORT. Ratio of success. the rate of success in primary and secondary operations in each circle as contrasted with last year. In primary vaccinations there is a better rate in all circles except Darjeeling, where the falling off is considerable, and in the Metropolitan circles, where it is slight. The ratios of success in secondary operations are less in the circles and higher in dispensaries. Cases of &quot; modified success&quot; have been eliminated from the former. Cost of vaccination. 4. The total cost of operations was Rs. 87,949-2-5 against Rs. 87,744-1-6REPORT. iii Prevalence of small- pox in Calcutta. 9. The facts and considerations adduced by Dr. Charles regarding the prevalence of small-pox in Calcutta are of the utmost interest and importance. Time will show how far the suppression of inoculation and the systematic and thorough performance of vaccination have been the causes of the very remarkable freedom from the disease enjoyed by Calcutta of late years; but the recent experience of small-pox in England proves to demon- stration that we must beware of permitting a lull in the prevalence of this disease to cause any laxity in maintaining the population protected by sound vaccination and revaccination. Though the policy of &quot; stamping out&quot; the disease when it appears is sound, and the practice often successful, no system or practice can compare in efficiency with that of conferring on every member of the community as complete protection as possible by sound vaccination. Degree of protec- tion of population. 10. Dr. Charles' data showing the degree in which the population of Calcutta is protected from small-pox are of the utmost value, and it is to be hoped that year by year this important method of testing the completeness of the work done by the vaccine establishment will be very carefully employed. The results shown in Dr. Charles' table, though they compare very favorably with similar statements obtained from the mofussil, abundantly prove that much remains to be done to render vaccination universal and protection from small- pox complete. It is doubtful whether these so necessary ends can be attained by anything short of a compulsory law: still nothing short of them should be considered satisfactory. Use of registration of births as an aid to vaccin- ation. 11. The efforts made to render the registration of births subservient to vaccination have not been very successful. If every birth were registered in Calcutta, and every child so registered vaccinated, the system would be perfect except as regards importations. This is the system practised in England and other countries. In India, however, the system of domiciliary vaccination must be systematically pursued for very many years to come, and it is questionable how far it is expedient to rely upon the aid of an imperfect system of registra- tion of births which may render the necessity of a systematic house-to-house system less apparent. Exhaustive vaccination of the unprotected must constitute the central object of endeavour, and the house-to-house plan is undoubtedly under present circumstances the most effectual means of attaining that object. 12. Dr. Charles bears warm testimony to the efficiency and diligence of the Superintendents acting under his orders. Metropolitan cir- cles ; summary of results of pre- vious years. 13. Metropolitan Circles.iv REPORT. Season 1868-69. &quot; The country adjacent to the Railway and down the river to Oolabarriah, comprising 4 thannahs in Hooghly, was efficiently vaccinated, and 6 thannahs in Hooghly and one in Burdwan were partially done. &quot; In the 24-Pergunnahs 2 thannahs were fully and 2 partially vaccinated. Season 1869-70. &quot;In the season of 1869-70, the work done was 10 thannahs in the 24-Pergunnahs fully and 1 partially ; 7 thannahs in Nuddea fully ; 7 thannahs in Hooghly fully and 2 partially; the total area being 2,071 square miles. Vaccination was carried on in 2,175 villages and 155,700 people were vaccinated. Season 1870-71. &quot; In 1870-71 in 24-Pergunnahs, 7 thannahs were fully and 7 partially vaccinated. &quot; In Nuddea, 6 thannahs were fully done and in Hooghly 2 thannahs slightly. &quot; The area covered was 2,509 square miles, and 140,144 persons were vaccinated in 2,185 villages. Season 1871-72. &quot; In 1871-72, in Burdwan, 7 thannahs were fully and 4 thannahs more than half done, and 3 thannahs slightly. &quot; In Nuddea, 2 thannahs were fully vaccinated. &quot; The area gone over was 2,231 square miles, and the total number of vaccinations 90,924 in 973 villages. Summary of work done. &quot; The total of the four seasons' work may be thus summed up (calculating only the work performed by the regular establishment and leaving out of the account that done by munici- pal and other extra vaccinators or in measures taken to arrest small-pox)REPORT. v Local vaccination the final aim. Dr. Powell's report, and in paragraph 16 the amount of work accomplished by 11 men thus employed is specified. The outturn is good and ratio of success large. Fair progress has thus been made in what must be considered as the final aim of vaccine effort, viz. localized and locally supported vaccination. This object can only be very partially realized as the vaccine establishment is at pre- sent organized and worked; but when the people have become thoroughly fami- liarized with the proceeding, and have come to look upon it as an institution and a necessity, it is hoped that localized vaccination may gradually become an accomplished fact. Result of season bad. 16. The results for the past season have been peculiarly unfortunate; the area of country overtaken has been much smaller and the number of vaccin- ations performed less. The decrease as compared with 1870-71 has amounted to 48,603 persons and 48,645 successful vaccinations. The percentage of suc- cess stands, however, nearly as high as in 1870-71, and was verified by Dr. Powell to within .43 per cent. The work done by each vaccinator during the season fell from 2,123 to 1,452 vaccinations per man, and the cost of each successful case rose from annas 4-¼ to annas 6-1. Causes of non-suc- cess. 17. Dr. Powell details in the 9 th paragraph of his report the causes of his diminished success. They were briefly : difficulties inherent in the occupation of a new field ; fever, disabling the vaccinators and disinclining the people to be vaccinated; prejudice and passive opposition ; heavy floods; a late Doorgah Poojah, and a less efficient establishment. These causes I consider valid and sufficient, and I cannot attribute the slightest blame to Dr. Powell and his assist- ants on account of the comparatively meagre work of the season; on the con- trary, they appear to have contended bravely and perseveringly against difficul- ties which they were powerless to overcome. Employment of vaccinators in dispensaries. Results. System modified. Might be discon- tinued. 18. There is one difficulty, however, which Dr. Powell describes in the 2nd paragraph of his report, namely, the employment of vaccinators in dispen- saries during the recess, which should not again disturb his proceedings. This mode of disposing of vaccinators during the non-working season, which has been practised in the Punjab and other parts of the presidency for years, was recommended by Dr. Murray and sanctioned in Bengal Government letter No. 838, dated 22nd June 1869. It has been adopted in the other circles of the province without difficulty, though the Ranchi vaccinators made a show of opposition at first. It soon became apparent that the vaccinators of the metro- politan circle were to give trouble. They objected to being employed as dressers on the score of caste, and many of them feigned sickness rather than obey the order. On my representation the order was modified (Bengal Govern- ment letter No. 2129, dated. 8th July 1871), and permission was given to allow half of the men to proceed on leave and exempt the remainder from working as dressers. The result mentioned by Dr. Powell of several of the men setting up as medical practitioners on the strength of the smattering of knowledge obtained in dispensaries, is one to be discouraged and avoided as much as pos- sible. This season the system has been modified and larger numbers placed at dispensaries in and close to Calcutta, while one-half of them will obtain leave alternately. As the services of these men are of little or no value quoad the dispensaries, I do not consider it necessary that the order should be enforced, and would second Dr. Powell's proposal; but when not actually employed, I think the vaccinators should, as in other circles, receive an unemployed pay of two-thirds of their employed pay, or Rs. 7 and 8 and 10 for men drawing Rs. 10, 12, and 15 a month. Inspection. 19. Dr. Powell's inspection was conducted on the same thorough system as in former seasons, and the results are highly satisfactory. The Deputy Sup- erintendents saw each about 80 per cent. of the vaccinations performed in their respective circles. This is a good proportion. Small-pox. 20. The particulars recorded regarding the prevalence of small-pox would be more valuable if the locality of the outbreaks were given. In about b
vi REPORT. 75 per cent. of the instances the disease was due to the practice of inoculation. The death-rate was 24 per cent., and vaccination appears to have been of material service in &quot; stamping out&quot; the disease. Inoculation. Instructing inocu- lators. Conditions under which they should be permitted to practise. 21. It is not to be wondered at that, notwithstanding the prohibition of inoculation, this time-honored practice is still occasionally resorted to. The syste- matic spread of vaccination aided by prohibitive law and, perhaps, a few examples, will no doubt in time procure its complete disappearance. It is satisfactory to observe that some progress was made in instructing inoculators. Dr. Powell's proposal to attach these men as apprentices to the circles on a salary of Rs. 5 during the working season has already been sanctioned. I agree with Dr. Powell in thinking that a strict watch should be kept over these men's proceedings so as to ensure good work. They should be registered, allowed to select a certain definite area of operations, engaged to vaccinate there exhaustively, should deposit a nominal register of work, and their proceedings should be thoroughly inspected and verified at least once a season by a member of the vaccine estab- lishment. These obligations would be compensated by the instruction in the art, and license to practise. Indeed the time may come when a system of licensing men certified as competent to vaccinate particular areas will supersede the present plan of State vaccination by wandering gangs receiving high pay from the public treasury. Darjeeling circle additional esta- blishment. 22. Darjeeling Circle.REPORT. vii Difficulties en- countered. 25. It is not necessary to follow Dr. Lidderdale through the detail of work in each district of his large circle. His proceedings, always characterized by energy, vary considerably in success according to the degree of opposition which he encountered, the existence of small-pox in the district, or the practice of inoculation and efforts of inoculators. Many special circumstances were against him,viii REPORT. Concentration of agency necessary. A flying party re- quired. Protection to be maintained by local vaccinators. one or two zillahs, and (b) to concentrate the agency now employed in the several zillahs of the circle in particular parts of it, say the sudder thannah, protect thoroughly and maintain thoroughly protected that, and extend gradually as means and men permit. I am inclined to the last-mentioned scheme, as I have a strong opinion that vaccine operations should be conducted in relation to the divisions which have been made for purposes of civil administration. If it will become possible eventually to localize vaccination, the present general and special efforts should be arranged so as to permit of the gradual development of that object. If either scheme of concentrated vaccination is adopted, viz. concentrating the whole establishment in one district, or concen- trating a part in a particular and definite portion of each district, a flying agency will become necessary to cope with outbreaks of small-pox. The Commissioner of the Rajshahye division and Superintendent of Vaccination are agreed in this, and it is proposed further, as successive districts or areas are thoroughly protected, to instruct and license inoculators and distribute them as local practitioners of vaccination over definite portions of the protected area for the purpose of maintaining protection. Act IV of 1865 might then be applied to the areas, districts, or portions of districts, thus successively disposed of. Summary of plan for future work. A plan of the kind now sketched promises the best results, and there appears to be no difficulty in realizing it. It consists briefly ofREPORT. ix Need of vaccine in- spectors. Principles on which vaccination should be developed. for many years, if systematic work is carried on until the whole division has been overtaken. It becomes therefore necessary to provide for continuing the protection once conferred by the Government establishment. This can best be done by licensing private vaccine practitioners and assigning to them definite and manageable areas. It is quite evident, however, that besides the instruction which they obtain from the Superintendent, systematic supervision is necessary, and one or more vaccine inspectors should be appointed to each district to assist, direct, and watch the proceedings of these men. They are evidently very willing to work under guidance, and the principles which in my opinion should guide the future development of vaccination in this division are as follow:x REPORT. Summary of work. There was, as compared with. 1870-71, an increase of 1,898 persons vaccinated and 1,918 successful vaccinations. Each man vaccinated 1,302 cases against 1,190. The percentage of success was 90.88 against 87.84, and the cost of each successful case Rs. 0-5-2, against Rs. 0-6-0¼. The work was more concentrated and systematic, and confined principally to the sub-division of Rajmehal. Work of inocula- tors. System and super- vision necessary. 35. Dr. Chandra had 20 converted inoculators at work in Deoghur; these men vaccinated 3,950 persons. One man was at work in the Pakour sub-division, 2 in Godda, and 6 in Doomka. Reports were received of 757 vaccinations by 5 of these men. The Civil Surgeon indicates the want of a little more system in the disposal of this agency. In this I quite agree with him, and the considerations adduced in connection with the Ranchi circle will equally apply to the Sonthal Pergunnahs. He points out also that supervision is necessary, and I recommend the appointment of a vaccine inspector to be employ- ed and paid as he proposes. It is to be hoped that the inoculators will come forward earlier during the coming season. Dr. Chandra is entitled to great credit for his good work in this district. Dispensary vaccin- ation. 36. Dispensary, municipal, and local vaccination.REPORT. xi Character of the work. of Arrah, Curran of Gowhatty, MacLeod of Sarun, Stewart of Pooree, Briscoe of Gowalparah, Connolly of Bancoorah, and Stork of Tipperah. The mode in which this work is performed is generally very unsatisfactory. The vaccinators are in most cases left to work very much as they please, to find subjects in the station and surrounding villages as best they may ; their proceedings are neither defined and directed, nor their work supervised as it ought to be. The work done is generally desultory and haphazard, and seldom systematic or exhaustive. In some stations an attempt has been made to procure systematic and thorough work. This is most conspicuous in Dacca, Patna, Berhampore, Pooree, Tipperah, and Mozufferpore. Amount of work done and success obtained. The number vaccinated by each man and the percentage of success are again far below the results obtained by special establishments. In some districts the outturn is meagre, e.g., Burdwan, Beerbhoom, Pubna, Cuttack, Pooree, Balasore, and Gya, and in others the percentage of success is very low, e.g., Jessore, Pubna, Cuttack, Cachar, Sylhet, and Gya. Unsatisfactory na- ture of proceed- ings. The districts and stations conspicuous for the amount of work done by each man are Bancoorah, Hooghly, Howrah, Serampore, Patna, Shahabad, Tirhoot, Backergunge, and Cachar; and those in which the percentage of success is best, Midnapore, Serampore, Moorshedabad, Pooree, Dacca, Noakholly, Kamroop, Seebsagor, Shillong, Patna, Durbungah, Bhaugulpore, and Singbhoom. I must admit that I am not at all satisfied with the results of dispensary vaccination, even though in some respects this is an advance on former years. The amount of vaccination done in most districts is a mere trifle in relation to what ought to be done, and what is done is not so well done either as regards system or success as it should be. Still it is of great importance to have at least one centre of vaccination and one available vaccinator in each district. The success of local vaccination must always greatly depend on the efforts of local officers, and also very materially on the character of the men employed to vaccinate. With a zealous civil surgeon obtaining aid and encouragement from the local civil authorities, the sudder station should form a nucleus of systematic and complete vaccination whence the work may gradually spread into the district. Aid of civil autho- rities necessary. Sustained interest in the subject de- sirable. I would here specially urge how necessary to the success of vaccination is the moral support of the civil authorities. There can be no doubt that the partial success which has attended the endeavours to convert inoculators has been greatly owing to the interest which the orders issued by Government in November 1870 has caused local officers to take in these men, and there is every reason to hope that a continued or enhanced interest will carry this very pro- mising movement to a successful issue. A fair commencement has been made, and it would be fatal to the cause of vaccination were efforts to flag now. The records of the year's proceedings do not show many instances of native gentlemen of position and influence interesting themselves in a matter which involves a great saving of human life, but non-official Europeansxii REPORT. lethal practice after providing a sufficient agency to accomplish thoroughly the protection of the people by means of its innocent substitute, persevering efforts will in time overcome all prejudice ; and meantime one great cause of small-pox will have been removed; and in the event of an outbreak of this disease among the unprotected, vaccination is still of greater use in limiting and stamping it out than inoculation could possibly be. I believe that partial vaccination is infinitely preferable to partial inoculation, which must be simultaneous and universal to deprive it of serious indirect consequences to the community, over and above its direct perils. Sex of the vaccin- ated. STATEMENT No. IV. CIRCLE PERCENTAGE OF Males. Females. Calcutta and Suburbs ... ... ... ... ... ... 53.7 46.3 Metropolitan Circles ... ... ... ... ... ... 51.3 48.7 Darjeeling Circle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55.3 44.9 Ranchi Circle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51.6 48.4 Sonthal Pergunnahs ... ... ... ... ... ... 43.9 56.1 Dispensary vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... 58.7 41.3 40. Sex of the vaccinated.REPORT. xiii proportion of the young than these. Perfect vaccination aims at protecting all infants within a few months of their birth. These figures show how imperfect vaccination is in every part of Bengal. Number of persons vaccinated by each man. STATEMENT No. VII. CIRCLE. No of operations per man. Darjeeling Circle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,482 Metropolitan Circles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,452 Sonthal Pergunnahs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,392 Dispensary vaccination ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 912 Ranchi Circle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 648 Calcutta and Suburbs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 559 43. Number of persons vaccinated by each operator.xiv REPORT. Darjeeling circle. Dangers of the practice. Chota Nagpore. In the districts comprised in the Darjeeling circle the practice is very general, and Dr. Lidderdale records valuable observations, showing its pernicious effect. In one instance 2 deaths had occurred among 25 persons inoculated. It is clear that the operation is not so universally or exhaustively performed in the selected villages as some writers would have us suppose, and it is equally clear that the strict precautions against infection which have been described are not always adopted. The disease does spread by infection and causes sickness and mortal- ity besides the direct effect. It is evidently a most dangerous weapon to handle, and its practitioners are obviously not so cautious or careful as they ought to be. Inoculation appears to have been very nearly suppressed in the Chota Nagpore division, and it is very satisfactory to note that small-pox has been corre- spondingly less severe and frequent. This may be fairly put forward as an evidence of the advantage of suppressing this noxious practice, even if means are wanting to vaccinate the people exhaustively. It amounts to the removal of a cause by which small-pox is maintained and spread. Other districts. Loss of life which must be caused by the practice under the most favorable cir- cumstances. In all the districts of Eastern Bengal and Assam, Behar and Orissa, inocu- lation is the universal practice. Many of the civil surgeons attribute outbreaks of small-pox to it, and in some instances the result of inoculation has been fatal. There can be no doubt that even under the most favorable circumstancesREPORT. XV instances followed this plan, but it is to be feared that in most instances the ser- vices of a single vaccinator cannot procure more than nominal benefit. Sanitary- precautions against the spread of the disease are most probably uniformly dis- regarded. Medical aid is always useful, and has in many cases been afforded. Vaccine census. Large proportion of inoculated. High proportion of those who have had small-pox. Proportion unpro- tected. Small ratio of vac- cinated. Care necessary in preparing such statements. 47. Protection from small-pox.xvi REPORT. of local vaccination has been considerably above that of former years, and consi- derable advance has been made in inducing inoculators to practise vaccination. On the whole, though good and earnest work and some progress is manifest, the results fall most lamentably short of the requirements of the province. I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, K. McLEOD, A.M., M.D., J. CAMPBELL BROWN, Officiating Secretary. Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Fourth Annual Report on the Presidency Vaccine Department, by SURGEON T. EDMONDSTON CHARLES, M.D., M.R.C.P., LONDON, Superintendent-General of Vaccination. INDEX. 1. Submission. 2 Numbers vaccinated during the year. 3. Character and success of the vaccination. 4. Humanized animal virus. 5. Small-pox in Calcutta and Suburbs. 6. Decrease of the mortality from small-pox in Calcutta. 7. Amount of protection existing in Calcutta. 8. Results obtained by the examination of schools in Calcutta and Suburbs. 9. Map showing amount of protection in Calcutta and Suburbs. 10. Birth Registers. Conduct of Super- intendents. 1. Submission.2 CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. I am not of opinion that the loss of one agent has led to the falling off; but should circumstances lead me to conclude that by entertaining another vaccinator the outturn of work will be increased, a vaccinator will again be taken on, as any economy in reduction of the subordinate agency is a very false one if it is attended by a falling off of work which could otherwise have been overtaken. I can fully acquit the Superintendent of any remissness in this matter. Cause of increase. In the grand total of work done during the year, this falling off does not show, as there has been an increase of 1,248 cases over last year. This increase reflects no credit on the vaccine establishment, as it simply depends on an accidental increase in emigration, over which they have no control. Quality of the vaccination. High ratio of success 3. Character and success of the vaccination.CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. 3 Remarkable ab- sence of the dis- ease. The existence of some general in- fluences deter- mining the pre- valence of small- pox probable. Suburbs have been reported by the police, and no other deaths from small-pox are known to the department. The deaths in Calcutta took place in April, May, June, July, January, February, and March; for five months there seem to have been no deaths. It is evident that we are now passing through a cycle in which small-pox is at its minimum; after the epidemic of 1869-70, which was so controlled by vaccination as to appear only in shadow without the terrible ravages of its usual reality. This circumstance is deserving of very particular notice. That there should be few deaths from small-pox two or three years after an epidemic, when many thousands of persons had been protected against a recurrence of the disease by an attack of small-pox, was a subject of easy explanation. That an epidemic appearing only in outline and not affecting any considerable number should be followed by a similar fall was not to be expected. The happy result which is now noted seems to point in the direction of some much more general causes operating to diminish an epidemic tendency, and taking place equally after an epidemic year, whether the mortality occasioned has been great or little. It seems preferable for the present to take this more extended view of the question, than to attempt to explain it by any improve- ment in the state of protection conferred by vaccination. Future years will show how much can be effected in this way, even in seasons when small-pox is not epidemic; but knowing the broad fact that these periods of inactivity of the disease have always constituted a prominent feature in its natural history, and not being able to convince myself that any measures have this year come into more successful operation to account for the usual decrease of small-pox, I hesitate for the present to regard the decline of the disease during the last year as due to anything but obedience to the laws regulating prevalence. Small-pox in Cal- cutta during the last 35 years. Causes of recent immunity. 6. Decrease of the mortality from small-pox in Calcutta.4 CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. Statistics confirmed by experience. There need be no hesitation in accepting the above facts as a true index of what has taken place in our power of controlling small-pox in Calcutta, for quite independently of the most reliable statistical information which we possess on the subject, I am sufficiently conversant with the main facts of the past history of small-pox in Calcutta, and so familiar practically with its recent manifestations, as to be able to state with the most positive certainty that the decrease of mortality does not depend on accidental causes, but is solely and entirely due to the successful efforts of the vaccine establishment. The mortality from small-pox was increasing up to 1865. While before the year 1865 the establishment had doubtless done much in teaching the population the simplicity of vaccination, and possibly had contri- buted somewhat to lessening the loss of human life, the fact that 5,826 lives were sacrificed to small pox in the seven previous years, in which only one epidemic was included, while 3,723 deaths took place in the immediately preceding septennial period, shows that there had been a progressive tendency of the death-rate to increase rather than decrease. The high mortality of the period from July 1844 to June 1851 depends on two epidemic years being accidentally included within these dates, and in no way vitiates the deduction that as Calcutta was growing in population, so was the mortality from small-pox increasing in spite of the efforts of the vaccine establishment. With these facts in view, the unprecedented reduction of the death-rate during the last seven years requires little comment. The table marked A in the appendix, showing the deaths from small-pox in Calcutta for five periods of seven years, assists in showing at a glance how marked the improvement during the last seven years has been. Protection from small-pox 7. Amount of protection existing in Calcutta.CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. 5 Out of 2,969 houses examined in the middle division in 1869, the large number of 20.34 per cent. refused all information: of the others, 45.15 per cent. admitted vaccination as being the protection enjoyed by the household; 28.20 per cent. claimed inoculation as being the protecting agent; 26.63 per cent. reported having had small-pox. In the north division, out of 2,974 houses in which an investigation was attempted in 1869, there were 23.13 per cent. in which information was refused; while of the others 51.70 per cent. admitted vaccination had been accepted in the house, 32.50 per cent. had received protection by inoculation, 15.79 per cent. by previous small-pox. Result of a vaccine census of schools. 8. Results obtained by the examination of schools.6 CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. The protection of Calcutta shown graphically. 9. The map showing amount of protection in Calcutta and Suburbs.CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. 7 (APPENDIX A.) Table showing the mortality in Calcutta from Small-pox for seven-year periods, from 1st July 1837 to 30th June 1872. Years and Months. Number of Deaths. From 1st July 1837 to 30th June 1844 ... ... ... 4,448 Ditto 1844 ditto 1851 ... ... ... 6,552 Ditto 1851 ditto 1858 ... ... ... 3,723 Ditto 1858 ditto 1865 ... ... ... 5,826 Ditto 1865 ditto 1872 ... ... ... 398 (APPENDIX B.) Table showing the results of inquiries made among the Residents in the South Division of Calcutta regarding the mode of protection from Small-pox in 1869. NUMBER OF PERSONS. Number protected by vaccination. Number protected by inoculation. Number had small-pox. Number unpro- tected. 28,077 ... ... ... 3,123 13,170 10,046 1,738 Percentage ... ... ... 11.12 46.90 35.77 6.18 (APPENDIX C.) Table showing the results of the examination of Schools in Calcutta and Suburbs in the year 1869. DIVISIONS. Number of boys present. Number vacci- nated. Number inocu- lated. Number had small-pox. Number unpro- tected. North Division ... ... ... 3,129 1,022 1,569 335 203 Percentage ... ...... 32.66 50.14 10.70 6.48 Middle Division ... ... ... 2,901 1,171 1,288 292 150 Percentage ... ...... 40.36 44.39 10.6 5.17 South Division ... ... ... 1,841 771 693 216 161 Percentage ... ...... 41.87 37.64 11.73 8.74 Total ... 7,871 2,964 3,550 843 514 Percentage ... ...... 37.65 45.10 10.71 6.53 (APPENDIX D.) Table showing the results of the examination of Rudimentary Schools in Calcutta and Suburbs for four years. YEARS. Number of boys present. Vaccinated. Inoculated. Small-pox. Unprotected. 1869 ... ... ... ... 846 365 164 169 148 Percentage ... ...... 43.14 19.38 19.97 17.49 1870 ... ... ... ... 2,050 901 398 496 255 Percentage ... ...... 43.95 19.41 24.19 12.41 1871 ... ... ... ... 1,750 1,006 353 244 147 Percentage ... ...... 57.48 20.17 13.94 8.40 1872 ... ... ... ... 2,145 1,322 332 330 161 Percentage ... ...... 61.63 15.47 15.38 7.50
8 CALCUTTA AND THE SUBURBS. Memorandum by G. SAUNDERS, ESQ., Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, Presidency Circle,[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Fourth Annual Report of the Metropolitan Circles of Vaccination for the year ending 31st March 1872, by SURGEON FRANK POWELL, M.B., Superintendent. Establishment. Municipalities em- ploying vaccin- ators 1. Constitution of the Establishment.10 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. dispensaries, (3) the supply of vaccinators to the several municipalities within the metropolitan circles which applied for their service, and (4) in one case (already mentioned) the sending of a man for employment in Dacca. Employment of vaccinators in dispensaries. Objected to. 2. The employment of Vaccinators in dispensaries during the non-working season.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 11 It is far easier to keep the men within call, ready to proceed to a locality infected with small-pox, if the vaccinators of each circle form a gang in the neighbourhood of the residence of the Deputy Superintendents under whom they work, than if they are scattered through a number of dispensaries. Reconsideration of the order soli- cited. Unless, therefore, the services of the vaccinators in the dispensaries are such an advantage to these institutions as to outweigh the disadvantages to this department, I would beg that the employment of vaccinators in dispensaries may be reconsidered. Plan of work. 3. Mode or plan of employment during the vaccinating season.12 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Second circle Floods. Sickness 5. Second Metropolitan Circle.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 13 Summary of work of the three cir- cles. 8. The number vaccinated.14 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Fever. SecondlyTHE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 15 meet and overcome them; if we yielded and left a district because there was opposition or other hinderance, it would be years before any progress could be made there. Inspection. 10. Tours of the Superintendent.16 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. the village, on whom neither I nor my Deputy Superintendent could make any impression. I again visited Mahatah on the 30th of January, and found that another outbreak of small-pox had taken place; the people had begun to take vaccination, but many still refused. In one house I saw a lad attacked with small-pox, his brother had fever, another brother appeared well, and the fourth child had been vaccinated in one point only six days before, when the parents interfered and prevented his being fully vaccinated. I persuaded the man to have the remaining children vaccinated; he was very unwilling, and but for my presence I do not think we should have succeeded. But I overcame his objections, and the child previously partially vaccinated was vaccinated in three other points. The two unprotected were likewise vaccinated; the boy who had fever when I saw him had a slight attack of small-pox, the others escaped altogether. The man was an influential man amongst his fellow townsmen, and the remainder of the inhabitants soon followed his example. Carelessness with regard to small- pox. I saw here, as I have done before, that there was no attempt to isolate the sick ; persons covered with pustules and scabs were sitting by the roadside or mixing freely with the uninfected inhabitants of their own or neighbours' houses. Another illustra- tion. At Moorgram small-pox was reported. The vaccinators arrived there on the 12th January, and on the 19th vaccinated extensively; there had been 7 deaths; 10 of the vaccinated suffered from small-pox within four days of the operation. Of these, 1 died, 1 was still ill at the date of my visit, 12th Feb- ruary, and 8 were convalescent. In these eight the vaccine vesicles were dis- tinctly marked, surrounded by small-pox pustules; the vaccination had modified, but not checked, the small-pox in these cases, but the further spread of the disease was arrested completely. Inoculation pro- hibited in these circles. Still practised in some localities. 12. Inoculation.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 17 Particulars. Form showing particulars regarding the protection from Small-pox enjoyed by the people. CLASS OF PERSONS EXAMINED. Number examined. Inoculated. Per cent. of total examined Vaccinated. Per cent. of total examined. Had small-pox. Per cent. of total examined Unprotected. Per cent. of total examined Convicts of Ahpore Jail ... ... ... ... 1,743 1,262 72.40 177 10.15 214 12.27 90 5.16 Ditto Presidency Jail ... ... ... ... 851 486 57.10 57 6.69 246 28.90 62 7.28 Ditto Kishnaghur 18 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. replace men absent on account of sickness. These men were diligent and have become fair vaccinators ; others offered, but when they learned that they would get no pay during their pupilage, they withdrew. In Diamond Harbour sub- division some inoculators commenced vaccination on their own account. Deputy Superintendent Jadub Chunder Ghose saw some of their work; out of twenty cases, in nine there were four scars, in one, three, in nine, two, and in one, one scar only, showing only partial success. He was unable to inspect any recent cases and thus judge of the quality of the virus used. Necessity of their being certified. A plan proposed Such attempts on the part of inoculators may at first sight appear likely to advance the cause of vaccination, but I fear that if men but very imperfectly acquainted with vaccination practise the operation, much inferior vaccination will be performed, which will not protect from small-pox, and hence vaccination as a protective agent will fall in the estimation of the people. It may be diffi- cult to stop such irregularities, but I would suggest that some steps should be taken to check them if possible. The people seem to think some certificate of qualification necessary, and on one occasion when this was demanded the inocula- tor produced the certificate of a vaccinator of the Calcutta suburbs (which he had improperly obtained) as his own. This feeling that a certificate of qualifi- cation is needed should be fostered, and probably when certificated men are available they will be resorted to in preference to others. To supply certificated men, I would submit that a limited number of inoculators (say two to each of the nine divisions of the metropolitan vaccine establishment) might be retained as apprentice vaccinators at a low salary of Rs. 5 a month; they on becom- ing qualified would receive certificates from myself and go out to vaccinate on their own account, and these certificates would be renewed annually so long as the vaccinator would allow his work to be inspected by an officer of this department, and thus in time a number of persons qualified to vaccinate would be scattered over the district working for their own benefit with but a very small initiatory expense to Government. Need of supervi- sion In order that this department might keep up even a slight supervision over these private practitioners of vaccination (and the supervision could not in any case be more than slight), I would suggest that they should keep registers and deposit them at stated periods in the thannahs, where they could be procured and verified by myself or the Deputy Superintendents. Some supervision is essential if the vaccination is to be kept up to a high standard, so as to be a real safeguard against small-pox. Our own trained vaccinators would carry on operations with degenerated lymph if they were not looked after, and men who would at most be but imperfectly trained, working for fees and without supervision, would soon look to numbers rather than quality; we should soon have spurious vaccination, which is no vaccination at all; these would not be exempt from liability to small- pox, many would suffer, and vaccination would fall into disgrace. Extra vaccinators 16. Extra vaccinators.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 19 PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. REVACCINATIONS Grand Total. PERCENTAGE OF SUCCESS, EXCLUDING UNKNOWN Names of Municipalities. Total. RESULT. RESULT. Successful. Unsuccessful, including doubtful. Unknown. Total. Unsuccessful, including doubtful. Primary vac- cination. Nyehatty union ... ... ... ... ... 542 541 ...... 1 ...... ...... 542 100.0 Keduhattee township ... ... ... ... 48 48 ...... ...... ...... ...... 48 100.0 Bagjullah 20 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Powell says) the people were less inclined to think of a prospective danger, than they would have been had not fever been afflicting the popula- tion in the villages wherever the vaccinators were at work. Attaching vaccin- ators to dispen- saries. 2. I entirely go with Dr. Powell in what he says of the inadvisability of employing vaccinators during the recess as compounders at dispensaries. I would keep them vaccinating as long as good work could be done as vaccin- ators, and then give them leave to their homes for two months. I doubt if the men are of much use as compounders under any circumstances at a dispensary. Apprentices. 3. Referring to Dr. Powell's proposition to take up apprentice inoculators on a salary of Rs. 5 a month, to teach them vaccination and then to license them to practise vaccination under the metropolitan inspectors, I think the practice might be found to work well. Might it not also be found practicable to give all vaccinators small salaries and allow them to go out in the villages and accept fees from the people ? We should thus be able to maintain double the vaccinating staff with the same number of inspecting officers. We must in time get the people to pay for vaccination, and this might be the best way of commencing the less expensive system.
Sixth Annual Report of the Darjeeling Circle of Vaccination, for the year 1871-72, by SURGEON R. LIDDERDALE, M.D. Establishment. Increase sanction- ed. 1. Establishment.22 DARJEELING CIRCLE. villages of Bhagoonee and Saldanga in the Boda Chukla thannah jurisdiction. This was suppressed with considerable difficulty on account of the opposition of the Mussulman villagers, which was finally overcome. Purneab. A gang of old ino- culators. 4. Purneah.DARJEELING CIRCLE. 23 The native superintendent suffered from fever severely, but attended well to his duty notwithstanding. The vaccinators were distributed in one thannah jurisdiction only in November, to extend the area already protected; but before the end of the month, outbreaks of small-pox required their presence in two others. Work scattered. Opposition. Small-pox. They carried on operations in many parts of eight different thannahs during the late cold season, so that no systematic protection could be afforded to the people in any definite area. In one place only, in Kaurgunge thannah jurisdiction, was there a really obstinate resistance to vaccination. Two head men of villages Modhoopore and Bowchundee would not accept it for their families, and professed themselves quite unable to influence the other people of the village who followed their example. Fourteen or fifteen fatal cases of small-pox occurred in these two villages during December, January, and Feb- ruary, and a vaccinator had to be kept there during these months trying to induce the people to be vaccinated. Different men were sent in hopes that where one failed another might succeed. All the Hindoos of Modhoopore and Bowchundee were protected, but the Mussulmans held out to the last. A circle of vaccination as complete as possible was thrown round them. The Magis- trate of the district was good enough to order an inquiry through the police into the case, and both of the head-men brought forward religious objections to vaccination. They are Ferazees, but I saw that one of them had been inoculated. Bograh. Good work. 7. Bograh.24 DARJEELING CIRCLE. to be acquainted with, was that the Civil Surgeon, during an epidemic of small- pox in the rainy season, had vaccinated two men who had afterwards got small- pox and died. The gang, as before mentioned, had to be removed into Rajshahye in March. With it in other districts where vaccination is more known, much better results could have been obtained. Each man operated on 842.33 persons, with an average of success of 93.57 per cent. Number of oper- ations. Cause of decrease in success. 10. Number and character of operations.DARJEELING CIRCLE. 25 Two sets of regis- ters objected to. in an enclosed and cultivated country where it is impossible to move a camp. If two or three hours in the morning are spent in reaching a vaccinator and as many in the evening getting back to camp, the time for inspection is much curtailed, and if this short time is devoted to the rigid verification of each case seen, the ground gone over is very limited and the general idea of the work done defective. By this system I sometimes saw as few as a hundred cases only in a day. Under section 6, paragraph 31 of the Inspector-General's letter No. 641, two sets of registers are directed to be used. I beg that this may not be insisted on in my circle at present, the time spent in getting one written often taking up many hours of the day. Some of my best vaccinators can just write enough to keep returns with great difficulty. Scattered nature of the work 12. Distribution of vaccinators.26 DARJEELING CIRCLE. each inoculator in a season. One mohulla in the first village visited was left entirely unprotected. In the village of Shalopore in Bograh 266 persons were vaccinated of ages from 25 downwards. This illustrates the partial nature of the protection afforded by inoculators in many parts of the country. Deaths caused by inoculation I also inquired into inoculation in mouzah Mowsaldanga in Rungpore, and found that out of forty-five persons operated on two had died, after which the people sent for a vaccinator who protected the neighbouring villages. An inoculator con- verted Inoculators prac- tising vacin- ation. Small-pox not always reported Inoculation received a check in Rungpore from the activity of the vaccinators, and one inoculator having had all his own and several villages in his vicinity protected by vaccination, consented to be taught, and. ended the season by vaccinating a good many persons. Four old inoculators in Rungpore are now vaccinating on their own account. One of them suppressed an outbreak of small-pox, three are working in Bograh, and two more came in to be instructed. In Rajshahye, however, they are obstinate and have declined the offers of instruction as yet. They have been inoculating all last cold season and are still busy. The outbreaks of small-pox originated by them have often been concealed by the rural police until serious loss of life has occurred. Native superintendent Tojummul Hossein found one village where there had been 130 cases of small-pox, with 24 deaths, without the chowkidars having ever reported the matter at the thannah. The instruction of inoculators in Dinagepore I found was followed by several serious evils. The vaccinators often employed them to carry on their operations while they absented themselves, and sent them round on the twentieth day to perform the ceremonies usual after inoculation and collect money. Necessity of super- vision. If some system of registration of inoculators permitted to practise vac- cination be not adopted, a serious check will be given to it on the occurrence of the first general epidemic of small-pox, as many imperfectly instructed men now practise without certificate or authority of any kind, and the character of their operations is a very inferior one, a fact which will soon be found out by the people and discredit good vaccination. Effort to train Pur- neah inoculators unsuccessful I had interviews with thirty-six inoculators of the Purneah district and offered them instruments if they would learn vaccination. They generally wanted to be paid while learning, and most of them I am convinced merely came to see if anything was to be got, and finding that some time would have to be occupied in learning before certificates as vaccinators would be granted, returned to their homes at once. From no small-pox having broken out in their neighbourhood this season, the first one out of three within my experi- ence without it, I think they can have done little or no inoculation. Subsistence allow- ance during training recom- mended The Commissioner of Rajshahye, in the letter before mentioned, recom- mends that a small sum as subsistence allowance be granted them when under instruction. If this were done I could induce nearly all to remain till they were fairly efficient. Proportion of per- sons protected. In accordance to memorandum No. 4932A, dated 22nd February 1872, from the office of the Inspector-General of Hospitals, I made an examination of six schools[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Fifth Annual Report of the Ranchee Circle of Vaccination for the year 1871-72, by ASSISTANT SURGEON J. J. WOOD, M.D. I HAVE the honor to forward along with this the fifth annual report of the Ranchee circle of vaccination, the returns for the past season 1871-72, and a sketch map of Chota Nagpore showing the amount and degree of vaccination. Establishment 2. The sanctioned establishment of 1 Superintendent, 3 native superin- tendents, and 20 vaccinators, remained the same. Summary of re- sults. The outturn of cases for the year is 35,650, of which 34,664 were success- ful, and the percentage of success is 98.38. The increase from last year is thus, in cases, 12,337, and in successful cases 14,087, and the average percentage of success is much greater. Each successful case cost annas 4 pie 7 7/10, while last year the cost was annas 7-0 2/5 pie.* THE NON-WORKING SEASON. Work done during the hot weather and rains 3. May and October were the only months in which no operations were performed. Only 458 vaccinations were accomplished during this part of the season, and 404 were successful, which, excluding 8 doubtful, gives 89.77 per cent., a good result considering the time of year. There was no call for vaccinators to go into Purulia or Chyebassa districts. Almost all the non-working season's returns are from sub-division Palamow of Lohardugga, and sub-division Pachamba of Hazareebagh. A centre for future extension was formed by native superin- tendent Elahee Bux around Baloomath, in Pergunnah Toree, which lies due north of Lohardugga thannah, and is on the low ground below the ghâts. THE WORKING SEASON. Lohardugga dis- trict work more concentrated. 4. I. Lohardugga.28 RANCHEE CIRCLE. work of the year brought to a close in the neighbourhood of Jhiko Chuttee near the margin of last year's extension from Bijlia. The sketch map shows how this party's work supplements what was done last year. Five hundred and forty-two villages were visited by the vaccinators, and of 16,866 cases 99.43 per cent. were successful. Work satisfactorily done Inoculators attach ed to the party. 6. In November I found that one or two outlying &quot; jungly&quot; tolahs had been overlooked; they were immediately undertaken. Superintendence was not made easier by nearly all the people in many villages being wholly or partly drunk, and the vaccinators' work is hindered and made less satisfactory by this custom of the Coles. The party under Elahee Bux has worked most satisfactorily during the past year. The native superintendent has been most enthusiastic and hard-working, and he has well earned his great success. One vaccinator had to be discharged for idleness and disobedience of orders, and a trained man was appointed, who has turned out well. The conduct of the vaccinators has otherwise been very good, and they have a great deal of the spirit of their native superintendent. In particular Sheikh Wahid Ally, after tedious illness in the non-working season, deserves great praise. From Novem- ber to March he accomplished 3,000 cases, 2,999 of which were successful, counting second operations. Seven inoculators were attached to this party for purposes of instruction and supervision. An inspection of the work showed them to be fair vaccinators, and only practice with supervision is needed to complete their education. Assistance render- ed by influential natives The help given by influential natives,RANCHEE CIRCLE. 29 Operations of a third party. 9. Native Superintendent Mukhun Lall and party of six vaccinators began operations in Ranchee thannah, at Childay, ten miles east of Ranchee, on the Purulia road, near where a few cases were vaccinated in 1870-71. To the east of this village the thannah consists mainly of a &quot;jungly&quot; track, the haunt of man- eating tigers, with scattered hamlets, the complete vaccination of which will be a work of no little difficulty, not to say danger. It was not, however, for these reasons that this part of Ranchee thannah was not undertaken. The thannah was found too large to be completely vaccinated last season, and what was intended and pretty nearly accomplished, was to do so much of it as to make it possible to finish the remainder another season. The party under Mukhun Lall worked from Childay north-west to the new Hazareebagh road, where the men under Mahomed Ishak Khan were employed, thence proceeding to the south, past Ranchee and Dorunda. In January they were sent to Ginjo, the western limit of the ground occupied by Mahomed Ishak Khan, and for the remainder of the season they continued in the northern part of Chorea thannah, the only portion of it then unprotected. Vaccination was performed in 255 villages, and in 9,015 cases 94.53 per cent. were successful. I had to find fault early in the season with two of the vaccinators, and the native superintendent was at that time inclined to be a little careless, but the conduct of the party has on the whole been good and their work creditable. Assistance was afforded by Laul Jitnath Sahee Deo, zemindar of Ginjo, and by most of the other zemindars into whose villages the vaccinators went. 10. All the work of which the above is an account, lay in district Lohar- dugga, and principally in the three thannahs of Ranchee, Chorea, and Lohar- dugga. A small part of Korambe thannah was worked by the party under native superintendent Elahee Bux. Summary. Ranchee thannah has been well begun, Chorea has been almost finished, most of the more populous part of Lohardugga thannah, and a portion of Korambe thannah, have been protected. Other districts of the division. 11. II. Hazareebagh, Maunbhoom, and Singbhoom.30 RANCHEE CIRCLE. difficulty may be anticipated, but vaccinators have from time to time been employed in almost every corner of the sub-division, and the villagers generally must by this date be pretty well acquainted* with vaccination. Inoculators. 14. Inoculators have not been detected at work in the Ranchee circle during the year under report. Vaccinations per- formed by them. Thirteen Brahmin inoculators were instructed in vaccination and worked under the native superintendents.RANCHEE CIRCLE. 31 Vaccination in Purulia. 18. I learn from the Civil Surgeon of Purulia that there are 99 inoculators registered, 37 of whom have been taught to vaccinate; 27 of these had been at work and showed 3,565 cases, of which Mr. Wilson saw more than half, and the character of the cases seems to have been extremely good, 98.78 being successful. The average number of cases to each man was less than 140, but this is a fault that will mend. Vaccination among native Christians. Besides the 13 inoculators above-mentioned, a Christian Cole from the Lutheran Mission at Ranchee was taught, and has since been employed at Gobind- pore, a mission station some 20 miles south of Ranchee. Another Christian is also employed* at Gobindpore, who was formerly a fair vaccinator when in Government employ. These men have peculiar advantages for vaccinating among the native Christians who come weekly to church at Govindpore, and I hope to hear more of their successful practice. Fees. 19. As to the fees charged by vaccinators, several competent officers think that the old rate of 4 annas for a boy and 2 annas for a girl is too high, and that it prevents vaccination reaching the poorer people. Two annas, it is agreed, is quite sufficient to repay a vaccinator for each case, and if a low standard could be fixed it might induce him to work harder to increase his gains. When men are learning vaccination under the native superintendents, they usually get food and drink from the villagers, but at that stage of their education I have always objected to their taking fees. When once a man is able to vaccinate he receives such remuneration as the persons can afford. I refer to vaccinators not on the Government establishment. Inspection. 20. Superintendence.32 RANCHEE CIRCLE. The percentage of successful cases was 98.15, and of successful points 95.82. 22. Hot weather set in early in March and all the parties were called on the 15th to head-quarters. Three vaccinators remained out, one in Palamow, one at Chuttra, and one in Pachamba, where small-pox continued up to 31st March. It is to be regretted that no arrangements could be carried out for giving effect to the orders of the Inspector-General of Hospitals with regard to ascer- taining the extent of protection from small-pox afforded to the places visited during the year. Causes of increased expenditure. 23. Finance.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Fifth Annual Report of Vaccination in the Sonthal Pergunnahs during the year 1871-72, by SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEON KALI KRISHNA GHOSE. I HAVE the honor to submit the annual returns and report of the Sonthal Pergunnahs vaccine circle for the year (1871-72) ending 31st March 1872. Establishment 2. At the beginning of the year the staff of vaccinators belonging to this circle had been reduced to four, one man having been dismissed for neglect of duty in March 1871, and another having left his post in May. It was then thought unnecessary to employ men during the non-working season. Trained men, however, were not to be found for the vacant posts ; and as experience had taught me that it would be worse than useless to employ men totally ignorant of the art of vaccination, I undertook, some weeks previous to the approach of the season, to train up men for the posts. I selected two from among the candidates who presented themselves, and began to give them lessons in vaccination in my leisure hours and to show them the right method of operating. They were told that they were not to be appointed until they had satisfied me that they were fit for being so. On the approach of the season they began to work under my immediate supervision in the town and its vicinity, and then by the middle of October, when it was found on inspection of their work that they were tolerably well up in the art of vaccination, they were admitted into my staff. There was yet, however, one more difficulty to be overcome. Raw youths unacquainted with the language, the customs and usages of a barbarous people, are miserably deficient in the tact and energy necessary to enable them to cope with their prejudices or to keep terms with their crude superstitious notions. To obviate this difficulty I associated these new men with old experi- enced hands, and then when they had acquired tact and skill enough for inde- pendent action, they were allowed to work for themselves in distant quarters. The result of this arrangement was as it should be, for I have not had this year to complain of the inefficiency of my staff as I had to do last year. These new hands, as well as those old ones with whom I had taken the greatest pains, last year as well as in this, to bring up to a certain standard of efficiency, have, as the results given below fully prove, worked to my satisfaction. At the kind recommendation of the Civil Surgeon, Sonthal Pergunnahs, and the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Government has been pleased to sanction a graded scale of pay for the vaccinators of this circle, and this has no doubt added a fresh stimulus to their exertions. This arrangement has been allowed to take effect from the 1st December 1871. Plan of work 3. On the approach of the season, being fully convinced of the necessity of systematic action and the utter worthlessness of all desultory proceedings, I felt that it would be unwise, with the small staff at my command, to scatter the work too much over a wide extent of country. I thought the work would progress much more favorably if it were allowed to proceed gradually from one district to another, than if it were to touch a certain portion of one district in one season and to jump over to a distant district in the next. Upon these considerations I obtained the consent of the Civil Surgeon, Sonthal Pergunnahs, who was kind enough to approve of my scheme, to carry on work in the remain- ing portions of Rajmehal, as well as in the adjoining sub-division of Pakour. I also proposed, if possible, to introduce the work in the district of Godda. In introducing the work in these two new districts, I adopted the following course, which I think fit to mention. The zemindars of Pakour, who were induced to assist me in the work towards the close of last season, were found very backward this season from some disturbance in their estates. I therefore 9
34 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. thought it would be mere waste of time and trouble at once to send vaccinators in the midst of a new district, where they were sure to meet with strong opposi- tion from the people. To obviate this difficulty I instructed those of my vaccinators who were working in the far interior of Rajmehal to proceed with their work gradually towards Pakour on the one side and Godda on the other, so that when they approached the borders thereof the introduction of vaccin- ation into them would be almost a spontaneous result; for, as a matter of course, constant communication is going on between the inhabitants of villages bordering upon each other in different districts. Vaccination is thus brought to the doors of those who had never heard of it before; the protected villages testify to its good results, whilst the unprotected learn to appreciate them. I had not, however, to wait till the very borders of Rajmehal had been reached, to introduce the work into Pakour and Godda. As the vaccinators were proceeding with their work, I was busy in preparing the minds of the people of Pakour for the reception of vaccination, and when I found that a certain number of native gentlemen were ready to set the example in their own households, I took hold of the opportunity of setting a vaccinator in the midst of them. The work being thus started in Pakour as well as in Godda, towards the latter end of January began to make fair progress in the former till it was fairly established. In the latter it was merely introduced, but could not make progress; as the vaccinators, being established and busily occupied in Rajmehal and Pakour, could not, without detriment to the work, attend to three districts at the same time. As a proof of the success of the plan adopted by us, it might be said that the inhabitants of those villages in Pakour where work has been done consist chiefly of Hindus and Mussulmans, who are generally known in other places to be foremost in opposing vaccination; but these here did not show much or any resistance. They had seen or heard of the work amongst their kindred races in several villages adjoining Bahawa, and were therefore convinced of its good effects. The Sonthals of certain villages in Pakour did at first think it an innovation, but the occurrence of small-pox in one village as described below facilitated its introduction. And the kind and timely assistance rendered me on all occasions of difficulty by Mr. C. W. Wilmot, the Assistant Commissioner of Rajmehal, who always took a warm interest in the promotion of vaccination, deserves my warmest acknowledgments. In the beginning of March 1872 the Civil Surgeon of Sonthal Pergunnahs directed me to send the head vaccinator to Doomka, for the purpose of training up certain men engaged there by the Assistant Commissioner, as well as of carrying on the work. This man was preparing to start when he met with a severe accident by a fall from his pony and was kept back. Another man was subsequently sent in his place, but it being then too late in the season, he was ordered back to Rajmehal. I am sorry the proposal came late, or it would have been very desirable if the work were introduced at Doomka this season in the way suggested by the Civil Surgeon, Results 4. The total number of persons vaccinated during the year, as shown in the returns, amounts to 8,352 against 6,454 of the previous year, the per- centage of successful cases 90.86 against 87.84, and the cost of each successful case 4 annas 8.42 pie against 6 annas 0.25 pie of the preceding year. This is no doubt a very gratifying result compared to that of the previous year. It shows an increase of 1,898 over the total number of that year, a rise by 3 per cent. in the percentage of successful cases, and a marked reduction in the cost of each successful case. This last circumstance is the more striking as during the year under review the actual expenditure of our establishment has been increased by an addition of extra allowance to the pay of the Deputy Superintendent, and an enhanced rate of pay to the vaccinators. The number of operations would have been still higher if it were not for the accident which befell our head vaccinator, and which prevented him from working during the whole of March.
SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 35 The operations were commenced in the first week of October with tubes of lymph received from England. These tubes had kept well with the excep- tion of a few which had lost their transparency, and they had given rise in the hands of my vaccinators on an average to at least 40 per cent. of successful cases; so had the tubes from Calcutta which the Superintendent-General of Vaccination was kind enough to supply me for some time. As a rule I would not allow more than one, or at most two men to be operated on from one tube. Arm-to-arm vaccination has been a little more generally practised this year than in the previous one, nearly half the number of cases being arm to arm. But owing to the prejudices of the people, as shown in last year's report, it was not so often allowed as we wished. Inspection. 5. The subjoined statement shows the amount of inspection performed by the Deputy Superintendent during the year. Successful. Unsuccess- ful. Doubtful. Total. Absent or not ins- pected. Grand Total. REMARKS. Seen after the 16th day... ... 4,835 395 74 5,304 298 5,602 Ditto from 13th to 16th day ... 1,426 93 55 1,574 62 1,636 Ditto 9th to 12th day ... 594 36 45 675 22 697 Ditto 5th to 8th day ... 361 21 16 398 13 411 Ditto 1st to 4th day... ... ... ... 6 ... 6 Seen too early to decide on the result. Total... 7,216 545 190 7,957 395 8,352 Percentage of suc- cess. It will be seen from the above statement that 95.27 per cent. of all the cases have been inspected by me. The percentage of success in cases seen by me is 90.68, while that in the general return is 90.86, the difference being slight indeed. The operations were generally performed in four points, but sometimes in six and sometimes in two. I am sorry I could not give the exact number of points that were successful in each case, because I did not note them down particularly in my inspection book. It is always desirable and should be our aim to have the full number of points successful in every case, but practically this is not always attainable; and I am inclined to think that if two or three or even one point gives rise to a perfect vesicle which runs a regular course, is surrounded with good areola and attended with febrile symptoms on the proper day, the system is as sure to have been affected as if five or six points had been success- ful in the same way. Plan of inspection. My inspections were generally conducted in company with my vaccinators. From the weekly reports submitted by them I would ascertain the localities where they were at work, go and find them there and take them with me in inspecting and minutely examining all the cases one by one. Their presence facilitated the inspection a great deal; for the people here are apt to fly from a stranger who appears for the first time amongst them, while they readily and gladly bring their children for inspection at the call of the vaccinator, who being constantly among them is looked upon with confidence. Thus also I had not only an opportunity of comparing at the very spot the registers of my vaccina- tors with the actual number vaccinated and marking those that were unsuccessful or doubtful, but of examining the mode in which operations were performed by having them done in my presence, and of pointing out to the vaccinators any defects either in the method of operation, in the selection of matter for the
36 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. Opposition purpose, or in the amount of care taken to watching every case which might have interfered with the results, and thus contributing as much as possible to their improvement. As I could thus almost always get my vaccinators with me in the inspection of their work, and as the villages with few exceptions were for the most part small, I did not find it necessary to keep a separate register with the head-man of each village. In my inspection tours I would also take the opportunity of ascertaining the feelings and opinions of the people in regard to vaccination and the vaccinators. In regard to the latter I am happy to say that I have never heard any complaints against them; the people every- where expressed themselves satisfied with their conduct and regarded them with kind feelings. But as regards the former the people themselves would not complain of anything. A little persuasion and argument would con- vince them of the protection which it is our aim to confer and make them acquiesce in the benevolent object of Government. But there are designing men here and there, inoculators for instance, who have lost their practice from the spread of vaccination, who make it their study to throw obstacles in our path. These men sometimes impress the people with a belief that vaccination is not attended like inoculation with an eruption of small-pox, which thus lies latent in the system ready to break out on the setting in of the rains. In one or two places especially this belief had taken such deep root in the minds of the people, that the vaccinators who were working there were kept at bay and not allowed to make any progress. It was only on my going to the localities in question, calling together all the principal men of the villages, and after much argument disabusing their minds of the false impression, that the work was allowed to go on. Besides these few instances very little opposition had to be encountered this year in the district of Rajmehal, where, in most places, the people have learnt to appreciate the benefits of vaccination. And it is particularly gratify- ing to find that several native villages to the north-east of Bahawa, which had formerly obstinately resisted all our efforts, have this year been brought round. This is the reason why the number of Hindus and Mussulmans operated on is much higher this year than in the previous one. Map. 6. The accompanying sketch map gives an approximate outline of the areas worked in by our vaccine staff during the year under report as well as in the previous years. The blue varying in depth according to the degree of protection conferred indicates those of the former, and the red in the same way those of the latter. I am sorry I could not show all the places where work was done previous to my time, i.e., previous to the year 1870, not only because they are not all to be found in the map in my possession, but because I have not personally seen them and have therefore no exact idea of their position and so forth. For the same reason I could not show the places worked in by our staff in the districts of Deoghur and Godda during the years 1868 and 1869. Such places of Rajmehal district for 1869-70 as could be found in the map have been exhibited in the sketch. But the district is so intersected by hills that a sketch map cannot be expected to give more than a mere approximate outline of the areas worked in. The names of all the villages could not be put down for want of space, but a few principal villages have been given and the surrounding ones included in the areas exhibited. The number of villages in which work has been done during the year by our vaccine establishment amounts to 133 in Rajmehal, 16 in Pakour, and 1 in Godda, the total being 150, out of which 146 have been inspected by me. Particulars of pro- tection. 7. The following statement is meant to indicate the degree of protection conferred by the Sonthal Pergunnahs vaccine establishment, and is drawn up in accordance with the principles laid down in circular memorandum No. 4932A, dated the 22nd February 1872, from the office of the Inspector-General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department. A few villages are selected, and the number of people of all sexes, ages, and conditions that are protected or unprotected in each has been given.
SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 37 Names of villages. Number inoculated. Number vaccinated. Number protected by natural small-pox Number unprotect- ed. Total popu- lation. REMARKS. Dhanjoeree... ... ... 131 450 1 ... 582 Burhait (Sonthalia)... ... 326 400 ... ... 726 Telo... ... ... ... 2,426 301 ... 25* 2,752 *Young infants were not allowed to be vaccinated. Talbaria... ... ... 240 430 ... ... 670 Kudma... ... ... 345 440 2 ... 787 Khootana... ... ... 300 270 1 ... 571 Uprole... ... ... 3,080 321 ... 6038 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. Stamped out by vac- cination. In the two others a few cases were seen, but the number of deaths could not be ascertained. The people in these three villages consisted chiefly of Hindus and Mussulmans, who had all along strenuously opposed vaccination, and it was with the greatest difficulty that I could introduce vaccination into the two former, the last one (Burhait) obstinately resisting to the last. The inocu- lators who had come from some other districts, and whom I had intended if possible to enlist on our side, fled the moment they received intimation of our approach. Small-pox quickly disappeared as soon as vaccination was established around the infected localities. In the beginning of May 1871 two more places were infected by small-pox, viz. Kanklatea, a populous bazaar near Sahibgunge, and Dolowee, a village near Teenpahar; three deaths were reported in the former, and one in the latter. The people of the former, consisting chiefly of tradesmen from different districts, had obstinate prejudices against vaccination, and had all along resisted our efforts. On the appearance of small-pox, besides going in person, I had sent two vaccinators in succession, but to no effect. I then took with me the best one of my staff and succeeded in winning over a portion of the Mahomedan section of the population, but the heat of the weather interfering seriously with the results of our oper- ations, we were compelled to withdraw. The disease, however, did not spread afterwards. In Dolowee vaccination was completely established and the small- pox stamped out. Chicken-pox mis- taken for small- pox. No more occurrences of the disease were heard of at the early part of the year; but towards the end of the season, i.e., in March 1872, in compliance with the instructions of the Assistant Commissioner, Rajmehal, I went to a village called Burtolla, to the south-west of Bahawa, with the purpose of adopting measures to prevent the spread of small-pox, which was said to be raging. I found, however, that the cases that had occurred were cases of chicken-pox and not small-pox. Fourteen persons were attacked, eleven of whom, chiefly adults, had marks of inoculation which they had undergone many years ago, and one, a child of eight or nine years of age, had marks of vaccination which he had three years ago. In the latter the eruptions were of the simplest kind, and but very few in number. All the cases had recovered when I saw them. But still I made arrangements for vaccinating all the unprotected people of the village and its neighbourhood. This was not done, however, as the inoculator, who was vaccinating in the neighbourhood, as mentioned below, and on whom I left instructions for protecting the village, fell ill and went away. This occurrence of chicken-pox was attributed by the people to the prevalence of vaccinia among cattle, many of which had died of the disease a month previous to the outbreak. In the latter end of March 1872 a Sonthalee village in the district of Pakour, named Choto Sonakur, was reported to have been infected by small-pox. I went there and found that two cases of a simple modified variety had occurred, both the subjects of which had marks of inoculation on their arms. The cause of this outbreak could not be ascertained, but it was found out upon inquiry that small-pox had occurred as the result of inoculation in a village within a few miles of Sonakur, upwards of a month ago, with which the latter had constant intercourse. Vaccination was quickly and thoroughly established in Sonakur and the disease prevented from making head. No more occurrences of small- pox came to our notice during the year, and I had not therefore the opportunity of giving a trial to the carbolic acid treatment as I was anxious of doing. Instructing inocu- lators. 9. I am happy to say that the instructions contained in circular memo- randum No. 130, dated the 23rd November 1870, from the office of Inspector- General of Hospitals, Indian Medical Department, have, though to a small extent, been experimentally carried out this year. Proceedings of a converted inocu- lator. The Civil Surgeon of the Sonthal Pergunnahs was kind enough to send an inoculator to me from Deoghur, with instructions how to encourage him to work. This man arrived here by the end of January 1872, and wanted to vaccinate amongst his clients in a certain portion of the Pakour district situate to the
SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 39 west of Bejapore station. As I was forbidden to interfere with him so long as he was not established, I warned my vaccinators not on any account to go to the localities where he was to work, and did not myself go to inquire about his doings till the beginning of March, when, after receiving a report from him that he had commenced work, I went and inspected his cases. He was indeed very anxious to see me at his place, for he had entangled himself into difficulties for which he wanted my help. Two inoculators were carrying on inoculation in his neighbourhood. These men had a quarrel with him and were trying to throw every obstacle in his way. He had given the people to understand that he had received purwannahs from the Sirkar Bahadoor to work, which they had not, and in corroboration of his statement, as well as to show the degree of interest Government was taking in the matter, he wanted to show that the Burra Baboo (alluding to me) would come every now and then to inspect his work. He was therefore very glad to find me at his place one day, when he sent instructions to the head-men of two or three villages to come and see me early the next morning. They did so, and were distinctly told by me that it was the earnest endeavour of Government to make vaccination supersede the pernicious system of inoculation. The people appreciated my saying and acquiesced in it. My words had, moreover, produced their desired effect in bringing about the result I had in view; for the two inoculators, as well as one other from a distant quarter, finding their practice fail, expressed a desire of being permitted to vaccinate. I took advantage of this circumstance, had them brought to me towards the latter end of March 1872, gave them instructions how to vaccinate, and supplied them matter for the purpose. They were instructed to work six or seven miles apart from each other, and never to come in contact with my vaccinators; for I was too well aware of the conduct of these inoculators to believe that they would not resort to meanness for the sake of securing an independent practice for themselves. And the result has fully justified my apprehension; for one of the three last mentioned inoculators, far from carrying out my instructions and working at a distance from my vaccinators, has, I am told, actually encroached upon and seriously interfered with the work of one of them. I heard that a portion of one village had been worked in by the latter, when the former came upon that village, spread false reports against vaccination, and induced the people to believe that he had received orders from Government to carry on his vocation. These inoculators follow their old custom of operating on the forearm, and this tallying with the long established ideas and usages of the people, who believe that they are inoculating and not vaccinating, they are able to gain ground at the expense of the vaccinators. As regards the amount of work done by these inoculators, I beg to state that I have not as yet received any reports from two of the last three; the other man's work does not fall within the year under review, and therefore need not be mentioned here. Work done by one man. The first, or Deoghur man, alone has done work during the latter part of the season. He vaccinated a total number of 147 cases in six villages, adopting the old method of operating only at one point on the forearm; and though his operations were very defective and gave rise in many cases to bad sores, yet I had reason to be satisfied with him, for he seemed to be sincere in his dealings and ready to carry out our instructions. I took the opportunity of instructing him in the right method of operating, and he promised to follow my advice in future. The experiment with the inoculators this year has been of too imperfect a character to enable us to arrive at a definite conclusion regarding its success. A more extensive trial is necessary, and this we hope to give next year. I am inclined, however, to doubt the advisability of allowing these men to practise in districts occupied by Government vaccinators. A clashing of interests between them might prove greatly detrimental to the progress of vaccination. RAJMEHAL, The 19th May 1872.
40 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. No. 239, dated Deoghur, the 23rd May 1872. From[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 41 their clients, and each man is bound to stick to his own clients, and is not allowed to extend his practice to families in charge of somebody else. Consequently when an inoculator finishes vaccinating all the unprotected children amongst his own clients, he has to wait till he obtains fresh subjects for operation by fresh additions to their families. For this reason, as the men who did the greatest amount of work during the past year are those who also did most work during the year before, they had com- paratively fewer cases to operate on within their prescribed beats. But this falling off will afterwards be supplemented by the work of those who have hitherto kept aloof, and also of those who commenced operations too late in the season to do much. Result of inspec- tion. 7. The result of the operations, from what I have seen by personal inspection in the neighbourhood of Deoghur, has been on the whole satisfactory. A decided improvement was noticed in the work of the older hands who have taken to vaccination for the last two years, but similar results did not attend the work of some of the new-comers. These men will, however, improve with a little teaching and further experience. The experiment of training inocu- lators a success 8. From the last and previous years' experience, I am now persuaded that the experiment of converting Brahmin inoculators into vaccinators has been a decided success. Not only did the old inoculators come back to me for permission to resume their work during the year under review, but several new applicants came to take up vaccination amongst their clients in the districts of Doomka, Godda, and Pakour, and also in portions of Hazareebaugh, Monghyr, and Bhaugulpore adjoining the district of Deoghur. I had one inoculator working in Pakour, two in Godda, and six in Doomka; and amongst these last six, it may be mentioned as a curious fact, was a Sonthal inoculator, who lives in the Deoghur district, but who willingly went to work amongst the people of his race in the distant parts of Doomka. In fact, the report of the success of the older hands having got abroad, this class of people have become so keen in taking up this modified form of their old profession, that my trouble now- a-days has been not so much to persuade them to take up this work, as to have to adjudicate sometimes between contending parties, who are members of the same family, as to who has the best claim to vaccinate certain of their family clients. Even bunniahs and mahajuns came to me all the way from the district of Monghyr, with contending inoculators belonging to the same family, for me to decide who had the best right to have them as clients. 9. As the men who were sent to these districts came late, they did not succeed in doing much. The inoculators in Godda do not appear to have done much, as no report has been received from them. The one in the Pakour dis- trict has vaccinated 147 in six villages, and reports have been received from four out of the six in Doomka about their having vaccinated 610 children in eight villages. Summary of season's proceed- ings. 10. Thus I had towards the latter end of the season vaccination work going on in all the sub-districts in the Sonthal Pergunnahs ; namely, it was carried on by the Government vaccine staff in the district of Rajmehal, and in some parts of Pakour ; and by Brahmin inoculators in another part of Pakour, in Godda, in Doomka, and all over Deoghur, who were all working on their own account without the expectation of any remuneration from Govern- ment. These inoculators have all worked under my orders. They were parti- cular in submitting their periodical reports to me, and many of them in the neighbourhood, when the work was over, before returning to their respective homes, came to pay their respects to me and promised to return early next season. Difficulty in sup- plying crusts. 11. The only difficulty I had to meet in the year's operations was to keep the inoculators well supplied with vaccine crusts, which did retard the progress of the work to some extent. Their clients object to the use of lymph in hermeti- cally sealed tubes ; arm to arm vaccination is not permitted, and they have not yet succeeded in collecting their own crusts. So that I had to keep them 11
42 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. regularly supplied with crusts, by obtaining them from the Superintendent- General of Vaccination, but more especially from my Deputy Superintendent at Rajmehal. System now neces- sary. A vaccine inspector proposed. 12. From what has been reported above, it will be allowed that the introduction of vaccination by means of Brahmin inoculators all over the Sonthal Pergnnnahs has now become an accomplished fact. Time has therefore arrived, I think, to introduce a little more system. The oper- ation has spread over a vast area, and several of the fresh hands would require a little instruction and watching. To ensure perfectly reliable results, a closer and more systematic plan of inspection of the work of the inoculators than was before thought advisable should be enforced. Neither the people themselves nor the inoculators object now to such in- spections. On the contrary, from what I have seen myself, the people have come to regard it as a sign, since they have to pay no tax for it, that the Sirkar Bahadoor does take an interest in their welfare. I would therefore venture to suggest that a native inspector be appointed for the purpose. If a sub-assistant surgeon be not allowed, a trustworthy, old, experienced vaccinator may be nominated on a pay of, for instance, Rs. 30 a month. This man should always be on the move, only coming in now and then to report progress to the Civil Surgeon, and to furnish materials for monthly returns. As the area of operation will be a very extensive one, some of the inoculators working not far from the beat of the Deputy Superintendent of vaccin- ation may be placed under his supervision; and, as before, the Civil Surgeon, as opportunity occurs, by periodically visiting some centres of operation, will be able to ascertain for himself whether everything is progressing satisfactorily or not. Progress of rational medicine and self- supporting vac- cination in the Sonthal Pergun- nahs 13. In conclusion I beg to be allowed to state that it is a matter of satisfaction to me to be able to report such satisfactory progress of the work of vaccination in the Sonthal Pergunnahs on the eve of my departure from here for a while. When I first took charge of this district the people scarcely had an idea of English medicine and surgery, and there was not a single place where the poor could resort to for a grain of medicine or for medical aid. Vaccination was not known, and those few who had heard of it had a great horror of losing their caste by the introduction of cow's blood into their system. Since then, by my continued humble exertions, no less than four charitable dispensaries have now been established in different parts of the Sonthal Per- gunnahs ; the blessing of vaccination has been extended over the whole land ; the prejudices of the high caste Brahmins and the narrow-minded bunniahs have alike been overcome; and they, as well as the ignorant Sonthals, have come to appreciate the value of this great prophylactic ; the Sonthal Pergunnahs have been made into a separate vaccination circle ; and finally, what is more cheering, the old Brahmin inoculators, originally the most inveterate opponents to the introduction of vaccination, have been won over, and by whom ? There is every reason to hope that, not before long, the whole work of vaccination, as an institution of the people themselves, will be carried on without the State having to keep up an expensive establishment for the purpose.
INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING PREPARATION OF REPORTS. 43 CIRCULAR MEMO. No. 135. FORT WILLIAM: OFFICE OF INSPR.-GENL. OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT; The 21st February 1872. Circular instruc- tions regarding the submission of reports con- cerning local vac- cination. THE undersigned is directed to request that you will instruct Civil Surgeons and Medical Officers in charge of dispensaries, in preparing their annual reports of vaccination for the year ending 31st March, to submit all the information at their command on the following subjects:ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. WESTERN DISTRICTSABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 45 The money thus expended can in my opinion be much more beneficially dealt with in the manner to be detailed further on. Public vaccinators employed to supervise inocu- lators. The Midnapore vaccinators were employed during the greater part of the year in super- vising the work of the inoculators who were instructed during the year 1870. Of the three thus engaged, two worked remarkably well and did excellent service. The third, I regret to say, although one of the best operators I have ever seen, failed altogether to perform the duty of supervision and instruction. He utterly failed, and eventually, quarrelling seriously with his pupils, I was obliged to withdraw him from this work altogether. He fell ill early in December, and for many weeks was unable to work. Now from this man I expected much assistance; he had worked as a vaccinator for nearly sixteen years in this district; some of the best work I have ever seen was done by him during 1869 and 1870. He belongs, however, to the Upper Provinces, is a man of hasty and violent temper, and although he is a Brahmin, when brought in contact with the Bengali Brahmin ticcadars incessant quarrels resulted. The most successful inspector is a man named Narain Chunder Banerjea, who worked as an inoculator for many years in the town of Midnapore and the surrounding villages. Some two years ago he applied to me for employment as a vaccinator, and after a few months instruction became an excellent operator. A Kulin Brahmin by caste, he was enabled to exert immense influence both amongst the people and his brother inoculators, and it was chiefly through his representations that so many inoculators came forward and agreed to learn vaccination. The third inspecting vaccinator is a man named Subdut Misser. He worked for upwards of 25 years as a vaccinator in Midnapore, and was obliged through ill-health to give up his appointment two years ago. He worked very well and displayed considerable tact and patience. Personally I paid many visits to the vaccinators, and whenever any difficulty presented itself I invariably went to the spot, and generally with satisfactory results. Late commence- ment of work. During the early part of the season much time was lost. The newly taught vaccinators were anxious to put off work until February, the usual time when inoculation commences. Why this special time is selected is simply due to the fact that February is a comparatively idle time in the Bengali villages, the rice harvest being over, and the people have then plenty of time to attend to domestic matters. I have found from personal experience that the people are much more willing to accept vaccination during the latter part of January and the month of February than at any other time, for the good reason, that they then have plenty of time to look after their children. The subjoined table shows the number vaccinated, the names and castes of the vaccin- ators, &c. The proportion of operations to the number employed is very small, but many difficulties were encountered this year which I hope will not again appear. Difficulties in re- alizing the scheme. Financially for the vaccinators it has not proved a success, but it must be borne in mind that these men were working for the most part in villages where for years past the people were vaccinated gratis, and they now find much difficulty in realizing their fees in conse- quence. Again, the people object very often to allow lymph to be taken from the arms of the children, and this circumstance has caused delay and doubtful vaccination. These are drawbacks which time will remove. Chowkidars ob- structive. The village chowkidar has proved obstructive on more occasions than one. This ill-paid functionary levied a small tax on the profits of the vaccinator, and when that individual refused to pay up, the chowkidar went about amongst the villagers spreading injurious reports, and on one occasion brought the work of the vaccinator to a stand-still. The vaccinator came to me complaining that the village chowkidar had persuaded the people that he, the vaccinator, knew nothing about his work; that the certificate he produced was a forgery; and that, moreover, if he was allowed to take lymph from the arm of any of the children he had operated on, the children would die or become idiotic. I went to the spot, a large village, or more properly a cluster of villages, called Chuck Gopeenathpore, about eight miles from Midnapore. The vaccinator showed me some 80 cases that he had operated on some seven days pre- viously, and he said that although there were at least 500 children waiting to be vaccinated, he could not proceed owing to the machinations of the chowkidar, who, of course, denied ever having said anything to the prejudice of the vaccinator. A long argument ensued, but the result was that over 100 children were operated on before I left the village, and subsequently matters were settled, except in one particular46 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. as the old. The inoculators must console themselves with the reflection that half a loaf is better than no bread, as in the villages where they used to work as inoculators not a person has been inoculated for more than five years. A small stipend proposed. I would, however, earnestly recommend that some small stipend be given to these men for the present, say Rs. 2 per mensem each during the working season, the Civil Surgeon being authorized to withhold payment whenever he sees occasion for so doing. At the close of the present season all the new vaccinators came forward, soliciting some little aid until their practice became more extended and profitable. Dr. Saunders, who happened to be here on inspection duty when the newly trained vaccinators came forward, saw the men, and heard what they had to say. He agrees with me in thinking that these men should receive some little aid on the understanding that they submit correct returns of their work and obey the orders of the Civil Surgeon. Brahmin ticcadars With the wandering inoculator I have little sympathy; but for the old Bengali Brahmin ticcadars I have some regard. After all it is not their fault that the profession they follow is dangerous to the community. They and their fathers before them for gener- ations have lived by its practice, and it is not to be wondered at that they have hitherto opposed in every way the introduction of vaccination. As a body the Brahmin village ticcadars of Bengal have been ignored and despised by vaccine superintendents, and with disastrous results to the cause of vaccination in more instances than one. Legislative enactments, so frequently demanded, may pauperise this class of people, but it will never subdue their opposition to vaccination,ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 47 Return of number of vaccinations performed during the years 1871 and 1872. Number of Children vaccinated by the Bengali Ticcadars in the years 1871 and 1872. Names of Ticcadars. 1871. 1872. Grand Total. Boys. Girls. Total Boys. Girls. Total. Baboo Banee Madhub Chuckerbutty... ... ... ... 60 42 102 288 272 560 662 48 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Jessore. Vaccination very backward. Jessore.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 49 Inoculation. 6. Inoculation.50 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. At Bograh. Mr. Lyons, Civil Medical Officer of Bograh, gives the following statistics regarding his district :ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 51 Pooree. Pooree.52 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Opposition of the pundahs. village community. The opposition of the pundahs in the town to the practice is a matter of regret. They remain deaf to all reasoning and remonstrance at present, and withstand its introduction as an encroachment on the rights and protective powers of the goddess Shitola. Time however must be allowed to remedy these matters. Inoculation. Inoculation is not practised as freely as in former years. There are 31 inoculators in the Pooree district according to a list furnished by the District Superintendent of Police. Only one or two however are in the neighbourhood of the town. The vaccinator was directed to ask these men to accompany him in his work; they however declined doing so, and I have not been able to see the men. No inoculators in- structed. The Magistrate was addressed on the 11th November 1871, requesting that arrange- ments might be made to have the inoculators from adjacent pergunnahs brought in to see the work of vaccination, so that they might be induced to follow it; none however presented themselves. Small-pox. There was no epidemic of small-pox during the year. Particulars regarding the protection from small-pox, furnished according to paragraph 9 of circular memorandum No. 135 of 21st February 1872. Vaccine census. Class of persons examined. Number ex- amined. Inocu- lated. Per cent. of total examined. Vacci- nated. Per cent. of total examined. Had small- pox. Per cent. of total examined. Un- pro- tected. Per cent. of total examined. Prisoners in Pooree Jail ... 95 24 25.26 34 35.79 27 28.42 10 10.52 Government school ... 110 30 27.27 27 24.54 44 .40 9 8.09 Vernacular school ... 29 6 20.78 1 3.44 12 41.37 10 34.40 Sanskrit school ... 31 3 9.67 ... ... 13 41.93 15 48.38 Total of schools 170 39 22.9 28 13.5 69 40.5 20 90.87 Grand Total ... 265 63 23.7 62 23.4 96 36.2 15 101.39 Balasore Deaths caused by inoculation. Balasore.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 53 &quot; It is only by understanding the causes of our disappointment in past attempts to spread the benefits of the operation that we can hope to secure success in the future. Early difficulties and successes. &quot; The old residents of Dacca narrate how the people fled from the city with their children when it was first noised abroad that they were to be inoculated with some strange matter, and it was only by offering a fee to every vaccinated child that compliance was at last gained. The old men in the north-west mohallas of the city still speak enthusiastically of the success with which the Civil Surgeon of that day, Dr. Tutin, vaccinated all their children. Their recollection of this circumstance was so engrossing five years ago, that they could not recall the knowledge or appearance of a Government vaccinator in their mohallas for nearly fifty years. Vaccination in1836 &quot; The spread of vaccination seems to have declined from this date, as I find Dr. Lamb, the Civil Surgeon, writing in 1836 that he found it impossible to compel the attendance of more than 25 to 30 children weekly, although he had two chuprassees specially employed in bringing in children, and had the help besides of the thannadars all over the district. He adds that the vaccinators perhaps procured as many more children to operate on, but he had his doubts if they were quite accurate in their returns. &quot; The difficulty of supervising and testing the operations of the vaccinators was thus early observed and confessed. Outbreak of small- pox in 1837. Deterioration of lymph. &quot; In the beginning of 1837 a serious check to the propagation of vaccination occurred An outbreak of a ' most virulent small-pox having broken out in the city, many of those who had been vaccinated were seized with the disease and died.' Dr. Lamb explained this unfor- tunate accident by the lymph having been in use before the year 1813, during which time no fresh matter had been employed. Up to 1834 he had been satisfied regarding its excellence, but in that year his confidence in it had ceased, as small-pox, or a disease very much resembling it, had very often followed the vaccination of children of European or mixed blood; while in children of purely native blood the deviation had been very trifling and rare. A fresh start made in 1840. &quot; In the beginning of 1840 a great decrease in the number vaccinated attracted the atten- tion of Government, and Mr. Taylor, the Civil Surgeon, attributed the decrease to the failure of the operation. New lymph was procured from Calcutta, but the confidence of the people had been shaken, and it was with difficulty that children could be induced to present them- selves for vaccination. From 1st May 1839 to 30th April 1840 there were 2,762 persons vaccinated; in the ensuing year they had fallen to 1,423. The lymph from Calcutta proving good, considerable progress was made in Dacca and in the district during 1841-42. Opposition of Rarhi inoculators. &quot; The antagonism of the Rarhi* inoculators, and the great demand for their services, excited the resentment of the Civil Surgeon, who appealed apparently in vain for the inter- ference of the Magistrate against these rivals. Vaccination during 184254 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Domiciliary vac- cination intro- duced in 1853 Vaccination during 1853. &quot; It was the practice until 1853 to have children vaccinated at the hospital; after that date the vaccinators sought for and operated on the children at their own homes. &quot; During 1853 the total number vaccinated was only 1,559, but as many as 1,532, or 98.2 per cent., are returned as successful. This reduction was referred to the introduction of the new vaccine establishment. The people are pronounced to be ' too indifferent about vaccin- ation, and not so fully convinced of the protection it affords as to be induced to bring their children to the vaccinators.' &quot; In July 1854 Dr. Green examined the prisoners then in jail, and found that 31 were vaccinated, 644, or 82.3 per cent., were inoculated, 16 were unprotected, and 91 had marks of natural small-pox. Failure in 1855. Dr Simpson's tes- timony. &quot; In 1855 vaccination was almost entirely suspended. ' The vesicle was very imperfect, coming up and going through its stages prematurely, and often degenerating into sores diffi- cult to heal.' From this year until 1860 I find nothing recorded regarding the obstacles met with in spreading vaccination. In January 1861, however, Dr. Simpson, in his half-yearly report of the Mitford Hospital, writes : ' The diligence of the three vaccinators cannot be correctly ascertained. Their returns are not trustworthy. They cannot show all the children they vaccinate, and I have no means of checking their returns.' They bring some children occasionally to show that the virus is effective, and they manage to keep up a supply. The prejudices of the people generally are against vaccination. This is the confession of no ordinary observer. During the last half century no Civil Surgeon of Dacca has had as much influence with the inhabitants and been as respected as the late Dr Alexander Simpson; yet, with all his command over the people, even he was obliged to confess that his endeavours to overcome their prejudices had failed. In July 1862 he again dwells on the ineffectual attempts to propagate vaccination, and he refers the failure to the want of zeal and diligence on the part of the vaccinators, and to the difficulty of testing the accuracy of their returns. Vaccination during 1858-71. &quot; I append a list of the total number of persons vaccinated between 1858 and 1871, and the percentage of successful cases of each year. The most striking thing about this list is the small proportion returned as successful as compared with the returns from other districts. &quot; It is difficult to offer any explanation of this shortcoming, as it is unlikely that the Civil Surgeons of Dacca have been stricter than their neighbours, or that the vaccinators have been so blind to their own interests as to register without reason so low a percentage of success. Obstacles andfailures. Vaccine census in 1871. &quot; Of the obstacles to the spread of vaccination in Dacca, and of the signal failure that has resulted from past endeavours, many letters and reports have been written by me. In none of them has the present state of vaccination in Dacca been more clearly shown than in my report to the Commissioner of Dacca, No. 597, dated 14th September 1871, a copy of which was delivered to you last year. The chief point in that letter was, that of 950 residents of Dacca, three-fourths of whom were under 15 years of age, only 18.3 per cent. were found to be vaccinated, 48.6 inoculated, 19.7 had marks of natural small-pox, and 13.2 were unprotected. Of 2,889 residents outside the city, 79.5 were inoculated, 3.2 were vaccinated, 14.1 were unprotected, and only 3.2 had marks of small-pox. Influences brought to bear on the people and mis- conceptions fos- tered by the ino- culators. &quot; It will have been observed that in the extracts from the records in my office, allusion is rarely made to the religious prejudices of the natives. When the great small-pox epidemic of 1850 appeared in Dacca, the inoculators appear to have seized the opportunity of extolling the advantages of inoculation and of decrying the benefits of vaccination. The same tactics have been practised ever since the introduction of the Inoculation Act into the city. The people have had pointed out to them the occasional occurrence of small-pox after vaccination and the necessity of having revaccination performed after a certain number of years. As natives always do, the mass accept what is told them without question or doubt. The advantages on the side of vaccination being carefully kept back, and the accuracy of what the inoculators tell them being past dispute, a large proportion of the residents of Dacca prefer sending their children beyond the five-miles prohibition limit, and having them protected once and for ever, instead of submitting them to an operation which requires to be renewed, and which, it is generally allowed, does not provide such a well-founded immunity as their own method does. Caste prejudices. &quot; I have ascertained that the children belonging to the Bysak and Tanti castes are invariably sent out of Dacca to be inoculated. They are not brought back until they have completely recovered. The poorer members, who cannot afford to act thus, keep their children unprotected at home.. Illustrative return. &quot; To test the effects of caste prejudices in opposing the spread of vaccination in Dacca, I insisted this year on the vaccinators keeping a careful register of the caste of every child vaccinated. The result is shown in a table herewith appended. Of the total number vaccinated, 1,925, 55 were Christian children, 793, or 41.1 per cent. were Mahomedans, and the remaining 1 ,077 were Hindus. It is not possible to ascertain what particular religious belief the parents of the Mahomedan children entertain, but with the Hindoos it is easy. The higher and middle classes most obstructive &quot; In glancing over the castes of the Hindus, it is at once apparent that the lowest in the social scale form the largest proportion. The Kumhars, or potters, of whom there are no
ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 55 Efforts made to overcome their resistance un- availing. great numbers in Dacca, furnish nearly one-third, and the still lower caste, the Namusudra, one-ninth. It is, however, neither the highest nor the lowest castes who are so tenacious of their prejudices as the intermediate ones, such as Boisaks, Sâhs, Sankharis, and Kurmokurs. Unfortunately these castes are the richest and most enterprising of the community, and their example affects others. On the 19th January the Magistrate and I met the mattbars of the mohullas where these castes predominate. We pointed out the necessity of having the children and the poorer members among them protected against small-pox; and as Government had prohibited inoculation, we demonstrated that it was desirable that they should consent to adopt vaccination. The mattbars acquiesced and promised to exert their influence in get- ting their neighbours to agree to have their children vaccinated. A day chosen by them- selves was fixed, but, with few exceptions, the only children presented then were those of the lowest castes residing in the quarter. On referring to the return it will be found that of these influential and very prolific castes only 151 were vaccinated. Compulsory vaccin- ation necessary. &quot; It is hopeless by persuasion to overcome the deeply-rooted prejudices of these castes- It has been attempted year after year without success. We must now either remain content to have in our midst a large proportion of the population who in their domestic arrange- ments and the structure of their houses are particularly liable to suffer severely during epidemics of small-pox, or Government, having advanced a step further than it has yet done, must make vaccination compulsory. Entire absence of small-pox from Dacca during the year. &quot; Several times during the past few months I have been warned of the presence of Rarhi inoculators in Dacca, and hints have been given that it has been the practice of these castes of late years to have inoculation performed within the recesses of their houses in defiance of the law. I consulted with the Magistrate and District Superintendent, and we decided on appointing a person to watch the proceedings of these visitors. Up to the present time he has been unable to collect any evidence which would criminate them. The fact that not a single case of small-pox has occurred in Dacca this year, is the best proof of the falsity of these rumours. Proceedings of the season 1871-72. Better agents em- ployed. &quot; At the opening of the vaccinating season there were six vaccinators in the city of Dacca56 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Mortality in Eng- land. Testimony of old writers in Bengal. &quot; The Small-Pox Commissioners who reported on the epidemic of 1850, quote on the other hand an assertion of a Sub-Assistant Surgeon at Hooghly, that in his district 300 lives were lost out of 1,000 children inoculated. It never seems to have struck the Commissioners that on no other matter connected with statistics would the ipse dixit of a Baboo have been accepted as authority on any professional question; still this instance is quoted at the present day as a motive for denouncing inoculation in Bengal. On the other hand, take the experience of inoculation in England, where individuals of all ages were indiscriminately operated on. Dr. George Gregory found, from an examination of the records of the Inoculation Hospital of London during a series of years, that 1 in 500 died. Dr. Heberden confessed that out of 400 persons inoculated, on an average 399 recovered. Of the results of inoculation in Bengal, we fortunately possess particulars in the writings of two physicians, who lived before Jenner made his great discovery, and whose minds were consequently unprejudiced and unbiassed. Mr. Holwell, who wrote ' an account of the manner of inoculating for small-pox in the East Indies in 1767,' says, at page 20 of his paper, ' when the treatment laid down by the inoculators is strictly followed, it is next to a miracle to hear that one in a million fails of receiving the infection, or of one that miscarries under it.' Dr. M. Maty, another physician, writes of inoculation at Patna in 1768: 'It seldom happens that the small-pox thus (by inoculation) procured has any bad consequences, and almost never that anybody dies of it.' &quot; The convictions of these physicians were never contradicted; they must therefore be accepted as correct, and in every respect as more worthy of belief than the assertion of a Baboo at Hooghly Necessity of exact data on this sub- ject Mortality occa- sionally exces- sive I regret that my duties prevent my visiting the villages in the interior and staying sufficiently long to observe the mortality attending the practice of the village ticcadars. That occasionally many deaths result from the ignorance of the operators, I am convinced, but this is not a reason for decrying the operation. The fault is that the law does not interfere to prevent the village barber from inoculating unhealthy children with a disease which the least knowledge would make him refrain from doing. I cannot, however, believe that the mortality is large as a rule. True, among a few castes, the death of a child from small-pox is looked upon as a special mark of divine partiality, but among the masses of the people parental love is as strong as among western nations, and the necessity of having a child to perform the funeral obsequies causes them to place a value on their children unknown to other races. For these reasons I cannot adopt the belief that Bengalee parents devote their children to an operation which is well known to be frequently fatal. Legislative inter- ference with ino- culation neces- sary &quot; That some legislative interference is urgently required, is what I have always advocated. At the present time, according to the police returns, there are 201 natives who are professed inoculators in the Dacca district. The large majority are of the Napit or barber caste. In that number are not included the Rarhi ticcadars, who belong to the Burdwan and Moorshe- dabad districts. They are far superior in skill and intelligence to the village ticcadars, and, according to the natives, they rarely loose a patient, as they make a selection of the children who are healthy. Educated natives in this quarter all affirm that the mortality among children inoculated by these men is under one per cent. &quot; To obtain satisfactory information on this point, it would be necessary for a Civil Surgeon to accompany these Rarhi inoculators and personally watch the result of their practice. Until some competent and unbiassed person does so, we cannot substantiate or disprove the assertion that the mortality after inoculated small-pox is as high as five, or as low as a quarter per cent. &quot; In the families of the Rarhi inoculators, as well as in those of the local ticcadars, the profession is a hereditary one. The manner of operating, the treatment to be pursued, the choice of matter, &c, are taught by the elders to the youngers. Skill is acquired only by practice. No books that I can hear of exist on the subject of inoculation.&quot; No vaccine operations have been performed, in any of the branch dispen- saries of this district. Vaccine census. Return showing the total number of Prisoners Inoculated, Vaccinated, &c., in the Dacca Jail. Number examined. Inocu- lated. Percent- age. Vaccin- ated. Percent- age. Unpro- tected. Percent- age. Natural small- pox. Percent- age Jail, 1864 ... ... ... 782 644 82.3 31 3.9 16 2.0 91 11.6 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 57 Return of vaccine operations dur- ing the years 185858 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Remarks by the Deputy Inspec- tor-General of Hospitals Dr. Buckle in forwarding this report writes as follows :ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 59 or Madaripore. The following table gives particulars regarding the degree of protection enjoyed by different classes of the community :60 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Cachar Cachar.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 61 The following statement shows the degree to which the inhabitants are potected by inoculation, vaccination, and small-pox. Vaccine census. Class of persons. Number examined. Inocu- lated. Percent- age of total examined Vaccin- ated. Per cent- age of total examined. Had small-pox. Per cent. of total examined. Unpro- tected. Per cent. of total examined Prisoners in jail ... ... 184 133 72.2 12 6.5 20 10.8 19 10.4 Bengali school-boys ... ... 101 58 57.4 6 5.9 9 8.9 28 27.7 English school-boys ... ... 117 68 58.1 14 11.9 2 1.7 13 11.3 Tipperah. Work more careful and systematic. Tipperah.62 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Proceedings of inoculators. disease, and during the time they were suffering the zemindar's daughters visited them : Thus the zemindar's family became infected. At the request of the zemindar I called there on my way back from Dhoobree in the latter end of March, and vaccinated all in his house with exception of himself; but as I was doubtful of the vaccine virus being good (it had been lying at Dhoobree for several months), I despatched the vaccinator with fresh crusts from here on the 4th April, and he revaccinated them and about 50 others on the 5th, on which date I again went to Luckhipore; and the following morning a number of men and women came with their children, but I found they would only have the latter vaccinated. So as an inducement I made the vaccinator vaccinate me in their presence, and immediately after they all offered their arms to be operated on, including the zemindar. Most likely the disease would then have been checked had not the zemindar foolishly allowed inoculators to go to work. I accidentally found out through one of his sons that these people were present (when I went to inspect the vaccine operations), and told the zemindar that if they were allowed to inoculate, the disease would be sure to spread. This advice was disregarded, and three inoculators were allowed to work there after I left, and 118 of those who had been vaccinated were afterwards inoculated, 26 of whom took ill with small-pox, and I believe 6 died. Absence of precau- tions against the spread of small- pox. When an outbreak does occur among them, very little can be done to prevent its spread (unless at Sudder Stations) ; they appear to have no dread of the disease, and, whether protected or not, think nothing of visiting houses infected or receiving visitors from them. They seldom will accept of any treatment except that prescribed by the koberajes ; and although there is a dispensary at Luckhipore, the hospital assistant was not called to treat a single case. The zemindar lost several of his family, and only allowed me to see two of his grown up daughters and one son, but none of his wives ; fortunately those that I did see and prescribed for recovered, which, it is to be hoped, will make him and his people have less faith in the koberajes. The annexed table contains the result of an examination made by me at the two schools and jail. Of the 27 marked as vaccinated, some had been previously inoculated, but all have been done since conviction. The greater portion of the unprotected children in the vernacular school are very young. Vaccine census Classes of persons examined at Gowalparah. Number examin- ed. Inoculated Per cent. of num- ber ex- amined. Vaccin- ated. Per cent. of num- ber ex- amined. Had small- pox. Per cent. of num- ber ex- amined. Unpro- tected. Per cent. of num- ber ex- amined. Teacher and pupils, verna- cular school ... ... 84 46 54.76 1 1.19 15 17.85 22 26.19 Teacher and pupils, Govern- ment English school ... 62 44 70.9 1 1.61 11 17.74 6 9.67 Adults in jail ... ... 96 51 53.12 27 28.12 14 14.58 4* 4.16 Total ... 242 141 58.26 29 11.98 40 16.52 32 13.22 * 3 under trial and 1 lunatic. Kamroop Kamroop.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 63 Inoculators induc- ed to practise vaccination. 2. The great increase this year is due to the fact that inoculation was prohibited ; the old inoculators were told they would be punished if caught at their practice, but were informed that if they came into Gowhatty they would be taught vaccination and would be supplied with lymph. I believe the dread of punishment, as well as seeing the beneficial effects of vaccination, induced a good many to come to Gowhatty to be taught; and also finding that by substituting vaccination for inoculation they would not lose anything, as I understand that out in the district they receive a fee of from 4 to 8 annas for each child they operated on. Method of instruc- tion. 3. I kept each batch of inoculators at the station for from three weeks to a month that they might see a number of cases operated on. During that time they collected a lot of scabs from healthy children, which they took away with them into the district. I had the names of all these men taken down, and the villages they were going to, and each got a certificate written in Bengali and signed by me that they were to show at the police thannah that they had been taught vaccination here. They were also cautioned that if they returned to inoculation, the police would get instructions to take them up and send them back to Gow- hatty. From frequent inquiries I made, I could not learn that any of them returned to inoculation. 4. I don't know that there is anything else to remark more than that the vaccine operations did not cost Government anything beyond former years; one or two voluntary vaccinators were paid two annas for each successful case, but that was discontinued this year. There is one permanent vaccinator attached to the dispensary, and he is paid Rs. 18 a month by the municipality. 5. The hospital assistant at Burpettah writes to say that none of the people would consent to have their children vaccinated, and has returned the form blank, which is herewith forwarded. Remarks by the Deputy Inspec- tor-General of Hospitals Mr. Buckle in forwarding the above remarks:64 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. outbreak of small-pox. Cases of small-pox were numerous throughout the dis- trict during the year. The following statement, showing the protection enjoyed by the people, accompanies the report:ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 65 Luckimpore. Luckimpore.66 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Patna. Patna.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 67 Work done by them. 8. The practice here is, when an inoculator applies for a license to vaccinate, for either the Civil Surgeon or Sub-Assistant Surgeon (or, in the sub-division, for the hospital assistant,) to examine the man as to his qualifications, and if these are satisfactory, to grant him a pass enabling him to vaccinate; if he be not qualified, he is, if willing to learn, taught at the dispensary. The amount of work performed by these men cannot be satisfactorily ascertained, for the simple reason that there are no means of compelling them to furnish returns, nor is there any inducement for them to do so. In some instances they have, however, brought work for inspection. Seven of these men returned 264 cases up to 31st December, and 8 men returned 220 children in the month of March. The Sub-Assistant Surgeon of the Patna dispensary has occasionally inspected their work in the houses where they per- formed it. Altogether 55 passes have been granted to inoculators during the last two seasons. I regret to state that one of these men was lately caught inoculating in the city, and on conviction was sentenced to one month's simple imprisonment by the Deputy Magistrate of Patna, a punishment which it appears to me was quite inadequate to put a stop to the practice. I have brought this to the notice of the civil authorities. Small-pox. 9. Small-pox has not prevailed to any extent during the past season; this satisfactorily accounts for a slight falling off in the number vaccinated as compared with 1870-71, when there was a serious outbreak of small-pox at the commencement of the season in one part of the city, which greatly alarmed the people and induced them to apply in numbers to be vaccinated. 10. Next season I hope to be able to furnish more extended statistics for the subjoined table. The particulars given below are derived from a daily inspection for a certain number days of all the patients presenting themselves at the dispensaries of Patna and Bankipore ; also from an inspection of all the prisoners in the Meetapore Jail. Vaccine census. Class of persons examined. Number examined Inocu- lated. Percent of total examined Vaccin- ated Per cent. of total examined Had small- pox Percent of total examined. Unpro- tected. Percent of total examined. Meetapore Jail Prisoners ... 414 245 59.17 2 48 166 4.0 1 .24 Bankipore Dispensary ... 138 04 46.38 17 12.31 38 27.5 19 13.7 Patna Dispensary ... ... 354 69 19.49 25 7.06 213 60.1 47 13.2 Total ... 906 878 41.7 44 4.85 417 46.02 67 7.39 11. The vaccinators on the whole have worked well during the past season. I have again to bring native vaccinator Gowri Tewaree of the city dispensary prominently to notice. He is a most zealous servant, and on more than one occasion has been the means of putting a stop to inoculation in the city by handing the inoculators up to justice. The falling off in numbers in the city dispensary, as compared with last year, is to be partly accounted for by the transfer of one of the vaccinators to Bankipore, which had formerly only 3 men attached to it. Gya. Gya.68 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Shahabad. Buxar. Shahabad.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 69 Tirhoot. Four inoculators instructed. Tirhoot.70 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. inoculators encouraged and assisted, the Civil Surgeon is sanguine that vaccin- ation might be generally introduced. He gives the following statistics of protection:ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 71 sections of the community. The results are pretty similar, except as regards the proportion of vaccinated. That there should be over 20 per cent. vaccinated among the school-boys, is a not unsatisfactory proof that vaccination is advancing among the better class.&quot; Class of prisoners exa- mined. Number examined. Inocu- lated. Per cent. of total examined. Vacci- nated. Per cent. of total examined. Had small- pox. Per cent. of total examined. Unpro- tected. Per cent. of total examined. Prisoners of MonghyrJail 246 185 75.20 6 2.43 50 20.32 5 2.03 Pupils of Monghyr school 141 81 57.44 29 20.57 28 19.85 3 2.12 Bhaugulpore. Fourteen inocula- tors instructed. Bhaugulpore.72 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. The hill people submit readily to vaccination. No inoculation is practised, and small-pox did not break out during the year. Julpigoree. Julpigoree.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 73 High fees charged. as in the former times of inoculation, village after village in the jurisdictions of the head-men is completely vaccinated. Sometimes, however, it occurs that a few of the villages, for want of funds to pay the fees of the inoculators, are left unprotected. This is owing to the high fees charged by the tikaits, and every member of the village community being unable to pay, the whole village, by choice of the villagers themselves, is left unvaccinated. Inspection. The number of these inoculators practising vaccination is great; twenty-six of them working in 13 batches were supplied with lymph, and the operations of the whole extended over a large portion of the district. In order to inspect the work of these men thoroughly, an establishment would be required that is not in existence. One inspection of the work of some was made during the year in February, and a special report submitted at the time.* Feeling of the people. The feeling of the people as regards vaccination is not against. I may go so far as to say that they show no feeling for or against it; all rests in the hands of the inoculators, who are the men to decide for the people whether it should be vaccination or inoculation. No practice of inoculation in the district during the year has come to my knowledge, and no small-pox prevailed. The following are the particulars regarding the protection from small-pox enjoyed by the people:74 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. Statement showing the Result of &quot; Vaccine Census&quot; throughout the Province. Locality. Class of persons. Observer. Inoculated. Vaccinated. Had small- pox. Unpro- tected. Calcutta 1869 ... ... Residents of South Division ... Dr. Charles . ... 46.9 11.1 35.7 6.1 Ditto ditto ... ... Schools ... Upper Division ... Ditto ... ... 45.1 50.1 37.6 32.6 10.7 10.7 6.5 6.4 Middle STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 75 TABLE A. Summary of Vaccination performed by the General Vaccine Establishment and Vaccination Circles under the Government of Bengal, and by the Establishments attached to Civil Stations or Dispensaries, from 1st April 1871 to 31st March 1872. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Circle. Parts comprised in the Circle. Total number of persons vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Revaccination. Percentage of successful cases excluding those unknown from the total. Paid by the State. Paid from other sources. Total cost. Cost of each successful case. Primary vaccin- ation. Revaccination. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. * Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. In primary. In secondary. Chowringhee Depôt ... Calcutta ... ... ... ... 368 4 372 367 ...... 1 368 2 ...... 2 4 100 100 8,934 0 0 3,708 0 0 12,642 0 0 0 14 5½ Park Street Dispensary... Ditto ... ... ... ... 8 ...... 8 8 ...... ...... 8 ...... ...... ...... ...... 100 ...... Medical College ... Ditto ... ... ... ... 18 2 20 18 ...... ...... 18 ...... 2 ...... 2 100 ...... North Division ... In the town and suburbs of Calcutta ... ... ... ... 3,144 106 3,205 3,138 8 2 3,148c 4 102 ...... 106 33.74 3.77 Middle 76 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in each Division of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 CIRCLE. Name and rank of Superintendent. Number of native super- intendents, head vaccin- ators. Number of vaccinators. Total number of persons vaccinated. Collectorate, political agency, or native state in which vaccin- ations were performed during the year. Population in area included in last column. Name of portion of district or of town. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. North Division. Town ... ... Surgeon T.E. Charles, M.D., Superintendent-General. 1 1 4 5 1,894 2,535 In the town and suburbs of Calcutta. North Divi- sion. Suburbs ... ... 1 1 3 3 1,356 1,519 Middle Division. Total ... 2 2 7 8 3,250 4,054 Town ... ... 1 1 4 4 1,579 1,497 Calcutta 430,000 Middle Divi- sion. Suburbs ... ... 1 1 2 2 1,445 1,599 Cooly depôts ... ... ... ... ... 7,657 5,163 Suburbs 250,000 South Division. Total ... 2 2 6 6 10,681 8,259 Total ... 680,000 Town ... ... 1 1 3 3 1,403 1,358 South Divi- sion. Subuibs ... ... 1 1 5 5 4,068 3,906 Cooly depôts ... ... ... ... ... 1,133 1,710 Total ... 2 2 8 8 6,604 6,974 Grand Total ... 6 6 *21 22 a20,535 19,287 Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in the 1st Circle ... ... Surgeon F.Powell, M B , Superin- tendent. 1 1 22 22 28,634 27,028 Burdwan Not Pro- curable. 5 Thannahs in Budwan. 2nd Circle ... ... 1 1 19 22 17,592 31,107 Burdwan and Nudden 3 Thamiahs in Burdwan and 2 in Nuddea. 3rd Circle... ... 1 1 22 22 45,290 81,984 Buidwan 6 Thannahs in Burdwan. Total ... 3 3 63 66 91,516 140,119 Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in the Darjeeling ... Surgeon R. Lid- derdale, M D , Superintendent 1 1 8 6 28,757 15,311 Cooch Behar 1,914,340 Rungpore ... 1 1 6 6 12,894 21,387 1,463,256 Dinagepore ... 1 1 6 6 24,518 13,370 754,939 Bograh ... 1 ... 6 6 25,067 13,720 802,903 Rajshabye ... 1 ... 4 4 5,862 4,835 361,394 Julpigoree ... ... ... 3 3 2,249 2,091 59,000 Darjeeling ... 1 ... 6 ... 7,308 ...... 1,636,449 Purneah ... 1 ... 6 ... 5,054 ...... 680,904 Maldah ... ... 1 ... 5 ...... 8,058 ......... ......... Total ... 7 4 45 30 1,11,709 78,772 7,673,185 Statement shotting particulars of Vaccination in Ranchee ... Assistant Sur- geon, J J. Wood, M.D., Superin- tendent. 3 3 20 20 35,650 23,313 Lohardugga and Hazareebaugh. 2,146,471 ......... ... ... 41 ... 6,937 ...... Lohardugga and Maunbhoom. 2,045,471 ......... ... ... 19 ... 9,326 ...... Singbhoom ... 346,518 ......... 3 3 80 20 51,913 23,313 4,538,460 Statement shotting particulars of Vaccination in the Sonthal Pergun- uahs. Baboo Kali Krishna Ghose, Deputy Super- intendent. ... ... 6 5 8,352 6,454 Sonthal Pergun- nans. 1,242,167 Rajmehal, Pakour, and Godda. * 4 vaccinators sanctioned but not employed. (a.) 11 repetition cases have not been shown in column 5, but are shown in column 9. (b.) Including cases of success modified by previous protection, the percentage of success amounts to 75 58. (c.) Includes 5 repetition cases. (d.) Includes 8 repetition cases.
STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 77 No. I. Superintendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, during the year 1871-72. 9 10 11 12 Primary vaccinations. Revaccinations. Percentage of of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of per- sons vaccinated by each vaccinator. A. B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Sex. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those &quot;doubtful.&quot; Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian. Hindoo. Mussulman. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding those &quot;doubtful.&quot; Unknown. In primary vaccination. In secondary vaccination. 948 855 4 1,628 171 ... 701 1,102 1,796 6 1 1,803 4 91 ... 95 99.66 4.21 473.50 700 645 10 886 449 ... 411 934 1,342 2 1 1,345 ... 11 ... 11 99.85 ...... 452. 1,648 1,500 14 2,514 620 ... 1,112 2,036 3,138 8 2 3,148 4 102 ... 106 99.74 3.77 464.28 844 692 71 947 518 ... 416 1,120 1,524 11 1 1,536 13 33 ... 46 99.28 28.26 394.75 708 718 20 966 440 ... 353 1,073 1,410 16 ... 1,426 ... 22 ... 22 98.87 ...... 722.50 422 344 23 718 25 ... 174 592 703 9 54 766 1,690 4,545 657 6,892 98.73 27.10 ...... 1,974 1,751 114 2,631 983 ... 943 2,785 3,637 36 55 3,728 1,703 4,600 657 6,960 99.01 27.01 504. 574 498 173 440 459 ... 266 806 1,071 ...... 1 1,072 87 242 2 331 100 26.44 467.66 2,237 1,792 54 2,722 1,253 ... 491 3,538 4,020 6 3 4,029 6 33 ... 39 99.85 15.38 813.60 73 60 ... 78 55 .. 10 123 133 ...... ... 133 215 785 ... 1,000 100 21.50 ...... 2,884 2,350 227 3,240 1,767 ... 767 4,467 5,224 6 4 5,234 308 1,060 2 1,370 99.88 22.51 683.87 6,506 5,604 355 8,385 3,370 ... 2,822 9,288 11,999 50 61 12,110 2,015 5,762 659 8,436 99.58 b 25.90 559.28 Metropolitan Circles, during the year 1871-72. 14,432 14,204 2 27,173 1,461 ... 1,782 26,854 28,503 95 38 a28,636 1 2 ... 3 99.66 33.33 1,301.54 9,225 8,345 1 11,979 5,590 ... 1,171 16,399 17,402 157 11 b17,570 2 28 ... 30 99.10 6.66 925.89 23,268 22,063 7 41,323 4,001 ... 2,822 42,509 45,135 131 65 c45,331 2 ... ... 2 99.71 100 2,058.63 46,925 44,612 10 80,475 11,052 ... 5,775 85,762 91,040 383 114 91,537 5 30 ... 35 99.58 14.28 1,452.63 Darjeeling Circle, during the year 1871-72. 17,212 11,545 2 10,674 17,380 701 2,117 26,640 20,713 9,696 7 30,416 ... ... ... ... 68.11 ...... 3,594.6 6,966 5,928 ... 6,966 5,928 . 217 12,677 10,531 3,342 35 13,908 ... ... ... ... 75.90 ...... 2,149 13,014 11,504 ... 2,893 20,910 715 1,229 23,289 23,539 1,070 163 24,772 ... ... ... ... 95.65 ...... 4,086.3 13,186 11,881 1 3,007 21,441 618 2,063 23,004 24,160 1,590 221 25,971 ... ... ... ... 93.82 ...... 4,177.8 3,178 2,684 ... 2,598 2,940 324 669 5,193 5,798 634 22 6,454 ... ... ... ... 90.14 ...... 1,465.5 1,350 899 ... 1,973 ... 276 323 1,926 1,931 256 62 2,249 ... ... ... ... 88.29 ...... 749.6 4,109 3,199 ... 4,170 3,138 ... 650 6,658 6,732 272 304 7,308 ... ... ... ... 96.11 ...... 1,218 2,714 2,340 2 2,327 2,579 146 191 4,863 4,686 322 46 5,054 ... ... ... ... 93.57 ...... 842.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ...... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ...... ...... ...... 61,729 49,980 5 34,608 74,316 2,780 7,459 104,250 98,090 17,182 860 116,132 ... ... ... ... 85.09 ...... 2,482.4 the Ranchee Circle, during the year 1871-72. 18,481 17,169 161 9,717 1,661 24,111 5,072 30,578 34,664 3,247 467 a 38,378 ... ... ... ... 91.48 ...... 1,782.5 c884 c976 c2 c417 c59 c1,382 c267 cl,593 3,787 147 3,117 b 7,051 ... ... ... ... 96.26 ...... 169.1 No record. 9,055 261 10 9,326 ... ... ... ... 97.19 ...... 490.8 19,365 18,145 163 10,134 1,720 25,493 5,339 32,171 47,506 3,655 3,594 54,755 ... ... ... ... 92.85 ...... 648.9 Sonthal Pergunnahs Circle, during the year 1871-72. 3,661 4,688 4 2,906 459 4,983 819 7,533 7,561 758 31 8,350 ... 2 ... 2 90.88 ...... 1,392 (e.) Includes 43 repetition cases. (f ) 4,423 repetition cases included in column C, results and total, giving discrepancy in total operations and persons. (g.) Age, caste, and sex of 2,728 repetition cases herein included are not stated. (h.) Includes 114 repetition cases. (i.) Age, caste, and sex of 5,077 cases not stated. 20
78 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. II. Statement showing the monthly number and results of the Vaccinations performed in each Circle of Superintendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, and Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee, and Sonthal Pergunnahs Vaccine Circles, during the year 1871-72. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circle of Superinten- dence. Months. Districts in which oper- ations were chiefly conducted in each month. Total number vaccinated. RESULTS. Total. Average percentage successful, excluding those &quot;un- known.&quot; Successful. Unsuccess- ful, includ- ing doubt- ful. Unknown. 1871. North Division. April... ... Town, primary... ... 28 28 ...... ...... 28 100. Ditto, repetition.. ... 1 1 ...... ...... 1 100. Ditto, revaccination... ... 2 ...... 2 ...... 2 ...... Suburb, primary... ... ... 27 26 1 ...... 27 96.29 May... ... Town, ditto... ... 20 19 1 ...... 20 95. June... ... Ditto ditto ... ... 21 20 1 ...... 21 95.23 July... Ditto ditto ... ... ... 30 29 ...... 1 30 100 August... Ditto ditto ... ... 24 24 ...... ...... 24 100 September... Town, primary ... ... 27 27 ...... ...... 27 100 Suburb, ditto ... ... 27 26 ...... 1 27 100 October... Town, primary ... ... 26 26 ..... ...... 26 100 Suburb, ditto ... ... 34 34 ...... ...... 34 100 November ... Town, primary... ... ... 179 179 ...... ...... 179 100 Ditto, revaccination... ... ... 1 ...... 1 ...... 1 .. Suburb, primary... ... ... 151 151 ...... ...... 151 100 December ... Town, primary... ... ... 272 271 1 ...... 272 99.63 Ditto, revaccination.. ... ... 8 1 7 ...... 8 12.50 Suburb, primary.. ... ... 231 230 1 ... .. 231 99.56 Ditto, revaccination ... ... ... 6 ...... 6 ... .. 6 ...... 1872. January... Town, primary ... ... 338 338 ..... ...... 338 100 Ditto, revaccination... ... 16 3 13 ...... 16 18.75 Suburb, primary... ... 363 363 ...... ...... 363 100 February... Town, primary... ... ... 545 542 3 ...... 545 99.44 Ditto, repetition... ... 2 2 ... . ..... 2 100 Ditto, revaccination... ... 46 ...... 46 ...... 46 ...... Suburb, primary... ... 331 331 ...... ...... 331 100 March ... Town, primary... ... 289 289 ...... ...... 289 100 Ditto, repetition.. ... 1 1 ..... ...... 1 100 Ditto, revaccination. ... 22 ...... 22 ... .. 22 ...... Suburb, primary.. ... 181 181 ...... ...... 181 100 Ditto, revaccination... ... 5 ...... 5 ... .. 5 ... .. Total... Town, primary... ... 1,799 1,792 6 1 1,799 99.66 Ditto, repetition... ... 4 4 ...... ...... 4 100 Ditto, revaccination... ... 95 4 91 ...... 95 4.21* Suburb, primary.. ... 1,345 1,342 2 1 1,345 99.85 Ditto, revaccination... ... 11 ...... 11 ...... 11 .....STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 79 TABLE No. II.80 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. II.STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 81 TABLE No. II.82 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. II.STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 83 TABLE No. III. Statement showing Expenditure of Vaccine Department in each Circle of Superintendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, in the Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee, and Sonthal Pergunnahs Vaccine Circles, during the year 1871-72. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinated. Percentage of success- ful, exclud- ing those unknown from the total. Cost of each successful case, exclud- ing cases of modified suc- cess after revaccin- ation. REMARKS Rs. As p Rs. As P. Rs. As. P. Paid by Government. Office establishment, at Rs. 102 per mensem ... ... ... 1,224 0 0 1,224 0 0 ...... ...... ...... * Including cases of success modified by previous pro tection, the per- centage of success amounts to 75.58. expended, the cost of each successful case has been Rs 0-14-5¼, the same including 3,863 cases of modified success after revaccina- tion is Rs 0-11-3¾ 3 Superintendents, at Rs 150 each per mensem... ... ... 5,400 0 0 5,400 0 0 ...... ...... ...... 3 Vaccinators, at Rs 10 each per mensem ... ... ... 360 0 0 360 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Contingencies, including office rent... 1,200 0 0 al,050 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Travelling allowance, &c. ... ... 1,204 0 0 b900 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Postage labels ... ... ... ... 42 0 0 ...... ...... ...... ...... Total... 9,430 0 0 8,934 0 0 ... ... ...... ...... Paid by Town Municipality. 3 Head Vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem... ... ... ... 1,980 0 0 c1,524 0 0 ...... ...... ...... 3 Vaccinators, at Rs. 12 each per mensem ... ... ... 6 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem ... ... . 3 Vaccinators, at Rs. 8 each per mensem... . Contingencies, at Rs. 18-5-4 per men- sem ... ... ... ... 220 0 0 220 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Total... 2,200 0 0 1,744 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Paid by Suburban Municipality. 3 Head Vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem.. ... ... .. 1,764 0 0 1,764 0 0 ...... ...... ...... 2 Vaccinators, at Rs. 12 each per mensem. ... ... 7 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem... .. . 1 Vaccinator, at Rs. 8 each per mensem ... ... ... Contingencies, at Rs. 16-10-8... 200 0 0 200 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Total... 1,964 0 0 1,964 0 0 ...... ...... ...... Grand Total... 13,594 0 0 12,642 0 0 20,535 *70.68 84 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. III.STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 85 TABLE No. IV. Statement showing the results of the year 1871-72, as compared with those of each of the previous five years, in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee, and Sonthal Pergunnahs Vaccine Circles. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Circle. YEAR. Total number of persons vaccin- ated. Number success- ful. Ratio per cent. success- ful, ex- cluding those &quot;un- known&quot; from the total. NUMBER OF VACCINATORS. Cost of whole vaccine estab- lishment. Cost of tra- velling allow- ances and contingen- cies. Total cost. Cost of each successful case, exclud- ing cases of modified suc- cess after re- vaccination. A. B. C. D. Paid by State. Paid from other sources. Total. Number previous- ly employed as inoculators or na- tive practitioners Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. CALCUTTA AND SUBURBS. 1866-67 * 1867-68 1868-69 ... 1869-70 .. 22,283 16,089 79.07 3 30 33 10 10,314 0 0 2,899 0 5 13,213 0 5 0 13 1½ 1870-71 ... 19,287 14,020 77.82 3 25 28 10 10,258 0 0 2,520 0 0 12,778 0 0 0 14 6¾ 1871-72 ... 20,535 14,014 70.72 3 24 27 10 10,272 0 0 2,370 0 0 12,642 0 0 0 14 5¼ METROPOLI- TAN CIRCLE. 1868-69 122,493 121,335 99.42 68 .. 68 .. .. No information kept. .. .. 0 4 1 1869-70 155,825 155,315 99.75 68 .. 68 11 22,831 9 9 7,325 5 186 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in each of the three Circles 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Circle of Medical Superintendence. Name and rank of Superin- tendent of Dispensary. No of na- tive Super- intendents of vaccina- tion attach- ed to the dispensary. No of vac- cinators attached to the dispen- sary. Total number of persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agen- cy, or Native State for the population of which the dis- pensary is pro- vided. Popula- tion of area in- cluded in last co- lumn. Name of dispensary. A. Sex 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. Males. Females. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. W. Purves, civil surgeon ... ... ... 1 2 a 10 284 Burdwan ... ...... Burdwan ... ... ... H. Connolly, civil medical officer ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 1,505 349 Bancoorah ...... Bancoorah 1,071 434 1,423 ...... ...... 791 632 E J. Roberts, civil medical officer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31 730 ...... Raneegunge ... 18 11 R. A Barker, M D, civil medi- cal officer ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 261 8 BcerbhoomSTATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 87 of Medical Superintendence in the province of Bengal, during the year 1871-72. 9 10 11 12 PRIMARY VACCINATION. REVACCIN- ATIONS. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. B. C. D. A. B. C D. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Successful Unsuccessful, including those doubtful Unknown. Total. Christians. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Other castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In primary vaccin- ation. In secondary vacci- nation. ... 10 ... ... ... 9 1 ... 10 ... ... ... ... 90 ...... 10 5 1,463 37 ... 6 1,499 1,104 272 ... 1,376 121 8 ... 129 80.23 93.79 1,505 ... 1,413 10 ... 9 1,414 1,127 296 ... 1,423 ... ... ... ... 79.19 ...... 29 ... ... ... 23 6 29 ... ... 29 2 ... ... 2 100 100 29 by civil medical officer 23 199 19 ... 21 220 211 28 2 241 15 5 ... 20 88.28 75 261 4 9,085 1,043 ... 4,219 5,913 9,716 225 ... 9,941 174 17 ... 191 98.03 91.09 5,066 ... 568 27 ... 6 589 570 25 ... 595 ... ... ... ... 95.8 ...... 595 ... 567 31 ... 125 473 480 112 ... 592 4 2 ... 6 81.08 66.66 598 97 1,277 445 ... 988 881 1,535 180 104 1,819 50 106 62 218 89.50 32.05 2,037 operations durting the year under report. 212 1,011 932 ... 556 1,599 1,942 213 ... 2,155 52 ... ... 52 90.11 100 2,207 9 859 26 ... 35 859 892 2 ... 894 ... ... ... ... 99.77 ...... 894 100 170 265 ... 135 400 400 135 ... 535 ... ... ... ... 74.76 ...... 535 1 320 348 ... 47 622 589 45 35 669 ... ... ... ... 92.90 ...... 223 25 787 262 ... 312 762 879 195 ... 1,074 ... ... ... ... 81.84 ...... 358 1 285 73 4 114 249 328 35 ... 363 ... ... ... ... 90.36 ...... 363 ... 116 33 ... 2 147 126 19 4 149 ... ... ... ... 86.89 ...... 149 ... 97 47 ... 7 137 119 14 11 144 ... ... ... ... 89.47 ...... 144 14 263 251 ... 25 503 463 65 ... 528 ... ... ... ... 87.69 ...... ...... ... 23 126 ... 8 141 118 31 ... 149 ... ... ... ... 79.19 ...... 149 27 by civil medical officer, 3 jail native doctor, 2 dispensary native doctor, and 117 vaccin- ator. operations. 1 41 44 ... 9 77 47 35 4 86 ... ... ... ... 57.31 ...... 86 ... 9 17 ... 26 7 19 ... 26 ... ... ... ... 26.92 ...... ...... ... 742 737 ... 13 1,466 1,086 393 ... 1,479 ... ... ... ... 73.42 ...... 739.5 42 470 6 ... 91 427 330 188 ... 518 ... ... ... ... 63.70 ...... 259 ... 155 ... ... 6 149 109 46 ... 155 ... ... ... ... 70.32 ...... 155 ... 18 3 ... . 21 14 3 1 18 3 ... ... 3 82.35 100 ...... 46 317 ... ... 40 323 339 24 ... 363 ... ... ... ... 93.38 ...... 363 14 336 6 ... 356 285 71 ... 356 ... ... ... ... 80.56 ...... 178 ... 5 3 ... 3 6 2 ... 8 ... ... ... ... 75 ...... ...... 625 20,606 4,791 4 6,797 19,217 22,860 2,674 161 25,695 421 138 62 621 89.52 75.31 55 1,077 793 ... 181 1,744 1,850 30 20 1,900 2 15 8 25 98.40 11.76 322 ... 338 474 ... 50 762 651 161 ... 812 ... ... ... ... 80.17 ...... 812 62 613 1,080 15 100 1,670 1,260 428 82 1,770 ... ... ... ... 74.64 ...... 1,770 8 254 104 50 98 318 324 92 ... 416 ... ... ... ... 77.88 ...... 416 ... 97 89 ... 3 183 146 37 3 186 ... ... ... ... 79.78 ...... 186 ... 50 1 ... 51 38 13 ... 51 ... ... ... ... 74.51 ...... 51 ... 7 16 ... 23 11 10 ... 21 2 ... ... 2 52.38 100 23 ... 192 1 3 6 190 157 36 ... 193 3 ... ... 3 81.34 100 196 ... 20 285 ... 6 299 211 93 ... 304 1 ... ... 1 69.40 100 305 21 572 228 175 690 306 620 290 24 934 62 ... ... 62 68.13 100 996 11 42 261 423 52 685 625 91 1 717 20 ... ... 20 87.29 100 368 71 99 364 ... 534 486 48 ... 534 ... ... ... ... 91.01 ...... 534 11 373 257 1 31 611 480 162 ... 642 ... ... ... ... 74.70 ...... 321 54 383 21 197 197 458 529 126 ... 655 ... ... ... ... 80.76 ...... 655 45 4,853 1,994 1,422 4,845 3,469 8,205 45 64 8,314 47 ... ... 47 99.45 100 ...... 3 97 18 129 29 218 173 70 ... 243 ... 4 ... 4 71.19 ...... 247 4 186 60 ... 25 225 197 53 ... 250 ... ... ... ... 78.8 ...... 250 11 779 24 ... 297 517 757 55 2 814 ... ... ... ... 93.22 ...... 814 1 226 68 23 54 264 169 149 ... 318 ... ... ... ... 53.14 ...... 318 5 16 1 105 32 95 119 8 ... 127 ... ... ... ... 93.70 ...... 127 362 10,274 6,139 2,543 6,696 12,622 17,008 1,997 196 19,201 137 19 8 164 89.49 87.82
88 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Circle of Medical Superintendence. Name and rank of Superin- tendent of Dispensary. No. of na- tive super- intendents of vaccina- tion attach- ed to the dispensary. No. of vac- cinators attached to the dispen- sary. Total number of persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political Agen- cy, or native state for the population of which the dis- pensary is pro- vided. Popula- tion of area in- cluded in last co- lumn. Name of dispensary. A Sex. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. 1871-72. 1870-71. Males. Females. DINAPORE CIRCLE. W A. Gardiner, assistant sur- geon ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 443 272 Patna 10,000 Dinapore... 260 183 B. Simpson, M D., civil sur- geon ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 5 4,717 5,951 127,891 Patna... 3,038 1,679 ... ... 2 1 1,557 290 13,38,038 Behar... 791 766 ... ... 4 3 2,121 1,666 25,188 Bankipore ... 1,233 888 ... ... 1 1 452 408 65,389 Barrh... 269 183 C. M. Russell, M.D., civil sur- geon ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 484 380 Gya ... ... 71,580 Gya... 314 170 J. H. Thornton M.B.,B.A. civil surgeon ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 3 2,224 2,705 Shahabad ... 16,04,000 Arrah... 1,386 838 ... ... 1 ... 639 465 ...... Jugdispore ... 377 262 ... ... 1 ... 1,292 235 ...... Sasseeram ... 889 403 R. T Wright, M.D., assistant surgeon ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 510 436 10,000 Buxar... 258 195 J. Meredith, M.D. ... ... ... ... 3 3 3,413 2,354 Tirhoot ... ...... Tirhoot ... 2,234 1,179 ... ... 1 2 1,586 1,050 ...... Durbhanga ... No record. ... ... ... ... 96 9 ...... Modoobanee ... 56 40 ... ... ... ... 48 . ...... Tajpore ... 30 18 ... ... 1 ... 80 40 ...... Hajeepore ... 21 49 R. McLeod, M.D, civil surgeon ... ... 10 9 2,334 4,359 Sarun ... ... 45,000 Chuprah... 1,302 1,032 J. Cullen, M.D., civil sur- geon ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 812 504 Chumparun ... 68,313 Chumparun .. 465 347 T. Mathew, civil surgeon ... ... ... a3 3 10,303 8,271 Monghyr ... 843,775 Moughyr... 4,841 5,462 ... ... ... ... 107 463 ...... Jamooee... 64 43 ... ... ... ... 2 ...... ...... Khuruckpore... 1 1 N B. Baillie, civil surgeon ... ... ... 2 2 659 486 Bhaugul- pore. ...... Bhaugulpore 404 255 ... ... ... ... 64 40 11,77,767 Mudehpoorah 37 22 ... ... ... ... 4 4 Banka... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 12 Colgong... 1 ... D. Picachy, civil medical officer ... ... 1 1 678 841 Purneah ... ...... Purneah... 424 252 T. Duka, M D ... ... 1 1 767 745 Darjeeling ... 14,000 Darjeeling ... 527 240 S.Delporatt surgeon ... ... ... ... ... ... 83 33 Hazareebaugh 186,417 Hazareebaugh 47 36 E.J. Hoskins,assistant surgeon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 84 Lohardugga 949,648 Ranchee... 15 10 Upendro Nath Sen, sub-assist- ant surgeon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26 40 444,059 Palamow... 25 1 S. J. Manok, civil medical officer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,588 2,681 Singbhoom ... ...... Chybassa... ... 1 W. Wilson, civil medical officer ... ... ... ... 451 536 Maunbhoom ... 537,055 Puruleah... 195 199 Total ... ... ... ... 45 41 45,575 35,360b ...... ...... ...... 19,504 14,755 Grand Total ... ... ... 100 95 91,256 80,019 ...... ...... ... 46,425 32,638 (a.) And 96 inoculators. (b ) Beerbhoom omitted from total and included under Presidency. (c) Includeded under sex, caste, and age of primary vaccination.
STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 89 9 10 11 12 PRIMARY VACCINATIONS. REVACCIN- ATIONS. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator B. C. D. A. B. C. D. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Christians. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Other Castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those doubtful. Unknown. In primary vaccin- ation. In secondary vac- cination. 6 299 137 1 52 391 395 48 ... 443 ... ... ... ... 89.16 ...... 443 ... 3,838 707 172 1,131 3,586 4,383 334 ... 4,717 ... ... ... ... 92.91 ...... 943 ... 818 739 ... 506 1,051 1,427 130 ... 1,557 ... ... ... ... 91.65 ...... 441 and 675 by native doctor. 2 1,264 855 ... 846 1,275 1,777 344 ... 2,121 ... ... ... ... 83.78 ...... 530 ... 182 270 ... unknown 397 55 ... 452 ... ... ... ... 87.83 ...... 397 and 55 by ( RESOLUTION.) JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. MEDICAL. Calcutta, the 9th October 1872. READ( 2 ) as Dr. Brown says, be unwise to rely upon a system of registration as the sole guide to vaccinators, there is no reason why it should not be an effective auxiliary. 8. PARAS 13-21.( 3 ) great, it is impossible after reading Dr. Lidderdale's report to avoid the conclusion that there is a want of system in the operations at present, and that the results are desultory. There were 111,709 persons vaccinated, or 32,937 more than last year, and the cost was only 2 annas 10 pie per case, though the ratio of success fell over 7 per cent. The only district in which the work appears to have been systematic and highly successful was Bograh, where the native superintendent, Tujummul Hossein, did really well. The energies of the small bodies of vaccinators elsewhere seem to have been taken up with flying visits to places where small-pox had broken out. The Inspector-General also points out that Dr. Lidderdale, in attempting to visit all the parties scattered over the vast area of his circle, has to adopt a much less thorough mode of inspection and check than that in force in the metropolitan circles. Dr. Brown recommends that in future the existing agency in each district should be concentrated in the sudder thannah and protect that thoroughly first, extending their operations as means and men are available; while a small flying agency to deal with out- breaks of small-pox elsewhere is placed at the superintendent's disposal. The Commissioner is said to approve of this plan, and the Lieutenant-Governor will be glad to have it laid before him in detail, accompanied by any suggestions which would facilitate the training and posting of inoculators as licensed vaccinators in the protected areas. At present the vaccinations are considerably less than half the estimated number of births per annum. Dr. Lidderdale will no doubt pay attention to the Inspector-General's hints as to his mode of inspection. 14. PARAS. 29-33.( 4 ) 17. PARAS. 40-43.REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PROVINCE OF BENGAL FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1873. BY J. CAMPBELL BROWN, ESQ., C.B., Surgeon-General, Indian Medical Department. Calcutta: 1873.
REPORT ON VACCINATION IN THE PROVINCE OF BENGAL FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1873. BY J. CAMPBELL BROWN, ESQ., C.B., Surgeon-General, Indian Medical Department. Calcutta: 1873.
No. 617. FROM THE SURGEON-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, TO THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BENGAL, JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. Fort William, the 27 th August 1873. SIR, I HAVE the honor to submit the reports and returns of vaccination in the provinces of Lower Bengal for the year ending 31st March 1873. The agency employ- ed during the year. Ex-inoculators Causes of increase. STATEMENT No. I. CIRCLE 1872-73. 1871-72. Superintendent- General Superintendents. Deputy Superin- tendents Native Superin- tendents. Head vaccinators Vaccinators Apprentices. Ex-inoculators. Superintendent- General Superintendents Deputy Superin- tendents. Native Superin- tendents Head vaccinators. Vaccinators. Ex-inoculators. Calcutta and suburbs .. 1 .. 3 .. 6 21 .. .. 1 .. 3 .. 6 21 .. Metropolitan circles .. .. 1 3 .. 12 78 24 .. .. 1 3 .. 9 57 .. Darjeeling circle .. .. 1 1 .. 7 43 .. .. .. 1 1 .. 7 45 .. Ranchee ii GENERAL REPORT. Number of opera- tions. Details of increase as compared with previous year. Caution as regards the accuracy of the figures. The sum total pro- bably not exces- sive STATEMENT No. II. Total number vaccinated. RATIO PER CENT. OF SUCCESSFUL CASES. Primary vaccina- tion. Secondary vaccina- tion 1872-73 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72 1872-73. 1871-72. Calcutta and suburbs .. 31,483 20,535 99.51 99.58 23.16 25.90 Metropolitan circles .. 267,074 91,516 99.78 99.58 55.26 14.28 Darjeeling circle .. 106,399 111,709 93.97 85.09 .. .. Ranchee GENERAL REPORT. iii amounts to 2,040,000. The total number of vaccinations does not quite reach one-third of this number. Number of opera- tions per vaccina- tor. STATEMENT No. III. CIRCLE. NUMBER OF OPERATIONS PER MAN. 1872-73 1871-72 Metropolitan circles .. .. .. .. .. 2,967 1,452 Darjeeling circle .. .. .. .. .. 2,474 2,484 Sonthal Pergunuahs .. .. .. .. .. 1,845 1,092 Ranchee circle .. .. .. .. .. 1,825 648 Eastern Bengal circle .. .. .. .. .. 1,320 .. Calcutta and suburbs .. .. .. .. .. 779 559 5. Number of Operations performed by each vaccinator.iv GENERAL REPORT. Sex of those vacci- nated. STATEMENT No. IV. CIRCLE. 1872-73. 1871-72. PERCENTAGE OF PERCENTAGE OF Males. Females. Males. Females. Calcutta and suburbs ... ... 58.9 46.1 53.7 46.3 Metropolitan circles ... ... 52.0 48.0 51.3 48.7 Darjeeling circle ... ... 53.9 46.1 55.3 44.9 Ranchee GENERAL REPORT. v Age of those vacci nated. 9. Age of the vaccinated.vi GENERAL REPORT. however, that the State has been debited by medical officers with sums which the account authorities debit to local funds, municipalities, &c. Average cost of each successful case. STATEMENT No. VII. CIRCLE. AVERAGE COST OF EACH SUCCESSFUL CASE 1872-73. 1871-72. As P. As. P. Calcutta and suburbs ... ... ... ... 10 1 14 5¼ Metropolitan circles ... ... ... ... 1 10 6 1 Darjeeling circle ... ... ... ... 2 10 2 10 Ranchee GENERAL REPORT. vii Reduction of cost of vaccination. Obstacles to success. of persons vaccinated in the cooly depôts. The cost of each successful case has also fallen from annas, 14¼ to annas 10-1. This is partly owing to the greater number of successful operations, and partly to the reduction of the gross cost of vaccination from Rs. 12,642 to Rs. 11,561,viii GENERAL REPORT. Darjeeling Hills should not be used as nurseries for the lymph required to set vaccination a-going in the plains, as the Hills of Kumaon and Gurhwal, the Tehree and Murree Hills, are successfully employed for the purpose in the North-Western Provinces and Punjab. I shall cause a copy of Dr. Charles' remarks to be forwarded to Dr. Lidderdale for report; and endeavour, if possible, to arrange that supplies of lymph shall be collected in and around Darjeeling and distributed to the plains at the commencement of the vaccine season. The transmission should be direct; sending either tubes or crusts to Calcutta, in the first instance, would only cause delay and deterioration. 19. The results of the season indicate, on the whole, good work and satisfactory progress, and are creditable to Dr. Charles and his Deputy Super- intendents. Metropolitan Circles. 20. Metropolitan Circles.GENERAL REPORT. ix very profitably employed in quietly, and without annoying or alarming the people, making special enquiries of this sort with a view to discover whether the work done during the previous season has been really as exhaustive as it ought to be, and to determine to what extent the people are actually protected from small-pox. Quality of vaccina- tions. Vaccinations per vac- cinator 23. It is very satisfactory to observe that the high standard of success hitherto attained in these circles has been maintained. The percentage of successful cases amounted to 99.73 against 99.58, and Dr. Goopta's inspections more than proved the reality of this success. The result is rightly attributed to the invariable adoption of the arm-to-arm system of vaccination; for on no other system, and not without very scrupulous care in practising it, is the result attainable. Each vaccinator performed 2,967 operations against 1,452 in 1871-72, or nearly twice as many. Part of this increase must be credited to the 24 apprentices; but after accounting for their work a very material and satisfactory difference remains. The cost of the circles, notwithstanding the increase of establishment, fell from Rs. 34,935 to Rs. 31,797, and the average cost of each successful case from ans. 6-1 to ans. 1-10. This was due to the saving effected under the head of the Superintendent's pay and house-rent. Resistance to vacci- nation by Fera- zees. 24. Dr. Goopta's report describes minutely the proceedings of the three circles. A sensible plan of operations was prepared by Dr. Cayley and approved by Government, and the scheme of work so projected has been fully realized. The areas undertaken have been exhaustively vaccinated with the exception of some Ferazee communities, and an impression has been made on these. A similar difficulty has been encountered on a larger scale by the Superintendent of the Dacca circle where Ferazee communities are more numerous. If these colonies of recusants are isolated by thorough vaccination being performed all round, then there is not much risk of small-pox breaking out among them. With tact and perseverance they will, no doubt in time, yield like their neigh- bours to the arguments and importunities of the vaccinators. Dr. Goopta's remarks on the subject of keeping the local civil authorities informed of intended and actual operations and securing their aid and co-operation, are sensible. I am decidedly of opinion that no vaccination should be undertaken in any part of the province without making the local civil authorities fully acquainted with what it is proposed to do, and it is equally desirable that they should also be informed regarding what has been done after the proposed work has been accomplished. Unless this is done, the local authorities cannot be expected to take that interest in vaccine operations which is so essential, nor render the aid and support which are so useful. Obstacles less for- midable 25. The obstacles to the prosecution of work were not so formidable as in the previous season. Sickness interfered somewhat with work, but less than might have been feared. Deputy Superintendents should, in future, provide themselves with a full supply of quinine and other useful medicines, and distribute them as circumstances demand through the agency of head vaccinators. The superintendent will be instructed to this effect. Obstacles in the form of floods, sickness, &c., must, however, always be liable to interfere with vaccination, and these things should be taken into account in making vaccine plans and forecasts. The feeling regard- ing vaccination im- proving. 26. It is satisfactory to find that the feeling of the people regarding vaccination is improving. The moral effect of the extension of Act IV of 1865 to these circles has been a great aid to vaccination. In a few years it is hoped that all prejudice and opposition will vanish, and as the people become habitu- ated to vaccination, they will come to consider it necessary. The advantage of surrounding the metropolis with a ring of protection, and prohibiting inocula- tion throughout this area, cannot be over-estimated. It is also satisfactory to find that some inoculators are coming forward to be instructed in vaccination,
x GENERAL REPORT. and that others are beginning to practise vaccination instead of their former dangerous craft. I quite agree with Dr. Goopta's remarks on this subject. The employment of vaccinators by municipalities and village communities has made good progress. Small-pox. 27. Small-pox has not prevailed to any material extent during the season. The details given by Dr. Goopta (para. 16) are interesting, and show how useful vaccination is in stamping out the disease. In 14 out of 52 villages the out-break was due to inoculation practised in the border district of Jessore, and no doubt, in many other instances, the disease was indirectly due to the same baneful practice. The localities where outbreaks occurred are still not specified. Sketch map. 28. The sketch map which accompanies Dr. Goopta's report gives an excellent general view of what has been done during the last five seasons. The district of 24-Pergunnahs, Nuddea and Hooghly have now, with some excep- tions, been very fairly protected, but much of Burdwan remains to be vaccin- ated. The localities, where vaccination has not been performed or has been imperfectly performed, will, if possible, be thoroughly vaccinated during the ensuing season. Deputy Superinten- dents 29. The superintendent brings to notice the merits and industry of his deputy superintendents, and singles out 1st Grade Sub-Assistant Surgeon, Jadub Chunder Ghose for special praise. I have much pleasure in support- ing his commendations of these useful and hard-working officers. The Metro- politan circles have done excellent work during the past season, and deserve credit accordingly. Dr. Goopta himself has worked hard. The amount and care of his inspections, and his lucid and sensible report, entitle him to the favorable notice of Government. Darjeeling Circle: Establishment. Other agency em- ployed in vaccina- tion. 30. Darjeeling Circle.GENERAL REPORT. xi Estimate of the suffi- ciency. amounts to 123,790, and of successful operations to 116,848. The population of the 8 districts included in this circle, amounts to more than 8 ½ millions, which giveiii GENERAL REPORT. Ranchee circle Establishment Additional agency 38. Ranchee Circle.GENERAL REPORT. xiii Failure of carly lymph supply. satisfactory circumstance, however, that 3,299 of the cases which he saw had been vaccinated only in one point. The number of points should never be less than two, and it is even advantageous to insert lymph in three or four points, for it is well known that the degree of protection from small-pox which vacci- nation confers is directly proportionate to the number of successful points. Dr. Wood's attention will be drawn to this matter and a sounder practice enjoined. Some difficulty appears to have been experienced in setting up a good vesicle at the beginning of the season. This appears to have been an almost universal occurrence, and constituted a serious drawback to the success of the season's work. Dr. Charles has some useful remarks in his report on this subject, and offers a suggestion on which I have already commented. He will be again addressed with a view, if possible, to devising means to remedy a defect in establishing vaccination which is of a very serious character. Dr. Wood found the labor of ascertaining to what extent the people are pro- tected from small-pox so great that he only examined 44 individuals and then abandoned the attempt in despair. I cannot concede that the simple process of finding out whether so many persons in a community or among a certain portion of a community have been vaccinated, inoculated, had small-pox, or remain unprotected, is a matter involving much difficulty or fatigue, and this circum- stance does not bespeak much energy or interest in his work on the part of the superintendent. Small-pox 43. It is satisfactory to find that small-pox has not prevailed severely or extensively during the year. The Sub-division Palamow of Lohurdugga where inoculation still lingers, appears to have been most seriously visited; but even here the Sub-Assistant Surgeon's report goes to show that many other eruptive disease went to swell the numbers registered under the head of small-pox. In the districts of Singbhoom and Maunbhoom the prevalence of small-pox appears to have been trivial. Work done by ex- moculators. Areas ofpractice. The question of fees. 44. Dr. Wood's report gives a summary of the work of ex-inoculators in the different districts, and the reports submitted by Messrs. Manook and Wilson which are given in extenso in the &quot; Abstracts of Reports of Civil Surgeons,&quot; detail the results of the season in the districts of Singbhoom and Maunbhoom. In these districts the Civil Surgeons appear to take a warm interest in the movement and to take pains in instructing the men, in assigning to them their fields of labor, and in supervising and verifying their work. Mr. Wilson examined 6,156 out of 8,458 cases, and Mr. Manook 1,578 out of 8,358, and it is satisfactory to find that in the former case the ratio of successful cases was found to be 86.5 per cent., and in the latter 70. These are not high rates, but considering the operators they cannot be considered disap- pointing. In the districts of Hazareebaugh and Loharduggah the proceedings of the ex-inoculators do not appear to have been supervised either by the superintendent of vaccination or by the civil surgeon. I certainly agree with Dr. Wood in his opinion with regard to the necessity of supervision, and think that a vaccine inspector should be appointed for each district. I am of opinion, however, that both the superintendent and the civil surgeons of Hazareebaugh and Ranchee ought to supervise and verify the work of ex- inoculators as much as their regular engagements permit. Two circumstances appear to hinder the satisfactory development of this scheme, namely (a) the advisability of permitting the instructed inoculators to settle down in their former fields of practice, and ( b) the question of fees. The civil surgeons of Singbhoom and Maunbhoom are quite alive to the defects entailed by the areas of practice of different men not being continuous. This is a fault which time will remedy, and the evil of leaving a certain tract of country without a vacci- nator for a time seems less than the evil of taking a man away from a place where he is known and has influence, and placing him among strangers. As regards the question of fees, this also leads to imperfect vaccination, the demands of the inoculators being beyond the ability or willingness of the
xiv GENERAL REPORT. people. Persons, families or villages may, on this account, remain unvaccinated. This difficulty will also be overcome in time, and the local authorities are evidently negotiating a compromise which will be naturally satisfactory. Success of the move- ment in Sing- bhoom and Maun- bhoom. Messrs. Manook and Wilson, the Civil Surgeons of Singbhoom and Maun- bhoom, are entitled to much credit for the interest and energy they have mani- fested in promoting this useful movement. It has now arrived at a stage at which it may be pronounced an institution, and all that appears to be necessary now is to provide the men with a small subsistence allowance while they are learning, and to appoint a vaccine inspector for each district, whose duty it will be to assist the men in establishing a good vesicle, to supervise and aid them in their work, to verify their returns, and ensure the quality of their vaccination. Mr. Manook's proposal to furnish the men with forms of register and returns with vernacular headings, is reasonable. Sonthal Pergunnahs: summary of re- sults. 45. Sonthal Pergunnahs.GENERAL REPORT. xv Its prohibition in the Rajmehal sub- division mooted season, it would appear that the Government establishment is equal to main- taining it protected by vaccination. The question might, therefore, I think, be raised whether, if the operations of the establishment were confined to this sub-division, strengthened if necessary by the addition of an equal number of apprentices who might subsequently settle in independent practice, the Act might not be extended to Rajmehal. I would suggest that the question be referred to the local authorities. There can be no doubt that the cause of vaccination throughout the whole district would be greatly strengthened by such a step. Proceedings of ex- inoculators. Want of supervision and verification. 50. Both the deputy superintendent and the civil surgeon of the Sonthal Pergunnahs give some information on the subject of the instruction and employment of inoculators. The number of men instructed was five, and of those who submitted returns of vaccination, 25. The number of vaccina- tions reported was 4,572 against 4,707 in 1871-72. The men were again late in coming forward, and valuable time was thus lost. This fault it will take time to correct. Another more serious drawback is that the work was not inspected with the exception of that performed by two men trained by the deputy superintendent. He remarks that the results were not very satisfac- tory. The want of supervision and verification is a most serious one, and with- out it a great doubt must rest upon the value of the figures submitted. The Civil Surgeon should certainly be able to exercise some supervision over the work of these men, and here and there to examine the quality of the vaccination performed, and verify the alleged number of operations. The aid of a vaccine inspector for the purpose of systematic inspection, would ensure better results, but the Civil Surgeon and deputy superintendent should be able to pay occasional visits to the men and see what they are about. The former might confine his tours to Deoghur and Doomka, and the latter to Rajmehal and Pakour. Baboo Kalikrishna Ghose points out some difficulties connected with Government vaccinators and ex-inoculators working in contiguous locali- ties. There is much force in what he writes, and until inoculation is prohibited by law, and the people are convinced that vaccination is better, the difficulties which he describes will continue to exist. Vaccinations to po- pulation. 51. The population of the Sonthal Pergunnahs amounts to 1,259,287 Estimating the births at 37,778, and the successful vaccinations at 14,000, much still remains to be done ere the district can be said to be sufficiently vac- cinated. Dacca circle cir- cuinstances under which the circle was established 1 Superintendent ... ... Rs. 350 6 Head vaccinators ... xvi GENERAL REPORT. Summary proceed- ings of the season. 53. The superintendent details the proceedings of the first season in a carefully prepared report. It was found impossible to recruit the sanc- tioned establishment, and the work was carried on with 3 head vaccinators instead of 6, and 36 vaccinators in place of 72. Many of the latter were, more- over, unskilled, and in other respects unsatisfactory. A good out-turn of work was however accomplished. 47,549 vaccinations were performed, 47,417 of which were successful or 99.73 per cent. Each vaccinator performed 1,320 oper- ations and the cost of each successful case amounted to anna 1-8. Surgeon K. P. Goopta, the Officiating Superintendent of the Metropolitan circles, was deputed in December to inspect the working of the new circle. He found that a satisfactory vesicle had been established, and that arm-to-arm vac- cination was alone practised. He inspected the work of each of the three divisions into which the circle had been divided, and found the results good. A careful programme had been drawn out for the season's work, and though much opposition was experienced, the superintendent and his staff were labour- ing with considerable success to overcome it. Attitude of the peo- ple. The extension of Act IV of 1865 to Dacca district mooted. 54. The superintendent's report indicates, that as far as circumstances permitted, work was done in a careful and systematic manner. Among a people wedded to inoculation it could not be expected that no opposition should be experienced, and it is not surprising that the usual suspicions and prejudices were encountered. They seem to have been judiciously combated and successfully overcome until the season for inoculation arrived when, no doubt instigated by the inoculators, opposition took on a more active form. The sect of Ferazees were also found to be intractable. Baboo Bhoobun Mohun Mitter recommends the extension of Act IV of 1865 to the district of Dacca. The population of this district is 1,193,512. The number of births would amount at 30 per 1,000 to 34,805. The number of successful vaccinations performed by the circle exceeded this number, and the establishment when complete should accomplish double the work of last season. I am, therefore, of opinion that the Act might very safely be extended to the Dacca district. The measure would, moreover, give a great impulse to vaccination in Eastern Bengal. Inspection. Small-pox. 55. The superintedent inspected and compared with the register 54 per cent. of the operations performed, and fully verified the percentage of success shown in the returns. Small-pox was not very prevalent during the season, and the two out-breaks which were reported to the superintendent were satis- factorily stamped out. It could not be expected that inoculation would be at once discontinued, and the operation is said to have been extensively prac- tised. Some inoculators, however, appear to have considered it better policy to learn and practise vaccination. This feeling will, no doubt, increase as vacci- nation gains a stronger hold on the district, more particularly, if inoculation is prohibited. Difficulties experi enced. 56. The superintendent points out the difficulty which vaccinators have experienced in obtaining lodgings in villages, and suggests that they should be supplied with tents and coolies to carry them. No complaint of this sort has reached me from any other circle, and I am not disposed to support this recommendation. &quot;When the vaccinators become more acquainted with the country, they should be able more readily to obtain lodgings. If men belonging to the district were appointed, as they ought to be if possible, they ought to have less difficulty in securing food and shelter in villages. He also proposes a graded system of salaries for vaccinators and extra vaccinators. I am of opinion that this would be an improvement and act as a stimulus to good behaviour and work, and would recommend that the superintendent should be permitted to grade his vaccinators accordingly, taking care not to exceed the total sum nor to alter the number originally sanctioned. I think likewise that the appointment of a few apprentices would be a useful measure. I am not sure, however, that the system of &quot; extra vaccinators&quot;GENERAL REPORT. xvii mend the creation of a third species of vaccinator until it appears how the existing system works. 57. Baboo Bhoobun Mohun Mitter has conducted the duties of his ap- pointment with zeal and judgment, and has so far amply justified his selection for the important position he occupies. Dispensary vaccin- ation Descriptions of vac- cinations included in the term. 58. Dispensary Vaccination.xviii GENERAL REPORT. Hooghly, Howrah. Serampore. 24-Pergunnahs, Nud- dea. Jessore Moorshedabad Dinagepore, Maldah Rajshahye, Rung- pore Bograh Orissa. Dacca Fureedpore Backorgunge Mymensingh Assam. Kamroop Nowgong. Patna and Banki- pore. Gya Arrah. Tirhoot. Chuprah Chumparun Monghyr. Bhaugulpore Sonthal Pergunnahs. Purneah. Darjeeling. Julprgoree. Chota Nagpore. to be feared that if vaccination is not pushed in Midnapore, the people will be left without protection. The work done in the towns of Hooghly, Howrah and Serampore, was considerable, carefully supervised, and of good quality. Several municipalities in the 24-Pergunnahs and Nuddea were supplied with vaccination by the superintendent of the Metropolitan circles. The people will appreciate better the vaccination which is locally paid for. The work was good and super- vised by the local medical subordinates and by members of the vaccine estab- lishment. Jessore is still very backward, though Dr. Bowser succeeded in getting more men employed and more work done. Moorshedabad shows better results than last year. Dr. Coates and his assistants exercised careful supervision over the vaccinators. There is room for improvement in the amount of work done in the town of Moorshedabad. The work done in Dinagepore and Maldah was very trifling. Considerable improvement is mani- fest in Rajshahye. No dispensary vaccination was performed in Rungpore. A very fair amount of vaccination was performed in Bograh and Serajgunge. The Orissa districts show very paltry results. Vaccination was carried on within the limits of the town of Dacca under Dr. Wise's supervision. The amount was much larger, and the ratio of success was above the average. Dr. Bose has succeeded in getting some good work done at Fureedpore. Vaccination in Backergunge is confined to the sudder station, and was rather less in amount than in 1871-72. In Mymensingh, on the other hand, the amount of work was doubled, and a good many vaccinations were performed in connection with the dispensaries in the interior. Vaccination is still very backward in the remain- ing districts of Eastern Bengal and in the Assam Districts. Fewer converted inoculators were employed in Kamroop in order that they might be more effectually supervised, but the results of inspection do not appear to have been satisfactory. Mr. Hughes, Civil Medical Officer of Nowgong, only inspected the work of his vaccinator once, and he was then unable to find a single vacci- nated person. Turning to Behar the results are more hopeful. The number of vaccinations in Patna and Bankipore have been much more numerous and fairly successful. The results for Patna itself are very satisfactory, and Dr. Simpson states that the work is regularly inspected and verified. Dr. R. McLeod deserves credit for the progress he has made in Gya, a most difficult and bigoted country. Dr. Thornton in Arrah has also been assiduous, and vaccination is making some progress in the district. In Tirhoot vaccination has formed several centres in the district, and the numbers vaccinated are increasing except at Durbungah where there is a great falling off. Fewer vaccinations have been performed in and around Chuprah, but a new centre has been formed at Sewan. Dr. Cullen has been very successful in inducing inoculators to vaccinate in Chumparun, and deserves much credit for having realized and performed the duty of inspecting and verifying their work so assiduously. The number of converted inoculators employed in vaccination in Monghyr exceeds that in any other district. More systematic inspection is very much wanted, but Dr. Purves saw enough to convince him that the work was fairly good. In Bhagulpore and the Sonthal Pergunnahs also a large number of inoculators has been induced to change their practice, but in both districts supervision is desir- able. Vaccination is very backward in Purneah. In Darjeeling, municipal vaccination obtained Dr. Duka's attention. A few vaccinations were performed by the dispensary establishment at Julpigoree. Vaccination in the Chota Nag- pore Division has already been dwelt on. The amount of inspection accom- plished by Messrs. Manook and Wilson in Singbhoom and Maunbhoom contrasts with the total abesnee of it in Hazareebaugh and Lohardugga. Inspection 62. The duty of inspecting and verifying work has, on the whole, been better performed during the past season than in previous years. The excel- lent practice of fixing certain days of the week for this work has been adopted by many Civil Surgeons who often take the duty in turn with the Sub-Assistant Surgeon. The practice of seeing cases at the dispensary only is not satisfactory. The vaccinator naturally brings his best cases. Verifying vaccination on the spot by comparing the vaccinated with the register is the
GENERAL REPORT. xix A vaccine inspector best plan, and a little of this kind of inspection is a great deal better than a great deal of the cursory or superficial kind. In districts where many con- verted inoculators are employed, there should be at least one vaccine inspector of the grade and pay (Rs. 20 and 16 ) of a native superintendent who should assist the men in establishing and maintaining a good vesicle, and supervise and verify their work. The Civil Surgeon should, however, occasionally inspect and satisfy himself regarding the quantity and quality of the work. Converted inoculators should also be provided, I think, with such stationery and forms as they may require for rendering the simple statistics required of them. It would also be well, could a subsistence allowance be given these men during the period of their tuition. The two last-mentioned matters could, no doubt in most cases, be arranged locally. Centralizing vacci- nation. 63. Centralizing Vaccination.xx GENERAL REPORT. &quot;6. The principle of concentrated and exhaustive work being accepted, the next question is,GENERAL REPORT. Mr. Molony's proposal to attach inoculators to circles, give them during the period of their training a subsistence allowance, and then permit them to settle among the people as licensed vaccinators, is in entire accord with my own views. The second object is being tried in several districts. Prohibition of inocu- lation. &quot; 7. There is a general feeling that, quite apart from the harm which the practice causes, it is a necessary condition of the success of vaccination to prohibit and suppress inoculation. As regards the &quot;circles,&quot; this has pro- bably been done as far as it is possible at present to go; but I think that Act IV of 1865 might advantageously be extended to many municipalities and stations where a sufficient vaccine agency already exists, or might easily be provided. Thus the plan of establishing and multiplying nuclei of really ex- haustive and good vaccination might be more generally adopted; Civil Surgeons, Sub-Assistant Surgeons or Native Doctors, as the case might be, performing the duty of supervising the proceedings of the vaccinator or vacci- nators. Flying parties for stamping out small- pox. &quot; 8. Another good suggestion is made by some of the reporters, which I have also noticed in my last annual report,xxii GENERAL REPORT. Cooch Behar divi- sion. Cooch Bahar division.GENERAL REPORT. xxiii from attack. The reports of Civil Surgeons also indicate that the results of mortuary registration are very unreliable, all kinds of eruptive diseases being entered under the head of small-pox. Sketch of the preva- lence of the disease throughout the provinces. 66. In commenting on the different circles I have already remarked on the diminished prevalence of small-pox of which they bear evidence. When outbreaks were reported, much good appears to have been done by the system of &quot;stamping out&quot;xxiv GENERAL REPORT. while under instruction, moderate rewards assigned to those who do really well and above all systematic inspection provided. Vaccination where inoculation has been abolished. 69. Vaccination in localities where inoculation has been prohibited.GENERAL REPORT. xxv staff of the metropolitan circles. The service of a special vaccinator was offered last year by the superintendent, but declined. The Sub-Assistant Sur- geon reports that a former vaccinator practises vaccination privately in this locality. The number of vaccinators is sufficient in Moorshedabad, but the amount of work insufficient. A more active Sub-Assistant Surgeon has been appointed to this station, and results will probably improve. The Dinapore vaccinator has done shamefully little work. If he per- formed a proper amount it would suffice. The amount of vaccination performed in Durbungah in 1871-72 was sufficient, but there has been a serious falling off. The Sub-Assistant Surgeon does not explain the cause in his report. Strong efforts are being made to bring the Chota Nagpore establishment, and work up to the mark, and progress is manifest yearly. Vaccination is very backward in Bhaugulpore, and this is more to be regretted as small-pox has recently broken out in the town. The people are prejudiced, it is said; still the municipality should, I consider, endeavour to secure better results than the figures of the last 10 years indicate. Kandhi and Comillah are not quite up to the mark. Their establishment is sufficient. It is satisfactory to be able to observe that in none of the localities where inoculation has been prohibited, has small-pox prevailed to any extent except Bhaugulpore. The continued immunity from small-pox is after all the best evidence of protection from small-pox, though, if vaccination is neglected, it is quite possible that a place may be slumbering in false security, and may, when small-pox chances to be introduced, suffer terribly. The thoroughness with which a community is protected by vaccination, can only properly be ascertained by a searching local inspection. Vaccine census. General conclusion. 70. Protection from Small-pox.4 CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. pitiated. This year a marked advance has been made among them, numbers having sent for the vaccinators to come to their homes. The superintedent of this part of the town, Baboo Kallidoss Bose deserves great credit for the way in which he brought about this result. The recusants seem to have become impressed with the idea that further resistance was unprofitable, as by watching the progress of events year by year, they found various members of their families vaccinated by one artifice or another. They seem to have arrived at the conclusion that it was advisable to purchase peace by submission rather than be constantly subjected to the worry of unexpected visits from the vaccinators. As they have been gradually led up to the result, and the action they have this year taken has been purely voluntary, there is fair ground for believing that no real difficulty will ever again arise, though among the class to which they belong, it will never be a very easy matter to have a large body under complete control. The Marrowarries. The third success this year achieved has perhaps been the most important one in reality, though, if judged of by the small numbers vaccinated, it would seem as if only a small matter had been accomplished. The large and populous part of the town, known as Burra bazaar, has this year for the first time had any impression made on it. It is occupied by heterogenous classes of up-country men. Many of them are wealthy, most of them are shrewd and intelligent in business, but retaining the narrowest bigotry of their native country, and are little influenced by the enlightenment and education of those around them. They have hitherto failed us in our attempts to introduce vaccina- tion among them, and have been much assisted in their opposition by an impenetrable barrier which surrounded them, owing to our not being able to obtain information to guide us in reaching their households. This year a fortunate circumstance has placed us much more favorably. A very intelligent member of this community was pursuaded by a friend of mine to introduce vaccination into his family. Such a chance was one I had long been on the look-out for, and the occasion was not to be lost. Every endeavour was made to secure his friendship, and he was induced to give us information about others, which has aided us in working so as to secure vaccination being this year introduced into some of their houses, and has opened the way for us to push vaccination in this part of the town in a way we could never do before. Our method of working is rather inquisitorial, but without discovering the weak points of each individual of the class, it is impossible to assail him successfully, for each family seems to be independent of those around, the example of one seeming to have little influence on another. One has to be treated in one way, one in another. One can only be reached through some potent friend, another can only have his own feelings on the subject over-ridden by the landlord of his house. A considerable number will listen to no arguments but those addressed to them by the business firms with whom they hold important relations. To study thus how individuals can be best reached, involves no little labour, and having once got the information necessary, to go and make an ally in the necessary quarter requires so much time that only the emergency calling for it justifies such an expenditure. During the entire season only 12 houses in the Burra bazaar have had vaccination introduced into them and only 19 individuals have been vaccinated. As before indicated, the result, though small numerically, is a very important one. To obtain the necessary information with which alone we can work successfully, this nucleus will serve as an important depôt from which in succeeding years the whole community will be overtaken as soon as their assailable position can be discovered. It has so been arranged, that representatives of all classes have been vaccinated. The nineteen vaccinations were performed in twelve families, seven Brahmins, eight Khetries two Banias and two Marrowaries having been protected. In connection with this subject it may be briefly mentioned that in the south division of the town and suburbs, vaccination has this year been introduced into 267 houses where it was not in practice before. In the majority of these no form of protection from small-pox had ever been employed before, the owners proclaiming themselves &quot; itcha,&quot; and trusting entirely to the good-will of their goddess. In some of these cases great pains had to be taken to introduce vaccination ; in one instance after repeatedly failing for seven years, the superintendent arranged that I should go down and assist at the vaccination. Ten chil- dren were vaccinated before me on this occasion, and one of them was drowned in a tank on the following morning, and this circumstance has been pointedly brought forward as a work of the vengeance of Shittallah, and further vaccination in that house brought to a standstill on account of this calamity. The father of several of these children is highly intelligent and talks English fluently. The superintendent of the division, Baboo Kassie Chunder Dutt, has been very zealous in his endeavours to arrive at the result above reported.
Fifth Annual Report on the Presidency Vaccine Department, by T. EDMONDSTON CHARLES, M. D., M. R. C. P., London, Superintendent-General of Vaccination, Calcutta, 1873. INDEX. 1. Submission. 2. Superintendents. 3. Numbers vaccinated during the year. 4. Character and success of the vaccination. 5. Small-pox in Calcutta and its suburbs. 6. Progress of vaccination during the year. 7. Cost of vaccination in Calcutta. 8. Humanized animal virus. 9. Experiment with crust vaccination. 10. Lymph supply. Submission. 1. Submission.2 CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. In the town, In the suburbs In the town exclusive of cases of re-vaccination, and cases in which the result was not known, 5,011 vaccinations were performed, shewing an increase of 603 vaccinations over last year when 4,408 vaccinations were reported. The vaccinations performed by the vaccinators of the suburban municipality amounted to 7,728 against 6,796 during the previous season, the increase being 932. As 171 of these lay without the boundary of the suburbs, they may be excluded from an exact calculation. Character and suc- cess of the vacci- nation. 4. Character and success of the vaccination.CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. 3 view was by going in a hired conveyance and securing auditors before they had time to disappear. As a further proof of the temper of the people and their determination not to submit to vaccination, I may mention that they consulted lawyers as to how they could best protect themselves against the persistent efforts made to win them over to be vaccinated. The only counsel they got from their legal advisers was to the effect that, no law was being broken, and that the best way of escaping what they complained of was, by accepting vacci- nation and thus securing immunity from the importunities of the vaccine department. A circumstance which added to the difficulties of combating a community thoroughly unanimous in their opposition, and combining to a man in withstanding every attempt made on them, lay in the fact of their looking up to a head man who occupied a position among them, different to that of any other single man in Calcutta. This patron of the sect was Baboo Tarrucknath Pramanick, a man of great wealth, intense religious feeling, and little education. His own family was grown up, but he had two grandchildren unpro- tected by inoculation; till they were vaccinated, it was hopeless to think of securing any other Kansaries. I had more than once succeeded in vaccinating among them, they had seen the harmlessness of the proceeding, admitted its desirability, but on religious grounds absolutely refused vaccination. I was led to believe that the circumstance of my having vaccinated some of the children of those who had given an unwilling consent, had rather impeded our progress than aided in furthering the spread of vaccination ; as feelings of religious hostility had been excited against those of their caste who had yielded in the matter and had their children vaccinated, which deterred others from following their example. As soon as I had fully mastered the religious objections of Baboo Tarrucknath Pra- manick, the document sent to Government from the Dhurmorochshiny Shoba, declaring in favor of vaccination, was sent to him. The effect produced was nil. The declaration of the Nuddea pundits which I had procured for another purpose was now tried, and the fact of my having had the children of the pundits vaccinated at their own homes was brought to prominent notice; the only reply received was, that these holy men could do no harm, as for him it was impossible that he could risk perdition by following in their steps. No stone has been left unturned to pursuade this man to allow vaccination to be introduced into his house. Four superintendents have been in charge of the division in which he lives, each knew that it would be looked on as no ordinary service did he succeed in this task, and each, besides his own personal exertions, has brought to his aid the services of influential friends, and all to no purpose. I myself have enjoyed the most ample facilities for in- fluencing him, inasmuch as with various medical men in attendance on his family I have been called in as a consultant in cases of difficulty or danger. I have tried to stipulate beforehand that vaccination should be performed as soon as danger was past, but a polite though unmistakably decided refusal to meet my views was vouchsafed. Failure year after year, device after device being exhausted without effect, made it look as if permanent defeat were possible. Baboo Issen Chunder Banerjee, who has for twenty years been one of the clerks in the office of the Superintendent General of Vacci- nation, one day made the statement that though we had all failed, he knew he could succeed in accomplishing the feat. He was enjoined to make the attempt, and a promise made that if he did effect his purpose, his name would be brought before Government as deserv- ing of reward. On Sundays and at other times when not engaged in his office, he devoted himself to the task. The fact of his being a Brahmin and his superior education and familiarity with their sacred writings, seems to have been the means which led to his being ultimately successful. As the result of his enterprising attempt, the great obstacle to the Kansaries being vaccinated was overcome; and when the grandchildren of Baboo Tarruck Nath Pramanick were vaccinated, many of the Kansaries removed their obstinate opposi- tion. In after years there will now be no more difficulty in practising vaccination among them than among any other class of the community. In the locality marked 5 in last year's map, up till this year, the progress of vaccina- tion has been slow and imperfect. The butcher class This quarter is inhabited by a turbulent class of butchers. Though vaccination has been pressed on them again and again, they have been very backward in receiving it. They have been openly and actively hostile to the vaccinators, so that a single vaccinator cannot shew himself alone among them, and a strong party has to be made up to work among them to prevent blood-shed. Each year they have required the most delicate management to prevent coming to open collision, and as soon as it was seen that no good was to be done among them, during any particular season, orders had to be issued not to irritate them by further visits till another year, when their heated feelings had cooled down. Vaccina- tion was never in any season at a complete stand-still among them, as they did not combine as a body against the vaccinators; at times one party, at times another having to be pro-
CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. 5 Census returns. I had hoped with the results of the census, to have been able to work out more satis- factorily than has hitherto been possible the extent to which vaccination every year falls short of the requirements of the population. On examining the figures supplied, however, I do not judge them to be sufficient for my purpose. In working with them the fact, that has been pointed out before, is very apparent, that the numbers every year vaccinated fall short of what they should do, were all additions to the population protected from small-pox. The other fact which was also known before, has also received abundant corrobo- ration, and there is now no longer room for doubt that the birthrate of Calcutta is a much smaller one than we should have been led to estimate it, by looking at statistics collected in Europe. This last fact comes out most strongly, and without attaching too much weight to figures to which exception might be taken, I conceive that the broad fact above stated, admits of no reasonable doubt. This is a matter for just congratulation, as the progress made in vaccinating Calcutta can now be viewed in a much more hopeful manner than it could have been without such confirmation. Though there is still much further room for progress, the numbers left every year unprotected are not so large as theoretical reasoning would justify us in believing, but are more in accord with the results obtained in examining the amount of protection actually found to exist among the community. Cost of vaccination . 7. Cost of vaccination in Calcutta.6 CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. been protected from small-pox, equally take up the time of the vaccinators with endless excuses, as the poor and ignorant, who, though living in Calcutta, have only recently come from places where they had never heard of vaccination. I have, in my report on the subject of making vaccination paying throughout Bengal, laid it down as a standard that 280 vaccinations per month may be considered the fair average work of each vaccinator on a large establishment. Working with the very same men and the very same superintendents in Calcutta, I can equally affirm that such an average is absolutely unattainable in this city. It is important that this should be noted, as my experience has not been simply with a similar class of vaccinators, but with identi- cally the same agents; and with this to guide me, I am prepared at any moment to send the present Calcutta establishment into the Mofussil, and over a series of years to work them up to the standard which my previous experience teaches me I can reach. Not only can a vaccinator never overtake the same number of operations in Calcutta as in the country around, but the head vaccinators will never be able to supervise the same number of vaccinators, nor the superintendents the same large establishment that they can guide efficiently in the country. A superintendent, hunting in the lanes of Calcutta for single vaccinated cases, can never overtake from sunrise to sunset the numbers that can be seen easily in a forenoon in the country; and not only so, but a vaccinator, when all his work can be so easily got at as it can in the Mofussil, does not need nearly so much looking after as he requires in a large city where any of his misdeeds can be so easily concealed, and where he must be supervised from week to week, if not from day to day. Even the circumstances of different cities are so varied that the work in them cannot be compared with any prospect of arriving at an exact estimate of how the establishment is working. Take Bombay, for example, where I am told crowds flock to vaccinating stations where a calf is used to vaccinate fromCALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. 7 really serious evil. I am well aware that the maximum of work consistent with safe pro- gress is a great desideratum, and that the establishment should be kept in full work; but in making all the arrangements it has been kept in view, that the municipality pay for the vaccinators, and if the residents of Calcutta fritter away the time of the men, it is they that suffer the loss, and not the Government. Attempts are made to lessen the burden on the municipality and to reduce the establishment from time to time; and the following table (vide Appendix A.) will show that this matter has attracted yearly attention, and that the same thing, which has been brought forward in the Resolution of Government, is being steadily dealt with season by season as occasion offered. Reductions. The reductions which have, during this and during recent years, been made in the es- tablishments, have been carried as far as is compatible with safety. Any hope that still further reductions to any great extent will be possible, is not warranted by past experience. That ten years hence, in consequence of small further reduction being rendered possible by the difficulties in the way of vaccination being diminished, the cost of vaccination will be still further lessened to a slight extent, there is fair reason to believe. Any progress in this direction will, however, be slow, and, reluctant as I am to confess it, no material dimi- nution can be effected. With the most complete data in my possession to enable me to form a judgment on the subject, I feel myself in a position to state most distinctly, that the time will never arrive in which a vaccination in Calcutta will come to cost such a small sum as one in the country around, and that no operator will ever be able to overtake so many vaccinations in Calcutta as he can readily do in the Mofussil. Humanised animal virus 8. Humanised animal virus.8 CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. evening and morning, and that, as the duration of the fever is short, the record is not so perfect as it would have been, had the observations been made so as always to secure the highest temperature that took place being noted. Besides the determination of the points sought for in the enquiry, it has come out so strongly than with the crusts made use of, no certainty of success could be secured, that I propose shortly to allude to this subject as well. Of the 16 children successfully vaccinated with crusts, only 3 suc- ceeded on a first attempt; 9 on a second, 3 on a third, and 1 on a fourth: that is twenty- nine attempts had to be made to vaccinate before sixteen children could be protected. The failures come out more strongly when the points of insertion made are compared with the number of vesicles resulting; out of one hundred and twelve points of insertions only twenty-two succeeded. Much of this want of success is doubtless due to want of practice in working with crusts, and to many of the vaccinations having been made by means of the usual punctures which is the only method allowed in the department. So great was the want of success of the vaccinators, that I dispensed with their services and I applied the solution of the crust myself to raw surfaces produced by scratching with a lancet. Though undoubtedly better results were secured in this way, failed points of inser- tion were still very frequent, and the contrast to the universal success, when working with lymph taken direct from the arm, was very striking. Whether in working with humanised animal virus in applying Bryce's test, or with lymph reared from crusts, the result was so uniform that I cannot recall a single instance of a point of insertion failing either in our hands or in those of the vaccinators. Lymph supply. Tubes Lymph Supply.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
APPENDIX B. No. 1. VACCINATION FROM ORDINARY LYMPH. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
No. 7. CRUST VACCINATION, (BRYCE'S TEST BY LYMPH REARED FROM CRUSTS.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. 9 Storing lymph in Calcutta, difficult and uncertain. Darjeeling proposed. Although it is right to take every precaution in this way, and to make every endeavours to overcome the difficulties attending the supply of lymph stored in Calcutta, it should not be lost sight of that we are working under self-imposed difficulties. As long as we store lymph in the plains of Bengal, however perfect may become our methods of delaying its decomposition, the result attained can never be so perfect as that within easy accomplishment by similar means, in places where the tendency to decomposition is not so much marked. As already insisted on in a former report, virus supplied by the Superin- tendent General of Vaccination in the North Western Provinces, which has been stored in the Himalayas near Almorah is comparatively free from the uncertainty which makes the virus of the plains such an undesirable supply to work with. There seems no reason for doubting that similar altitudes near Darjeeling, would furnish an equally reliable lymph. The Darjeeling circle of vaccination has now been working long enough to render it able to undertake the function of supplying virus, much more easily than it could have done on its establishment. Even now, however, I would propose that the measure be gradually introduced, both Darjeeling and Calcutta supplying lymph till it can be seen how far it is possible to substitute the one field of supply for the other. As a temporary measure the Superintendent of the Darjeeling circle might be placed in direct communication with this office, and instructed to have a supply of virus despatched to Calcutta regularly, so as to arrive here daily from the 1st of November to the 31st of December. Possibly, during the first year, it may not be found possible to transmit the supplies with sufficient regularity to allow of entire dependence being placed on it and provision will be made to supersede or supplement it, if necessary. As a permanent arrangement it would probably be found to work better, to have the virus despatched to its destination direct from Darjeeling, where in the absence of the superintendent of the circle in his district, the Civil Surgeon might superintend its distribution. The vexation caused to the officers concerned by the constant failures consequent on using lymph stored in Calcutta is very great; and the check that such uncertainty in the action of the lymph gives to the popularity and extension of the prophylactic, is such a serious matter, that every possible endeavour should be made to place the lymph-supply on a more satis- factory footing. Number of vacci- nators employed, from 1868 to 1873 APPENDIX A. Table shewing the number of Vaccinators employed for the Town and Suburbs during the five years from 1868-69 to 1872-73. YEARS TOWN. SUBURBS TOTAL. REMARKS 1868-69 15 12 27 The Head vaccinators. 1869-70 13 12 25 ( Native Superintendents ) remained the same in each year. 1870-71 12 10 22 1871-72 11 10 21 1872-73 11 10 21 3
10 CALCUTTA AND ITS SUBURBS. Memorandum by H. B. BUCKLE, ESQ., Deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, Presidency Circle,[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Fifth Annual Report of the Metropolitan Circles of vaccination for the year ending 31st March 1873, by ASSISTANT SURGEON K. P. GUPTA, M. B., Officiating Superintendent. Superintendents. 1. Constitution of the establishment.12 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. This plan was approved of by Government, and Dr. Cayley set to work to carry it out. Preparation 4. Preparation.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 13 Then again, one division under head vaccinator Woomesh Chunder Mookerjee of the third circle, after having established virus in thannah Ghattal, had to withdraw and go else- where and begin the work afresh in a new field. These and other circumstances were very discouraging and threatened to interfere with the season's work. But by the use of proper medicines and by removal to healthier localities, we were able to combat and at last to overcome the difficulties. Great credit is due to the deputy superintendents who, by their tact and energy, succeeded in inducing the men to persevere in their work in the midst of sickness and death. First Circle 8 The first Metropolitan Circle.14 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Second circle. Area. Number vaccinated. 9. Second Metropolitan Circle.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 15 Protection afforded. Districts. Names of thannahs. Population. Operations 1872-73. Operations of the previous year. 24-PERGUNNAHS. Bishtoopore ... ... ... 74,229 7,160 Once thoroughly done before. Atcheepore ... ... ... 59,132 8,197 Dabeepore ... ... ... 43,157 14,056 Half done before. Diamond Harbour... ... ... 48,872 3,204 BURDWAN. Roynah ... ... ... 1,02,005 18,864 621 Khandgbose ... ... ... 67,665 1,749 1,636 Kotulpore ... ... ... 1,10,255 4,470 ...... Jebanabad ... ... ... 1,28,969 5,679 ...... Goghat ... ... ... 1,36,246 15,111 ...... Culna ... ... ... 1,21,480 5,239 ...... Gangooreah ... ... ... 1,31,200 1,261 ...... Poorbusthullee ... ... ... 82,064 2,080 10,089 Montessur ... ... ... 83,181 5,492 938 Aoosgram ... ... ... 1,15,393 2,753 10,000 HOOGHLY. Domjoor ... ... ... 1,19,037 3,546 Once tho- roughly done before. Shibpore ... ... ... 97,784 1,493 Total 16 15,20,669 1,00,354 23,284 Area. Number vaccinated. The total area of country vaccinated by the third circle is 1097 square miles. Total number of villages visited is 1,185, and the total number vaccinated is 1,08,638 of which 1,08,412 were successful. The deputy superintendent inspected 82,561 or 76.03 per cent. The above three tables shew only the amount of protection afforded, and not the total work of each circle which is shewn in the following para. In those tables have been shewn only those thannahs where large numbers were vaccinated, the names of thannahs where small numbers have been done being omitted. Total number vacci- nated. 11. The number vaccinated Circles. PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE-VACCINATION. Grand Total. Percentage of success exclud- ing unknown. REMARKS. Total. RESULT. Total. RESULT. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding doubt- ful. Unknown. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding doubt- ful. Unknown. Primary. vaccination. Re-vaccination. 1st Circle 83,774 83,613 140 21 33 22 11 ... 83,807 9,983 6,666 2nd Ditto 74,602 74,066 447 89 64 41 23 ... 74,666 9,930 6,406 3rd Ditto 108,582 1,08,412 109 61 56 ... 17 39 1,08,638 9,989 ... Total 2,66,958 2,66,091 696 171 153 63 51 39 2,67,111 9,973 5,526 Number of cases inspected. In the first circle the deputy superintendent inspected 59,660 cases or 71.2 per cent, in the second 55,986 or 75 per cent; and in the third 82,561 or 76.03.
16 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. The work has been done very systematically protecting village after village and leaving out none if possible. Cost of each success ful case Cost of each successful case (Rs. 0-1-10) one anna and ten pies against six annas and one pie. Average number of vaccinations performed by each vaccinator 2,967.48 against 1,452.63. Comparison of pre- sent with past years. 12. Comparison of present and past years.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 17 special report on it. I returned to Calcutta towards the close of December, and went out again to thannahs Bishtoopore and Atcheepore to inspect vaccinations done since my last visit there in November. At the beginning of January I inspected in thannahs Domjoor, &c., in Howrah; then went back to Nuddea and thoroughly inspected in thannahs Kaloopole, Allumdangah, Naoparrah, Dowlutpore, Kurreempore, Maharpore, Teyhutto, and partially in thannahs Nakasheepara, Chapra, and Gangnee. I returned to Calcutta towards the close of February and then went down to thannahs Dabeepore, Diamond Harbour and Bankeepore and inspected the work there. From thence I returned to Calcutta, and in the beginning of March started for Barrakhur to inspect in thannah Neamutpore and in the adjoining district of Maunbhoom. I stopped there for a week and then came down to Burdwan, and inspected in thannah Roynah. As Goghat was at that time very sickly I regret I could not go there to inspect; but Deputy Superintendent, Baboo Jadub Chunder Ghose, has been there and inspected. He came back with fever and has had four attacks since, and is still convalescent. Though I avoided Goghat, yet I did not escape altogether ; soon after my return to town I was laid up with a sharp attack of the Burdwan fever. Result of Superin- tendent's inspec- tions My inspections have been conducted as thoroughly as possible, i. e., inspecting village after village and often comparing with the registers. I have inspected 523 villages. The result of my inspections I shew in a tabular form. Vaccinated in 4 points of which there were successful Vaccinated in 2 Points of which there were successful Doubtful. Sore arms. Compared with regis- ter Total. Absent. Grand Total. 4 3 2 1 Failed. 2 1 Failed. Seen after the 16th day 3,148 28 7 1 2 47 1 ... 1 2 3,237 3,237 263 3,500 18 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Ferazees. argument. They would persistently oppose all attempts at vaccination. Among this last class I might include the Ferazees, a peculiar sect of Mahomedans who believe that if it is God's will that a person shall die of such and such a disease, no human efforts are of any avail. They suppose it is against God's will to vaccinate or inoculate a child, because if God has destined that child to die of small-pox, nothing will save it and it is no use vaccinating. This sect of Mahomedans is to be met with in the north of Nuddea chiefly in thannahs Kurrimpore, Maharpore, &c. Curiously enough, and as if to convince them that they were in the wrong, Providence declared itself against them and small-pox of a virulent type broke out among them. The whole of the Ferazees, men, women and children, not being protected by inoculation or vaccination were very liable to catch the infection. Many were attacked and several perished. At this critical juncture they could not hold out any longer and received vaccination. All unprotected men, women and children, with a few exceptions were vaccinated, and small- pox was nearly stamped out. Deputy Superintendent Buddynath Brummo deserves great credit in having talked these men over. He was personally known to many of them from his former connection with the Krishnaghur Dispensary, and when he went from house to house they received him kindly and listened to his advice and accepted vaccination. The Ferazees have since told him that they were great fools to follow their chief Moulvie in refusing vaccination. The chief priest has paid the full penalty by losing two of his children from small- pox. Deputy Superintendent, Baboo Ramsoonder Ghose, also came across several Ferazee villages in thannahs Allumdangah, Nowparrah, &c., which at first opposed all attempts at vaccination. But by a little patience and perseverance and by the tact and persuasive eloquence of the Baboo, they were won over; only one or two Ferazee villages still remain unprotected. In the course of my tour I noticed there was less opposition in Nuddea ( barring the Ferazees) than in the 24-Pergunnahs and Burdwan ; and even in the same zillah it varies in the different thannahs. For instance, in thannah Neamutpore, Sub-Division Raneegunge, and the adjoining thannahs in the district of Manbhoom, the people very readily accepted vaccination; whereas from thannah Kaksa in the same sub-division and within one or two days' journey, dogged opposition was met by our vaccinators in season 1871-72. In thannah Royna there was considerable opposition at first, whereas the people of the adjoining thannah, Selimabad, were most anxious for vaccination. Some villages have made remarkable progress in appreciating the value of vaccination, that is, they have asked for vaccinators and paid for their services ; as Anundpore in thannah Gangoorea, zilla Burdwan, Khooroop in thannah Ampta, Howrah, Moida in thannah Joynugger, 24-Pergunnahs, &c., &c. Instruction of in oculators. 15. Instruction of inoculators.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 19 to practise vaccination without previous training, it would lead to doubtful and spurious vaccination which will not protect its subjects against small-pox. The result will be that doubt and discredit will be cast upon vaccination generally, and the progress of the operation will be greatly retarded. Hence it is necessary that inoculators should receive instruction and training and be certified as to their qualifications before being allowed to practise. These certificates should be so framed that there might be no possibility of forging or falsi- fying them. The reason why I would insist on this point is, that some of the inoculators who practised vaccination on their own account in thannah Kotulpore in Burdwan, Dia- mond Harbour, and 24-Pergunnahs, actually showed to the people false certificates purport- ing to bear the signatures of English officers whose names have never been heard of in the vaccine department. On this subject I will submit a special report. Outbreaks of small- pox. 16. Small-pox reports.20 THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. Work done by mu- nicipal vaccina- tors. I shew in the annexed table the work done by the municipal vaccinators.THE METROPOLITAN CIRCLES. 21 from unreasonable personsSeventh annual report of the Darjeeling Circle of Vaccination, By SURJEON MAJOR R. LIDDERDALE, M. D., Superintendent. Establishment. 1. Establishment.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
DARJEELING CIRCLE. 23 home in January, leaving the vaccinators without supervision. No substitute could be ob- tained. The number of operations did not fall short of the year before. Each vaccinator protected 1496 persons. One hundred and thirty-seven villages were protected. Purneah. 4. Purneah.24 DARJEELING CIRCLE. I have been able to see, the consequence in a few years would be that, vaccination would be entirely rejected by the people as unprotective against small-pox, and a general return to inoculation take place. Results. Their return shews 4474 operations or 745 per man with a percentage of success of 90.55. It is however untrustworthy. Only 75 persons under one year were operated on. From this it is evident that nearly all the young children in the villages; in fact those at a most suitable age for vaccination were passed over. This is a marked rejection of the teaching of the vaccine department. The population of this district is 1,501,924, giving a birth rate at 30 per mile or more than 45,000 annually. The reported cases of vaccination were 15,218 for last season, so that a third of the birth-rate only is overtaken. A municipal vaccinator was entertained for the city but up to the beginning of March his operations were few in number. Rungpore Locality vaccinated 6. Rungpore.DARJEELING CIRCLE. 25 Each vaccinator performed 2,744 primary operations, which, considering the illness of the native superintendent in November and of one of the most experienced vaccinators nearly the whole season, is satisfactory. Ex-inoculators. The birth rate of this district is about 20,000 per annum. The average number of operations for the last two years reaches this sum, besides there are thirteen inoculators now practising vaccination, eight of whom were instructed this season. They have chosen their own ground for operation, and are fairly distributed over the district. Twelve of them return 6313 operations for 1872-73. These added to the 16,469 of the Government vacci- nators exceeds the birth rate. They have not been verified which is very necessarry to obtain a good standard of work. Prohibition of in- oculation advocat- ed. I think a case has been made out for the introduction of the act forbidding inoculation into this district, and the establishment of licensed vaccinators in areas already gone over by the Government gang. The people, and especially the inoculators, would begin to think that Government was in earnest about vaccination and a good impression be produced in Bograh and all the neighbouring districts. Rajshahye 8. Rajshahye.26 DARJEELING CIRCLE. Inspections. 11. Inspections of the superintendent and deputy superintendents.DARJEELING CIRCLE. 27 with eight deaths had occurred in two villages. It was introduced into Govindgunge thannah from Dinagepore district in December. I found it out in January when passing through this part of the district. It had become pretty generally distributed before its dis- covery. It has been suppressed. Rungpore has been more free from small-pox than at any time in my experience. I visited two villages in which inoculation had been practised in September and November, and in both instances found that the work had been badly done. All the later cases in the first village visited, were concealed by the people except one, indeed it was with great difficulty and after much delay that I succeeded in seeing any of the children. The operations were performed by one of the Bowlaree Baids who have shewn such opposition to vaccination. In Rajshahye. There was small-pox in Rajshahye in April, May, and June, but it was got under by the exertion of native superintendent Tajummul Hoosein. Inoculation goes on without check in parts of Rajshahye. Only one inoculator came before me this year, and he wanted a purwannah granting him permission to inoculate in a certain area. I made arrangements for his being taught vaccination, but he disappeared. In Julprgoree. There was little small-pox in Dinagepore, Maldah, or Purneah, but it appeared in Julpigoree in September, and has existed in a large number of villages in the Boda thannah during the cold weather. Vaccinators were sent for its suppression when it was found out. I personally visited a number of these villages, and in one prevailed upon the head man to accept vaccination which he did after discussing the subject. When he had made up his mind to have his household vaccinated, he insisted that the young men who worked in the fields should be first protected as their lives were most valuable to him. Instruction of in- oculators Fifteen inoculators were instructed in vaccination during the season, but by payment as proposed in para. 15, most of those residing in Purneah, Julpigoree, Dinagepore, Rungpore, and Bograh, will come in for instruction. Without some form of maintenance they cannot remain away from their homes for such a time as is required for their instruction. Inoculation is gradually falling into disuse in the Darjeeling circle and happily so as its protective power on account of careless performance of the operation has been greatly overrated. I saw at Sumghia, in Dinagepore in March four severe cases of small-pox in persons three of whom had been inoculated. Every year's experience convinces me the more that, inoculation requires to be repeated as much as vaccination, and that as at present practised it does not afford an efficient form of protection for the people generally from small-pox which is being constantly reproduced by it. Vaccine census of 23 schools. The following is the vaccine census of 23 schools examined during my cold weather tour. Some were sudder station schools, others in outlying parts of districts. I avoided taking a census of patshalas in villages where vaccination had first been practised as it would have given a false idea of the protection generally afforded to the country. No. of schools. No. of boys ex- amined. Inoculated. Inoculated per cent of total examinied. Vaccinated. Vaccinated per cent of total examined. Had small-pox. Had small-pox per cent. of total examined. Unprotected. Unprotected per cent. of total examined. 23 1286 556 43.25 280 21.77 74 5.75 376 29.23 Scheme for teaching; inoculators and providing for the inspection of their work. 14. Scheme for teaching inoculators and providing for the inspection of their work.28 DARJEELING CIRCLE. That they be held responsible after appointment for the suppression of small-pox and the efficient protection of the people. That they must engage before appointment to submit to such inspection as the Govern- ment thinks necessary, and that any trained man will be deprived of his license who fails to do so. That an area, containing 30,000, but not more than 50,000 inhabitants, be set aside for each licensed vaccinator. He should be expected to perform 1,500 operations per annum. That licensed vaccinators be permitted to charge their own fees unless they are found to take advantage of their position and impose upon the people in which case the district magistrate should have power to interfere and fix a reasonable sum, and that they be dis- couraged from performing any unnecessary ceremonies to prevent vaccination becoming a caste business instead of a measure of sanitation. nspect on. 15. Inspection.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Sixth annual report of the Ranchee Circle of Vaccination for the year 1872-73,30 RANCHEE CIRCLE. 7. Owing to the slow progress of their work in November, the party under native superintendent Elahi Bux was removed from Baloomath thannah altogether and sent to the north of Lohardugga. Here, among the Ooraon Coles, work flourished in December, but one village lying close in Munkah refused to be vaccinated. The village lies at the foot of a ghât five miles long, and the worst I ever crossed ; but this had not prevented its being visited, for a village close to it had been vaccinated. I had explained to the men the importance of visiting all outlying villages and tolahs. Mahomed Ishak's party. 8. To take the three parties separately, the party under native superintendent Mahomed Ishak consisted of six vaccinators, but two of them were detained for a month in the beginning of the season on account of a case in Court, and two had to be sent into Hazareebaugh district in February on account of small-pox appearing. At first, there was a great deal of trouble experienced in convincing the people, and some villages held out till the end of the season, particularly one village I visited, where the ' unsuccessful' would not have the operation repeated'. Attitude of the peo- ple 9. On the whole, I think it would be unjust to this party to say that they did not do about their best during the season, for the people are very shy and jungly, and fled into the woods sometimes on the approach of the vaccinators. They were only to be got at slowly and by much painstaking. The zemindars, too, not only gave us no assistance at first, but active opposition was threatened in a few instances, it was supposed, at the prompt- ing of the head men. One vaccinator of another party was actually assaulted in a village, which had all the children vaccinated shortly after. By the month of January this party had got as far north as Baloomath village, and in the end of February they had reached Hirhra, 12 miles north-west of Baloomath. 10. In the end of February the villages around Quitta were entered upon, from which, as will presently be told, we had been shut out at an earlier date, but there was no time to do all of them. Work done by this party The number of villages in which this party worked is 200; the number of vaccinations RANCHEE CIRCLE. 31 14. I was not informed of this movement in time to correct it without much loss of valuable working time to the vaccinators, and when the party once began to work well in this new thannah, it would not have been altogether good to have re-called them to Munkah. Native superintendent Mukhun Lall has been warned that reduction or dis- missal will be the consequence, if he does not attend to his instructions. Work done by this party. Work went on steadily in Bareysar and in Burwa, the thannah south from it, till the end of the season, and the numbers are32 RANCHEE CIRCLE. be got. But although the whole country was covered with vaccinators after this fashion enough would not be done. Native superintendence is needed for this work alone during the working season. In Hazareebaugh many ex-inoculators dwell who have been trained to vaccinate, but the number is much too small to cover the whole area, and their work would be desultory, or even worthless, without careful supervision. Until there are a much larger number of trained and resident vaccinators in Lohardugga and Hazareebaugh there will always be need for a staff of men, in the case of epidemic small-pox particularly, to carry on vaccination. Work done by ex- inoculators in Maunbhoom 20. In Maunbhoom 7,362 persons have been vaccinated this year (against 3,728 last year) by twenty-seven ex-inoculators. 6,516 of these cases were tested by the Civil Surgeon. This in a population of 995,570 is by far too little. Under efficient native superin- tendence a great deal more work could be got out of the native and resident vaccinators in Maunbhoom. In Singbhoom. In Singbhoom 8,258 persons have been vaccinated this year by 24 inoculators against 9,326 last year in a population of 415,023. To the Civil Surgeons of these districts I am indebted for the facts noted above. 21. There are 100 ex-inoculators on the register in Maunbhoom and 37 in Singbhoom, and the number annually engaged in vaccinating could, doubtless, be increased, but one native superintendent should be appointed for each district, for the cold weather at least, to look after and direct those vaccinators who are already engaged. It is plainly impossible for Civil Surgeons to attend to them sufficiently. Ex-inoculators* did 21,684 successful cases this year against 12,842 last year. With each thannah defined and each vaccinator's beat known there would be little difficulty in supervising work in the season, and it would be comparatively easy to provide for epidemics. Such provision has not been required in these two happy districts of late years, in consequence of all inoculators ceasing their old trade, and Act IV. B. C. of 1865 being in force. Epidemic small-pox, Lohardugga. Hazareebaugh. Chyebassa 22. Epidemic Small-pox, Lohardugga.RANCHEE CIRCLE. 33 Inspection. The cases inspected according to Dr. Powell's plan are given below, where the percent- age of successful points is 96.71:First Report of the Eastern Bengal Circle of vaccination. By SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEON BHOOBUN MOHUN MITTER, Superintendent. Establishment sanc- tioned. 1. Establishment sanctioned.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
EASTERN BENGAL CIRCLE. 35 Interest taken by local authorities. 9. Interest taken by the Deputy Magistrate of Moonsheegunge in promoting vaccina- tions.36 EASTERN BENGAL CIRCLE. left behind, of which 25,349 were seen successful and 47 unsuccessful, including eight doubtful cases. The percentage of successful cases inspected is 99.81, and that in the general return 99.73. Attitude of the peo- ple 13. Attitude of the people.EASTERN BENGAL CIRCLE. 37 Recommends the ex- tension of Act VI of 1865. In this state of affairs, it is expedient to prohibit inoculation, by the extension of Act IV (B.C.) of 1865 to this district, and I beg to lay the subject before you for your favorable consideration. Ex-inoculators. 16. Instruction of Inoculators.38 EASTERN BENGAL CIRCLE. Scale sanctioned by Government for one year. Number of months to be employed. Salary. 6 Head Vaccinators, each 15-0-0 per mensem ... ... 12 1,080 0 0 36 Vaccinators, each 10-0-0 per mensem ... ... 12 4,320 0 0 36 Extra Vaccinators, each 10-0-0 per mensem ... ... 6 2,160 0 0 Total ... ... 7,560 0 0 Proposed Scale of Pay for one year. Number of months to be employed. Salary 6 Head Vaccinators, each 15-0-0 per mensem ... ... 12 1,080 0 0 12 First grade Vaccinators, each 12-0-0 per mensem... 12 1,728 0 0 12 Second ditto each 10-0-0 ditto ... ... 12 1,440 0 0 12 Third ditto each 8-0-0 ditto ... ... 12 1,152 0 0 12 First grade extra Vaccinators, each 12-0-0 per mensem ... 6 864 0 0 12 Second ditto each 10-0-0 ditto ... 6 720 0 0 12 Third ditto each 8-0-0 ditto ... 6 576 0 0 Total ... 7,560 0 0 Behaviour of estab lishment. 21. Behaviour of the establishment.The sixth annual report of Vaccination in the Sonthal Pergunnahs. By SUB-ASSISTANT SURGEON KALI KRISHNA GHOSE, Deputy Superintendent. Establishment 1. The establishment continued the same as last year, i e., one deputy superintendent and six vaccinators; the latter being arranged in grades; thus one in the first grade on a salary of Rs. 16 per month employed rate, and Rs. 12 per month unemployed rate; 2 in the second grade on Rs. 13 and 10 ; and three in the third grade on Rs. 10 and 8. There were no changes among these. Plan of work Field of operation 2. On the approach of the season, being fully alive to the importance of systematic action, I arranged my vaccinators, so that the areas vaccinated may, as far as practicable, be an extension of those of previous years. I accordingly obtained the consent of the civil surgeon, Sonthal Pergunnahs, to commence work in the remaining unprotected por- tions of Rajmehal, as well as in the interior of Pakour, and, if possible, gradually to extend it towards Godda on one side, or Doomka on the other. Introduction of vac- cination into Pa- kour. Difficulties experi- enced 3. In the sub-division of Rajmehal, a large number of villages having been gone through in former years, the work of introduction was not a matter of difficulty. But in Pakour a very few villages only were, for the first time, protected by vaccination last year, and those were chiefly located by the side of the railway line, none of the principal villages in the interior having been touched. This year I proposed to commence work in such of the principal villages in the interior, as might, by their position and so forth, exercise a favorable influence on the progress of vaccination. And as great opposition was anticipated at the outset, I set two of my expert vaccinators; viz, Indro Narain Dass and Rutty Kanto Dass (the one a second grade and the other a third grade vaccinator) to work in these places. A circumstance occurred which facilitated the introduction of the work here. A report of small-pox (which afterwards turned out to be false) was made by the inhabitants of a certain village, named Bissenpore in the interior of Pakour. I went there accom- panied by one of my vaccinators, and found that a few deaths had occurred from dysentry and fever, which certain people of the village attributed to small-pox. They said that an inoculator, by name Megh Roy, had performed inoculation in their village last year, that this had not given rise to the usual erruption of small-pox, which had accordingly lain latent in the system, and now appeared in the shape of bloody discharge from the intestines and so forth. I did not think of at once disabusing their minds of this false impression, but took advantage of it for the purpose of introducing vaccination and of winning over to our side the inoculator named. I offered the people hopes of protection from the dire mortality with which they were threatened and they accordingly agreed to my proposals. Thus on the 3rd October 1872, vaccination was introduced in one village in the interior of Pakour. This village was made the centre from which our operations were to proceed on all sides. A few weeks afterwards it was found however, that vaccination was making but slow progress in a few insignificant villages of this quarter. My object was to gain over some of the principal villages whose example might serve to stimulate the rest and thus render its progress easy. In one of my inspections I was told that the Purgonyte of Sohori, an influential man among the Sonthals of that quarter, was offering great opposition to vacci- nation. This man had a number of villages under him, the people of which would only follow his example. I accordingly went over to Sohori and tried all arts of persuasion but to no effect. The headmen of the village were inexorable. I then instructed my vacci- nators to win over such villages as readily yielded, so that no time might be lost in estab- lishing vaccination in a certain number of them. Then on a subsequent visit I went over a second time to Sohori and after much effort succeeded in getting a child, belonging to the Desh Manjee or the second man in the village, vaccinated. This done, the rest of the people afterwards came forward of their own accord. The introduction of vaccination in this village facilitated its progress in many others which were under its jurisdiction, till by gradual marches southward we came upon Heran- pore which is one of the most populous and important villages in the interior of Pakour sub- division. Here the population is composed chiefly of Hindus; the mundel Heru Seal is reckoned as a man of influence; and there is a class of people called moyras who have all along been the most inveterate opponents of vaccination. I had once, in the month of October, called on this mundel for the purpose of introducing vaccination in his village, but he had then told us to put off till the month of Kartick (which was an evil month with the Hindus) was over. My vaccinators were in the meantime busily engaged in carrying on work in such of the surrounding villages as they could win over. Another Purgonyte of the village of Sarsa, a few miles to the south-west of Heranpore, an equally
40 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. influential man with the first one, had yielded chiefly through my influence and persuasion and set the example to all the villages under him, which gradually came one after another to accept vaccination. There were still however many villages which would not yield until the people of Heranpore had first set them the example. This was a most serious obstacle. For the mundel of Heranpore who had at first promised to be our friend, had afterwards not only resisted several successive attempts made by vaccinators but had even instructed all the villages under his influence to follow his example. He was also secretly on the look out for an inoculator so that by introducing inoculation among the villages; he might the more effectually thwart our purpose. Month after month elapsed and these villages stood out in open defiance, till my vaccinators began to complain that until the mundel of Heranpore could be won, over, the work of vaccination in Pakour would be a failure. I accordingly determined in one of my visits towards the latter end of February, to make a last attempt upon Heranpore. A case of small pox, as mentioned before in one of my special reports, had then appeared in the mission house there. The converts attached to the house, together with a portion of the village adjoining it, had been, vaccinated. I called on the mundel and at first explained to him the urgent necessity of getting all the people of his village vaccinated, but finding him still inexorable. I, at last, had recourse to certain threats not altogether groundless. I told him that small-pox had, already appear- ed in the neighbourhood, that there was every likelihood of its affecting the unprotected people of his village, and that should he allow it to do so by rejecting the offers of sure pro- tection that were now given, he, as mundel, would certainly be held responsible for every death that might occur. I, at the same time, made a sham reprimand to my vaccinators ordering them, on pain of dismissal, never again to set their foot in Heranpore where they were so disgracefully treated and so often forled in their attempts, but to go and mind their business elsewhere. This had the desired effect. From the very next day the mundel began to induce the people to accept vaccination and a few days afterwards when he had fully prepared their minds he sent for one of my vaccinators. Thus one of the most important villages in Pakour sub-division was brought over to our side and one of the most obstinate people here (the moyras) whose prejudices for three suc- cessive seasons I have nowhere been able to overcome was here subdued. And thus vaccination made rapid progress in the north-westerly portion of Pakour sub-division till the area overtaken bordered upon that of the south-westerly portion of Rajmehal. The two vaccinators employed at Pakour were also very energetic and successful in stamping out certain out-breaks of small-pox mentioned below. Co-operation of civil authorities I must however confess that I owe a great deal, for the establishing of vaccination in this sub-division, to the hearty co-operation of Mr. T. R. Hand the extra Assistant Com- missioner, who was kind enough, at my request, to furnish my vaccinators with perwanahs, addressed to all the Purgonytes and Mundels of his district These perwanahs are of great use to us; for they serve as passports among the rude and barbarous people with whom we have to deal. We are not even reckoned as Government servants or allowed quarters in their villages until we have shown that we bore the &quot; seal and mohur &quot; of the burra sahib of the district or sub-division. Operation in Rajme- hal 4. In Rajmehal sub-division we had not many difficulties to encounter. Here many villages had been protected in previous years, and the people, especially the Sonthals, have in most places learnt to appreciate the benefits of vaccination. Four of my vaccinators were at first placed to work in this sub-division Second grade vaccinator, Oghore Nauth Mookerjee, was employed near Burhart, a large village not less than 24 miles away from the town of Rajmehal, with instructions to proceed southward; third grade vaccinators Anundo Lall Mohunto and Bhagiruth Doss were posted between Burhait on the south, and Burio on the north, and were told to proceed westward and northward; and first grade vaccinator Peary Mohun Dass was temporarily stationed to the west of Teenpahar with orders to go over to Godda as soon as a sufficient supply of matter was obtained. Very satisfactory. The work in Rajmehal sub-division has also progressed very satisfactorily; several new places which had never before witnessed the effects of vaccination have this year been protected, and the areas extended especially into the southerly and westerly portions of the district; those in the former have, in some places as already pointed out, nearly come in contact with those of the north-westerly portions of Pakour; and those in the latter have in a few places nearly approached the boundaries of Godda sub-division. Godda. 5. First grade vaccinator, Peary Mohun Dass, was sent to Godda in December. He worked there for that month and a portion of January, and protected seven villages in Muneeharee pergunnah where he vaccinated a total number of 595 persons. I inspected his cases in February, but was told that further progress was impossible from the vigorous
SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 41 opposition that was offered in certain quarters. As I did not think it at all practicable to bestow the necessary amount of constant and close supervision upon these distant places without sacrificing the, interests of the work in those quarters where it was being hotly and systematically pursued, I thought it advisable to recall the vaccinators to Rajmehal sub- division. He went on working in a few villages near Maharajpore and Teenpahar stations till the beginning of March, when his services were urgently called to check the progress of the epidemic of small-pox that broke out at Kanklotea(Sahibgunge). Thus the work this year has been carried on in 83 villages in Rajmehal sub-division; 68 in Pakour; and 7 in Godda; giving a total of 158 villages protected by vaccination. Number vaccinated during the year Cost of each success- ful case. 6. The total number of persons vaccinated during the year as shewn in the accom- panying returns, amounts to 11,071 against 8,352 of the previous year; the number success- ful42 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. with doubtful success resulted, my vaccinators have always attempted to produce typical vesicles and have generally succeeded in doing so. The number of times that each man's work was inspected during the season, is as follows :SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 43 In Sahibgunge Subsequently, in the beginning of March the disease broke out in Kanklotea bazaar in Sahibgunge, which is a most populous bazaar by the side of the railway line, about 24 miles to the northwest of Rajmehal town. The population here is a mixed one, consisting chiefly of Hindu and Mahomedan tradesman from different parts of the country. Here fifteen cases and four deaths were at first reported but twenty-six cases more subsequently occurred with eight deaths among them. Six of these cases, which ultimately recovered, were among the recently vaccinated. The occurrence here was traced to contagion from an infected village near Colgong. A second outbreak in Rajmehal The disease then broke out at Koylabazaar, a village inhabited chiefly by Mahomedans and situate within 3 miles of Rajmehal town. Here 13* cases and 2 deaths had occurred as the result of inoculation. Subsequently it broke out in two Paharia villages, viz; Tegra- pahar and Kharobasha, in the interior of Pakour. In the former 8 persons were attacked of whom 1 died; and in the latter 43 persons of whom 20 died. In these two instances outbreak was traceable to contagion from Koopapahar. Then in one more village in Rajmehal Sub-division. viz, Borome, which is situated near Bejapore station, and inhabited by Hindus and Mamomedans, 10 cases of small-pox with 6 deaths had at first occurred, but subsequently 20 cases more with 2 deaths were reported. A few more villages have since been infected with the disease, but as these do not fall within the year under report, the particulars are not given here. In those cases in which contagion is mentioned as being the cause, the histories so far as they could be gathered in a few instances, have already been given with the special reports and have not therefore been repeated here. Thus in Pakour sub-division 6 villages were infected, with a total number of 118 cases, of which 45 died, the rate of mortality being 38.1 per cent; and in Rajmehal sub-division 4 villages were infected, with total number of 90 cases of which 22 died or 24 4 per cent. The number of deaths is given on the authority of the people on whose statements we have to depend for ascertaining it. Among the number attacked, 10 were ascertained to have been previously inoculated, 4 of whom died; and 8 were recently vaccinated, all of whom recovered. It could not be ascertained whether any more persons among those that have died, were previously in- oculated or not. But none of the cases mentioned above were among the previously vac- cinated. In fact, the villages mentioned, with the exception of a very insignificant portion of Sahibgunge, had never before witnessed the benefits of vaccination. Thus the fire lighted up in one or two places by inoculation, led to a general confla- gration which would have continued its ravages unchecked had not vaccination come in to quench its fury. Death-rate from small-pox44 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. means the disease was entirely prevented from spreading. In Rajmehal also one of my vaccinators, named Anundo Lall, had acted very energetically in suppressing the spread of small-pox. Information reached him one night of the occurrence of small-pox at Koolkha, and the very night he went over a distance of 5 or 6 miles accompanied by Sonthals, and the next morning vaccinated all the unprotected people of the village. The principal vaccinator of my staff, Peary Mohun Dass, has also shown great tact and energy at Kanklotea. Here in former years we had to give up our attempts after operating on a few stray individuals, owing to the obstinate and unconquerable prejudices of the people. The people would not by any means be persuaded to submit to the operation, would deny or hide their children, and openly declare that they would not incur the wrath of the goddess, who has been pleased to favor them with her presence, by introducing any extraneous influences. They would rather die of small-pox than accept of vaccination. It is, however, a matter of satisfaction to find that in a place like this where we had not the least expectation of success, over a hundred and forty people have already been protected by vaccination chiefly through the efforts of the vaccinator named above. And although the number protected still falls very much short of the requirements of the place, yet, considering all the circumstances, it cannot be denied that a great thing has been achieved. I must, however, cordially acknowledge the kind and timely assistance rendered us by Mr. C. A. S. Bedford, the Ex-Assistant Commissioner of Rajmehal, whose strict injunc- tions to the mundel and chowkeydars have been of great service to us at Kanklotea. I am now happy to be able to say that in all places mentioned above except one (Koylabazaar) in Rajmehal, vaccination has been established ; and in most of them the disease has been entirely stamped out by its influence. Treatment of small- pox by carbolic acid There is no circumstance so trying to those engaged in vaccination or so full of danger to its cause as the prosecution of the work in a place where small-pox is lighted up among an ignorant and prejudiced people. The disease may be incubating in the systems of the unprotected, ready to break out after vaccination is performed and before it had taken effect. One such instance occurring might be sufficient to throw distrust upon vaccinators and vaccination, and prove utterly destructive of its cause. Fully aware of this contingency I took the precaution beforehand to warn my vaccinators of the danger they were liable to incur by being too confident and hopeful and instructed them to let the people clearly to understand that they were not free from the dangers of small-pox until the vesicles were properly risen and the areola fully formed. And I am fortunate in being able to say that, excepting the 8 cases already pointed out in which the disease appeared and ran its modified course almost simultaneously with vaccination, no instances have come to my notice among the cases mentioned, in which any of my vaccinated people have succumbed to the disease although lying on the same bed with persons suffering from small-pox. I also feel pleasure in stating that my instructions in regard to the treatment with carbolic oil have to a great extent been carried out where permitted. I had directed a mixture of 1 part of carbolic acid with 10 parts of cocoanut or mowha oil to be used in cases of small-pox where no objection should be raised against its use. The two vaccinators Indro Narain and Rutty Kanto give reports of twenty-four cases having been cured by it, and vaccinator Peary Mohun Doss reports eight cures. I am not prepared to say that the cures are attributable to the remedy and not to nature; but I had seen three or four cases at least, in an apparently hopeless condition, which afterwards got well under its use. I am sorry my duties prevented me from watching the treatment or I could have furnished the results in detail. But from what I have been able to gather I am inclined to believe that it had no injurious or unplea- sant effect, but had, in a few instances in which it was early administered, prevented suppuration; and in advanced eases helped to destroy the fSONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 45 reasonable, would be but of little avail in overcoming the fondness of a rude and barbar- ous people for time-honored customs. They see Government vaccinators at work among them, and are at once led to believe that inoculation has been stopped. They therefore think it dangerous to oppose these men and in many cases yield without much opposition. An impression pre- valent that inocu- lation has been prohibited. Inoculators also are under this impression, and I am inclined to think that wherever they have come forward for vaccination, they have felt the necessity for doing so. They are afraid of carrying on their old practice for fear of being detected, and have therefore no alternative left but to take to vaccination. It is on this account too that wherever in- oculation is heard of, it is found to be carried on most cautiously and secretly; and that were it not for the outbreaks of small-pox to which they have given rise and the rapid progress of vaccination, the few instances that I have mentioned would scarcely have come to light. This impression, therefore, has helped the spread of vaccination a great deal, and it is not our business, uncalled for, to disabuse the minds of the people of it. But a false impression can never be expected to last long. The spell must somehow or other be broken; and the re-action to which that would give rise might be productive of dangerous consequences to the cause of vaccination. Symptoms of this are even now percep- tible. There are people, especially Hindus and Mahomedans, who live in or near the towns, who are shrewd enough to perceive the falsity of this impression. These men often attempt to instigate the people to resist vaccination and to favour the old custom of inoculation. This for instance in Koylabazaar, near Rajmehal town, we had made several attempts at the com- mencement of the season to introduce vaccination, but failed, owing to the opposition of the people who are composed chiefly of Mahomedans. They had subsequently called in the services of an inoculator from a foreign district, whose operations had given rise to the outbreak of small-pox mentioned above. But notwithstanding these evil effects, the people would not feel disinclined to venerate their old custom and would not by any means be persuaded to take vaccination. I then attempted by all manner of argument and per- suation, to dissuade the inoculator from his practice and to win him over to our side, shew- ing him the advantages vaccination had over inoculation and the rapid progress it was making among the people; so much so that there was every likelihood of its soon entirely superseding the latter and thereby destroying his practice. I, at the same time, gave him hopes of making much more practice under our system, than he could ever possibly expect to have in his old method. But he was too shrewd to yield to these persuasions. He per- ceived that we were powerless to do anything for checking his practice, and though for the time being he seemed to acquiesce in my sayings, yet by his subsequent conduct he seemed to bid defiance to our efforts. This is but one instance but yet its influence for mischief should never be underrated It might deter other inoculators from coming over to our side as they should otherwise have done, and it might lead the people to believe that there was nothing to prevent their taking to their old custom. A few such instances and there is every apprehension of the foundations of vaccina- tion being shaken and our hold upon the people lost. Recommends the extention of Act IV of 1865, prohi- biting inoculation. All these dangers and drawbacks to vaccination could, I think,&quot; be prevented or removed, by extending the act prohibiting inoculation, to these districts. Then inocula- tors would be entirely disarmed and have no other alternative left but to come over to our side, vaccination would have a firmer hold upon the people who would see no other resource, and outbreaks of small-pox would be much less frequent than now. Thus vaccination being freed from the clogs and encumbrances which now hinder its path would make rapid progress and gradually become self-supporting. Inoculators. 10. Inoculators.46 SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. direct, subject to my supervision and inspection. The first two alone have done work during the season, and the rest have done little or nothing. Of these Ramrutton Mundel had come forward at the end of the season. Work of ex-inocu- lators. Unsatisfactory Bany Madhub Chuckerbuttee vaccinated a total number of 490 cases in 5 villages in Rajmehal sub-division; and Bycunt Nath Banerjea operated on 312 cases in 4 villages in the same sub-division. They had at first operated only on one point on the forearm in males and upper arm in females; but subsequently upon my insisting on them to observe a uniform system with my vacccinators (the object of which will be perceived below) they had operated in a few cases on two points on the upper arm. The work of both of these two men was inspected by me two or three times during the season; and with the exception of a few cases in which good vesicles were at all seen, the results on the whole have not been very satisfactory. Each time, however, that I inspected their cases I took occasion to point out their defects and warn them to be more careful for the future. The inadvisibility of allowing these men to practise in the neighbourhood of Govern- ment vaccinators, was hinted at in my last year's report. This has however been more strongly felt this year. These inoculators are courted by the people chiefly upon the suppo- sition that they were practising their old method and they make it their interest to keep up this impression. It is on this account that they generally operate on the forearm, especially in males. They cannot, through fear of losing their practice, give out that they were carry- ing on vaccination. They might have a few staunch clients, who, out of veneration for them, might submit to anything they do. But still people of low means generally look to their purses more than to anything else, and when they come to know that these men were carrying on the same sort of work for fees, which the Government people perform gratis, they are apt to declare themselves for the latter, and even to deny the fees to which the inoculators are entitled. Difficulties. On the other hand, if these inoculators are allowed to have their own way, the interests of vaccination are likely to suffer a great deal. The people have still a great veneration for the time-honored custom of inoculation, and when they see their old inoculators practising it (as they are made to believe) amongst them, and that, in defiance of all the measures taken by Government (as they imagine) for its suppression, they make bold to decry vacci- nation and to deny it all access to their villages. Thus I do not think it a good policy to allow inoculators to practise vaccination in the neighbourhood of Government vaccinators. The interests of both are liable to suffer to the great detriment of vaccination. I had however tried to obviate this difficulty by placing these two classes of vaccinators far apart from each other. But this again is not always practicable without sacrificing the interests of either. For the inoculators think it a great loss to go and work in distant places leaving their old clients, and on the other hand vaccinators cannot be told to leap over to a distant place without interfering with the gradual and steady progress of vaccination. In order that vaccination might be self-supporting it must first have a firm hold upon the confidence of the people, which cannot be the case, if it is allowed to be interfered with by any disturbing cause however slight. I do not at all mean to deny the importance of allowing inoculators to practise vaccination, but I am only pointing out the disadvantages which result from allowing these men to practise in the midst of Government vaccinators. I earnestly hope that these difficulties may in future be overcome by assigning to either class different areas in separate sub-divisions and by at the same time prohibiting inoculation. Vaccine census 11. The subjoined statement, drawn up chiefly on the authority of my vaccinators who furnished the necessary information, will convey some idea of the degree of protection enjoyed by the people. Class of people examined Number examined. Inoculated Per cent of total examined. Vaccinated. Per cent of total examined. Had small-pox. Per cent of total examined Unprotected Per cent of total examined. Inhabitants of 10 villages in Rajmehal sub- division, chiefly Sonthals ... ... ... 6,512 4,496 69.04 1,860 28.56 110 1.68 46 0.70 Inhabitants of 4 villages in Pakour sub-divi- sion ; about ¼th Paharias, more than 1/3rd Sonthals, and the remainder Hindus ... 2,562 1,731 67.56 645 25.17 83 3.24 103 4.02 Boys of Rajmehal school, chiefly Hindus ... 56 28 50 13 23.21 3 5.35 12 21.42 Total ... 9,130 6,255 68.51 2,518 27.57 196 2.14 161 1.76
SONTHAL PERGUNNAHS. 47 The number unprotected in the villages of Rajmehal sub-division is so very small in comparison, because in half the number of them exhaustive vaccination was performed. The number unprotected among the boys of the Rajmehal school is comparatively very high, shewing that the district is much better protected than the town, where, owing to the obsti- nate prejudices of different classes of the people vaccination cannot at all progress favor- ably. RAJMEHAL, 12th May, 1873.
ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS, PRESIDENCY CIRCLE. WESTERN DISTRICTSABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 49 good season's work being accomplished, as many of the inoculators of the town have, since the appointment of the vaccinator, come forward and received instructions willingly; hitherto, they could not be induced to learn, and steadily opposed it. Scene of operations. &quot; With a view to giving effect to the Inspector-General of Hospital's instructions contained in the report published on vaccination for 1871-72, the thannahs of Chatna, Bancoorah and Bissenpore, were selected for operations at the commencement of the working season. Why chosen '' The object in choosing these thannahs as centres was, that operations were commenced in them last year; they lie in a direct line from east to west, in the order noted, and are the most populous: each has its Rajbaree, with the usual amount of influential attendants; and if once a belt of vaccination could be successfully established across the district, the extension of operations to the north and south at a future period would not be attended with much difficulty. &quot; The area being only about 50 miles in length and 20 in breadth, offered every facility for the work of supervision being efficiently carried out. Aid rendered by civil authorities &quot; The civil authorities, I am glad to have it to report, rendered most cordial assistance throughout the season. I would here particularly mention the Moonsiff of Bissenpore, Koylash Chandra Mookerjee, who took great interest in the work; much of the success attained there is due to his personal influence and great exertions. &quot; No appreciable aid was received from any of the leading members of the native com- munity ; they are extremely prejudiced, and in some places directly opposed to vaccination. Ex-inoculators &quot; In addition to the two paid vaccinators, 44 instructed inoculators were at work in the district. Thirty-eight of these were employed in the defined areas, and six were deputed north as pioneers in the Gungajulghatty division, with a view to familiarise the people there with vaccination for the ensuing season. &quot; The inhabitants of this thannah being Kanouj Brahmins are most strenuously opposed to vaccination, on the score of the virus used being taken from the cow. Nothing but time will remove these caste prejudices. &quot; The men sent there were old inoculators of the place; being new to the work they had undertaken it was not deemed advisable to hamper them with any instructions as to registers, &c, so they were simply told to go and set to work in their old beats, merely furnishing a report of their whereabouts and noting any operations they might have succeeded in per- forming to enable the work being verified. Number vaccinated. '' This arrangement was attended with fair results ; they have made a commencement, and vaccinated 119 successfully. Causes of delay in starting work. &quot; The work of vaccination was not fairly commenced until late in January, this was owing to the difficulties which existed in obtaining an adequate supply of lymph and crusts to start a large body of inoculators simultaneously, and to the late arrival of the iustruct- ed inoculators, who, knowing that the people would not accept of vaccination until the rice harvest and Peetah Poojahs were over, delayed coming in. This, it is to be hoped, will not occur again, as the men have promised faithfully to be in on the 1st October next. &quot; The vaccinators employed in the defined areas were provided with certificates of com- petency, bearing my signature and the official seal of the magistrate, on condition that they would furnish a weekly register of operations, showing the name, father's name, resi- dence, sex, age, date of operation and result; and, further, that their work should be closely supervised; this being agreed to, they were established in areas assigned to them, and made to understand thoroughly the principles of good exhaustive work. On this score, however, I have no apprehension, as from time immemoral inoculation has been con- ducted on this principle and the people know no other; any change under this head would be attended with as much difficulty as vaccination itself. &quot; The Government vaccinator, with a gang of apprentices, was always kept on the move in establishing newly taught vaccinators, instructing those under his charge, and starting vaccination in localities where the people were opposed to it. Where he failed in overcom- ing the prejudices of the people, I at once visited the locality, and held meetings of the leading members with the instructed inoculators of the place; this mode of procedure was attended with satisfactory results as I invariably succeeded, though not without some trouble, in having the work of vaccination fully established before I left. 13
50 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Reports, &c., not received regularly ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OP CIVIL SURGEONS. 51 Inspection by the Government vac- cinator &quot;To some of the places not inspected by me in the interior the Government vaccinator was deputed to do the work. I have every confidence in him, and feel satisfied that he has performed the duty strictly, as he is very scrupulous in giving a man the benefit of a doubt, particularly to an ex-inoculator. Examples of bad vaccination &quot; Operations were for a time suspended at Bissenpore in March, owing to the lymph having degenerated; this can only be accounted for by the fact that the people of this place are in a bad state of health, and the weather had become suddenly and unusually hot for the season of the year. Lymph being procured from genuine vesicles in the adjoining villages, work was commenced afresh with increased vigour as it does not pay for the instructed inoculators to be idle. ''Had strict supervision not been exercised, these men would have gone on with this spurious matter to the discredit of vaccination, as the first outbreak of small-pox would prove. '' In December last, 141 people were reported to have been vaccinated by Modusoodun, an ex-inoculator, the majority were said to have been successful; travelling over 32 miles of country from village to village through the jungles, I found that there were but three successful cases, Modusoodun of course made himself scarce, and has avoided me carefully ever since. Necessity for super- vision. ''Instances of this kind clearly show the absolute necessity for systematic supervision. The work of these men require close looking after, not only to prevent the possibility of their bringing vaccination into disgrace, but to ensure correct returns of their work being regularly submitted. Work of 1872-73, compared with the two preceding years. &quot; 4. The progress made in vaccination, as compared with the two preceding years, is tabulated for ready reference:52 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL. SURGEONS. &quot; The majority of these men, thirty-five, being only instructed since December 1872, much could not be expected from them . The greater portion of the work was performed by the nine vaccinators of 1871-72. &quot;During the year under review, 121 towns and villages were operated on; of these, 105 were thoroughly vaccinated,and 16 partially; the season having advanced, and much con- stitutional disturbance being, noticed to attend the operations, the vaccinators were directed to, suspend work on the 31st of March; this was in accordance with the views of the people, who are averse to vaccination after this period. Men from the Bancoorah and Bissenpore divisions were also employed in arresting outbreaks of small-pox. &quot; The work of vaccination has been confined strictly within the limits of the area noted, and carried out systematically, each village operated on being thoroughly protected before passing on to another. Opposition met with. &quot; 5. The district being one in which vaccination is but little known, an unusual amount of opposition was met with,ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 53 &quot; When timely information reached, a staff of vaccinators were sent out with ,a special perwannah by the magistrate, and the unprotected were at once operated on with satisfactory results. Amount of protec- tion from small- pox. &quot; 9. The subjoined Table shows the amount of protection from small-pox enjoyed by the people as far as admissions into jail are concerned :54 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Statement of individuals vaccinated in 1872-73 classified according to caste. Castes classified. Numbers operated on. REMARKS. Castes classified. Numbers operated on. REMARKS. Brahmin ... ... 980 Brought forward ... 10,872 Kyastha ... ... 648 Chootar ... ... 157 Chuttree ... ... 94 Laik ... ... 375 Bouri ... ... 1,207 Dhoba ... ... 68 Tamuli ... ... 310 Moochi ... ... 140 Kamar ... ... 271 Bheriwala ... ... 57 Kolu ... ... 295 Mall ... ... 70 Koomar ... ... 73 Hari ... ... 102 Poddar ... ... 132 Soori ... ... 208 Tailee ... ... 1,558 Bhoomij ... ... 26 Sakaree ... ... 92 Samonta ... ... 92 Sonthal ... ... 194 Acharjee ... ... 12 Boistub ... ... 188 Khoyra ... ... 354 Gowala ... ... 1,146 Mali ... ... 32 Dome ... ... 96 Korga ... ... 6 Moyra ... ... 191 Jalia ... ... 135 Baniah ... ... 213 Bhat ... ... 2 Koshie ... ... 23 Sakra ... ... 7 Mullo ... ... 71 Sarak ... ... 9 Chassa ... ... 395 Sarawali ... ... 27 Majee ... ... 368 Koormi ... ... 24 Matia ... ... 162 Chandal ... ... 3 Tanti ... ... 842 Mahomedans ... ... 54 Agoori ... ... 53 Boidya ... ... 3 Lohar ... ... 370 Joogi ... ... 16 Napit ... ... 170 Christians ... ... 6 Kaot ... ... 3 Detailed Castes not on record ... ... 676 Bagdi ... ... 707 Carried over... ... 10,872 Total ... 13,533 No vaccination was performed at Raneegunge. Beerbhoom dis- trict. Inoculation exten- sively practised. Small-pox. Beerbhoom District.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 55 would starve. Small-pox prevailed in February, March and April 1872 in two villages in the Bhangchatta thannah, 14 persons died out of 70 attacked. The people would not accept vaccination. In December it again broke out in these villages. Vaccination was established through the agency of the native doctors of the Oochkurn and Shajapore endemic dispensaries. Small-pox broke out towards the close of the year in the north of the district, and at Teelpara, a village about a mile from the station. Midnapore trict. Arrangements sanc- tioned by Govern- ment. Midnapore District.56 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. gratis, and that, moreover, the vaccinators were paid Government servants. On the actual position of the vaccinators being explained, then the question of the amount of fee to be paid for each case remained to be dealt with. The vaccinators stated that, in former years, they were paid four annas for each boy, and two annas for each girl; but the villagers replied, and I think with truth, that no such nirrick ever existed; that the small-pox inoculators were paid partly by money and partly in kind, and that each man paid accord- ing to his means. '' In two large Mahomedan villages near Keshpore, where upwards of 200 children had been vaccinated, the villagers themselves, on my visiting the place, requested me to settle the matter. I declined to interfere; but suggested that the vaccinators should submit the question to a punchayet formed of the leading men amongst the villagers, and the matter was subsequently adjusted in that way. Re distribution of areas &quot; 8. The magistrate has suggested that a re-distribution of the areas in which the men worked during the past season should be effected, and that the thannahs of the district should form the basis of such re-distribution. Mr. Harrison thinks that a vaccinator, with one or two assistants, should be attached to each police station, and in this opinion I cordi- ally concur. Such an arrangement would favor the formation of a more regular system than at present obtains. The work of supervision would be facilitated, the officer in charge of the thannah without interfering in any way with the vaccinators, would be in a position to ascertain from time to time whether the work was being regularly carried out; and in cases where Government may decide upon giving a retaining fee, the vaccinators could be paid through the police office rendering it unnecessary for the men to waste time in coming into the sudder station for their monthly pay. &quot; 9. Before concluding this portion of the report, I would ask the Inspector-General to recommend Government to sanction for another season the expenditure* incurred during the past year. Although I had expected more satisfactory results, yet, if the difficulties we have had to contend with be taken into consideration, the results obtained may be more leniently viewed. The epidemic outbreak of fever frequently demanded my presence in other quarters of the district; and, moreover, the outbreak of small-pox at Moyna pre- vented my devoting to the proceedings of the newly trained men, the time and supervision which they required, and which I flatter myself would have enabled me to report greater progress, and furnish more definite information than I am enabled to do on this occasion. Operations at Dhan tore, Debrah, &c. &quot;10. Return marked B shows the number vaccinated by instructing vaccinator Digambur Chuckerbutty, and the five men trained by him during the past season. The operations were commenced under my personal supervision about the end of November, and I remained with the party for about a week. We commenced operations in the village of Dhantore, and here I was obliged to reject fully one-third of the children as unfit to be operated on owing to the grave extent they had suffered from fever. After visiting some other villages in the vicinity of Debrah, I ordered the party to proceed towards Subung, and work in the villages in that neighbourhood, and to return to Debrah later on in the season, when it was to be hoped that the public health would have improved. I was not able to see much of this party before the end of January, when I found them in full work in the neighbourhood of Pingelah. The men under training had, in the meantime, become pretty expert operators; and as they were anxious to commence working in their own villages before the close of the season, early in February each man was provided with a lancet and a copy of Dr. Charles' Bengalee pamphlet on vaccination, and com- menced working under the immediate superintendence of the vaccinator who had instructed them. Disputes regarding defined areas &quot; 11. Frequent disputes occurred amongst these men, as the number of villages that each man was entitled to work in had never been defined accurately, if at all. In consultation with the magistrate, I hope to be able to definitely arrange the number of villages each man should work in, not alone at this place, but throughout the district, the basis of the re-distribution being the thannah divisions. All these men can read and write, and seem active and intelligent, but necessity for constant supervision is very obvious ; and to ensure the success of this system it will have to be continued for many years to come, if, indeed, it can ever be with safety abandoned. Other inoculators. &quot; 12. Four inoculators from Ghattal and Chunderkona came into Midnapore and remained for some weeks under the instruction of the municipal vaccinator. No operations were performed by these men owing to the bad state of the public health in the quarter of the district where they reside. * Minus the price of the tent, i. e., Rs. 300.
ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 57 &quot; 13. One inoculator came from Dantoon, on the border of Balasore. This man is an Oorya brahmin, and remained in Midnapore for several months. He was very anxious to learn, and eventually left, being provided with a lancet and pamphlet. It is remarkable that this man should have taken so much trouble travelling so great a distance, and remaining away from his home for so long a period, inasmuch as Ooryas are supposed to hold an unconquerable aversion to vaccination. He will commence working next season, and I hope to be able to ascertain from personal observation how far he has succeeded in over- coming the prejudices of his countrymen. The Subung inocu- lutors. &quot; 14. In previous letters and reports I alluded to a large settlement of inoculators who lived near the Subung police station, and it was my intention to have spent a considerable portion of the working season in that neighbourhood. &quot;In my letter No. 161, dated the 30th of August 1872, I mentioned the large extent of country through which these men were in the habit of working, and how desirable it was to enlist them on the side of vaccination, if possible. On my arrival at Subung I saw some 40 of the inoculators, and after explaining to them the object I had in view, they requested to be allowed a day for consultation before coming to a decision. They returned at the end of 24 hours, and said that they declined to practise vaccination. They said that they had not inoculated for many years past, and that they had taken to other means of gaining a livelihood since Government had prohibited inoculation. Refusal to practise vaccination &quot;They informed me that there were hundreds of villages within the jurisdiction of the Subung thannah where no inoculation had been carried on for the past 10 years, and I subsequently visited villages where I found many grown up people without any form of protection. At the time I was trying to induce the Subung inoculators to learn vaccination, I was endeavouring to check the spread of small-pox at Moyna, where that disease prevailed to a serious extent. My attention was to open a school of vaccination for the Subung inoculators at Moyna, distant from Subung about 12 miles, where two of the most experienced and active of the paid vaccinators were at work. &quot; 15. Having so far failed at Subung I proceeded to Moyna. Table C shows the result of the season's operations. Small-pox in Moy- na pergunnah. &quot;Since May 1872 small-pox had been hanging about the Moyna pergunnah, but at first in a very mild form. The origin of the disease could not be traced. It seems to have subsided during the rains; but early in the October following it re-appeared, and spread from village to village with great rapidity. The vaccinators reported the dis- ease in 23 villages, and that it was rapidly spreading in every direction. The people refused vaccination, never having heard of it before, and at the end of nearly two months only some 500 children had been operated on. The vaccinators found the greatest diffi- culty in keeping up a supply of lymph, and in fact matters wore a very unfavorable aspect. The magistrate had been in correspondence with the Moyna Rajah regarding the prevalence of the disease, and fortunately succeeded in enlisting his interest and influence on behalf of the vaccinators. Vaccination started Satisfactory pro- gress and results. &quot; 16. On my arrival at Moyna, the Rajah received me very courteously and promised me every assistance. He allowed me to vaccinate 19 members of his family, including three of his sons. He sent for the head men of the villages and ordered them to render every assistance in collecting the children, &c , and I have no hesitation in saying that the suc- cess that attended my subsequent efforts in trying to overcome the prejudices of the people was due in a great measure to the exertions of that gentleman. Before I left Moyna, up- wards of 300 children were vaccinated, and arrangements for stamping out the disease in the effected villages were organized. I found that small-pox had broken out in 23 villages, and owing to the large number of unprotected people living in the pergunnah I dreaded that the disease would spread to a serious extent. The type was for the most part mild, and I saw very few cases of confluent small-pox; but many deaths had taken place, and in some villages panic was very marked. The protection afforded by vaccination was undoubted, and although some of the vaccinated contracted the disease, no casualty occurred amongst them, and the people seemed satisfied with the results obtained. Difficulty of carry- ing out arm-to- arm vaccination &quot; 17. The work would have progressed much more rapidly were it not for the difficulty connected with the lymph supply. The work from beginning to end was carried out on the arm-to-arm system, and it was found necessary to vaccinate some well grown lads in every village who were more or less independent, and who were not likely to listen to the objections raised by their female relatives. These boys were paid by the relatives of each child vaccinated, and one individual, when I was at Moyna in February last, received one afternoon four Rupees at the rate of about one pice for each child vaccinated from the vesi- cles on his arm. This was the expedient generally resorted to, and it answered, on the whole, 15
58 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. very well. The village priest also took an active part in the proceedings. The ceremonies usually carried on in connection with small-pox inoculation were generally adhered to, and the prejudices of the people, particularly with reference to the days that they considered propitious, were invariably respected. he outbreak pro- bably stamped out. &quot; 18. Vaccination was carried on in 60 villages in this pergunnah, and I consider there are ample grounds for the belief that a formidable outbreak of small-pox was controlled and eventually stamped out. The vaccinators, both experienced operators, worked willingly and well, and I regret that it is not in my power to offer them some reward for their exer- tions. The scene of their labours was upwards of 35 miles from the sudder station, and for upwards of four months they were subjected to many inconveniences and privations. The vaccinators report that 64 people died from the disease to their knowledge, and it is to be feared that many more deaths took place of which they never heard. In a village that I visited I found 18 people suffering from small-pox, and of these four died. Vaccination afforded very marked protection in this instance, notwithstanding that one of those who were vaccinated was carried off by the disease. The operations were carried on in this pergunnah up to the end of March, when the weather became suddenly hot, and the season's work was brought to a close Vaccination in Tum- look &quot;19. The return marked D shows the result of the attempt made to introduce vaccination on the new system in connection with the Tumlook dispensary. The native doctor reported that small-pox had broken out in a large village about two miles distant from the town of Tumlook, on the 25th of January 1872, and that, in compliance with my orders, he had secured the services of one of the local inoculators who was willing to be taught the practice of vaccination. It was not practicable to send a vaccinated child so great a distance, and I sent the native doctor a supply of fresh crusts, and ordered him to commence operations at once. He reported in a few days that he had vaccinated some 300 children, and that a certain proportion of the operations were performed by the inoculator under his superintendence. I was not able to visit the village until some 10 days after the children were vaccinated. I found seven cases of small-pox, two of which were of the confluent variety. I also learned that four people had died from the disease; but, fortunately, up to date none of those vaccinated had been attacked, nor were they subsequently, and the further spread of the disease was efficiently checked. &quot; I vaccinated with my own hand some 30 boys whom I found in the Tumlook Govern- ment school without any form of protection with lymph procured from the village above- mentioned, all of which proved successful. Operations were afterwards carried on in three other villages round Tumlook, and I think, on the whole, a successful start has been made in this part of the country on the new system. The inoculator was partly paid from the dispensary funds, and partly by the people. Vaccination in Mid- napore. Infants vaccinated successfully at all seasons &quot;20. Return marked E shows the number vaccinated in the town of Midnapore. In the early paragraphs of this report I mentioned that the vaccinator's time was partly taken up in looking after the work of the men operating in the villages surrounding the station, and, consequently, the number of operations performed in the town were not nearly so numerous as in other seasons. Small-pox attacked one family residing in the town about the end of March. It was clearly imported from the district of Moorshedabad, from whence a member of the family had recently returned, and where the disease was at that time prevalent. The disease attacked four members of the same family, one of whom died (a female,) who had neither been inoculated nor vaccinated. I visited the house and had all the unprotected people vaccinated; but the weather was then very hot, and as the character of the vesicles were not satisfactory, and as the disease fortunately did not spread, the operations were discontinued. Infants, I find, can be vaccinated at all seasons of the year successfully, but grown up children and adults, in fact, all those who are exposed to the heat of the sun, should not be operated on after the first week in March in this district under ordinary circumstances. Vaccination at My- sadul. &quot; 21. I enclose a report from the sub-assistant surgeon in charge of the Mysadul charitable dispensary. The difficulties to which he alludes are not peculiar to that quarter of the district, but the real state of the case is, that, during the past cold weather, the sub- assistant surgeon has been appointed to the medical charge of the Rajah's establishment, and he has now but little time left for attending to work of this description. I only heard of one instance of inoculation being attempted during the past year. It appears that an inoculator from Subung commenced working at a place called Narainghur, a large pergunnah some 16 miles to the south of the station. The vaccinator in whose ilaqua the inoculator was attempting to work reported the matter to me, and a letter to the local zemindar led to the prompt expulsion of the inoculator, of whom nothing more was heard.
ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 59 Cause of delay in submitting report. &quot; 22. In conclusion, I must apologise for the delay which has taken place in the sub- mission of this report. The returns from the various quarters of the district in which operations were conducted took some time to collect, and even now the returns from two trained vaccinators who were working within the jurisdiction of the Gurhetta police station have not as yet been received. The work of these men was inspected by me in January last, and I then found that they were working with a fair measure of success, and I much regret that I cannot submit the result of the season's operations for that quarter of the district.&quot; A. Number vaccinated by the 16 trained vaccinators receiving an allowance from Government of Rs. 2 per mensem during the working season 1872-73. MIDNAPORE. Numbers. Names of the trained vacci- nators. Villages where they live. Station. October 1872. November 1872 December 1872 January 1873 February 1873. March 1873. No of Boys No of Girls. Total. Grand Total 1 Goluck Chuckerbutty ... Dhulhurrah.. Keshpore.. 98 196 232 294 155 228 571 532 1,103 2 Chunder Mohun Chuckerbutty 3 Reedoy Nath Chuckerbutty . Shamchand- pore. Ditto .. 142 194 155 328 412 549 1,010 770 1,780 4 Banee Madhub Chuckerbutty 5 Grish Chunder Chuckerbutty Antrah. Midnapore 210 345 191 365 377 170 805 853 1,658 6 Ram Sodoy Chuckerbutty .. 7 Troylucko Chuckerbutty .. Dhulhurrah .. Keshpore.. 30 135 160 132 76 52 283 319 602 7 Bhoyrub Chuckerbutty .. Keshpore .. Ditto .. 276 206 185 225 78 130 604 496 1,100 9 Gopaul Chuckerbutty .. Angorah .. Ditto ... 32 84 141 247 208 94 367 439 806 10 Modhoosoodun Chuckerbutty. Ditto .. Ditto .. 87 75 113 207 372 128 337 645 982 11 Anund Chuckerbutty .. Barooah .. Midnapore 59 58 66 239 149 112 322 361 683 12 Sittanath Ghose .. Amdohee .. Ditto .. 204 238 184 237 185 168 710 506 1,216 13 Sumbhoo Chuckerbutty .. Mangloe .. Ditto .. 88 107 282 315 358 62 587 625 1,212 14 Dhononjoy Chuckerbutty .. Ditto .. Ditto .. 24 113 64 105 36 36 207 171 378 15 Hurrakisto Chuckerbutty .. Rampoorah . Debrah . 25 58 117 207 265 252 392 532 924 16 Dinobundo Soor .. Bandpallah .. Midnapore 250 110 300 125 570 325 907 773 1,680 14,124 B. Number vaccinated by Digambur Chuckerbutty, instructing vaccinator, and the men trained by him during the past season 1872-73. 1 Digambur Chuckerbutty .. Dasandah .. Midnapore 336 462 850 1,335 748 561 2,034 2,258 4,292 1 Goyaram Chuckerbutty .. Khasbazar.. Debrah .. .. .. .. .. 400 254 345 309 654 2 Woodoychunder Chuckerbutty 3 Bhojohoree Chuckerbutty .. Barragur .. .. .. .. .. .. 247 57 127 177 304 4 Teetaram Chuckerbutty .. Dhantore .. Ditto .. .. .. .. .. 581 920 871 630 1,501 5 Ramcoomar Chuckerbutty .. Pinglah .. Subung.. .. .. .. .. 347 13 202 158 360 7,111 C. Number vaccinated by Narain Chunder Banerjee and Baneedeen Misser, vaccinators on special duty at Moyna, during the past season 1872-73. No. Names. Residence. Names of places where vaccin- ated. No. of villages. Total. Grand Total. 1 Narain Chunder Banerjee Midnapore ... Moyna ... 52 villages ... 2,807 2 Baneedeen Misser ... Ditto ... Ditto ... Ditto ... ... 6,832 9,639
60 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. D. Number vaccinated in Tumlook and adjacent villages by trained vaccinator Issan Chunder Bhutto during the past season 1872-73. No. Name. Residence. Pergunnah. Place where vaccinated. Total number vaccin- ated. 1 Issan Chunder Bhutto... ... Nokeebossan ... Tumlook ... Villages of Tum- look ... 851 E. Number vaccinated by Subdut Misser, municipal vaccinator, during the past season 1872-73. No. Name. Residence. Place where vaccinated. No. of males. No. of females. Total. 1 Subdut Misser ... ... Midnapore ... Midnapore Town 680 510 1,190 Ruthgurah Bazaar. Ruthgurah Bazaar.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 61 CENTRAL DISTRICTS.62 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. RAJSHAHYE DIVISION. Moorshedabad. Moorshedabad District.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 63 Attitude of the peo- ple. &quot; 5. Among certain classes the feeling of opposition to vaccination is still very strong, though, on the whole, as far as I have been able to ascertain, less difficulty is experienced in these days by the vaccinators in persuading the people to have themselves and those belonging to them vaccinated than in former years. Inoculation. &quot; 6. Inoculation, being prohibited by law within the limits of the different municipal- ities, is practised, with rare exceptions, almost exclusively in the interior of the district and far beyond the jurisdiction of the said municipalities. Facts or statistics regarding the mortality, &c., resulting from inoculation are not available. I regret, therefore, I am un- able to afford any information on this point. Two inoculators in- structed. &quot; 7. Two inoculators, who of their own accord applied to the civil surgeon to be taught to vaccinate, were trained by Dr. Coates and sent to their respective villages, with a supply of lymph,64 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. years become an institution. There is no active opposition to vaccination. Inoculation is still practised in many parts of the district. There was very little small-pox in 1872. Bograh district Number vaccinated. Bograh District.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 65 Small-pox. after they have proved that they were acquainted with the proper way of vaccinating, it has been given them. None of them have as yet submitted any report of their success, although they promised to do so. No small-pox was reported in this district, until the arrival of a batch of recruits for the 44th Native Infantry on the 19th February. The men were isolated, and all the unprotected around were vaccinated. The disease did not spread further. A few cases in the city were met with during March due to the arrival of a man ill with small-pox from Goalundo. The disease is still met with in the city. Joinsher. Manickgunge. &quot; A vaccinator was employed during February and March by the dispensary at Join- sher, and vaccinated 245 cases; 227 of which are said to have been successful. Native doctor Bissessur Doss supervised his proceedings, and states that the people are favorably disposed to vaccination at Joinsher. The native doctor at Manickgunge vaccinated 11 persons. No vaccine operations were performed at any of the other dispensaries.&quot; Furreedpore dis- trict Number of opera- tions. Furreedpore District.66 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS; Noakhally district. Inoculator's work. Noakhallu District.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 67 worked, a single vaccinated person. The people are opposed to vaccination, and inocula- tion is much practised. Small-pox prevailed in the district during the year, but apparently not with severity. Sibsaugor district. Sibsaugor District.68 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. they never comply with it. Four of these men have been prosecuted this year for inoculat- ing within municipal limits. At Behar, some few passes were granted in Mr. Broadley's time, and the hospital assistant reported that they performed and brought for inspection 175 cases. This is promising, inasmuch as inoculation is not forbidden there. No inocula- tors were trained at Barh. Small-pox. &quot; Small-pox has been tolerably prevalent all over the district, but in no place was it so bad as to necessitate any exceptional measures.&quot; Gya district. Gya District.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 69 &quot; According to a previous arrangement, I met the sub-divisional officer at that town in the middle of December. On the evening of my arrival there, we went round the town and endeavoured to induce parents to submit their children to the operation. In only two instances were we successful. On the following morning my efforts resulted in nothing. My approach was generally the signal for children being snatched up by the parents, doors being barred, or houses being emptied. Before I left, however, I got some of the people to promise that, in the event of the cases of the previous evening proving successful, they would also allow their children to be vaccinated. Fortunately, these cases did turn out a success, and when I visited the town on the 5th of March I had the satisfaction of inspecting about 150 cases of successful vaccination, and also of hearing that some of the neighbouring villagers had applied for the services of the vaccinator. The great bar to vaccination in the mofussil is the ignorance and apathy of the people. Inoculation. &quot; 7. No statistics are available regarding inoculation, which is forbidden within the municipal limits of the city of Gya. Inoculators in Gya. &quot; 8. The result of training and employment of inoculators has not been satisfactory. In December three inoculators from the district of Tirhoot applied to me for vaccinating lancets and a certificate authorising them to vaccinate. I granted their application, on the condition that they would deposit a rupee (which they were to forfeit, if they did not return the lancet,) and that they would confine their operations to the town of Gya, and subject any case to my inspection. After some hesitation these terms were accepted, and they commenced work. At the end of February they had vaccinated 16 cases in all. They occasionally absented themselves from the town for a few days at a time. I could not trace them, but I strongly suspected that they went to adjoining villages to pursue their old practice. During March one of them was caught practising inoculation in the town, and I had him prosecuted ; and on conviction he was fined Rs. 20, or, in default, one month's imprisonment, by the deputy magistrate. He paid the fine. Such a light sentence will, I fear, have little effect in putting a stop to the practice. I deprived this man and another of their lancets, and their authority to vaccinate. In Nowada. &quot; In the Nowada sub-division the deputy magistrate, Syed Ameer Hossein, who took a zealous and intelligent interest in the subject, induced eight inoculators to qualify themselves as vaccinators. They were trained by the vaccinator and native doctor. The latter was strictly enjoined to employ only as many men as whose work he could efficiently super- vise. On my periodical visit to the dispensary in January they had only vaccinated very few cases; and when, under the orders from the deputy Inspector-General of Hospitals, I again visited the sub-division in the end of February, 1 found that, with the exception of the man whose work lay nearest the station, most of them were carrying on their old practices. Subsequent reports from the native doctor confirmed the result of my inspection. They worked in a desultory way all over the sub-division, and when they thought them- selves free from inspection, they invariably returned to their old practice. One man was fined Rs. 5, or in default one week's imprisonment. It is difficult to control men over whom you possess no legal and very little moral power. The native doctor was instructed to return no case as one of vaccination, unless he had personally inspected it and verified the report. Small-pox. &quot; 9. Small-pox did not prevail to any extent. When an outbreak occurs the vaccinators are sent to the spot, and the people, as a rule, are not indisposed to avail themselves of their services. Vaccine census &quot; 10. I hope next season to be able to give more extended statistics regarding the protection from small-pox enjoyed by the people. Every patient who comes to the dis- pensary is now examined with a view to that result. &quot; In the schools it was remarked that the greater number of vaccinated persons occurred among the younger boys. Vaccine Lymph. &quot; 11. Vaccine lymph.70 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Inspection. Number of vaccina- tions. ing villages ; but on any report of small-pox in the Arrah sub-division they were sent to the place with orders to vaccinate as many of the people as possible. The work of the vaccinators was inspected twice a week and found to be very good. It will be seen from the return that 2,120 vaccinations were performed by the three vaccinators, and 551 by some converted inoculators. The greater part of the former were done in Arrah and its immediate vicinity. The people of Arrah and the surrounding country accept vaccination readily. Inoculation has considerably fallen off since its prohibition within the bounds of municipalities, but in remote parts of the district it still prevails extensivley. Ex-inoculators. &quot; Seventeen inoculators were induced to adopt vaccination during the year 1872-73. The principles and practice of vaccination were explained to them, and they were required to perform some vaccine operations in my presence, after which they received certificates of their ability to vaccinate, and supplies of vaccine lymph or crusts for their operations. Some of them sent in returns of the number of persons vaccinated by them after com- mencing practice, but it was impossible to verify these in any way. Small-pox. Number of opera- tions compared with 1871-72. Small-pox has been unusually prevalent in the district this year, but in consequence of measles and chicken-pox having been promiscuously reported under the head of small-pox in the police reports, it is impossible to form a correct estimate of the actual amount of small-pox which has occurred. Wherever the disease broke out with severity vaccinators were sent to the spot, and attempts were made by enforcing isolation, using sulphur fumigations, &c., to prevent it from spreading. It will be seen from the return that the number of vaccine operations performed in 1872-73 exceeded by 447 those of the preceding year, and that the percentage of successful cases was considerably higher. The result would have been still more satisfactory, but for the nearly complete failure of the vaccinations performed in October, November and part of December 1872. Sasseram. Sasseram.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 71 Durbungah. Number vaccinated. Durbungah.72 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. their routes without the slightest compunction. My own belief is, that since vaccination has made some way in municipal towns, inoculation has been on the increase in the interior of the districts generally.&quot; Sewan. Sewan.ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 73 Work done. 96 were employed, in 1871 and 1872, 124, and during the last season there has been also a considerable increase. The return of work by these men submitted, is really for 1871 and 1872, as the information cannot be obtained in time to embody in the return for the present year. This course has hitherto been pursued. On the requisition of the civil surgeon, these men receive purwannahs from the police to practise vaccination within the limits of certain thannahs. The police are also requested to report any man who may be found practising inoculation. These men hitherto have been under no regular supervision. They appear after the season is over with some of the crusts and a memo regarding the particulars of the operations they have performed. &quot; They returned for 1871 and 1872 over 9,000 cases, but their work will never be satis- factory, until they are properly supervised. They likewise must receive some encourage- ment, and in my No. 25 of the 16th January 1873 I stated my views on the subject, and appended an estimate of the probable cost of a scheme for district vaccination. The futures of vac- cination in Mon- ghyr. &quot; I am quite convinced it will be only with the assistance of these men under proper supervision that district vaccination can succeed, and they should not only be encouraged, but fairly remunerated as well, at any rate, until such time as vaccination gets a firm hold. Eventually, inoculation may be made penal in the district as well as in the town. &quot; Most of these men, previous to taking to vaccination, had practised inoculation for years in their respective villages, and had regular agreements with families to perform the necessary operations. &quot; In this way they have a knowledge of the people and gain admission where strangers would be debarred. &quot; It is astonishing to me how so many of them take the trouble to apply for purwannahs, as they have to come long distances, and all they get in a monitary point of view is the division of Rs. 120 among the lot. &quot; I was able to inspect only a very small proportion of the work of these men, but what I did see was encouraging and much better than I anticipated. &quot;The method of inspection I pursued was as follows:74 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. &quot;It may be said they only work for about three months and-a-half, viz., December, January, February and part of March. &quot; Perhaps, the chief cause of this may be due to the habits and employments of the people. In October and November great numbers are engaged in the fields cutting rice and sowing wheat, barley, rye, &c., and in March the latter crops have to be reaped. &quot;For reasons already given, small-pox must, no doubt, be constantly more or less in the district, but fortunately is seldom heard of in an epidemic form. Deaths from small- pox. &quot;From the mortuary returns for 1872 it appears that a total of 160 deaths from small- pox took place, equal to 1 in about 11,000 inhabitants. It would be fortunate, if this represented the true death-rate. In the municipality five and in the district 155 deaths were returned. Deaths according to season. &quot; In the district, January and February accounted for five and six deaths, respectively. The disease was most fatal in the months of April, May, June and July, during which period 135 of the 155 deaths occurred. The greatest mortality, viz., 41, took place in April. There were no deaths in September and October, and only one in December. Number vaccinated during the year. &quot;Taking into consideration the irregular and, to a great extent, uncontrolled agency employed in district vaccination, I think, on the whole, the results may be considered so far satisfactory. &quot;The returns of the year under report show a considerable increase, compared with the previous season, 12,531 against 10,303. Even allowing that this number has been properly vaccinated, protection in this way will have been afforded to only a very small proportion of the inhabitants. With a population of 1,812,986, and calculating the birth-rate at 30 per 1,000, it would be necessary to make provision for the vaccination of about 54,000 children. &quot; With a sufficient grant of funds for the encouragement of the converted inoculators, and a proper staff of trained vaccinators, in order to supervise their work, I am of opinion that a great deal of good work might be done. In addition to the private fees, these men receive, I really think that they should be encouraged at first by some definite remuneration from Government. When the prejudices of the people are fairly overcome, and vaccination so generally accepted, and means for its performance provided, so that it would justify Government in introducing the inoculation Act into the district, then the vaccinating ino- culators might be left to support themselves by fees alone, in the same manner as they did when they practised inoculation. Until that time arrives, I think, as proposed in my letter referred to in a previous part of this report, that a fixed allowance by Government of, say, Rs. 2 per mensem should be paid to all the men receiving due authority to practise vaccina- tion and doing approved work.&quot; Bhaugulpore dis- trict. Bhaugulpore DistrictABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 75 on, and to report immediately, if they found small-pox following their proceedings in any case, but not in any other way to interfere with them. Native doctors attached to dispen- saries were also directed to inspect the cases, as far as possible, but not to interfere other- wise. Number of men em- ployed. &quot;Eighty-one applied to me and were furnished with purwannahs and vaccine materials. Most of these were old men, Kaists and Gowallas by caste, about three-fourths of them residents of the district, chiefly the northern part about Mudehpoeoa, the others chiefly from the adjoining districts, Purneah and Tirhoot. Many of them have by custom obtained hereditary rights; and though now living far away, in some cases, in other and distant districts, their ancestors in more than one instance, for as many as seven generations, have performed the office of inoculator in the same place. &quot;In addition to these, 20 men were furnished with purwannahs by the deputy magis- trate of Soopole, one by the deputy magistrate of Banka, and four men were kindly furnished and set to work in Katwa, the extreme south of the district, by the civil surgeon of the Sonthal Pergunnahs, whose head-quarters are within a few miles of Chandwa, a place where their services were urgently required; some of these did excellent work, one having vaccinated more than a 1,000 persons. Number of success- ful operations. &quot;The result has been that 8,036 cases of vaccination have been returned as success- ful by these men. As regards the number, I see no reason whatever for disbelieving it; indeed, I have no doubt that it is below the number operated on, because the men making their reports only some time after the cases have been done in all probability return only the successful ones, considering, as the persons operated on would also do, that the vacci- nation had not been performed at all, unless some result was obtained; again, not being paid for their services, there is no inducement for them to make a false return ; and when- ever I have inspected them I have always found a number corresponding with the reports made previously. Value of the vacci- nation. &quot;As regards the value of this vaccination as a preventive to small-pox, it is, perhaps easy to form a fair opinion ; but as yet no cases of the disease occurring after recovery from vaccination have come to my notice, and as many of the people, especially the upper classes, are still bitter opponents of it, I think, if this had happened, and as small-pox is so large- ly prevalent, it most probably would occur, I should certainly have been made aware of it; at any rate, I feel certain from the result of my own inspections that it is fully equal to ordinary dispensary vaccination. Reasons for believ- ing in the trust- worthiness of the ex-inoculators. &quot;As to the trustworthiness of the inoculators within the municipal district, the Inoculation Act is in force, but beyond it there was nothing, but the discouragement given by the sub-divisional officers and police to prevent inoculation being carried on, yet these only two instances have come to my knowledge where these men have certainly employed inoculation instead of vaccination, and of these one was the case of a man who had received authority from a sub-divisional officer to vaccinate, but had not been supplied with the necessary material. Within municipal boundaries, where the Act is in force, five cases were detected in which, undoubtedly, small-pox followed immediately after operations by three inoculators, and these men were prosecuted summarily and punished, and their proceedings put a stop to ; this was at the end of the season, when the heat had greatly increased, and vaccination was becoming difficult; and as all these men had previously employed fine vac- cination, it seems quite probable that it was rather the fact of finding their stock of vac- cine lymph failing in effect in consequence of the heat, than a wilful intention to break the law; another evidence of this is the absence of a desire on the part of the parents of these children for inoculation in preference to vaccination ; again, these cases were brought forward by the police, who were stimulated by the expectation of half the fine imposed being awarded to them to bring forward as many cases as possible, yet these were all they could find; all the deputy magistrates of sub-divisions, the superintendent of police, and subordinate police officers in every portion of the district in which I have been able to make enquiries, and the native doctors, have expressed to me their belief that vaccination only and not inoculation has been practised by these men; and all these officers had been called upon previously to report any instances to the contrary that might come to their notice. A stronger reason than any of these, however, for believing that inoculation has not been practised is the fact that small-pox, though largely prevalent within the muni- cipality, and nearly all over the southern portion of the district, has scarcely appeared in that portion of it north of the Ganges, neither has the disease increased at all in propor- tion to the work of the operators, it having re-commenced some months before it is cus- tomary for them to begin inoculating, and it has not materially declined since their operations were suspended.
76 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Feelings of the peo- ple &quot; As to the feeling of the people, I believe there is a considerable change among them in the town in this respect since the commencement of the season, and less unwilling to submit their children for vaccination than formerly; indeed, their objection to it, as I have frequently found, is not to vaccination only, or a preference for inoculation, but an indifference to both, and an anxiety that their children should go through an attack of small-pox itself while young, in the belief that it is the best means of securing their future immunity from it; as a rule, the upper classes, and those living in towns, are less willing to avail them- selves of vaccination than villages ; thus, at Colgong, where small-pox has been worse than anywhere else, the people have repeatedly refused to adopt it; at Banka, Mudehpoorah and Soopole, the head-quarters of sub-divisions, the same thing has occurred, and still less has been done at Sunbursa, where the chief zemindar, after being repeatedly requested to assist the vaccinators, and having promised to do so by having his own children vaccinated, is stated to have caused them recently to be inoculated. On the other hand, a pleader in the town gave good assistance by collecting and causing a number of children to be vaccinated. personal inspection. &quot; In a district more than 200 miles in length personal inspection of cases must be necessarily very limited, but as far as opportunity offered, I have endeavoured to do so. I have thus seen cases at Mudehpoorah and Soopole, and several villages between these, also at villages around Banka, at Colgong and Peerpointee, besides constant inspection in the town of Bhaugulpore and the municipal district around it. The sub-assistant surgeon and native doctor attached to the police have also been required to inspect it, and the native doctors in charge of dispensaries in the district. &quot; As from the persons employed it was very improbable that accurate returns would be forthcoming,ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 77 Out turn of work small. small-pox afforded. Considering the number of persons employed, the out-turn of work is certainly small. This is accounted for, in a great measure, by the fact that they have to find clients before they can do anything. Judging from the fact that much work was done within the old areas, they appear naturally to prefer keeping up their connections with these to going in search of new ones. As suggested by Dr. Chandra in last year's report, and recommended by the Inspector-General of Hospitals in his general report for the same period, I would beg to urge the necessity of appointing a native superintendent or inspector to look after the work of the vaccinators. It is impossible for the civil surgeon to actively superintend the work; and unless it is so superintended, it is feared that discredit may be brought upon vaccination as an efficient protection against small-pox. With the aid of an efficient superintendent, it is possible that, in future years, matters might so arrange them- selves as to permit of the vaccinators practising within defined areas for which they might be made responsible. &quot;The vaccinators are supported by fees paid by their clients.&quot; Purneah district Purneah District.78 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. of them reverted to inoculation. They were apprehended and punished. The people are opposed to vaccination, unless the zemindar or headman shows the example of accepting it. Inoculation is much practised. The sub-assistant surgeon states that reports of small- pox are constantly received, but on enquiry most of them are found to be untrue. Measles, chicken-pox, and sometimes even urticaria being included by the police under the denomi- nation of chechack. Singbhoom district. Singbhoom DistrictABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 79 instances, the age and the caste have also not been given in the returns sent in, so that the several columns in the return do not agree with the total number vaccinated. I would suggest that blank forms of returns on large sheets of paper, with printed headings in Ben- galee, be supplied for these men, when they are likely to make their returns more com- plete, as in manuscript forms they do not take the trouble to write down the headings properly. Inspection &quot;I could inspect the work of only three sets of vaccinators, visiting 31 villages, and ex- amining 1,578 cases, of these 196 were unsuccessful and 1,382 successful cases. Of the successful cases, 723 were excellent cases of vaccination, the vesicles were well formed and whole, but the remaining 659 cases were somewhat indifferent, as the vesicles had burst, either of themselves or by being scratched and rubbed over with turmeric or tamarind by the people themselves. The inoculators are at a disadvantage regarding the success of their operations, as the people do prefer to see the tika turn into sores and have a well marked and large sized indentation on the skin, and rub the vesicles over with all kinds of filth and irritating substances. Work of catechists Work done in civil station. &quot; Besides these brahmin tekaits, four native catechists of the German Lutheran Mis- sion were by permission of their pastor, the Rev. A. Nottrott, taught vaccination in order to vaccinate the native christians in their own villages. I have received returns from two of the catechists, who have performed 75 operations, with 51 successful and 24 unsuccess- ful cases. I have shown their work separately in the return, from which it will be seen that they have vaccinated more among heathens than among christians. Next season I expect to instruct some more of these catechists in vaccination. The vaccination at the civil station was also satisfactory during the year as regards numbers. Taking advantage of a threatened outbreak of small-pox by the occurrence of a few cases, the whole station was vaccinated. The result was, that 701 persons were vaccinated, with 441 successful, 141 unsuccessful and doubtful, and 119 unknown cases. The large number of unsuccessful cases was owing to the first supply of lymph having turned out bad. The subsequent sup- ply which I received from the North-Western Provinces was very good lymph. Half the working season was again lost last season for want of a sufficient quantity of crusts to supply the tekaits with. One of the inoculators was employed to vaccinate at Chyebassa, and he vaccinated 237 persons, with 181 successful and 31 unsuccessful and doubtful cases, the result in the remaining 25 being unknown. By sanction of the deputy commissioner he received a remuneration of Rs. 24 from the town fund. Small-pox &quot; Four cases of small-pox occurred at Chyebassa in the sudder bazaar. This was taken advantage of, as before mentioned, to carry out vaccination throughout the civil station. The disease did not spread. There were reports of many cases of small-pox by the police, but on examination all these turned out to be chicken-pox. &quot; In the month of January a report was received from the police out-post Kokpara, 60 miles east of Chyebassa, of the occurrence of one case of small-pox. &quot; The dresser attached to the dispensary was sent out to vaccinate at the locality, and he sent in from time to time returns of his work, from which it appeared that vaccination was proceeding very satisfactorily, as, with few exceptions, all the cases were returned as successful. On afterwards inspecting his work all the cases were found to have been unsuc- cessful, false returns having been submitted by him. He was dismissed. Fortunately, there was no outbreak of small-pox, and with the exception of the solitary case reported as small-pox no report of further cases was received. &quot; The returns submitted by the dresser have not been shown in the present return.&quot; Maunbboom dis- trict. Employment of in- oculators. Maunbhoom District.80 ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. Work. &quot;During last vaccinating season, 27 tekaits performed 6,516 operations in 128 villages, situated in 16 different pergunnahs, and I verified the same; the results of which verifica- tion are given below :ABSTRACTS OF REPORTS OF CIVIL SURGEONS. 81 &quot; The second point to which I wish to draw your attention is, that very few high-caste people have had their children vaccinated, as ½ 9/6 ths of the vaccinated children seen by me were of low caste. I think everything should be done in order to induce men of high caste, especially those of position and influence, to accept vaccination, and encourage others to do the same. I have spoken to a few native gentlemen on the subject occasion- ally, and they have politely assured me that they would have had their household vaccinated, but for a marriage, or a birth, or a death, or, in fact, excuses are never wanting, and this sort of thing goes on season after season. Why these domestic matters should be going on at the vaccinating time of the year has not been explained to me, nor am I likely to get a true explanation, I imagine. Fees &quot; The third point is the question of fees. In many places this is still a disputed point, as the tekaits claim more for vaccinating a boy than for a girl, viz., four annas for the former, and two annas for the latter. I advised the parents to pay an uniform rate of six pice for each successfully vaccinated child of either sex ; or, if they preferred it, to pay the inoculating fees whatever they were. From all I have heard on the subject, it seems to me that whilst, on one hand, the tekaits ask too much, considering that the operation is extremely simple, and that it costs the operator nothing, the people, on the other hand, though comparatively poor, wish to give too little, considering the benefit of having their children protected from small-pox. In a few instances, the ex-inoculators receive from well-to-do people good presents of rice, cloth, &c, but this does not seem to compensate them for any shortcomings from other people who are too poor to afford more than a regulation fee. To give force to his argument of charging a high fee, a tekait has sometimes told people that the process of vaccinating has cost him &quot; much money.&quot; This is a palpable falsehood, so far as the lancet and vaccine crusts are concerned. If he expended anything in making poojah, in the belief that such a ceremony would enhance the efficacy of the little operation, he has spent his money for nought, and ought to be the loser. Then, as regards his wish to charge more for vaccinating a boy than a girl, I have explained to several people that this is a fancy charge, because there is no more trouble (and certainly no ex- pense) in vaccinating a male than a female child. &quot; As stated in my several reports, the operations were, generally speaking, well-per- formed, and I had seldom any fault to find, except with the man who made three punctures on each arm, and another man who made gashes. &quot; Between 17th November last, and 1st instant, I have, as my various inspection reports have shown, made 22 visits in the interior of the district, the time occupied in travelling having been 56 days, and the distance travelled 1,560 miles. 21
STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 83 TABLE A. Summary of vaccination performed by the General Vaccine Establishment and Vaccination Circles under the Government of Bengal, and by the establishments attached to civil stations or dispensaries, from 1st April 1872 to 31st March 1873. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Circle. Parts comprised in the Circle. Total number of persons vaccinated. Primary vaccination. Re-vaccination Percentage of successful cases excluding those unknown from the total Paid by the State Paid from other sources. Total cost. Cost of each successful case. Primary vaccina- tion Re-vaccination. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful. Unknown. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful and doubtful Unknown. Total In primary. In secondary. Chowringhee Depôt (1) Calcutta .. .. .. .. .. 390 .... 390 390 .... .... 390 .... .... .... .... 100 .... 7,853 6 3 3,708 0 0 11,561 6 3 0 10 1 Park Street Dispensary (1) Ditto .. .. .. .. .. 8 .... 8 8 .... .... 8 .... .... .... .... 100 .... Medical College .. (2) Ditto .. .. .. .. .. 64 2 66 29 .... 35 64 .... .... 2 2 100 .... North Division .. In the town and suburbs of Calcutta .. .. .. .. 145 .... 145 142 2 1 145 .... .... .... ... 98.61 .... Middle 84 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE Statement showing particulars of vaccination in each division of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 CIRCLE. Name and rank of Superintendent. Number of Native Super- intendents, head vacci- nators Number of vaccinators Total number of persons vaccinated Collectorate, Political Agency, or Native .State in which vacci- nations were performed during the year. Population in area included in last column. Name of portion of district or of town. 1872-73. 1871-72 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73 1871-72. North Division. Town .. .. Surgeon T E Charles, M D , Superintendent-General. 1 1 4 4 145 1,894 In the town and suburbs of Calcutta. Calcutta 447,601 North Divi- sion. Suburbs .. .. 1 1 3 3 .. 1,356 Middle Division. Total .. 2 2 7STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 85 No. I. Superintendence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, during the year 1872-73. 9 10 11 12 Primary vaccinations. Re-vaccination. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total. Average number of per- sons vaccinated by each vaccinator. A. B C. D. A. B. C. D. Sex. Casta. Age Results. Total. Successful. Unsuccessful, in- cluding those &quot;doubtful&quot; * Unknown. Total. Males. Females. Christian Hindoo Mussulman. Other castes. Under 1 year. Above 1 year. Successful. Unsuccessful in- cluding those &quot;doubtful.&quot; Unknown. In primary vaccination In secondary vaccination. 85 60 .. 76 69 .. 40 105 142 2 1 145 .. .. .. .. 98.61 ... 36.25 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... .... .... .... .. .. .. .. .... .... .... 85 60 .. 76 69 .. 40 105 142 2 1 145 .. .. .. .. 98.61 .... 36.25 1,641 1,838 96 2,255 628 .. 935 2,044 2,905 38 36 2,979 17 74 3 94 98.70 18.68 510.16 1,331 1,189 27 1,631 862 .. 780 1,740 2,506 14 .. 2,520 3 17 .. 20 99.44 15 506.60 853 681 .. 1,532 2 .. 388 1,146 1,484 9 41 1,534 2,937 7,946 335 11,218 99.39 26.98 .. 3,825 3,208 123 5,418 1,492 .. 2,103 4,930 6,895 61 77 7,033 2,957 8,037 338 11,332 99.12 26.89 508.54 1,051 873 236 846 842 .. 447 1,477 1,924 ... .. 1,924 144 1,294 .. 1,438 100 10.1 672.40 2,767 2,441 20 3,513 1,675 .. 650 4,558 5,201 7 .. 5,208 265 1,801 .. 2,066 99.86 12.82 1,454.80 99 96 .. 140 55 .. 10 185 195 .... .. 195 493 1,668 .. 2,161 100 23.29 .. 3,917 3,410 256 4,499 2,572 .. 1,107 6,220 7,320 7 .. 7,327 902 4,763 .. 5,665 99.90 15.92 1,063.60 7,827 6,678 379 9,993 4,133 .. 3,250 11,255 14,357 70 78 § 14,505 3,859 12,800 338 16,997 99.51 || 23.16 779.76 Metropolitan Circles during the year 1872-73. 43,172 40,602 12 38,636 45,126 .. 7,231 76,543 83,613 140 21 a 83,774 22 11 .. 33 99.83 66.66 2,793.23 38,351 36,251 500 35,936 38,166 .. 6,937 67,665 74,066 447 89 b 74,602 41 23 .. 64 99.40 64.06 2,488.66 57,375 51,207 50 94,664 13,868 .. 4,802 103,780 108412 109 61 c 108,582 .. 17 39 56 99.89 .... 3,620.56 138898 128060 562 169236 97,160 .. 18,970 247,988 266091 696 171 266,958 63 51 39 153 99.73 55.26 2,967.48 Darjeeling Circle during the year 1872-73. 8,659 7,810 .. 1,637 14,630 202 710 15,759 16,092 375 57 16,524 .. .. .. .. 97.72 .. 2,744.8 5,350 4,719 2 3,366 6,560 125 251 9,824 9,677 578 51 10,306 .. .. .. .. 94.36 .. 1,679.1 12,781 9,978 .. 9,524 12,954 281 1,742 21,017 22,546 1,207 44 23,797 .. .. .. .. 94.91 .. 3,793.1 3,281 2,856 .. 4,363 1,534 240 348 5,789 5,660 610 156 6,426 .. .. .. .. 90.27 .. 1,022.8 3,558 2,428 .. 2,585 3,151 250 1,263 4,723 4,706 1,239 289 6,234 .. .. .. .. 79.15 .. 1,496.5 5,826 4,918 4 3,068 7,462 210 454 10,290 10,099 671 54 10,824 .. .. .. .. 93.76 .. 1,790.6 1,364 1,048 .. 2,323 .. 89 497 1,915 2,014 322 76 2,412 .. .. .. .. 86.21 .. 804. 16,553 15,264 1 4,663 26,408 745 2,772 29,045 29,901 1,450 466 e 31,817 .. .. .. .. 95.37 .. 5,302.8 57,378 49,021 7 31,529 72,721 d 2,142 8,037 98,362 100695 6,452 1,193 108,340 .. .. .. .. 93.97 .. 2,474.89 Ranchee Circle during the year 1872-73. 18083 16,212 180 10,767 795 22,553 4,079 29,616 31,928 1,583 566 h 34,077 56 160 2 218 95.27 25.92 2,071. 1,027 944 .. 554 12 1,405 109 1,862 1,802 121 48 i 1,971 .. .. .. .. 93.70 .. 975.5 831 611 .. 1,280 123 39 .. 1,442 1,420 21 1 j 1,442 .. .. .. .. 98.54 .. 710.5 8 2 1 4 .. 5 .. 10 .. 10 .. 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19,949 17,769 181 12,605 930 24,002 g 4,788 32,930 35,150 1,735 615 37,500 56 160 2 218 95.29 25.92 1,825.9 Sonthal Pergunnahs Circle during the year 1872-73. 5,970 5,093 27 2,186 439 h8,414 1,226 9,840 10,486 541 39 11,066 4 1 .. 5 95.09 80. 1,845.16 Eastern Bengal Circle during the year 1872-73. 23,442 24,070 3 16,529 30,980 .. 2,768 44,744 47,406 124 1 i 47,531 11 26 .. 37 99.73 29.72 1,320.8 253464 230694 1,159 242078 206363 34,558 39,039 4,45,119 474185 9,618 2,097 4,85,900 3,993 13,038 379 17,410 98.01 23.44 (a) Includes 8 successful and 2 unsuccessful repetition cases, total 10 (g) Includes Coles and some low caste Hindoos. (b) 86 STATISTICAL STATEMENT. A.STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 87 TABLE No. II.88 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. II.STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 89 TABLE No. II.90 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. II.STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 91 TABLE No. III. Statement showing expenditure of Vaccine Department in each Circle of Superintend- ence in the Metropolis, Lower Provinces, Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee, Sonthal Pergunnahs and Eastern Bengal Vaccine Circles, during the year 1872-73. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Circles. Sanctioned. Expended. Total number vaccinat- ed. Percentage of success- ful cases, exclud- ing those unknown from the total. Cost of each successful case, exclud- ing cases of modified suc- cess after re-vaccina- tion. REMARKS. Paid by Government. Rs. As. P. Rs. As. P. R. As P. CALCUTTA AND SUBURBS. Office establishment, at Rs. 102 per mensem ... ... 1,224 0 0 1,147 8 9 3 Superintendents ... ... 5,400 0 0 4,500 0 0 ... ... 3 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each . 360 0 0 360 0 0 ... ... Contingencies, including office rent ... ... ... ... 1,200 0 0 1,079 13 6 ... ... Travelling allowance, &c. ... 1,195 0 0 720 0 0 ... ... Cost of postage labels ... 42 0 0 *46 0 0 ... ... *Drew for Ja- nuary and February 1873, Rs. 11 Total ... 9,430 0 0 7,853 6 3 ... ... Paid by Town Municipality. 3 Head vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem ... 1,980 0 0 (1)1,524 0 0 ... ... 3 Vaccinaors, at Rs. 12 each per mensem .. ... ... 6 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem. ... ... ... 3 Vaccinators, at Rs 8 each per mensem... ... ... Contingencies, at Rs. 18-5-4 per mensem ... ... ... 220 0 0 220 0 0 ... ... Total ... 2,200 0 0 1,744 0 0 ... ... Paid by Suburban Municipality. 3 Head vaccinators, at Rs. 15 each per mensem ... ... 1,764 0 0 1,764 0 0 ... ... 2 Vaccinator, at Rs 12 each per mensem ... ... 7 Vaccinators, at Rs. 10 each per mensem ... ... ... 1 Vaccinator, at Rs. 8 each per mensem ... ... ... Contingencies, at Rs. 16-10-8 per mensem ... ... 200 0 0 200 0 0 ... ... Total ... 1,964 0 0 1,964 0 0 ... ... GRAND TOTAL ... 13,594 0 0 11,561 6 3 31,483 92 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. III.STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 93 TABLE No. III.94 STATISTICAL STATEMENT. TABLE No. IV. Statement showing the results of the year 1872-73, as compared with those of each of the previous five years, in the Metropolis, Metropolitan, Darjeeling, Ranchee, Sonthal Pergunnahs, and Eastern Bengal, Vaccine Circles. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Circles. YEARS. Total number of persons vaccin- ated. Number success- ful. Ratio per cent, success- ful, ex- cluding those &quot;un- known&quot; from the total. NUMBER OF VACCINATORS. Cost of whole vaccine estab- lishment. Cost of tra- velling allow- ances and contingen- cies. Total cost. Cost of each successful case exclud- ing cases of modified suc- cess after re- vaccination. A B. C D. Paid by the State. Paid from other sources Total. Number previ- ously employed as inoculators. Rs As. P Rs. As. P. Rs. As P. Rs. As P. CALCUTTA AND SUBURBS. 1867-68 .. 1868-69 .. 1869-70 .. 22,283 16,089 79.07 3 30 33 10 10,314 0 0 2,899 0 5 13,213 0 5 0 13 1½ 1870-71 .. 19,287 14,020 77.82 3 25 28 10 10,258 0 0 2,520 0 0 12,778 0 0 0 14 6½ 1871-72 .. 20,535 14,014 70.72 3 24 27 10 10,272 0 0 2,370 0 0 12,642 0 0 0 14 5¼ 1872-73 .. 31,483 18,216 58.60 3 24 27 10 9,341 8 9 2,219 13 6 11,561 6 3 0 10 1 METROPOLITAN CIRCLE 1868-69 .. 122,493 121,335 99.42 68 .. 68 .. No Information .. 0 4 1 1869-70 .. 155,825 155,315 99.75 68 .. 68 11 22,831 9 9 7,825 5 1 30,156 14 10 0 3 1 1870-71 .. 140,119 139,639 99.67 66 .. 66 13 26,880 0 0 8,355 0 0 35,235 0 0 0 4 0¼ 1871-72 .. 91,516 90,994 99.55 66 .. 66 9 28,019 2 3 6,916 10 8 34,935 12 11 0 6 1 1872-73 .. 267,074 266,154* 99.72 90 .. 90 19 23,927 3 5 7,870 10 3 31,797 13 8 0 1 10 DARJEELING CIRCLE 1867-68 .. 25,438 22,661 89.99 26 .. 26 .. 13,304 10 8 1,951 15 4 15,256 10 9 0 10 9 1868-69 .. 47,905 42,169 91.59 29 .. 29 12 14,366 9 10 1,371 0 0 15,737 9 10 0 5 11 1869-70 .. 81,444 75,464 93.11 29 8 37 19 15,043 14 8 1,152 10 0 16,197 8 8 0 3 5 1870-71 .. 78,772 74,348 95.20 30 6 36 19 15,885 1 8 1,486 5 8 17,371 7 4 0 3 8 3/4 1871-72 .. 111,709 97,982 81.18 42 3 45 19 16,531 1 7 1,323 2 10 17,854 4 5 0 2 10 1872-73 .. 106,399 100,695 93.97 42 1 43 9 16,578 5 7 1,706 3 4 18,284 8 11 0 2 10 RANCHEE CIRCLE. 1867-68 .. 6,447 5,118 75.70 19 .. 19 .. 1,404 7 4 358 3 4 1,762 10 8 0 5 6 1868-69 .. 7,904 4,618 58.42 20 .. 20 13 8,593 14 1 1,145 0 0 10,148 14 1 2 3 2 1869-70 .. 19,101 16,074 87.54 20 .. 20 8 8,644 5 0 1,055 0 0 9,699 5 0 0 9 7¾ 1870-71 .. 23,313 20,578 92.12 20 .. 20 6 8,066 14 6 979 15 0 9,046 13 6 0 7 0 2/5 1871-72 .. 51,913 47,506 98.10 20 60 80 61 9,083 6 7 994 0 0 10,057 6 7 TABLE No. V.
96 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE Statement showing particulars of Vaccination in each of the three Circles 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Circle of Medical Superintendence. Name and rank of superinten- dent of dispensary. No. of na- tive super- intendents of vaccina- tion attach- ed to the dispensary. No of vac- cinators attached to the dispen- sary. Total number of persons vaccinated. Collectorate, Political agency, or Native state for the population of which the dispensary is provided Population of area included in last column. Name of dispensary. A Sex. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. Males. Females. PRESIDENCY CIRCLE J. G. French, M.D., civil surgeon ... ... 2 1 74 10 Burdwan 2,034,745 Burdwan 63 7 ... ... 1 ... 723 ... Cutwa.. ... ... H. C. Connolly, civil medical officer ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 2,390 1,505 Bancoorah. 526,772 Bancoorah 1,256 1,134 ... ... 1 ... 683 ... 373 310 ... ... 44* ... 10,460 1,423 5,803 4,657 R. A. Barken M. B. , civil medical officer ... ... 1 1 491 261 Beerbhoom. 695,921 Beerbhoom .. 300 191 R. G. Mathew, M. D, civil surgeon ... ... 25 2 32,915 10,132 Midnapore... 2,540,963 Midnapore Ruthgurrah Bazar. 242 109 ... ... 2 1 351 595 R F Thompson, ditto ... ... ... 1 1 2,285 2,037 Hooghly ... 363,635 Hooghly 1,121 841 ... ... ... ... 6 ... Bundipore 6 ... J. Greene, M.D., civil medical officer. ... ... 1 1 858 894 Scrampore ... 393,864 Scrampore 589 269 J. Elliot, M. D., civil surgeon ... ... ... 1 1 1,619 2,207 ... 731,057 Howrah 998 617 K. P. Goopta, M. B., superinten- dent metropolitan circles. ... ... 10 ... 3,657 ... 24-Purgunnahs 2,210,047 Baraset, Sath- khira, Gober- dangnh, Bus- seerhaut, Ka- dahatty, Nye- hatty, Ja- goolce, North and South Su- burban. F. J. Earle, M. D., civil surgeon ... ... 1 ... 509 ... Nuddea ... 1,812,795 Kishnaghur 255 245 ... ... 4 ... 502 ... Chogdoho, San- tipore Beer- nuggur. ... ... 1 ... 105 ... Ranaghaut 64 41 H.C. Bowser, M.D., civil medical officer. ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 1 857 535 Jessore ... ... 2,075,021 Jessore 634 223 ... ... 1 ... 261 ... Jhemdah 143 118 ... ... 1 ... 570 ... Magoorah 345 225 ... ... 1 ... 277 ... Nuldangah 145 132 ... ... 1 ... 194 ... Sreedhurpore 100 94 J. M. Coates, M. D., civil surgeon ... ... 3 3 1,791 1,074 Moorsheda- bad. 1,353,626 Berhampore 1,099 692 ... ... 3 3 683 669 Moorshedabad 398 285 ... ... 1 ... 46 ... Lalgolla 19 27 ... ... 1 1 373 363 Jungipore 197 176 ... ... 1 1 300 149 Jamooakandy 180 120 ... ... 1 1 301 144 Azimgunge 161 140 F. C. Ghose, ditto ... ... ... 1 ... 196 528 Dinagepore 1,501,924 Dinagepore 121 75 ... ... 6* ... 4,474 ... ... ... D. N. Chatterjee, civil medical officer. ... ... ... 1 41 149 Maldah ... 676,426 Maldah 28 15 E. C. Bensley, M. D., civil surgeon ... ... ... ... 63 ... Rajshahye 1,310,729 Beauleah 40 23 ... ... 2a ... 1,550 ... Nattore 789 761 ... ... ... ... 43 ... Kurruchmena 33 10 ... ... ... ... 37 ... Pootea 20 17 ... ... ... ... 767 ... Lallpore 422 345 K.D. Ghose, civil medical officer ... ... 2* ... 140 ... Rungpore 2,149,972 Rungpore ... ... A. Lyons, civil medical officer. ... ... 2 ... 1,543 ... Bograh 689,467 Bograh 779 764 ... ... 12* ... 6,313 ... ... ... H. M. Davis, civil medical officer ... ... 1 1 78 86 Pubna ... 1,211,594 Pubna 40 38 ... ... 1 2 1,267 1,479 Serajgunge 707 560 ... ... ... ... 34 26 Doolye 20 14 H. Cayley, civil surgeon ... ... ... ... 2 2 307 518 Cuttack 1,494,784 Cuttack 190 117 ... ... ... ... 41 21 Jappore 24 8 J. Meredith, officiating civil medical officer ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 154 363 Pooree 769,674 Pooree 72 82 ... ... ... ... 3 ... Khoordah 2 1 V. Richards, civil medical officer ... ... 2 2 341 356 Balasore 770,232 Balasore 230 111 ... ... 1 ... 168 8 Bhuddruck 120 48 Total ... ... ... 84 28 80,841 25,532§ 24,713,248 18,123 13,642 DACCA CIRCLE. J. Wise, M. D., civil surgeon ... ... ... 6 6 2,984 1,925 Dacca 1,852,993 Dacca Mitford Hospital. 1,756 1,228 ... ... 1 ... 245 ... Joinsher ... 125 120 ... ... ... ... 11 ... Mamckgunge 4 7 B. N. Bose, M. D., civil surgeon ... ... ... 1 1 1,234 812 Furreedpore 1,012,589 Furreedpore 741 477 Ayres, civil medical officer ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... Goalundo 5 ... C. E. W. Bensley, civil surgeon ... ... 1 1 1,271 1,770 Backergunge 2,377,438 Backergunge 941 326 11 ... Dowlutkhan 7 4 J. C. Shaw, civil surgeon ... ... ... 1 1 819 416 Mymensing 2,349,917 Mymensing 762 57 ... ... ... 1 52 186 Sherepore 41 11 ... ... ... ... 51 51 Ramgopaulpore 29 22 ... ... ... ... 121 23 Hosseinpore 76 45 ... ... 1 1 855 196 Tangail ... 437 418 (a) Assisted by two extra men employed temporarily. STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 97 No. V. of Medical Superintendence in the Province of Bengal during the year 1872-73. 9 10 11 12 PRIMARY VACCINATION. RE- VACCINATION. Percentage of successful cases, excluding those unknown from the total Average number of persons vaccinated by each vaccinator. B. C D A. B. C D. Caste. Age. Results. Total. Successful Unsuccessful, including those doubtful. Unknown. Total. Christians. Hindoos. Mussulmans. Other castes. Under one year. Above one year. Successful. Unsuccessful, includ- ing those doubtful. Unknown. In primary vaccina- tion. In secondary vacci- nation. ... 61 9 ... ... 70 48 22 ... 70 3 1 ... 4 68.57 75. 37 ... ... ... ... ... ... 707 14 2 723 ... ... ... ... 98.05 ... 723 ... 2,319 71 ... 122 2,268 1,689 701 ... 2,390 ... ... ... ... 70.66 ... 2,390 6 633 44 ... 36 647 491 192 ... 683 ... ... ... ... 71.88 ... 683 ... 10,403 57 ... 107 10,353 8,873 1,587 ... 10,460 ... ... ... ... 84.82 ... 237.72 3 474 14 ... 20 471 332 110 45 487 4 ... ... 4 75.11 100. 491. No information. ... ... ... ... 32,915 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1316.6 ... 321 30 ... ... 351 344 7 ... 351 ... ... ... ... 98 ... 1,755 20 1,131 730 81 568 1,394 1,765 175 22 1,962 106 201 16 323 90.98 34.52 2,285 ... 5 1 ... 1 5 ... 6 ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... By native doctor 9 827 22 ... 25 833 858 ... ... 858 ... ... ... ... 100. ... 868. 44 1,348 223 ... 326 1,289 1,551 37 27 1,615 4 ... ... 4 97.67 100. 1619. ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,615 22 20 3,657 ... ... ... ... 99.39 ... 365.7 58 240 202 ... 30 470 498 2 ... 500 8 1 ... 9 99.6 88.88 509 ... ... ... ... ... ... 501 1 ... 502 ... ... ... ... 99.8 ... 125.5 ... 78 27 ... 40 65 105 ... ... 105 ... ... ... ... 100. ... 105 41 357 459 ... 135 722 780 77 ... 857 ... ... ... ... 91.01 ... 171.4 ... 110 151 ... ... 261 221 40 ... 261 ... ... ... ... 84.67 ... 261. 3 383 184 ... 51 519 554 16 ... 570 ... ... ... ... 97.19 ... 570 ... 100 155 22 18 259 275 2 ... 277 ... ... ... ... 99.27 ... 277 ... 114 80 ... 13 181 187 ... ... 187 5 2 ... 7 100. 71.43 194 ... 850 831 110 200 1,591 1,470 183 138 1,791 ... ... ... ... 88.92 ... 150 6 250 427 ... 39 644 628 47 8 683 ... ... ... ... 93.03 ... 227 ... 20 26 ... 2 44 46 ... ... 46 ... ... ... ... 100. ... 46 ... 281 91 1 48 325 346 27 ... 373 ... ... ... ... 92.76 ... 373 ... 237 63 ... 29 271 277 22 ... 299 ... 1 ... 1 92.64 ... 300 ... 200 59 42 14 287 260 29 12 301 ... ... ... ... 89.96 ... 301 1 63 109 23 3 193 149 9 38 196 ... ... ... ... 94.30 ... 196 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,474 ... ... ... ... 90.55 ... 6 By civil medical officer. ... 32 6 ... 1 37 25 l8 ... 38 8 ... ... 3 65.78 100. 35 98 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Circle of Medical Superintendence. Name and rank of superinten- dent of dispensary. No. of na- tive super- intendents of vaccina- tion attach- ed to the dispensary. No, of vac- cinators attached to the dispen- sary. Total number of persons vaccinated Collectorate, Political agency, or Native state for the population of which the dispensary is provided. Population of area included in last column. Name of dispensary. A. Sex. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. 1872-73. 1871-72. Males Females. DACCA CIRCLESTATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 99 No. V.100 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. VI. LOCALITY. Class of persons examined. Number ex- amined. Inoculated. Per cent. of total ex- amined. Vaccinated. Per cent. of total ex- amined. Had small- pox. Per cent. of total ex- amined. Unprotected. Per cent. of total ex- amined Burdwan ... ... Burdwan ... ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... 209 142 67.94 16 7.66 39 18.66 12 5.74 Chuckdighee ... ... ... School boys ... ... ... 65 26 40. 20 30.77 1 1.54 18 27.67 Villagers ... ... ... ... 315 117 37.14 72 22.86 25 7.94 101 32.05 Bancoorah ... ... ... ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... 1,406 1,198 85.21 ... ... 105 7.47 103 7.32 Beerbhoom ... ... ... ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... 342 265 77.48 28 8.19 33 9.65 16 4.68 Boys of Government school ... 282 130 46.10 55 19.50 14 4.97 83 29.43 Ditto Vernacular school ... 180 60 33.33 40 22.22 15 8.34 65 36.11 Girls' Mission school ... ... 38 ... ... 22 57.89 11 28.95 5 13.16 Village Teelpara ... ... 584 556 ... 10 1.71 23 3.94 15 2.57 Ditto Hossenabad ... ... 647 456 70.48 ... ... 3 .46 188 29.06 Midnapore ... Ruthgurah Bazaar ... ... Mahomedans ... ... ... 321 72 22.43 2 .62 149 46.42 98 30.53 Hindoos ... ... ... ... 929 576 62. 124 13.35 129 13.89 100 10.76 24-Pergunnahs ... Alipore, Bhowampore, Garden Reach ... ... ... ... Dispensary patients ... ... 4,191 910 21.71 773 18.44 1,618 38.61 890 21.24 Baraset, Busseerhaut, Gober- dangah, Satkhirah ... ... Ditto ... ... 3,488 2,473 70.90 496 14.22 244 7.00 275 7.88 Nuddea ... ... Kishnaghur ... ... ... Dispensary patients ... ... 863 856 90.19 7 .81 ... ... ... ... Chooadangah ... ... ... Hindoos ... ... ... ... 497 405 81.49 38 7.65 21 4.22 33 6.64 Mussulmans ... ... ... 1,706 1,582 92.73 48 2.81 7 .4l 69 4.05 Other castes ... ... ... 29 14 48.28 7 24.14 5 17.24 3 10.34 Santipore ... ... ... ... Dispensary patients ... ... 294 99 33.67 131 44.57 19 6.46 15 15.30 Jessore ... Jessore ... ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... ... 536 354 66.04 1 .19 68 12.69 113 21.08 Jhenidah ... ... ... ... Brahmins ... ... ... 524 405 77.29 ... ... 43 8.21 76 14.50 Kyasths ... ... ... ... 523 428 81.84 ... ... 35 6.69 60 11.47 Nobosaks ... ... ... 345 269 77.97 ... ... 18 5.22 58 16.81 Other hindoos ... ... ... 569 413 72.58 ... ... 43 7.56 113 19.86 Mussulmans ... ... ... 741 533 71.93 ... ... 53 7.15 155 20.92 Sreedhurpore ... ... ... School boys ... ... ... 50 44 88. 5 10 ... ... 1 2 Cultivators ... ... ... 50 47 94. ... ... 2 4. 1 2 Moorshedabad ... Berhampore ... ... ... School boys ... ... ... 165 113 68.49 42 25.45 5 3.03 5 3.03 Prisoners ... ... ... 291 259 89. 1 .34 19 6.53 12 4.13 Moorsbedabad ... ... ... Hindoos ... ... ... ... 248 98 39.51 18 7.26 80 32.26 52 20.97 Mahomedans ... ... ... 824 208 25.24 210 25.49 280 33.98 126 15.29 Jungipore ... ... ... ... Villagers ... ... ... ... 1,015 592 58.33 373 36.75 11 1.08 39 3.84 Jumooa Kandi ... ... ... Hindoos ... ... ... ... 324 166 51.24 21 6.48 7 2.16 130 40.12 Mussulmans ... ... ... 24 6 25. 4 16.67 4 16.67 10 41.66 Azimgunge ... ... ... ... Patshala scholars ... ... 84 30 35.71 14 16.67 4 4.76 36 42.86 Maldah ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dispensary patients ... ... 1,179 748 63.44 154 13.06 153 12.98 124 10.52 Prisoners ... ... ... 801 671 83.77 22 2.75 78 9.74 30 3.74 School boys ... ... ... 2,127 1,618 76.07 81 3.81 77 3.62 351 16.50 Rajshahye ... Beauleah ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... 1,016 775 76.28 91 8.96 97 9.55 53 5.21 Jail establishment ... ... 12 6 50. 1 8.33 5 41.67 ... ... Kurruchmeria ... ... ... Hindoos ... ... ... ... 86 47 54.65 21 24.42 ... ... 18 20.93 Mussulmans ... ... ... 37 16 43.24 8 21.62 ... ... 13 35.14 Pooteah ... ... ... Middle class ... ... ... 162 85 52.47 38 23.46 5 3.08 34 20.99 Lower class ... ... ... 667 543 81.41 98 14.69 8 1.20 18 2.70 Rungpore ... Rungpore ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... ... 342 260 73.03 6 1.75 29 8.48 47 13.74 Dispensary patients ... ... 246 115 46.75 35 14.23 4 1.62 92 37.40 School boys ... ... ... 280 123 43.93 100 35.72 21 7.50 36 12.85 Villagers ... ... ... ... 1,267 702 55.41 277 21.86 88 6.95 200 15.78 Battashim ... ... ... Zemindaree schools ... ... 100 60 60. ... ... 20 20 20 20 Oohpore ... ... ... School boys ... ... ... 42 22 52.38 7 16.67 2 4.76 11 26.19 Dispensary patients ... ... 62 45 72.58 ... ... 7 11.29 19 16.18 Villagers ... ... ... ... 55 35 63.63 2 3.64 5 9.09 13 24.61 Bograh ... ... Bograh ... ... ... ... School boys ... ... ... 74 32 43.24 21 28.39 1 1.35 20 27.02 Prisoners ... ... ... 598 416 69.58 55 9.19 65 10.87 62 10.36 Villagers ... ... ... ... 490 259 52.86 183 37.34 29 5.92 19 3.88 Dispensary patients ... ... 83 43 51.81 30 36.14 1 1.21 9 10.84 Nowkhilla ... ... ... Lower class people ... ... 47 14 29.79 3 6.38 9 19.15 21 44.65 Sherepore ... ... ... Dispensary patients 12 7 58.34 1 8.33 8 25. 1 8.83 Pubn ... ... Pubna ... ... ... ... Villagers ... ... ... ... 125 58 46.40 31 24.80 10 8. 26 20.80 School boys ... ... ... 100 78 78. 8 8. 2 2. 12 12 Police ... ... ... ... 50 28 56. 2 4. 19 38. 1 2 Prisoners ... ... ... ... 100 90 90. 1 1. 6 6. 3 3 Doolye ... ... ... ... Population ... ... ... 125 58 46.40 31 24.80 10 8. 26 20.80 Cuttack ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... 752 523 69.55 12 1.60 193 25.66 24 3.19 Lunatic asylum ... ... 48 28 58.33 3 6.25 17 35.42 ... ... School boys ... ... ... 428 269 62.85 17 3.97 115 26.87 27 6.31 Pooree ... ... ... ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... ... 63 22 34.92 18 28.57 23 36.51 Government schools ... ... 119 26 21.85 8 6.72 63 52.94 22 18.49 Station ... ... ... ... 20 6 30. 3 15. 11 55. Balasore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Prisoners ... ... ... 161 129 80.12 9 5.59 18 11.18 5 3.11 School boys ... ... ... 114 96 84.21 9 7.89 2 1.76 7 6.14 Villagers ... ... ... ... 1,839 1,317 71.61 70 3.81 29 1.58 423 23. Dacca ... ... Dacca ... ... ... ... Patients ... ... ... ... 956 711 74.37 41 4.29 109 11.40 95 9.94 Kalipara ... ... ... ... Population ... ... ... 470 351 74.68 2 .43 12 2.55 105 22.34 Dacca Circle ... ... ... Villagers ... ... ... ... 18,390 11,848 64.74 4,642 25.36 697 3.81 1,113 6.09
STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. 101 TABLE No. VI.102 STATISTICAL STATEMENTS. TABLE No. VII. Deaths registered from Small-pox in the Districts of the Lower Provinces, during each month of the year 1872 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Number. Circle. Division. DISTRICT. Population according to census of 1872. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Total. Deaths per 1,000 of population. 1 WESTERN. Burdwan. Burdwan ... ... ... 2,034,745 5 2 9 4 1 3 13 6 1 2 ... 1 47 .02 2 Bancoorah ... ... ... 526,772 3 ... ... ... ... 17 ... 3 ... ... ... ... 23 .04 3 Beerbhoom ... ... ... 695,921 5 5 5 3 9 2 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 32 .05 4 Midnapore ... ... ... 2,540,963 3 2 15 4 5 3 1 5 6 14 8 23 89 .02 5 Hooghly ... ... ... 363,635 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 4 .01 6 Serampore ... ... ... 393,864 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 ... 4 .01 7 Howrah ... ... ... 731,057 ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... 1 ... 3 .004 Total ... 7,286,957 16 10 30 11 15 26 17 14 12 16 11 24 202 .03 8 Presi- dency 24-Pergunnahs ... ... 2,210,047 6 3 3 2 6 11 ... 2 ... ... ... 4 37 .02 9 Nuddea ... ... 1,812,795 3 2 12 16 6 5 5 34 ... 3 23 13 122 .07 10 Jessoro ... ... ... 2,075,021 18 4 20 14 17 15 15 14 9 ... 8 11 145 .07 Total ... 6,097,863 27 9 35 32 29 31 20 50 9 3 31 28 304 .05 11 CENTRAL. Rajshahye. Moorshedabad ... ... 1,353,626 ... ... 3 14 15 4 1 12 2 2 1 2 56 .04 12 Dinagepore ... ... ... 1,501,924 ... 1 10 ... 4 1 ... ... ... ... 24 4 44 .03 13 Maldah ... ... ... 676,426 ... 1 1 4 3 ... 2 ... 4 ... ... 5 20 .03 14 Rajshahye ... ... ... 1,310,729 6 56 17 13 19 8 3 ... ... ... ... ... 122 .09 15 Rungpore ... ... ... 2,149,972 19 1 3 4 1 6 3 43 6 ... ... 7 93 .04 16 Bograh ... ... ... 689,467 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 2 .003 17 Pubna ... ... ... 1,211,594 2 4 9 18 13 15 17 6 1 ... ... 1 86 .07 Total ... 8,893,738 27 63 43 53 55 34 28 61 13 2 25 19 423 .05 18 Cooch Behar. Darjeeling ... ... ... 94,712 ... ... ... ... 1 2 4 3 1 ... ... ... 11 .12 19 Julpigoree ... ... ... 418,665 2 ... ... 9 1 ... ... 2 1 6 ... 6 27 .07 Total ... 513,377 2 ... ... 9 2 2 4 5 2 6 ... 6 38 .07 20 EASTERN. Dacca. Dacca ... ... ... 1,852,993 2 5 16 5 4 2 3 1 13 1 7 3 62 .03 21 Purreedporo ... ... ... 1,012,589 ... 4 2 ... 3 3 5 1 2 ... ... ... 20 .02 22 Backergunge ... ... ... 2,377,433 2 23 13 14 12 12 6 3 5 3 2 6 101 .04 23 Mymensing ... ... ... 2,349,917 9 4 1 27 9 7 7 6 8 5 2 11 96 .04 24 Sylhet ... ... ... ... 1,719,539 ... ... 2 1 5 1 1 2 ... ... ... ... 12 .007 25 Cachar ... ... ... ... 205,027 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... 2 ... 9 .04 Total ... 9,517,498 15 36 35 47 33 25 25 14 28 9 13 20 300 .03 26 Chitta- gong. Chittagong ... ... ... 1,127,402 2 11 19 9 3 ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 45 .04 27 Noakhally ... ... ... 713,934 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 .003 28 Tipperah ... ... ... 1,533,931 1 ... 2 3 1 5 2 ... ... ... 5 4 23 .01 Total ... 3,375,267 3 12 22 12 4 5 2 ... 1 ... 5 4 70 .02 29 BEHAR. Palna. Patna ... ... ... ... 1,559,638 12 5 39 39 43 19 24 14 6 ... 6 2 209 .13 30 Gyah ... ... ... ... 1,949,750 6 5 28 57 89 67 40 40 7 1 33 6 379 .19 31 Shahabad ... ... ... 1,723,974 ... ... 11 32 17 53 11 56 24 23 1 7 235 .13 32 Tirhoot ... ... ... ... 4,384,706 7 18 9 28 33 40 9 16 8 2 3 12 185 .04 33 Sarun 2,063,860 19 15 23 40 54 58 32 9 9 3 10 8 280 .13 34 Chumparun 1,440,815 2 4 7 20 79 74 27 18 10 2 1 1 245 .17 Total 13,122,743 46 47 117 216 315 311 143 153 64 31 54 36 1,533 .11 35 Bhaugul- pore Monghyr ... ... ... ... 1,812,986 6 5 18 43 16 33 31 9 ... ... ... 1 162 .09 36 Bhaugulpore ... ... ... ... 1,826,290 2 4 24 66 15 12 7 7 1 1 15 20 174 .09 37 Purneah ... ... ... ... 1,714,795 2 16 4 ... 11 2 ... ... 3 1 4 ... 43 .02 38 Rajmehal ... ... ... ... 190,890 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... 39 Deoghur S. P. ... 1,068,397 6 ... 8 8 36 6 3 4 2 5 ... ... 78 .07 Total ... 6,613,358 16 25 54 117 78 53 41 20 6 7 19 21 457 .06 40 ORIS- SA. Orissa Cuttack ... ... ... ... 1,494,784 63 78 66 28 15 6 9 2 1 4 ... 2 274 .18 41 Pooree ... ... ... ... 769,674 3 5 10 6 7 17 1 3 3 ... 2 6 63 .08 42 Balasore ... ... ... ... 770,232 2 5 1 4 ... 4 10 ... 2 ... ... ... 28 .03 Total ... 3,034,690 68 88 77 38 22 27 20 5 6 4 2 8 365 .12 43 SOUTH-WEST FRONTIER AGENCY. Chota Nagpore. Hazareebaugh ... ... ... ... 771,875 1 3 8 6 52 30 31 1 5 1 11 18 167 .21 44 Lohardugga ... ... ... ... 1,237,123 5 1 2 13 14 20 12 3 ... ... 4 4 78 .06 45 Singbhoom ... ... ... ... 415,023 3 ... 6 1 2 1 ... 2 6 8 3 ... 32 .08 46 Maunbhoom ... ... ... ... 995,570 ... 1 3 8 8 2 ... 1 ... ... 2 ... 25 .02 Total ... 3,419,591 9 5 19 28 76 53 43 7 11 9 20 22 302 .09 47 Assam Goalparah ... ... ... 444,761 6 7 17 10 5 21 1 ... ... 1 ... 9 77 .17 48 Kamroop ... ... ... 561,681 9 8 6 9 23 4 12 27 11 13 3 12 137 .24 49 Durrung ... ... ... ... 236,009 16 20 30 21 55 7 16 2 5 ... ... 5 177 .75 50 Nowgong ... ... ... ... 256,390 1 3 ... 10 5 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 1 22 .08 51 Seebsaugor ... ... ... ... 296,589 1 5 6 33 13 26 7 7 ... 1 1 10 110 .37 52 Luckhimpore ... ... ... 121,267 1 3 ... 2 ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 8 .06 53 Khasi and Jynteah Hills 141,838 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... Total ... 2,058,735 34 46 59 85 101 58 38 36 18 15 4 37 531 .25 GRAND TOTAL ... 63,933,617 263 341 491 648 730 625 381 365 170 102 184 225 4,525 .07 C. J. JACKSON, M.D., Offg. Sanitary Commissioner for Bengal.
RESOLUTION. JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. MEDICAL. Calcutta, the 15th November 1873. READ( 2 ) 4. The average cost of each successful case was 2 annas 5 pie against 4 annas 2 pie the year before. Part of the decrease is accounted for by the pay of superintending officers having, in some instances, been in abeyance; but on the whole the improvement is satisfactory and marked everywhere, save in Ranchee, where the average cost has slightly increased. The actual expenditure of the year is put at Rs. 78,286-12-5. 5. Calcutta and Suburbs.( 3 ) 8. Ranchee Circle.( 4 ) 13. The Lieutenant-Governor concurs generally with Dr. Brown in the praise awarded by him to most of the Superintendents of Circles, and to those Civil Surgeons who have taken an active interest in this branch of their work. His Honor hopes that the returns of the current season may continue the high standard now attained. 14. The Lieutenant-Governor has again to thank Dr. Brown and his Secretary for much valuable advice and assistance and for a very clear and useful report. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, A. MACKENZIE, Junior Secretary to the Govt. of Bengal. No. 4635. COPY forwarded to the Surgeon-General, Indian Medical Department, for information and guidance. No. 4636. COPY forwarded to all Commissioners for information and guidance. By order of the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, A. MACKENZIE, Offg. Secretary to the Govt. of Bengal. CALCUTTA,The 15th November 1873. D. E. J.
