kTyneside
Belfast
Preston
Blackp<
Liverp<
Greater
Manchester
:tingham
West
Midlan
Coventry
Luton
^outhend
Greater
London
Aldershot
Portsmouth Br'!|h,on
Plymouth
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Hull
®
Population density
(persons per sq km)
over 750
450-749
250-449
150-249
75-149
under 75
The density of population is shown by county
for England and Wales, by region for Scotland
and by Education and Library Board areas for
Northern Ireland.
Population density
and major urban areas
Major urban areas
over 500,000
population
Greater London
West Midlands
Greater Manchester
West Yorkshire
Tyneside
Glasgow
Liverpool
Sheffield
Nottingham
Bristol
7,430,000
2,320,000
2,300,000
1,450,000
770,000
745,000
740,000
630,000
588,000
510,000
200,000-499,000
population
100,000-199,000
population
Bournemouth
i 1 1 1
0 20 40 60 miles
® W-
Medway Towns
Urban areas are defined as continuous
built-up sites; they include transport
and mining and quarrying areas and
any areas completely surrounded
by built-up sites. Most of the
named urban areas are
designated by the
largest town
within them.
Glasgow
An Official Handbook
An Official Handbook
Prepared by the Central Office of Information
LONDON: HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
© Crown copyright 1985
First published 1985
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
Government Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London WC1V 6HB
13a Castle Street, Edinburgh EH2 3AR
Brazennose Street. Manchester M60 8AS
Southey House, Wine Street, Bristol BS1 2BQ
258 Broad Street, Birmingham B1 2HE
80 Chichester Street, Belfast BT1 4JY
Government publications are also available
through booksellers
Obtainable in the United States of America
from Bernan Associates,
9730-E George Palmer Highway,
Lanham, Maryland, 20706
<c‘
■z
c>
'/V • 0^
ISBN 0 11 701277 7
S C 0/
Contents
Page
Introduction viji
1 Land and People I
Introduction
The Four Lands 4
Physical Features 18
The Social Framework 1 g
2 Government 29
The Monarchy 29
Parliament 32
The Privy Council 45
Her Majesty’s Government 45
Government Departments 49
The Civil Service 55
Local Government 59
The Fire Services 65
3 Overseas Relations gy
Membership of the European Community 69
The Commonwealth 74
International Peace and Security 77
Britain and the United Nations 80
Other International Organisations 82
Development Co-operation 82
4 Defence 89
Defence Procurement 95
Civil Defence 96
5 Justice and the Law 97
The Law 97
Criminal Justice 97
Civil Justice jjg
Administration of the Law 117
6 Social Welfare j 21
National Health Service 121
Personal Social Services 130
Social Security 133
Voluntary Social Services 14!
7 Education J44
The Youth Service 2 58
8 The Environment j g 1
Planning 161
Housing 165
Conservation 17 ^
Control of Pollution
9 The Churches
181
10 National Economy
11 Framework of Industry
12 Manufacturing and Service Industries
Manufacturing
Construction
Service Industries
13 Energy and Natural Resources
Energy
Non-fuel Minerals
Water
14 Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Agriculture
Fisheries
Forestry
15 Transport and Communications
Inland Transport
Ports
Shipping
Civil Aviation
Communications
16 Employment
17 Public Finance
18 Banking and Financial Institutions
19 Overseas Trade
20 Promotion of Science and Technology
21 Promotion of the Arts
22 The Press
23 Television and Radio
24 Sport and Recreation
Appendix 1
Currency
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1985
Appendix 2
Guide to Sources
185
193
211
211
232
233
241
241
258
260
263
263
272
274
277
277
286
288
290
294
299
315
325
335
345
357
371
379
387
401
401
401
402
403
403
405
Index
Diagrams
Availability of Certain Durable Goods 25
The Royal Family 3 j
Final Expenditure at Market Prices in 1983 189
Components of Consumers’ Expenditure in 1973 and 1983 191
Primary Energy Consumption 242
Aircraft and Helicopters Operated by British Airways in March 1984 292
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1983 337
Maps
Physical features
Population density and major urban areas
Major conservation and recreation areas
Motorways and major trunk roads
Britain
The European Community
New Towns
Enterprise Zones
Oil
Gas
Coal
Electricity
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
Main Railway Passenger Routes
endpapers
5
69
163
166
245
248
251
255
259
284
Photographs
Town and country
Computers at home and school
Liverpool’s International Garden Festival
Environmental protection
Electronic summit
Tension leg platform
Solar power and the solar system
Plastics and glass technology
Sporting records
Recreation
Theatre and film
The arts
between pp 8 and 9
y between pp 136 and 137
>■ between pp 264 and 265
> between pp 360 and 361
Acknowledgment is made for photographs to: the British Tourist Authority and
the Northern Ireland Tourist Board for Town and Country’ (between pp 8 and 9):
Keith McLuckie for computers in school (facing p 136); British business for
videotex terminals (facing p 264); ALL-SPORT Photographic Limited for Tessa
Sanderson (facing p 360); London Television Service for Richard Noble and
Thrust 2 (facing p 360); Techno-Sunley Leisure Limited for Fulham swimming
pool (between pp 360 and 361); David Crosswaite for Starlight Express (between
pp 360 and 361); Welsh Channel 4 for SuperTed (between pp 360 and 361); and
the National Portrait Gallery for D. H. Lawrence (facing p 361).
Introduction
Britain 1985 is the thirty-sixth official handbook in the series; it has
been prepared by the Central Office of Information on behalf of the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office. The handbook is widely known as
an established work of reference and is the mainstay of the reference
facilities provided by British information services in many countries. It
is sold by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office throughout the world.
Britain 1985 describes many features in the life of the country,
including the workings of the Government and other major institu¬
tions. It does not attempt an analytical approach to current events.
Care should be taken when studying British statistics to note whether
they refer to England, to England and Wales (considered together for
many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which
comprises England, Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom
(which is the same as Britain, that is, Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) as a whole.
The factual and statistical information in Britain 1985 is compiled with
the co-operation of other government departments and agencies, and of
many other organisations. Sources of more detailed and more topical
information (including statistics) are mentioned in the text and a guide
to official sources is given in Appendix 2.
The text, generally, is based on information available up to August
1984.
Reference Services
Overseas Publications and Foreign Languages
Central Office of Information, London.
1 Land and People
Historical
Outline
England and
Wales
Introduction
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland) and Northern
Ireland, and is one of the ten member states of the European Community. Its full
name is the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The word Britain derives from Greek and Latin names probably stemming from
a Celtic original, which is also reflected in the name of the region of
north-western France ( Brittany in English) settled by migrants from Britain in
the filth and sixth centuries ad. Although, in the prehistoric time-scale, the
Celts were relatively late arrivals in the British Isles (following cultures which
had produced such notable monuments as the stone circles of Avebury and
Stonehenge) it is only with them that Britain emerges into recorded history, and
the term Celtic is often used rather generally to distinguish the early inhabitants
of the British Isles from the later Anglo-Saxon invaders.
Following sorties by Julius Caesar in 55 and 54 bc, Britain was occupied by
the Romans in the first century ad and an ordered civilisation was established
under their rule for two or three hundred years except in the territory north of
Hadrian's Wall (the wall across northern England planned by Hadrian, Roman
Emperor from 117 to 138 ad) and in some western areas. Christian missionaries
arrived not only in Roman Britain but in Scotland and Ireland.
The final Roman withdrawal in the fifth century, however, followed a long period
of increasing disorder during which there began raids on the island from
northern Europe—mainly by peoples traditionally described as Angles (from
Schleswig), Saxons and Jutes. It is from the Angles (who are reputed to have
settled mainly in the region now known as East Anglia) that the name England
derives. In the following two centuries the raids turned into settlement and the
establishment of a number of small kingdoms (with the Britons, or Celts,
maintaining an independent existence in the areas now known as Wales and
Cornwall). Among these kingdoms, more powerful ones which claimed over¬
lordship over the whole country were established, first in the north (North¬
umbria). then in the central area (Mercia) and finally in the south (Wessex).
However, the rise ol Wessex in the ninth century under the leadership of Alfred
the Great (849-99) was contemporaneous with further raids and settlement
from Europe, in this case by the Vikings from Scandinavia. In the tenth century
the Wessex dynasty defeated the invading Danes and established a wide-ranging
authority in England. A second wave of Danish invasions, however, led to the
establishment of a Danish dynasty in England between 1017 and 1042, when
the Wessex line was restored.
The last successful invasion of England took place following a disputed
succession when Duke William of Normandy (a duchy established by the Vikings
and owing only nominal allegiance to the French king) enforced his claims by
defeating the English at the Battle ol Hastings of 1066. There was considerable
settlement by Normans and others from France, French became the language of
the nobility for the next three centuries and the legal and, to some extent, social
structure was influenced by that which prevailed across the Channel. The
monarchy established by William and his successors was (except in intervals of
2
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Ireland
civil war) considerably more effective both in administrative and military terms
than its predecessors and it began to establish its authority over increasingly
wide areas of the British Isles. This policy was pushed forward with most energy
by Edward I (1272-1307). His most lasting success was in Wales, the main
stronghold into which the Britons had retreated. With the death in battle in
1282 of the Welsh Prince Llewellyn the royal authority became firmly established
there. Edward gave his own heir the title of ‘Prince of Wales’ which has
subsequently been bestowed upon the eldest son of the sovereign. The rising led
by Owain Glyndwr at the beginning of the fifteenth century showed strong
continuing Welsh national feeling but a new dimension to the situation was
provided by the accession to the English throne in 1485 of Henry VII of the Welsh
House of Tudor. Wales was politically assimilated to England under the Act of
Union in 1535.
A more difficult problem concerned relations between England and Scotland.
Hadrian’s Wall had proved no insurmountable barrier between the Romans and
their northern neighbours, and far-reaching expeditions both by the Romans
into Scotland and by the Scottish people known as Piets into England took
place. In the sixth century the Scots from Ireland or ‘Scotia’ settled in the area of
Scotland now known as Argyll. Lothian was English in population, and Welsh
Britons moved north from the invading English into Strathclyde. A united
kingdom, under the Scots king Kenneth MacAlpine, emerged in the ninth
century while Scotland, like England, was endeavouring to defend itself against
the Vikings. The establishment of a powerful monarchy in England, however,
especially after the Norman Conquest in the eleventh century, was to pose an
intermittent but considerable threat to Scottish independence throughout the
Middle Ages and well into the sixteenth century.
The eventual unification of the crowns reflected the fact that, after the
Reformation (Henry VIII’s breakaway in 1534 from the authority of the Roman
Catholic Church), old national antagonisms had become less important than
religious differences. Following the death of Henry’s daughter, the childless
Elizabeth I in 1603, the Protestant James Stuart, James VI of Scotland (son of
Mary, Queen of Scots, whose grandmother was a sister of Henry VIII), was
welcomed to the English throne as James I. England, Wales and Scotland were
henceforth known as Great Britain. Apart from the union of the monarchies,
however, England and Scotland remained separate during the seventeenth
century, except for an enforced unification by Oliver Cromwell early in the period
of the Commonwealth (1649-60) after he had defeated royalist forces in
Scotland. By the beginning of the following century political and economic
arguments for a closer union were making themselves heard in both countries.
Eventually, in 1707, both sides agreed on the formation of a single parliament
for Great Britain although Scotland retained its own system of law and church
settlement. The union was put under strain when Queen Anne died in 1714 and
George, Elector of Hanover (descended from a daughter of James I) succeeded
the Stuarts on the British throne. ‘Jacobite’ rebellions, aiming to restore the
Stuarts to the British throne, took place in 1715 and 1745 and it was from the
highlands of Scotland that they attracted most of their—in the event-
ineffective support.
In Ireland, out of a patchwork of Celtic and pre-Celtic peoples similar to that in
Britain, a number of kingdoms had emerged before the Christian era; any
supremacy established by one over the others in the following 1,000 years was of
a temporary nature. In cultural matters Ireland compared favourably with most
of Europe during the Dark Ages and, in particular, Christianity survived in
Ireland when it had been displaced for the time being in England by
LAND AND PEOPLE
3
Channel Islands
and Isle of Man
Anglo-Saxon invaders. Ireland, however, did not escape the incursions of the
Vikings, who dominated the country during the tenth century.
In 1169 Henry II of England launched an invasion of Ireland, the overlordship
of which he had been granted by the Pope, who was anxious to bring the Irish
church into full obedience to Rome. A large part of the country came under the
control of Anglo-Norman magnates but their descendants tended to assimilate
to their new country and little direct authority was exercised from England
during the Middle Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much greater tendency to intervene in Ireland.
Henry VIIPs assumption of the title of King of Ireland in 1541 arose from his
desire to apply the Reformation settlement and thereafter the religious issue was
to produce far-reaching consequences. The determination to establish royal
authority in Ireland was strengthened during the reign of Elizabeth I by the fear
that the country might be used by Philip of Spain in his efforts to subjugate
England, and a series of campaigns were waged against Irish insurgents. The
main focus of the resistance was the northern province of Ulster and, with its
collapse in 1607, Ulster became an area of settlement by immigrants from
Scotland and England. (There was settlement by immigrants elsewhere in
Ireland, though on a lesser scale.)
The English civil war of 1642-52 led to further risings in Ireland which were
crushed by Cromwell. The restoration of the monarchy in 1660 was followed by
the accession of the Roman Catholic James II to the throne in 1685, and there
was more fighting after his deposition three years later in favour of his nephew
and son-in-law, the Protestant William of Orange and his wife Mary.
During most of the eighteenth century there was an uneasy peace and towards
its end various efforts were made by British governments to achieve stability. In
1782 the Irish Parliament (dating from medieval times) was given legislative
independence; the only constitutional tie with England was the Crown. The
Parliament represented, however, only the privileged Anglo-Irish minority, who
had obtained possession of most of the agricultural land, and Catholics were
excluded from it. Against the background of an abortive rebellion in 1798 and
the prospect of intervention by France (with which England was at war between
1793 and 1800) the Irish Parliament was induced to vote for union with what,
from 1801, was to be the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland.
The Irish question' continued as one of the major problems of British politics
during the nineteenth century. In 1886 the Liberal Government introduced a
Home Rule Bill which would have given an Irish Parliament authority over most
internal matters while reserving to Britain control over external affairs. This led
to a split in the Liberal Party and the failure of the Bill. It was not until 1914 that
Home Rule was enacted by the Government of Ireland Act. Its implementation
was, however, prevented both by the threat of armed resistance on the part of
the Protestant majority in Ulster and by the outbreak of the first world war.
A nationalist uprising in Dublin in 1916 was suppressed, but with the end of
the first world war a guerrilla force known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA)
began operations against the British administration. In 1921 a settlement was
reached under which six of the nine counties of the province of Ulster received
their own Parliament, but remained represented in and subject to the supreme
authority of the British Parliament, while the remainder of Ireland as the Irish
Free State (later to become the Irish Republic) became a self-governing state
outside the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the United
Kingdom, they have a special relationship with it because of the antiquity of
their connection with the Crown. The Channel Islands were integrated into the
4
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ENGLAND
Government
Duchy of Normandy in the tenth and eleventh centuries and have been
territories of the Crown ever since the Norman Conquest. The Isle of Man was
under the nominal sovereignty of Norway until 1266 when it was ceded to
Scotland, subsequently passing to the Earls of Derby for a period but eventually
coming under the direct administration of the Crown in 1765. Today the
territories are Crown dependencies, with their own legislative ^assemblies and
systems of local administration and of law, and their own courts. The British
Government is responsible for their defence, their international relations and,
ultimately, their good government.
The position of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man in the European
Community is broadly that the islands remain outside the Community except
for customs purposes and for certain aspects of the Common Agricultural Policy.
Community provisions relating to the free movement of people and services do
not apply.
The Four Lands
In the following pages there are brief descriptions of a number of aspects of
social, economic and political life for each of the four countries, England. Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland, with some additional material on the political
situation in Northern Ireland. (Statistics on the four lands are contained in
Table 1.)
England is predominantly a lowland country. There are upland regions in the
north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the Yorkshire
moorlands) and in the south west in Devon and Cornwall. For the most part,
however, the country is undulating or flat and, in the south, crossed by low
ranges of hills including the Cotswolds and the Kent and Sussex Downs. The
greatest concentrations of population are in the London and Thames estuary
areas, the West Yorkshire and north-west industrial cities, the midlands
conurbation around Birmingham, the north-east conurbation on the rivers
Tyne and Tees, and along the Channel coast. The variety of urban communities
has been enhanced by immigrant Huguenots, Jews and other refugees from the
European continent, the Irish and more recently people from the Caribbean and
the South Asian sub-continent, together with Chinese, Cypriots, Italians and
others.
The Church of England, which was separated from the Roman Catholic
Church at the Reformation, is the Established Church in England, with
privileges balanced by certain duties which it must fulfil; the Sovereign must
always be a member of the Church and appoints its two archbishops, 24 bishops
and some other senior clergy.
England has no government minister or department exclusively responsible for
its central administration of domestic affairs, in contrast to Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. Instead, responsibility is shared among a number of
government departments, whose responsibilities in some cases also cover
aspects of affairs in Wales and Scotland. There are 523 members of Parliament
for England in the House of Commons, and arrangements are made for the
discussion of regional affairs. Traditionally, of the two major political parties,
the Conservatives find their support chiefly in suburban and rural areas, while
the Labour Party derives its main support from urban industrialised areas. In
the 1983 election England returned 362 Conservative members of Parliament,
148 Labour, 10 Liberal and 3 Social Democrat. Local government outside
London is administered through a two-tier system of counties subdivided into
Britain
50
 I 
100
 I 
—f—
50
150 kilometres
—I
100 miles
International boundaries
Country boundaries
County boundaries in England
and Wales and regional
boundaries in Scotland
Shetland Islands
Orkney Islands
Western Isles
Atlantic
Ocean
North Sea
■?§
Isles of Scilly
0
<70
Channel Islands
FRANCE
6
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Economy
districts. London is administered by a central council and 33 bodies responsible
for particular areas.
Eight ‘standard’ regions in England are delimited principally for statistical
purposes: South East. East Anglia, South West, West Midlands, East Midlands,
Yorkshire and Humberside, North West and North. They play no part in local
government and do not always coincide with the regional units adopted by
central government departments.
The legal system of England comprises on the one hand a historic body of
conventions, known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity’, and on the other, parliamen¬
tary and European Community legislation. Common law stems from the work of
the king’s judges after the Norman Conquest of 1066 who sought to bring
together into a single body of legal principles the various local customs of the
Anglo-Saxons. Great reliance was placed on precedent, and the practice of
reporting on cases commenced in the thirteenth century. Equity law derives
from the practice of petitioning the king’s Chancellor in cases not covered by
common law. The English legal system is therefore distinct from many of those
of Western Europe which have codes deriving from Roman Law. The Habeas
Corpus Act 1679 is a fundamental statute forbidding imprisonment without
trial.
Up to the eighteenth century the English economy was mainly agrarian and the
chief manufacture was wool cloth. Trade, particularly following voyages of
exploration, developed rapidly. London as the capital city, and a major port and
mercantile centre, and the textile areas (East Anglia, south-western England
and West Yorkshire) were the most populous and prosperous regions. In the late
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however, rapid growth took place in the
midlands, the north west, west Yorkshire and the north east, where the
coalfields and iron ore deposits permitted Britain to become the first industrial¬
ised nation, basing its wealth on coalmining, on the manufacture of iron and
steel, heavy machinery and textiles, on shipbuilding and on trade. London
enhanced its position with the growing strength of the economy but East Anglia
and the west country, remote from areas of industrial development, were
affected by agricultural depression, and entered a period of relative decline.
In the twentieth century, the second period of industrialisation, based on new
sources of energy, new manufacturing industries and new forms of transport,
has continued to change the broad pattern of regional and industrial develop¬
ment in England. In the 1920s and 1930s the northern industrial centres saw
their traditional industries weakened owing to fluctuations in world trade and
competition from other industrialising countries and, in some cases, from
substitute products. London, its surrounding counties and the West Midlands
generally benefited from the newer, more mobile, industries. These included
chemicals (such as pharmaceuticals, dyes, plastics and artificial fibres),
electrical and electronic engineering, vehicle manufacture, aircraft building,
instrument engineering, aluminium and rubber manufacture and a wide range
of consumer goods, including processed food, drink and tobacco products as
well as durables.
In the second half of the century economic and population growth has tended
to favour smaller towns and rural areas, particularly those in the South West
and East Anglia. A number of industrial areas (in the North, the North West,
Yorkshire and Humberside and the West Midlands) have suffered over the last
decade as a result of the decline in manufacturing employment. Through its
regional industrial policy the Government aims to reduce regional disparities in
employment opportunities by making investment incentives available in the
areas of greatest need, including those which have been dependent on declining
industries. Measures also exist to revive economic activity in inner urban areas.
LAND AND PEOPLE
7
Table 1: General Statistics
Northern United
England Wales Scotland Ireland Kingdom
Population
(’000, mid-1982 estimate)
Area
(sq km)
(sq miles)
Population density
(persons per sq km)
(persons per sq mile)
Gross domestic product
(£ per head, 1981)
Employees in
employment
(’000, mid-1983)
Percentage of
employees in:
(June 1983, provisional)
agriculture, forestry and
fishing
engineering and allied
industries
all other manufacturing
construction
mining, quarrying, gas,
electricity and water
service industries
Unemployment rate
(per cent, June
1984)
Average gross weekly
earnings
(£, all full-time men, April
1983)
Identifiable public
expenditure b
(£ per head, 1982—83)
46,799 2,808 5,166
130,440
50,363
359
929
17,415
1-6
12-6
14-4
4-6
2-9
640
120
20,768
8,018
135
350
883
2-5
9-7
13-8
5-8
60
62-2
15-4
78,783
30,418
66
170
3,674 3,049 3,547
1,881
2- 3
9-6
13-3
6-4
3- 8
64-6
14-3
168 1 156-3 167-5
1,539 1,990 1,726
1,567
14,120
5,452
111
287
2,723
466
2-0
6-9
15-0
5-4
2-0
68-5
20-4
150-5
2,335
56,340
244,111
94,251
231
598
3,605
20,645
1-7
12-1
14-3
4-8
3-1
64-0
12-6
167-5a
1,612
' Great Britain only.
Excluding borrowing by nationalised industries and some other public corporations.
East Anglia, still largely agricultural, has been the fastest-growing English
region in both population and employment since the 1960s. Particular growth
points have been Peterborough, the east coast ports (which, besides benefiting
from relative proximity to the northern European Community countries, have in
some cases become important bases for the development of gas resources in the
8
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
southern North Sea) and nine towns receiving population overspill from
London. Food processing, agricultural machinery, vehicle engines and elec¬
tronic and instrument engineering are the strongest industries, and the
service sector has been growing in Cambridge, Ipswich and Norwich.
Greater London and the industrial cities of the West Midlands, the Northwest,
Yorkshire and Humberside and the North continue to represent the largest
concentrations of manufacturing industry. London is an important area for
products of all kinds including food and drink (especially brewing), instrument
engineering, electrical and electronic engineering, clothing, furniture and
printing. Of importance in the surrounding south-eastern counties are oil
refining (along the Thames and near Southampton), pharmaceuticals, pumps,
valves and compressors, instrument engineering, electronics (particularly in
Berkshire and Hertfordshire, and around Chelmsford), motor vehicles, aero¬
space, building materials, timber, paper and plastics products. There is
diversity, too, in the North West, with significant activity in food processing
(especially grain milling, bread and flour confectionery and biscuits), chemicals
of all kinds, textile machinery, insulated wires and cables, computers (Manches¬
ter being one of the largest centres in the country), motor vehicles, aerospace,
clothing, glass making (with the world's largest flat glass maker, Pilkington's, in
St Helens), paper and rubber products. Lancashire is the centre of the cotton
and allied textile industries.
The characteristic manufactures of the West Midlands are metals (steel tubes,
iron castings and non-ferrous metals), machine tools, electrical engineering,
motor vehicles, carpets, pottery (with over 80 per cent of Britain's ceramics
industry located in Staffordshire) and rubber production. Of the other regions,
Yorkshire and Humberside has important shares of cocoa, chocolate and
confectionery production, iron and steel, machine tools, textile machinery,
woollen and worsted goods (producing about two-thirds of Britain’s wool
textiles), carpets, clothing and glass containers. The North has general
chemicals, iron and steel, process plant, shipbuilding and marine engineering,
and clothing: the East Midlands has steel tubes, iron castings, over two-thirds of
Britain's hosiery and knitted goods industry, and footwear; and the South West
has food processing (especially dairy products), aerospace, pumps, valves and
compressors, and paper products.
In agriculture, the number of mixed holdings has been falling, as part of a
general tendency towards greater specialisation. Dairying is most common in
the west of England, where the wetter climate encourages the growth of good
grass: sheep and cattle are reared in the hilly and moorland areas of northern
and south-western England; and arable farming, pig and poultry farming and
horticulture are concentrated in the east and south. Horticulture is also
important in the West Midlands. Forestry is mainly found in the North, South
East and South West regions. The principal fishing ports are in the South West
and on the east coast.
England has plentiful energy resources in its coalfields and has access to
offshore oil and gas reserves. About 60 per cent of Britain's deep-mined coal is
produced in the East Midlands and Yorkshire coalfields, the former being the
most productive in the country. The electricity grid of England and Wales is one
of the largest interconnected power networks under unified control in the
Western world. The world's first large-scale nuclear power station was estab¬
lished at Calder Hall in Cumbria in 1956, while substantial investment in
reprocessing capacity is being undertaken nearby. Other nuclear power stations
are on coastal sites, including eight around the coasts of southern England.
Important mineral deposits in England include aggregates for the construction
industry (sand, gravel and crushed rock), industrial minerals (including clay,
salt from the North West and china clay from Cornwall), tin ore, also from
TOWN AND COUNTRY: ENGLAND
St Paul’s Cathedral in
London, designed by the
great English architect.
Sir Christopher Wren
(1632-1723).
The Cheviot Hills in
Northumberland, near the
village of Crookham.
WALES
SCOTLAND
Ab°ve: Charl°tte square, Edinburgh, was one Below: Ben Nevis, Britain’s highest
of the finest architectural achievements of mountain, seen across Loch Linnhe from
Robert Adam (1728-92), Corpach.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Above: Belfast.
The domed
building in the
centre is the
City Hall.
Left: The Sperrin
Mountains in
County Tyrone.
LAND AND PEOPLE
Cornwall, and iron ore from the East Midlands and Humberside. Investment in
water resources includes the Kielder Reservoir (Northumberland), one of
Europe’s largest man-made lakes.
A motorway network has been constructed in England since the 1950s and
comprises four long-distance arterial routes linking London and the cities of the
midlands, the North and North West and the South West, and over 30 shorter
motorways. Priority is being given to completion of the London orbital route
(expected in 1986) and schemes of industrial importance. Inter-city travel has
been improved by the introduction of high-speed rail services which are among
the best in the world in speed, frequency and comfort. Many ports have been
equipped to deal with new developments in shipping (such as container ships)
and to take account of changes in the nature of trade brought about by the
increase in oil traffic through North Sea ports and the growing proportion of
trade with the continent of Europe. The major airports are Heathrow (the
busiest international airport in the world) and Gatwick, both serving London,
and Manchester, Luton and Birmingham.
Employment in service industries has accounted for an increasing share of
total employment in recent years, expansion being particularly marked in
financial and business services. London is one of the world’s leading centres of
banking, insurance and other financial services. Decentralisation of some office
services from the capital has led to a growth of office employment in the South
West and East Anglia in particular. London and the surrounding counties
account for two-thirds of advertising and market research activity, more than
half of all services offered by research establishments (other than those attached
to businesses), half of central government services and nearly half of non-food
wholesale distribution in England. After London and the South East, the North
West, with its main centre in Manchester, has the next most important
concentration of service industries. Tourism and catering have also expanded:
overseas visitors spent about £3,685 million in England in 1983, two-thirds of it
in London. They are, however, tending to spend more time in areas outside
London in the South East, the South West and the midlands. The South West is
the most popular region for domestic tourism, accounting for more than a fifth
of main holidays. The Lake District, with 11 major lakes, and peaks including
Scafell (England s highest point, at 978 m, 3,210 ft), is also very popular with
walkers and climbers.
Cultural and
Social Life
Cultural life in England takes so many forms that a brief summary can only
attempt to suggest its variety. London alone has about 100 theatres, including
some 40 in the ‘West End’, together with fringe and suburban theatres, about a
dozen major centres for music concerts, ballet and opera, four major art
galleries, a dozen major museums (with over 80 smaller galleries and museums),
some 400 public libraries, and over 140 West End, local and independent
cinemas. In a typical week there are many lectures, poetry readings, and jazz,
rock or folk music performances. Leisure facilities include discotheques, bingo
halls, amusement arcades, ice and roller skating rinks and swimming pools.
With its ceremonial occasions, palaces, other historic buildings and shops,
London is also one of the world’s leading tourist centres. About 15 attractions
(Westminster Abbey, the Tower of London, Madame Tussaud’s—an exhibition of
waxworks of famous people—the London Zoo and the museums and art
galleries) each receive more than a million visitors a year.
Because of its size and its position as the capital city, London is not
representative of the rest of England, but much the same broad range of cultural
interests is reflected in most other cities and towns. There are, for example,
about 280 theatre centres and 110 fringe theatres elsewhere in England. The
English Tourist Board lists some 1,130 art galleries, museums, and similar
10
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
WALES
Government
institutions in the rest of England. Recent developments have included the
growth of leisure centres where a wide range of recreations is offered. Distinctive
features of the northern industrial cities are special social clubs, working men’s
clubs, which attract well-known entertainers. In addition there are many rural
or outdoor recreations which are strongly supported and there is active interest
in numerous games and sports, many of them having been devised in England.
The English love of gardens and landscapes is associated with a tradition of
sightseeing visits to the numerous country houses, gardens and unspoilt rural
and coastal areas. There are seven national parks, two forest parks, some 35
designated ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty', about 140 country parks
approved by the Countryside Commission, 550 ‘outstanding conservation
areas’, 620 km (385 miles) of designated heritage coastline and 1,550 historic
buildings and gardens listed by the English Tourist Board. Newer developments
include the opening of safari and wildlife parks and of‘theme’ parks devoted, for
example, to maritime history, which offer a diversity of entertainments as well.
Many regions and towns have associations with the great English writers and
artists, such as William Shakespeare, William Wordsworth, Arnold Bennett,
Charles Dickens, the Bronte sisters, Thomas Hardy, Thomas Gainsborough and
John Constable.
Wales is a country of hills and mountains with extensive tracts of high plateau
and shorter stretches of mountain ranges deeply dissected by river valleys. The
highest mountains are in Snowdonia in the north west; the highest peak is
Snowdon (1,085 m, 3,560 ft). The lower-lying ground is largely confined to the
relatively narrow coastal belt and the lower parts of the river valleys. The main
areas of settlement are in the southern valleys and coastal areas where
two-thirds of the population live. The chief urban centres are Cardiff, Swansea,
Newport and Wrexham. Wales is a principality; Prince Charles, the heir to the
throne, was invested by the Queen with the title of Prince of Wales at Caernarfon
Castle in 1969 when he was 20.
The country has its own Welsh language, spoken (according to the 1981
census) by 19 per cent of the population, chiefly in the rural north and west. The
Welsh name of the country is Cymru. Measures adopted since the 1960s have
helped to revive the use of the language, which is of Celtic origin and closely
resembles Breton, spoken in Brittany in France. They include recognising the
equal validity of Welsh with English in law courts, the encouragement of
bilingual education in schools, and the extended use of Welsh for official
purposes and in broadcasting. Welsh-language television programmes are
transmitted in Wales by Sianel 4 Cymru (Channel 4 Wales).
There is no established church in Wales, the Anglican church having been
disestablished in 1920 following decades of pressure from adherents of the more
evangelical Methodist and Baptist persuasions. Methodism in particular had
spread rapidly in Wales in the eighteenth century, assuming the nature of a
popular movement among Welsh speakers and finding strong support later in
industrial communities.
The country returns 38 members of Parliament and there are special arrange¬
ments for the discussion of Welsh affairs. For the last 60 years the industrial
communities of Wales have always supported the Labour Party in elections,
ensuring a Labour majority in Wales. In the 1983 election 20 Labour, 14
Conservative, 2 Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) and 2 Liberal members were
returned. Substantial administrative autonomy is centred on the Secretary of
State for Wales, who is a member of the Cabinet, and has wide-ranging
responsibilities relating to the economy, welfare services and the provision of
amenities. The headquarters of the administration is the Welsh Office in
LAND AND PEOPLE
11
The Economy
Cultural and
Social Life
Cardiff, which also has an office in London. In 1979 proposals for the
establishment of an elected Welsh assembly in Cardiff to take over policymaking
and executive powers from central government were rejected in a referendum
held in Wales. Local government is exercised through a system of elected
authorities similar to that in England, and the legal system is identical with the
English one.
The south Wales coalfield was developed during the latter part of the industrial
revolution in the second half of the nineteenth century, creating populous urban
centres which drew labour from the rural areas and from England and Ireland.
However, the economy was narrowly based, mainly on coal, iron, steel and
tinplate, and contracted sharply during the 1920s and 1930s, resulting in
severe employment problems and substantial emigration. Since 1945 the
Government’s regional policies have introduced a diverse spread of manufactur¬
ing firms, including, most recently, Japanese and American electronics
concerns, to help to offset the contraction in the traditional basic industries.
(Wales is developing as an important centre for electronics in Britain.) In
addition, there is a range of modern light engineering concerns as well as
chemical and plastics plants, while the Royal Mint was transferred to Llantrisant
from London in 1968. South Wales remains the principal industrial area but
new manufacturing firms have also been introduced on the smaller coalfield in
north-east Wales, around Wrexham and Deeside, again to offset the decline in
the older, basic industries which previously dominated the area. Light industry
has also been attracted to the towns in the rural areas in mid- and north Wales
and an important refinery complex has developed around Milford Haven, which
is one of Britain’s major oil ports.
Agriculture occupies about 80 per cent of the land area, the main activities
being sheep and cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy farming in the
lowlands. Wales accounts for about 11 per cent of forest area in Britain and over
20 per cent of Forestry Commission timber production.
Wales produces about 7 per cent of Britain’s deep-mined coal and 14 per cent
of opencast production, including all of its anthracite. The biggest pumped-
storage power station in Europe, at Dinorwig, has been operating since 1983.
There are nuclear power stations at Wylfa and Trawsfynydd. Wales exports about
a third of its water supply to England.
Good communications exist in the south with motorway links across the
Severn Bridge to southern England and the midlands, and high-speed rail
services to a number of destinations in England, while the main road along the
north Wales coast is being upgraded.
There has been expansion in financial and professional services and in the
tourist and catering trades. With its north coast resorts, and the attractions of
three national parks (Snowdonia, the Brecon Beacons and the Pembrokeshire
Coast), Wales accounts for 15 per cent of domestic tourism.
There is much literary, musical and dramatic activity in Wales and there is a
National Library and National Museum. Welsh literature is one of the oldest in
Europe. The countiy is well known for its choral singing and the Welsh National
Opera has achieved an international reputation. The special festivals of Wales,
known as eisteddfodau, encourage Welsh literature and music. The greatest of
these is the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, held annually, entirely in Welsh,
and consisting of competitions in music, singing, prose and poetry. The small
town of Llangollen has extended its eisteddfod to include artists from all over the
world in the annual International Eisteddfod. Famous modern Welsh artists
have included the opera singer Sir Geraint Evans, the poet Dylan Thomas and
the actor Richard Burton. The politicians David Lloyd George (former Prime
12
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SCOTLAND
Government
Minister) and Aneurin Bevan were noted orators in a strong Welsh tradition. An
active local press includes a number of Welsh language publications. Great
interest is aroused by the annual rugby football competition in which sides
representing Wales, England, Scotland, Ireland and France take part.
Health services are provided mainly under the National Health Service,
administered by the Welsh Office, while personal social services, and education
(except at university level), are provided mainly through the local authorities.
Educational provision is similar to that in England except for the use of Welsh in
some schools. The collegiate University of Wales, founded in 1893, comprises
seven member institutions.
Scotland may be divided broadly into three areas: the sparsely populated
highlands and islands in the north, accounting for just over half the total area of
the country: the central lowlands, containing three-quarters of the population
and most of the industrial centres and cultivated farmland: and the Southern
Uplands, containing a number of hill ranges, which border on England. The
highest mountains are the Grampians in the central highlands, with Ben Nevis
(1,342 m, 4,406 ft) the highest peak. The chief cities are the main administrat¬
ive centre Edinburgh, the main industrial centre Glasgow, and the two regional
centres Aberdeen and Dundee.
The period from 1750 onwards has been one of considerable and continuous
emigration of Scots to England and overseas. The rate slowed markedly in the
1970s as the offshore oil and gas industries developed and there was inward
migration to the north east of Scotland. The large outflow of people from
Strathclyde has continued, however, though at a lower level than before. In the
mid-nineteenth century, as Scotland industrialised rapidly, there was large-
scale immigration from Ireland, which led to the establishment of sizeable
Roman Catholic communities.
The period from 1750 until the beginning of the twentieth century was also
one of stability and economic progress and of remarkable achievements in many
fields. Among the famous men to emerge were David Hume, Robert Burns, Sir
Walter Scott, Adam Smith, Robert Adam, James Watt, John MacAdam, Lord
Kelvin and James Clerk Maxwell.
The Church of Scotland, which became the established church in 1690, has
complete freedom in all matters of doctrine, order and discipline. It is a
Protestant church which is Presbyterian in form, that is, governed by a
hierarchy of church courts, each of which includes laymen.
There are special arrangements for the conduct of Scottish affairs within the
British system of government and separate Acts of Parliament are passed for
Scotland where appropriate. In the 1983 general election the 72 Scottish seats
in the House of Commons were apportioned as follows: 41 Labour, 21
Conservative, 5 Liberal, 3 Social Democrat, and 2 Scottish National. Since 1959
Scotland, like Wales, has had a majority of Labour members of Parliament.
Administrative tasks relating to a wide range of economic and social functions
are the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, a member of the
Cabinet, working through the Scottish Office, with its administrative head¬
quarters in Edinburgh and an office in London. A proposal for an -elected
assembly for Scotland, on which a referendum was held in 1979, failed to gam
the support of the required 40 per cent of the electorate, even though a majority
of those voting gave it their approval.
Local government generally operates on a two-tier basis broadly similar to that
in England and Wales but established by separate legislation.
The principles and procedures of the Scottish legal system (particularly in civil
law) differ in many respects from those of England and Wales, stemming, in
LAND AND PEOPLE
13
part, from the adoption of elements of other European legal systems, based on
Roman law, during the sixteenth century.
The Economy Following very early industrialisation and specialisation, Scotland experienced
the same pressure on its chief industries as the north of England and Wales, and
much of the present century has been dominated by changes in the economic
structure in response to changing domestic and world circumstances. The
regional policies of successive Governments and investment by overseas
companies have both made significant contributions to the growth of more
modern and technologically based industries. Prominent among newer indus¬
tries is electronic engineering, which has developed strongly in the industrial
areas of central Scotland. Scotland has an important electronics industry with
several companies producing semi-conductors and personal computers, as well
as those producing for the defence and other markets. It is a significant centre
also for chemicals, especially petrochemicals, and has been seeking to develop
the medical equipment industry. Traditional Scottish manufactures, such as
high-quality textiles (tweeds, woollens and knitwear) and food and drink
products, remain important. The whisky industry is a major export earner.
In addition, while some traditional industries (coal, steel, shipbuilding and
textiles) have experienced a long-term decline in employment, economic
performance in Scotland has benefited since 1970 from the development and
expansion of offshore-related industries following the discovery of oil and gas
under the northern North Sea. Some 100,000 jobs had arisen directly or
indirectly by 1983 as a result of North Sea activities. Many of these jobs reflect
overseas investment solely related to the development of North Sea resources,
but oil has also given a stimulus to traditional industries such as engineering
and encouraged firms to serve overseas offshore markets from Scotland.
Northern and north-east Scotland (particularly Aberdeen) have benefited most
from offshore developments. By contrast, though only a little to the south,
Tayside and the Dundee and Arbroath areas have suffered especially from the
run-down of the jute industry. Strathclyde, by far the most populous region, has
also experienced serious industrial decline and population loss, particularly in
Glasgow. In the remainder of the central belt and in the five new towns (East
Kilbride, Glenrothes, Livingston, Irvine and Cumbernauld) trends have been
generally more favourable. In Lothian the large concentration of service
industries centred on Edinburgh has been a helpful influence.
Scotland has one-third oi Britain s total agricultural land, but 70 per cent of it
consists of hill grazing for cattle and sheep. About 10 per cent of the agricultural
area is used for crops, and 70 per cent of this is under barley. Scotland accounts
for nearly half of Britain’s forest area and for 40 per cent of public sector timber
production. Fishing remains an important activity: more than 65 per cent of
total landings of fish in Britain are made by Scottish vessels.
Despite the advent of cheaper natural gas, Scotland still depends heavily on
electricity: nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply a higher proportion of
energy than in any other part of Britain. Large supplies of unpolluted water form
a major resource.
Communications, both domestic and international, have improved in many
central and coastal areas, particularly in the north and north east, owing to the
stimulus oi the oflshore oil industry and road- and bridge-building programmes.
The offshore oil industry has also encouraged expansion in financial and
business services which have been traditionally strong in Scotland. Tourism is
of some importance, particularly in the more remote areas, and accounts for
around 9 per cent of domestic tourism in Britain. Scotland’s cultural and
historic associations, its varied scenic beauty, and the opportunities for sport
and recreation are particular attractions. Scotland is the home of golf and
14
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cultural and
Social Life
NORTHERN
IRELAND
courses at St Andrews, Gleneagles, Turnberry and Prestwick are internationally
renowned. Skiing is growing in importance, with centres at Aviemore, Glenshee,
Glencoe and the Lecht, and further developments are planned.
A vigorous cultural life in Scotland has as its highlight the annual Edinburgh
International Festival. The Scottish Arts Council (a committee of the Arts
Council of Great Britain with a large degree of autonomy) supports a wide range
of activities. Notable performing arts bodies are the Scottish National Orchestra,
Scottish Opera, Scottish Ballet, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Baroque
Ensemble and the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. Scotland possesses
excellent collections of the fine and applied arts, notably in the National Galleries
of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum and the National Museum of Antiquities
in Edinburgh, and the City of Glasgow Museum and Art Galleries (including the
Burrell Collection, opened in 1983).
A language of ancient Celtic origin, Scots Gaelic is spoken by some 80,000
people mainly in the islands and north west of Scotland. It is the indigenous
language, with its own literary background. Scottish people in the lowlands have
for centuries spoken Scots (or Lallans), a derivative of the Northumbrian dialect
of Old English, which has its own recognised literary tradition and has seen a
revival in recent times.
An active press includes two daily newspapers based in Edinburgh and
Glasgow which have a circulation outside Scotland. There are ten other dailies
and three Sunday newspapers. Articles in some papers are printed in Gaelic.
Television programmes are produced by BBC (Scotland) and by three indepen¬
dent companies, covering the highland, lowland and border regions. BBC Radio
Scotland covers most of the population and there are five ‘community’ services
in the highlands and islands, two of them mainly in Gaelic, and two in the
borders. Independent radio stations provide services for Edinburgh, Glasgow,
Dundee/Perth, Aberdeen, Ayr and Inverness.
As in the rest of Britain the National Health Service, and local authority social
services, education and housing programmes provide for the welfare of the
community.
Local authorities are responsible for the provision of most education, except at
university level. Secondary education in Scotland is almost completely organised
on comprehensive lines. Independent bodies administer vocational further
education institutions and colleges of education. There are eight universities, of
which four (St Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh) were established in
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, while the other four have been established
since 1964. The educational tradition has been particularly strong in Scotland,
helping many Scots to positions of eminence in the arts and sciences.
Over 50 per cent of Scotland’s housing has been built since 1945, only
Northern Ireland having a larger percentage. Scotland has a high proportion of
housing rented from public authorities (over 50 per cent compared with a
national average of just over 30 per cent).
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only 21 km (13 miles) from Scotland. It
has a 488-km (303-mile) border in the south and west with the Irish Republic. At
its centre lies Lough Neagh, Britain’s largest freshwater lake (381sqkm,
147 sq miles). Many of the principal towns lie in valleys leading from the Lough,
including the capital, Belfast, which stands at the mouth of the river Lagan. The
Mourne Mountains rising sharply in the south east include Sheve Donar ,
Northern Ireland's highest peak (852 m, 2,796 ft).
Just under two-thirds of Northern Ireland's population are descendants oi
Scots or English settlers who crossed to north-eastern Ireland mainly in the
seventeenth century; most belong to the Protestant faith, and have a traditional
LAND AND PEOPLE
15
Government
Background to
Civil
Disturbances
Direct Rule
and Political
Initiatives
loyalty to the maintenance of the union with Great Britain. The remainder, over
a third, are Irish in origin and mainly Roman Catholic; many of them are
nationalist in political opinion, favouring union with the Irish Republic.
For 50 years from 1921 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament in which the
mainly Protestant Unionists formed the Government after successive elections.
Nationalists resented this continuing domination, and the exclusion of Roman
Catholics from political office. Although substantial advances for the whole
population were achieved in social welfare and economic development, during
the late 1960s an active and articulate civil rights movement emerged. The
sectarian disturbances which followed and the introduction of the Army in 1969
in a peace-keeping role were exploited by extremists from both sections of the
community, notably the Provisional Irish Republican Army (which broke away
from the Official IRA in 1970) claiming to protect the Roman Catholic minority.
Subsequently, sectarian divisions have been exacerbated by the actions of
terrorists from both sides.
The demands of the civil rights movement were met by a series of reforms.
Among the most important were measures to ensure the proper representation
of minorities in local government and fairer housing allocations in the public
sector.
More recent measures include the outlawing of religious and political
discrimination in employment, and the establishment of an independent police
complaints board. Commissioners have been appointed to look into complaints
of maladministration, including discrimination, by central or local government;
actions by official bodies have been made illegal if they discriminate on religious
or political grounds; an advisory human rights commission has been set up; and
a law against sex discrimination has been implemented. While terrorism
continues, certain emergency powers are in force. These include special powers
of arrest in respect of certain serious crimes; non-jury courts to try those
offences; and the proscription of organisations involved in terrorism. There has
been much concern, however, to reconcile these powers as far as possible with
respect for individual liberties; the measures are temporary, need regular
renewal by Parliament and have been subject to independent review, most
recently in 1984. Most traditional rights, including the freedom of the
communications media and the right to prosecute the security forces if they
exceed their authority, remain in force. Northern Ireland’s legal system, and the
safeguards it enshrines, is broadly similar to that in England and Wales.
The use of violence as a means of overcoming political differences has been
condemned by the overwhelming majority of people living in Northern Ireland
and, although terrorism continues, the level of violence is much lower than some
years ago. The police take the primary role of maintaining order; the Army’s task
is one of assisting the civil authorities, and the number of soldiers on service has
been considerably reduced. Security policy rests on the principle of fair and
effective enforcement of the law by bringing terrorists to justice through the
courts. They are tried for criminal offences and not for political beliefs. At the
heart of the policy is a determination to develop the effectiveness of the police to
the point where military involvement in the maintenance of law and order is no
longer needed.
When, despite the Northern Ireland Government’s substantial reform
programme, the intercommunal violence continued, the United Kingdom
Government concluded that the best hope of ending terrorism and achieving
political progress would be for the United Kingdom Parliament and Government
to take over the responsibilities for law and order in Northern Ireland. The
Northern Ireland Government felt unable to accept this and resigned, and in
16
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1972 a period of ‘direct rule’ began, with a United Kingdom Cabinet minister
responsible for functions previously exercised by the Northern Ireland Govern¬
ment and for the Northern Ireland departments.
Several major but unsuccessful initiatives towards stable and effective
devolved government supported by both sides of the community have since been
made. A new constitution which devolved powers to an elected legislative
assembly, and a power-sharing' executive representing all sections of the
community, encountered Protestant ‘Loyalist’ opposition culminating in a
general strike in 1974; in 1976 an elected constitutional convention failed to
agree on a system of government that would command widespread acceptance;
in 1978 a planned framework for a form of devolution to consolidate common
ground among the political parties was rejected; and in 1980 there was a
political conference and extensive discussions. In 1981 the appointment of a
Northern Ireland Council to advise the Secretary of State was proposed but the
political parties in Northern Ireland were not prepared to accept this.
In October 1982 elections took place to a new 78-member Assembly, although
not all of those elected took their seats and others later withdrew for some
months. The Assembly provides an opportunity for elected representatives to
undertake consultative functions, for example, by commenting upon legislative
proposals, and in the longer term to try to reach agreement on how a devolved
government might be established which would command widespread accept¬
ance across the community.
The Government’s policy continues to rest on the two fundamental principles
that, first, there will be no change in Northern Ireland’s status as part of the
United Kingdom without the consent of the majority of people of Northern
Ireland, and secondly, any form of devolved government must be acceptable to
both sides of the community.
The future of Northern Ireland is a matter for the United Kingdom
Government and Parliament and the people of Northern Ireland, and the
principle of self-determination is enshrined in law. A 1973 border poll' showed
clearly that the majority of people in Northern Ireland wished to remain part of
the United Kingdom. At the same time, the Government attaches importance to
co-operation with the Irish Republic and contacts are increasing in economic
and cultural as well as in security matters.
Northern Ireland returns 17 members to the United Kingdom Parliament.
The Economy
The geography of Northern Ireland has played an important part in shaping its
economic development. A situation on the western edge of Europe, with few
indigenous mineral resources and only a small local market, has tended to
favour the concentration of industry and population on the eastern seaboard
close to trading links with the rest of the United Kingdom. Most of Northern
Ireland’s trade is with, or through. Great Britain. With certain exceptions, the
parts of the region beyond the immediate influence of the industrialised area
around Belfast have stayed mainly rural, with generally small and often
scattered communities relying mainly on farming.
Since the end of the second world war two dominant trends have been
apparent in the economy. First, employment in the traditionally important
industries (shipbuilding, linen and agriculture) has declined. Secondly, there
has been growth in the numbers seeking work, reflecting the relatively high rate
of natural increase of the population, which is only partly offset by migration. In
an effort to counterbalance these factors and to promote growth, programmes
within the broad framework of United Kingdom regional policy have been
carried out to develop infrastructure and attract investment from within the
country and from abroad. Despite the progress made many of Northern Ireland s
economic problems were intensified from around the mid-1970s. The impact ot
LAND AND PEOPLE
17
the world-wide recession accelerated serious decline in existing industry and
adversely affected the flow of new inward investment.
Belfast has Britain’s largest shipyard; and other well-established industrial
activities include the manufacture of aircraft, textile machinery and a wide
range of engineering products, tobacco and clothing. There has also been
extensive development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment, electronic
instruments, telecommunications equipment, carpets and synthetic rubber. As
part of the Government’s industrial development policy, the promotion of small
firms is being pursued. The establishment of ‘enterprise zones’ in Belfast and
Londonderry and the designation of Aldergrove airport as a ‘freeport’ are
expected to serve as additional incentives to investment.
Agriculture (predominantly livestock and products) is still the most important
industry, almost a tenth of civil employment (including the self-employed) and
accounting for over three times the proportion in Britain as a whole.
The world recession and the pace of technological change have led to rising
unemployment as in the rest of the country; the Northern Ireland unemploy¬
ment rate is persistently the highest of any of the standard regions. To meet this
special problem successive governments have offered higher incentives than are
available in the rest of the country to encourage new investment both from
within Britain and from overseas, and assistance to mitigate high energy costs.
Northern Ireland s productivity and industrial relations records for some years
have been better than those in the country as a whole.
The modern diversification of the economy has helped to stimulate output,
productivity and incomes, and has assisted in narrowing the gap between living
standards in Northern Ireland and those in the rest of the United Kingdom.
Gross domestic product per person, which tends to be depressed in Northern
Ireland relative to the country as a whole as a result of higher unemployment,
lower activity rates and larger family sizes, has nonetheless risen from just
under two-thirds of the British average in 1963 to about three-quarters. Average
earnings are more than nine-tenths of the national average.
The principle underlying Northern Ireland's financial relations with the rest of
the country is that it has parity, both of taxation and services, with England,
Scotland and Wales. To maintain social services at the level of those in Great
Britain, to meet the cost of security measures, and to compensate for the natural
disadvantages of geography and lack of resources, the United Kingdom
Government’s subvention to Northern Ireland in 1983-84 was just over £1,300
million.
Cultural and
Social Life
In day-to-day social life Northern Ireland is in many ways similar to the rest of
the United Kingdom. For thousands of visitors (857,000 in 1983), as well as for
local people. Northern Ireland's landscape and natural features, its cultural
traditions and festivals continue to offer special attractions. For many North
Americans the land from which their forebears emigrated (a number of United
States presidents have been descended from Northern Ireland families) has a
unique interest. The story of this contribution to American life, the history of
Northern Ireland, and aspects of its culture—from the dialects and strong
literary tradition (poets like Louis MacNeice and Seamus Heaney have inter¬
national reputations) to the songs and dances and folk art—are recorded in the
Ulster-American Folk Park, the Ulster Museum and the Ulster Folk and
Transport Museum.
With its own Arts Council, Northern Ireland has orchestras, much theatre and
ballet and the restored Belfast Grand Opera House. The Queen’s Festival, one of
several annual events, is a major international occasion. The strong musical
tradition has produced such soloists as flautist James Galway and soprano
Heather Harper.
18
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National Health Service provides both hospital and practitioner services,
and health and personal social services correspond fairly closely to those in the
rest of the United Kingdom, although the administrative framework is different.
While publicly maintained schools are open to children of all religions, in
practice, Protestants and Roman Catholics are for the most part educated in
sepafate schools. Efforts are made in the schools to promote greater under¬
standing and respect between Protestant and Roman Catholic children.
Contrary to developments in the rest of the United Kingdom, emphasis on the
comprehensive principle in secondary schools has been very small. Housing and
the improvement of the urban environment present significant problems for the
authorities, notably in Belfast where a continuing rehabilitation programme is
being carried out, but planning and conservation arrangements are much like
those in the rest of the country.
Distinctive local programmes are broadcast and there is a local press; national
radio and television networks are received, however, and the national press is
sold widely. Sport has an important role in the community, and many
world-class sportsmen and sportswomen have come from Northern Ireland.
Physical Features
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term for a
group of islands lying off the north-west coast of mainland Europe. The largest
of the islands is Great Britain (the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland).
The next largest comprises Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. Off the
southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south west are
the Isles of Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by
small islands and to the north east are the Orkneys and Shetlands. All these
have administrative ties with the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea
and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and France are largely
self-governing, and are not part of England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland.
Britain’s area is some 244,100 sq km (94,250 sq miles), of which nearly 99
per cent is land and the remainder inland water. This is about the same size as
the Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand or Uganda, and half the size of
France. It is just under 1,000 km (some 600 miles) from the south coast to the
extreme north of Scotland and just under 500 km (some 300 miles) across in the
widest part. There are numerous bays and inlets and no place in Britain is as
much as 120 km (75 miles) from tidal water. The prime meridian of 0° passes
through the old observatory at Greenwich (London).
The seas surrounding the British Isles are shallow, usually less than 90 m (50
fathoms or 300 ft), because the islands lie on the continental shelf. To the
north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly from 180 m
(some 600 ft) to 900 m (about 3,000 ft). The shallow waters are important
because they provide breeding grounds for fish. The warming effect on the air of
the North Atlantic current is magnified as its water spreads across the shelf.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. The prevailing winds are
south-westerly and the weather from day to day is mainly influenced by
depressions moving eastwards across the Atlantic. The weather is subject to
frequent changes but to few extremes of temperature. It is rarely above 32°C
(90°F) or below -10°C (14°F). Near sea-level in the west the mean annual
temperature ranges from 8°C (46°F) in the Hebrides to 11°C (52 F) in the extreme
south west of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the east. The
mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetland), ranges
from 3°C (37°F) during the winter (December, January and February) to 11 C
(52°F) during the summer (June, July and August); the corresponding figures
for the Isle of Wight, in the extreme south, are 5°C (41°F) and 16°C (61°F). The
LAND AND PEOPLE
19
POPULATION
Birth Rates
average annual rainfall is more than 1,600 mm (over 60 inches) in the
mountainous areas of the west and north but less than 800 mm (30 inches) over
central and eastern parts. Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year,
but, on average, March to June are the driest months and September to January
the wettest. The distribution of sunshine shows a general decrease from south
to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with altitude. During
May, June and July (the months of longest daylight) the mean daily duration of
sunshine varies from five hours in northern Scotland to eight hours in the Isle of
Wight; during the months of shortest daylight (November, December and
January) sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of an hour a day in
northern Scotland and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
The Social Framework
The way of life of the people of Britain has been changing rapidly in the
twentieth century. As in many other countries underlying causes include two
major wars, a lower birth rate, longer expectation of life, a higher divorce rate,
widening educational opportunities, technical progress, and a better standard
of living.
With nearly 56 million people, Britain ranks about fourteenth in the world in
terms of population. This compares with 38-2 million in 1901, about 6-5 million
at the end of the seventeenth century and some 2 million at the end of the
eleventh century. Early figures are based on contemporary estimates, but from
the beginning of the nineteenth century relatively plentiful and reliable
information is available. Most of it comes from two main sources: the regular
flow of statistical information based on compulsoiy registration of births,
marriages and deaths, and the censuses taken regularly every ten years since
1801 (because of war there was no census in 1941). The most recent was in April
1981. Statistical information about the population in Britain is probably more
complete and detailed than in any other country. After 1975 the population fell
slightly for about two years, for the first time (other than in war) since records
began, reflecting a temporary decline in the birth rate. Thereafter the upward
trend was resumed until 1982, when it again fell slightly. Projections for the
future suggest that population growth will take place at a much slower rate than
was expected a few years ago. Britain’s total population is expected, on 1981
estimates, to be 56-4 million in 1986, 58 million in 2001 and 58-8 million in
2016.
In 1983 there were 694,000 live births (in England, Scotland and Wales), 2,000
fewer than in 1982, which outnumbered deaths (643,000) by 51,000. The total
period fertility rate (an indication of the average size of family) has, in general,
been declining and in 1982 was 1 '75, which is below the level of 2-1 required for
the replacement of the population.
Several factors may have contributed to the relatively low birth rate.
Contraception has become more widespread and effective, making it easier to
plan families, and voluntary sterilisation of men and women has also become
more common. An appreciable proportion of pregnancies (about 40 per cent of
those conceived outside marriage and 8 per cent of those conceived within
marriage) are ended by legal abortion.
The postponement of conception within marriage coupled with a trend
towards later marriage has led to an increase, to 25, in the average age at which
women have their first child in marriage. Another feature is the current
preference for smaller families, especially two-children families, than in the past,
which has led to a significant decline in the proportion of families with four or
more children.
20
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mortality
Marriage and
Divorce
Age and Sex
Structure
At birth the expectation of life for a man is about 70 years and for a woman 76
years compared with 49 years for men and 52 years for women in 1901. The
improving health of the population has mainly had the effect of increasing
young people’s chances of reaching the older age groups. Life expectancy in the
older age groups has increased relatively little.
The general death rate has remained about the same for the past 50 years, at
about 12 per 1,000 population, reflecting the gradual ageing of the population
since there has been a considerable decline in mortality at most ages,
particularly among children and young adults. The infant mortality rate (deaths
of infants under one year old per 1,000 live births) was 11 1 in 1981; neonatal
mortality (deaths of infants under four weeks old per 1,000 live births) was 6-7
in 1981; and maternal mortality is about 01 per 1,000 live births.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising
standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical
facilities, improved health measures, better working conditions, education in
personal hygiene, and the smaller size of families. Major changes since 1951 in
the causes of death have included the virtual disappearance of deaths resulting
from infectious diseases (notably tuberculosis) and an increase in the pro¬
portion of deaths caused by circulatory diseases (including heart attacks
and strokes) and by cancer.
During the last decade there has been a marked change in the pattern of
marriage. In 1972 there were 480,300 marriages in Britain, but by 1981 the
number had declined to 397,800. The proportion of the population of England
and Wales who were or had been married remained at around 63 per cent. Of the
population aged 16 or over in England and Wales in 1981, 64 per cent were
married, 24 per cent single, 9 per cent widowed and 4 per cent divorced. The
trend of the 1960s towards earlier marriage was reversed at the beginning of the
1970s, since when there has been a slow increase in the average age for first
marriages, which in England and Wales is now just over 25 for men and 23 for
women. Remarriages (of one or both parties) account for about one-third of all
marriages in Great Britain, compared with 20 per cent in 1971 and 15 per cent
in 1961, and about 11 per cent of all marriages are remarriages where both
partners had been divorced.
The divorce rate has been increasing steadily and in 1981 about 12 decrees of
divorce were made absolute for every 1,000 married couples in England and
Wales, compared with two in 1961. The rates are much lower in Scotland and
Northern Ireland. In 1981 about 155,600 divorces were granted in Great Britain;
the proportion granted to wives was about 70 per cent. The average age of people
at the time of divorce in England and Wales has been falling and is now about 38
for men and 35 for women.
Another feature, common to many other Western European countries, has
been a considerable increase in cohabitation. Nearly 20 per cent of women in
Great Britain marrying in the late 1970s where the marriage was the first for
both parties had lived with their husbands before marriage (compared with 6
per cent in the early 1970s) and about 13 per cent of non-married women aged
18 to 49 were cohabiting during 1982. Cohabitation occurs more frequently for
separated or divorced women than for single women. There is some evidence of
a growing number of stable non-married relationships and in the proportion of
illegitimate births (which now account for over 14 per cent of live births in
Britain compared with 6 per cent in 1961) registered by both parents.
Although the total population has remained relatively stable in the last decade,
there have been noticeable changes in the age and sex structure, including a
decline in the proportion of young people under 16 and an increase in the
LAND AND PEOPLE
21
proportion of elderly people, especially those aged 85 and over. The estimated
age distribution of the British population in mid-1982 was roughly as follows:
under 16 years, about 22 per cent: 16—64, 63 per cent; and 65 and over, 15 per
cent. Some 18 per cent of the population were over the normal retirement ages
(65 for men and 60 for women), compared with 15 per cent in 1961.
In April 1981 there were 28-6 million females and 27 million males in Britain,
representing a ratio of nearly 106 females to every 100 males. There are about 6
per cent more male than female births every year. Because of the higher
mortality of men at all ages, however, there is a turning point, at about 50 years
of age, at which the number of women exceeds the number of men. This
imbalance increases with age so that there is a preponderance of women among
the elderly.
Distribution
of Population
The population density is about 231 per sq km which is relatively high in
comparison with most other countries. England is the most densely populated
with 359 people per sq km (with Greater London having a density of 4,283
people per sq km), and Scotland the least densely populated with 66 people per
sq km, while Wales and Northern Ireland have 135 and 111 people per sq km
respectively.
Table 2 gives figures for some of Britain's largest urban areas. About half of
the population lives in a belt across England, with south Lancashire and West
Yorkshire at one end, the London area at the other, and the industrialised
midlands at its centre. Other areas with large populations are: the central
lowlands of Scotland; north-east England from north of the river Tyne down to
the river Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast
from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less densely populated areas are the eastern
fringes of England between the Wash and the Thames estuary, and the far south
west. The eight major metropolitan areas which have been denoted as
‘conurbations’ in successive population censuses accommodate a third of Great
Britain’s people while comprising less than 3 per cent of the total land area. They
are: Greater London, Central Clydeside, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, South
Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear, the West Midlands and West Yorkshire. Most of the
mountainous parts, including much of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
and the central Pennines, are very sparsely populated.
Table 2: Size and Population of the Main Urban Districts, Mid-1982
Area
sq km
Greater London
Birmingham
Glasgow
Leeds
Sheffield
Liverpool
Bradford
Manchester
Edinburgh
Bristol
Belfast
Coventry
Cardiff
1,580
264
198
562
368
113
370
116
261
110
140
97
120
609-7
102-0
76-3
217-0
141- 9
43- 6
142- 9
44- 9
100-6
42-3
54-0
37-3
46-3
Population
sq miles (thousands)
6,765-1
1,017-3
761-0
716-1
545-8
510-7
464-7
458-6
444-7
399-6
324-9
317-4
279-8
22
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Migration
Nationality
Since the nineteenth century there has been a general trend, especially in
London, for people to move away from the congested urban centres into
suburbs. The 1981 census recorded that only in the remoter rural areas has the
rate of population growth been higher in the 1970s than in the 1960s. There has
also been a geographical redistribution of the population from Scotland and the
northern regions of England to East Anglia, the South West and the East
Midlands. Another feature has been an increase in the rate of retirement
migration, the main recipient areas (where in some towns the elderly can form
over one-third of the population) being the south coast of England and East
Anglia.
Traditionally there is a net outflow of people from Britain to the rest of the world,
in 1982 it amounted to 57,000.1 Between 1973 and 1982 some 2-27 million
people left Britain to live abroad and about 1 -8 million came from overseas to live
in Britain, so that net emigration reduced the population by about 430,000. Of
the 259,000 emigrants in 1982, 29 per cent left for Australia, Canada or New
Zealand, 15 per cent for other Commonwealth countries, 14 per cent for other
European Community countries and 11 per cent for the United States. Of the
202,000 immigrants, 10 per cent came from Australia, Canada or New Zealand,
24 per cent from other Commonwealth countries and 27 per cent from other
European Community countries. A significant number of those leaving or
entering Britain were returning migrants.
Nationality legislation is embodied in the British Nationality Act 1981 which
took effect from 1 January 1983. Under this Act, citizenship of the United
Kingdom and Colonies was replaced by three citizenships: British citizenship
for people closely connected with Britain, the Channel Islands, and the Isle of
Man; British Dependent Territories citizenship for people connected with the
dependencies; and British Overseas citizenship for those citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies who did not acquire either of the other citizenships. With
one small exception, citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had the
right of abode in Britain when the Act came into force acquired British
citizenship. , 0 .+ •
British citizenship is acquired automatically at birth by a child born in Britain
if his or her father or mother is a British citizen or is settled in Britain. A child
adopted in Britain by a British citizen is a British citizen. A child born abroad to
a British citizen born, adopted, naturalised or registered in Britain is a British
citizen by descent. The Act safeguards the citizenship of a child born abroad to a
British citizen in Crown service, certain related services, or in service under a
European Community institution. British citizenship may also be acquired by
registration by certain children born in Britain who do not automatically
acquire such citizenship at birth or born abroad to a parent who is a citizen by
descent; by British Dependent Territories citizens, British Overseas citizens,
British subjects under the Act (three very limited categories) and British
protected persons after five years’ residence in Britain (except for people from
Gibraltar who may be registered without residence); and by naturalisation for
Commonwealth citizens, citizens of the Irish Republic, and foreign nationals.
The British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983 conferred British citizenship
(with effect from 1 January 1983) on those Falkland Islanders who did not
acquire it under the 1981 Act. For naturalisation, which is at the Home
Secretary’s discretion, five years’ residence, good character and sufficient
knowledge of English, Welsh or Scottish Gaelic are required except for the
spouse of a British citizen, who needs only three years’ residence and no
1 International migration statistics exclude movements to and from the Irish Republic.
LAND AND PEOPLE
23
language qualification. Most existing entitlements to registration (including
those for Commonwealth citizens and Irish citizens settled in Britain since
before 1973, and in certain circumstances that for women married to citizens of
the United Kingdom and Colonies before 1983) are preserved for five years from
1 January 1983. In 1983, 60,717 people acquired citizenship by naturalisation
and registration in Britain.
Immigration
THE
ECONOMIC
AND
SOCIAL
PATTERN
Housing and
the
Environment
Immigration into the United Kingdom is controlled by the Immigration Act 1971
(as amended by the British Nationality Act 1981) and the immigration rules.
British citizens and those Commonwealth citizens who had the right of abode
before 1 January 1983 (when the 1981 Act came into force) have the right of
abode and are therefore exempt from immigration control. Those who do not
have this right require permission to enter and remain in the United Kingdom,
which is given in accordance with the rules made under the Immigration Act.
These rules, which are approved by Parliament, allow people to enter and stay
either temporarily, for instance as visitors and students, or with a view to
eventual settlement, for instance as work-permit holders, business people and
persons of independent means, or for immediate settlement as dependants of
those already settled in the United Kingdom.
A visa or other form of entry clearance may be needed for entry and in general
those wishing to come to the United Kingdom for employment must hold work
permits on arrival, although Commonwealth citizens who have a grandparent
born in the United Kingdom and European Community nationals who intend to
work in the United Kingdom do not need work permits.
This section deals (to some extent in broad and informal terms) with social
developments affecting many sections of the population.
The majority of people (some 97 per cent) live in private households (in
families or on their own). The remainder include residents in hotels, and people
in the armed services and in educational or other institutions. In 1981 eight out
of ten people lived in a unit headed by a married couple.
Among many changes in household and family structure is the continuing fall
in the average size of households in Great Britain from over four persons in 1911
to 31 in 1961 and 2-7 in 1981. The fall reflects a greater proportion of people
living on their own (8 per cent) or in one-parent families, the increasing number
of elderly people (more of whom are living alone), and the preferences of parents
for smaller families. The trend towards smaller households (23 per cent of
households consist of one person) is expected to continue and the number of
one-person households is forecast to increase from 4-4 million in 1979 to about
6 million by 1991, of which 3-6 million would be pensioner households.
Four British households out of five live in houses rather than flats and over half
of all households own or are buying their own homes. Terraced housing, much
of it built in the early years of the present century, provides accommodation for
about 30 per cent of all households. In inner urban areas slum clearance and
redevelopment have been major features of post-1945 public housing program¬
mes, but the modernisation and conversion of sub-standard housing have
increasingly been encouraged as alternatives to clearing and rebuilding.
Emphasis in new building is on low-rise, high-density designs, often incorporat¬
es gardens or patios. Nearly half of Britain’s housing has been built since 1945.
The main housing development of the past 100 years, however, has been
suburban. Many families now live in houses grouped in small terraces, or
semi-detached or detached, usually of two storeys with gardens, and providing
two main ground-floor living rooms, a kitchen, from two to four bedrooms, a
bathroom, and one or two lavatories. Originally many houses were located in
24
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Living
Standards
‘ribbon development’ along main roads, but in recent years housing estates have
nearly always been sited away from main roads.
Housing standards are continually improving; some 97 per cent of households
in Great Britain have exclusive use of a bath or shower, and a similar proportion
sole use of an inside lavatory (high percentages by international standards)
while 60 per cent have central heating.
An important influence on the planning of housing and services has been the
growth of car ownership: about 60 per cent of households have the use of at least
one car (or van), including 15 per cent with the use of two or more. Greater
access to motorised transport and the construction of a network of modern
trunk roads and motorways have resulted in a considerable increase in personal
mobility and changed leisure patterns, as well as changes in the design of
housing and shopping areas. Most detached or semi-detached houses in new
suburban estates have garages, and out-of-town shopping centres, usually
including large supermarkets, are often specially planned for the motorist.
The growth in car ownership has brought very great benefits but also a
number of problems, notably, in many towns and cities, increased congestion,
noise and air pollution. Public transport, too, has been affected, and many
services have been reduced or withdrawn, especially local bus and train services
in rural areas. However, greater competition in express coach services has
resulted in more long-distance and commuter coach services being provided.
There has been a steady reduction of the main atmospheric and freshwater
pollutants that have been of concern in the past, producing dramatic improve¬
ments in, for example, the quality of the air in cities and the condition of major
rivers, although various forms of pollution remain a problem in some areas.
There is a high degree of concern for the natural and the urban environment, as
shown by the enormous growth in the past few decades in the number of
organisations (especially voluntary societies) concerned with conservation.
Marked improvements in the standard of living have taken place during the
twentieth century, but generally at a slower rate than in some other major
industrialised countries. Total real personal disposable income in 1982 was
12-2 per cent higher than in 1976. Long-term trends in the pattern of
expenditure show a substantial rise in expenditure on housing, televisions,
telephones, electrical and some other durable goods, motor vehicles, alcohol and
entertainment, and in expenditure overseas. As real incomes have risen, the
share of expenditure on food has fallen. Unlike many other countries, the share
devoted to tobacco continues to decline; an increasing number of people have
stopped smoking for health reasons.
The general level of nutrition remains high. Over the last 20 years there have
been substantial rises in the consumption of poultry, instant coffee, pork and
processed (including frozen) vegetables, while home consumption per person of
mutton and lamb, beef and veal, bread, potatoes, eggs, milk, butter, sugar, tea
and some other foods has fallen. However, another feature has been an increase
in the number of meals eaten away from home, either at work or in restaurants,
and a growth in the consumption of food from ‘take-away’ and ‘fast-food’ shops.
In addition, in the 1960s and 1970s the proportion of convenience foods eaten
grew as women increasingly went out to work and had less time to prepare
meals, and as the variety of prepared foods rose in line with the growth in
ownership of refrigerators and freezers; there is evidence of a more recent return
to fresh foods. Other features have included the growing popularity of health
foods and slimming products and of ‘speciality’ vegetables such as peppers and
aubergines.
Alcohol consumption has risen substantially since the 1950s and alcohol
abuse has become a growing problem although the level is well below that of
LAND AND PEOPLE
25
Availability of Certain Durable Goods
Per cent of households with goods
some other European Community countries. Beer remains much the most
popular alcoholic drink, but consumption of wines and spirits has been growing
and many wine bars and continental-style cafes have opened in recent years. A
high proportion of beer is drunk in public houses (pubs’), which are a
traditional social centre for many people, but there is a tendency for more beer to
be drunk at home and in clubs: beer consumption has recently been falling. A
notable development has been the large increase in consumption of lager, now
estimated to account for about one-third of the beer consumed.
Ownership of many durable goods has been increasing and some goods, such
as televisions, vacuum cleaners and refrigerators, are available in more than 90
per cent of households. Of durable goods shown in the diagram above,
ownership of telephones, freezers and central heating systems is growing most
rapidly; other durable goods which have grown in popularity include music
centres and other audio equipment, video recorders and home computers (it is
expected that by 1986 half of British households will have a computer).
Alterations in the pattern of income distribution have included a fall in the
share of the top 10 per cent from 33-2 per cent of total pre-tax income in 1949 to
24-8 per cent in 1979-80, although successive falls have been mainly retained in
the top half of the distribution. Income before tax of the self-employed is less
evenly distributed than total income, mostly because of the very large incomes of
a small number of people, mainly professionals such as lawyers, accountants
and doctors. The combined effect of the tax system and the receipt of benefits is
to redistribute incomes on a more equal basis.
Wealth is much less evenly distributed, with the top 1 per cent of the
population aged 18 or over owning about 24 per cent of marketable wealth, the
top 10 per cent having 59 per cent and the top 50 per cent having 95 per cent.
The inclusion of non-marketable’ rights in occupational and state pension
26
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Women
Equal
Opportunities
schemes reduces these shares substantially to around 13, 37 and 80 per cent
respectively. There has been little change in the distribution of marketable
wealth, but the trend for marketable wealth plus occupational and state pension
rights shows a fairly continuous movement towards greater equality after 1974,
indicating the growing significance of pension rights as part of total wealth.
Considerable changes have occurred in the twentieth century in the economic
and domestic lives of women, due, in part, to the removal of almost all sex
discrimination in political and legal rights. At the heart of women’s changed role
has been the rise in the number of women, particularly married women, at work.
With later marriages and the availability of effective methods of family planning
there has been a decline in family size. Women as a result are involved in
child-bearing for a much shorter time and this, together with a variety of other
factors which have made housework less burdensome, has made it possible for
women with even young children to return to work.
Women comprise about two-fifths of the British labour force. Since the second
world war the proportion of married women who work has grown to some 61 per
cent of those between the ages of 16 and 60, and they now make up some 26 per
cent of the labour force compared with 4 per cent in 1921. Many families have
come to rely on married women’s earnings as an essential part of their income.
There is still a significant difference between women’s and men s earnings but
the equal pay legislation which came into force at the end of 1975 has narrowed
the gap. Women’s average hourly earnings, exclusive of overtime (for full-time
employees), increased from just under two-thirds of those of men in 1970, to
nearly three-quarters in 1984. Nevertheless, women’s wages remain relatively
low because women tend to work in lowly paid sectors of the economy and they
work less overtime than men.
These changes have been significant, but, because tradition and prejudice can
still handicap women in their careers and personal lives, major legislation to
help to promote equality was passed in the 1970s.
Under the Equal Pay Act 1970 (and corresponding legislation in Northern
Ireland), women in Great Britain are entitled to equal pay with men when doing
work that is the same or broadly similar, or work which has been given an equal
value under a job evaluation scheme. The Act was amended in 1983, so that
equal pay may now be claimed for work of equal value even when it has not been
subject to a job evaluation. The Sex Discrimination Act 1975 makes discrimination
between men and women unlawful in employment, education, training and the
provision of housing, goods, facilities and services. Discriminatory advertise¬
ments which breach the Act are also unlawful. (Northern Ireland has similar
legislation.) In most cases complaints of discrimination may be taken before the
county courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, or the sheriff courts in
Scotland; complaints concerning employment are dealt with by industrial
tribunals. The Equal Opportunities Commission was set up in 1975 (1976 in
Northern Ireland under separate legislation) to enforce the Sex Discrimination
Act and the Equal Pay Act. Its aims are to eliminate sex discrimination and
promote equal opportunities. The Commission advises people of their rights
under both Acts and may give financial or other assistance to help individuals to
conduct a case before a court or tribunal. It also has power to conduct investi¬
gations and to issue notices requiring discriminatory practices to stop. In
addition, it keeps legislation under review and may submit proposals for
amending it to the ministers concerned. The Commission also seeks to make
women more aware of the opportunities available to them and in 1984 launched
a year-long campaign, Women into Science and Engineering—WISE 84—
designed to encourage more women and girls to take up careers in these areas.
LAND AND PEOPLE
27
Ethnic and
National
Minorities
Race Relations
Act
Britain has a long history of accommodating minority groups and in the last two
hundred years or so a variety of people have settled in the country, some to avoid
political or religious persecution, others seeking a better way of life or an escape
from poverty.
The Irish have long made homes in Britain, and comprise the largest single
minority group. Many Jewish refugees started a new life in the country towards
the end of the nineteenth century and in the 1930s, and after 1945 large
numbers of other European refugees settled in Britain. The large communities
from the West Indies and South Asian sub-continent date from the 1950s and
early 1960s. There are also sizeable groups of Americans, Australians, Chinese
and various European communities such as Greek and Turkish Cypriots,
Italians and Spaniards. More recently Ugandan Asians and refugees from
Indo-China have settled in Britain.
In 1981 the population of New Commonwealth1 and Pakistani ethnic origin
was estimated at 2-2 million (just over 4 per cent of the total population of Great
Britain) of whom over 40 per cent were born in Britain. Most of them share
aspirations that are broadly similar to those of the British community as a whole
and they enjoy full political and civic rights. Although the circumstances of
many members of the ethnic minority communities are less fortunate than
those of other groups (for example, they suffer disproportionately from
unemployment and often live in poor housing in the older urban areas) there
have been important advances over the last 20 years in employment and housing
conditions, and many individuals have achieved distinction in their careers and
in public life.
The difficulties minorities face are being alleviated by continuous social
programmes, some of which benefit the whole community, while other projects
are directed towards meeting the minorities’ special needs. Although fewer
children than formerly go to school with no knowledge of English, there are still
many who have an insufficient grasp of the language. Language teaching is
recognised to be of prime importance and additional teachers are appointed to
schools with ethnic minorities. For adults, classes at or outside their place of
work are run by local authorities and voluntary organisations. Government
grants are available to authorities with substantial ethnic minority groups
towards the salaries of extra staff such as teachers, health visitors and
interpreters.
The welfare of ethnic minorities and good relations between minorities and
the local community are promoted by community relations councils and other
voluntary bodies. In recognition of the tensions that can arise between the police
and ethnic minorities, consultation between the police and the community is
seen as having particular importance and consultative committees have been set
up in many areas. Policies for promoting equality of opportunity in a multiracial
society in which all citizens receive equal respect are pursued against a
background of legislation against discrimination.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes discrimination unlawful on grounds of
colour, race or ethnic or national origin in the provision of goods, facilities and
services, in employment, training and related matters, in education, in housing
and in advertising. It strengthened legislation passed in 1968 which, in turn,
widened the scope of the first race relations legislation enacted in 1965; it also
strengthened the criminal law on incitement to racial hatred.
The 1976 Act brought the law against racial discrimination into line with that
against sex discrimination (see p 26), and gave complainants direct access to
civil courts and, in the case of employment complaints, to industrial tribunals.
1 All other Commonwealth countries except Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
28
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Commission for
Racial Equality
Leisure
Trends
The Commission for Racial Equality was established by the Race Relations Act
1976 with statutory duties to work towards the elimination of discrimination
and to promote equality of opportunity and good relations between people of
different racial groups. It has power to investigate unlawful discriminatory
practices and to issue non-discrimination notices, enforceable in the courts,
requiring that such practices should cease. It has an important educational role
and has issued a code of practice in employment. It is also the principal source of
advice for the general public about the Race Relations Act and has discretion to
assist individuals with their complaints.
The Commission supports the work of the 100 or so community relations
councils, which are independent, voluntary bodies set up in most areas with a
significant ethnic minority population to promote harmonious community
relations at the local level. It makes grants towards the salaries of the community
relations officers employed by the councils, most of whom also receive funds
from their local authorities, and gives grants to ethnic minority self-help groups
and to other projects run by or for the benefit of the minority communities.
Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend it
and higher real incomes than had previous generations. Agreed hours of
full-time work are usually from 35 to 40 hours a week, although many people
actually work somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime. A large majority of
employees work a five-day week.
The most common leisure activities are home based, or social, with visiting or
entertaining relatives or friends and watching television among the most
popular. Watching television is the main evening pastime for all except young
men. Nearly all households have a television set and in winter the population
aged five and over spend on average 20 hours a week watching programmes.
Growing numbers are using video recorders to provide television viewing suited
to their individual taste and to watch programmes at times other than their
transmission. Other popular pursuits include: listening to the radio, records or
cassettes: reading: do-it-yourself home improvements such as house painting
and decorating: going out for a meal or for a drink or to the cinema or to watch a
sporting event; gardening; outings (such as visits to the countryside, seaside or
to museums); photography; visits to social clubs and leisure centres; and social
and voluntary work. About half the households in Britain have a pet, the most
common being dogs (of which there are thought to be more than 5 million in
Britain) and cats (nearly 5 million).
Sports and other pastimes have grown in popularity, reflected by increasing
membership of the main organisations concerned with outdoor activities,
although for some sports, such as football, the number of spectators has been
declining. Activities in which people participate include, in order of popularity,
walking, darts and swimming.
Almost all full-time employees are entitled to a paid holiday each year in
addition to public holidays and by the end of 1981 over four-fifths of manual
workers had a basic holiday entitlement of four weeks or more.
The number of holidays (of four or more nights) taken in Great Britain by
British residents was 33-5 million in 1983 compared with 40-5 million in 1973.
Holidays abroad in 1983 numbered 14-5 million, compared with 8-25 million in
1973 and well over half involved ‘package’ arrangements. More than four-fifths
of overseas holidays were taken in other European countries, with Spain being
the most popular destination; it received one-third of all British holidaymakers
abroad. The next most popular destinations were France, Italy. Greece and
Austria. The main holiday period is May to September when over 80 per cent of
holidays in Britain and 70 per cent of holidays abroad are taken. Some 42 per
cent of the population, however, took no holiday away from home in 1983.
2 Government
The United Kingdom constitution, unlike that of most other countries, is not
contained in any single document. Formed partly by statute, partly by common
law and partly by convention, it can be altered by Act of Parliament, or by general
agreement to create, vary or abolish a convention. The constitution thus adapts
readily to changing political conditions and ideas.
The organs of government are clearly distinguishable although their functions
often intermingle and overlap. The legislature. Parliament, is the supreme
authority. The executive consists of: (1) the Government—Cabinet and other
ministers who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy,
(2) government departments, which are responsible for national administration,
(3) local authorities, which administer and manage many local services, and
(4) public corporations responsible for operating particular nationalised indus¬
tries or, for example, a social or cultural service, subject to ministerial control in
varying degrees. The judiciary determines common law and interprets statutes,
and is independent of both legislature and executive.
The Monarchy
The British people look to the Queen not only as their head of State, but also as
the symbol of their nation's unity. The monarchy is the most ancient secular
institution in the United Kingdom. During the last thousand years its
continuity has only once been broken (by the establishment of a republic which
lasted from 1649 to 1660) and, despite interruptions in the direct line of
succession, the hereditary principle upon which it was founded has always been
preserved. The royal title in the United Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the
Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of
Her other Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender
of the Faith'. The form of the royal title is varied for those other member states of
the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of State,1 to suit the particular
circumstances of each. Other member states are republics or have their own
monarchies.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the
other member nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of
State, her representative is the Governor-General appointed by her on the advice
of the ministers of the country concerned and completely independent of the
United Kingdom Government.
In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is usually represented by
governors, who are responsible to the British Government for the good
government of the countries concerned.
Succession,
Accession and
Coronation
The title to the Crown derives partly from statute and partly from common law
rules of descent. Lineal Protestant descendants of a granddaughter of James I of
England and VI of Scotland (Princess Sophia, the Electress of Hanover) are alone
‘The other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is head of State are: Antigua and
(Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Canada, Fiji, Grenada, Jamaica, Mauritius, New
Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu.
30
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Acts of
Government
eligible to succeed, and although succession is not bound to continue in its
present line, it can be altered only by common consent of the member nations of
the Commonwealth of which the Queen is Sovereign.
The sons of the Sovereign have precedence over the daughters in succeeding
to the throne. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant, and the
powers of the Crown are vested in her as though she were a king. While the
consort of a king takes her husband’s rank and style, the constitution does not
give any special rank or privileges to the husband of a Queen-Regnant although
in practice he fills an important role in the life of the nation, as does the Duke of
Edinburgh.
The Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon as his or her predecessor dies
and there is no interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed at an Accession
Council to which all members of the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal (see p 34), the Lord Mayor and Aldermen and other
leading citizens of the City of London are also invited.
The Sovereign’s coronation follows the accession after a convenient interval. It |
is a ceremony which has remained essentially the same for over a thousand
years, even if details have often been modified to conform to the customs of the
time. It takes place at Westminster Abbey in London in the presence of
representatives of the Houses of Parliament and of all the great public interests
of the United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other
Commonwealth nations, and of representatives of other countries.
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she is head of the executive, an integral
part of the legislature, head of the judiciary, the commander-in-chief of all armed
forces of the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the established Church of
England. As a result of a long process of evolution, during which theponarchy s
absolute power has been progressively reduced, the Queen acts on the advice of
her ministers, which she cannot ignore. The United Kingdom is governed by Her
Majesty’s Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of a trend during the past hundred years
towards assigning powers directly to ministers, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen. These include
summoning, proroguing (discontinuing until the next session without dissol¬
ution) and dissolving Parliament; giving royal assent to Bills passed by both
Houses of Parliament; appointing many important office holders, including
government ministers, judges, officers in the armed forces, governors, diplo¬
mats and bishops and some other senior clergy of the Church of England;
conferring peerages, knighthoods and other honours1; and remitting all or part
of the penalty imposed on a person convicted of a crime. An important function
is appointing the Prime Minister and by convention the Queen invites the leader
of the political party which commands a majority in the House of Commons to
form a government. In international affairs, the Queen as head of State has the
power to declare war and make peace, to recognise foreign states an
governments, to conclude treaties and to annexe or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (as when appointing the Prime Minister), those acts
involving the use of ‘royal prerogative' powers are nowadays performed by
government ministers who are responsible to Parliament and can be questioned
about a particular policy. It is not necessary to have Parliament’s authority to
exercise these powers, although Parliament has the power to restrict or abolish a
prerogative right.
. Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister, a few
are conferred on her personal selection-the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the
Order of Merit and the Royal Victorian Order.
The Royal Family
From the reign of Queen Victoria up to September 1984
QUEEN VICTORIA, 1819-1901,
1. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
'o _ Jh >-• £ a)
=|cl<:=fs2J-Soll^
Sc
«iU1)Uft,£L,;£3c/}0v.QoS o
g.S.S.5." £ E.E i;it3-2i:-OTi
Wa U. Ih t-i 4) CH CC 3
a-a,a.o,(xa,Na.>JQwJJQ
sz
30^
SSsog
C S
<’0
jJS
a>;-
o o
sll
W*
^ u. O
C <u'C
H T3 xi
EiO
7
i. S 5
'tQ‘2
00 ^
*
. °<
S :«Ctf
>-oQ
Q
X '
<%*
Ss<
CZ
0An£
z^w
2Eg
vo>
s:«
>0
>W
■o5:
Xm
oy
Wf-
oC,
gj
2s
^ Ov On On^C. 3
^ o ^ ^
N <N
W
w
4) " ^
^ “ c C
IS ai c 2 "S
« Si 0 3 S'®
M.S'" C’O’"
^ u o.r<t
S<GmC
c
v ■*
E€
a o
32
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
Royal Income
and
Expenditure
Ministerial responsibility in no way detracts from the importance of the
Queen's role in the smooth working of government. She holds meetings of the
Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other officials at home and
overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs
innumerable state papers; she must be informed and consulted on every aspect
of nationaUife; and she must show complete impartiality.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made for a regent to be appointed to perform them should the Queen be
totally incapacitated. The regent would be the Queen’s eldest son, the Prince of
Wales, then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event of the
Queen's partial incapacity or absence abroad, there is provision for appointing
Counsellors of State (the Duke of Edinburgh, the four adult persons next in line
of succession, and the Queen Mother) to whom the Queen may delegate certain
royal functions. However, Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the Queen’s express instructions), or create peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with British kings and queens, and, in
spite of the change in the outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, many
traditional customs and ceremonies are retained. Royal marriages and royal
funerals are marked by public ceremony, and the Sovereign’s birthday is
officially celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on Horse Guards
Parade. State banquets take place when a foreign monarch or head of State
visits Britain; investitures are held at Buckingham Palace to bestow honours;
and royal processions add significance to such occasions as a State opening of
Parliament, when the Queen drives from Buckingham Palace to Westminster.
Each year the Queen and other members of the royal family visit many parts of
the United Kingdom. Their presence at scientific, artistic, industrial and
charitable events of national and local importance encourages nationwide
interest and publicity. The Queen pays state visits to foreign governments,
accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh. She also undertakes lengthy tours in
the other countries of the Commonwealth. Other members of the royal family
pay official visits overseas, occasionally representing the Queen, and often in
connection with an organisation or a cause with which they are associated.
About 85 per cent of all expenditure arising from the royal family’s official duties
is met by public departments. This includes the costs of the royal yacht, the
Queen’s Flight, travel by train and the upkeep of the royal palaces. Apart from
this the Queen’s public expenditure on staff and expenses incurred in carrying
out official duties as head of State is financed from the Civil List, approved by
Parliament. (In 1984 this was £3-85 million.) Her private expenditure as
Sovereign is met from the Privy Purse, which is supplied mainly from the
revenues of the Duchy of Lancaster1; and her personal expenditure as a private
individual from her own personal resources. There are annual allowances
approved by Parliament to other members of the royal family, though not to the
Prince of Wales, who as Duke of Cornwall is entitled to the net revenue of the
estate of the Duchy of Cornwall (he has voluntarily surrendered a proportion of
the revenue to the nation). The Queen pays into the Exchequer a sum equivalent
to that provided by Parliament in respect of certain members of the royal family.
Parliament
Parliament is the supreme legislative authority. Its three elements, the Queen,
the House of Lords and the elected House of Commons, are outwardly separate,
■ The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the
reigning*Sovereign: It is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately
administered by the Chancellor ol the Duchy.
GOVERNMENT
33
The Functions
of Parliament
The Meeting of
Parliament
are constituted on different principles, and meet together only on occasions of
symbolic significance such as the State opening of Parliament when the
Commons are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making
body, however. Parliament usually requires the concurrence of all its parts.
Parliament can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, for any of the
constituent parts of the country separately, or for any combination of them. It
can also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, which are Crown
dependencies and not part of the United Kingdom, having subordinate
legislatures which make laws on island affairs.1
Free from any legal restraints imposed by a written constitution, Parliament is
able to legislate as it pleases: generally to make, unmake, or alter any law; to
legalise past illegalities and make void and punishable what was lawful when
done and thus reverse the decisions of the ordinary courts; and to destroy
established conventions or turn a convention into binding law. It can prolong its
own life beyond the normal period without consulting the electorate.
In practice, however, Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this way. Its
members bear in mind the common law and have tended to act in accordance
with precedent and tradition. The validity of an Act of Parliament which has
been duly passed, promulgated and published cannot be disputed in the law
courts, but no Parliament would be likely to pass an Act which it knew would
receive no public support. The system of party government helps to ensure that
Parliament legislates with its responsibility to the electorate in mind.
As a member of the European Community, the United Kingdom recognises the
various types of Community legislation, and sends 81 elected members to the
European Parliament.
The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws, (2) to provide, by voting
taxation, the means of carrying on the work of government, and (3) to scrutinise
government policy and administration, particularly proposals for expenditure.
In discharging these functions Parliament helps to bring the relevant facts and
issues before the electorate. By custom. Parliament is also consulted before the
ratification of all important international treaties and agreements, the making
of treaties being, in theory at least, a royal prerogative exercised on the advice of
the Government and not subject to parliamentary approval.
A Parliament has a maximum duration of five years, but is often dissolved and a
general election held before the end of this term. The maximum life has been
prolonged by legislation in such rare circumstances as the two world wars.
Dissolution and writs for a general election are ordered by the Queen on the
advice of the Prime Minister.
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions. Each usually lasts for one
year beginning and ending most often in October or November and inter¬
spersed with ‘adjournments’ at night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter and
the late (English) Spring Bank Holiday and during a long summer recess
starting in late July or early August. The average number of ‘sitting’ days in a
session is about 175 in the House of Commons and about 150 in the House of
Lords. At the start of each session the Queen’s speech to Parliament outlines the
Government's broad policies and proposed legislative programme. Each session
is terminated by prorogation. Parliament then ‘stands prorogued' until the new
session opens (on occasions Parliament has been dissolved without proro¬
gation). A short speech is made on behalf of the Queen summarising
' The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and the
Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy Council and the local assemblies. It
is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the Privy Council member primarily concerned with island
affairs, to scrutinise each legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
34
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The House of
Lords
Parliament’s work during the past session. An adjournment does not affect
uncompleted business, but prorogation terminates nearly all parliamentary
business, so that all public Bills not completed lapse, and must be reintroduced
in the next session unless they are to be abandoned.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Spiritual and the Lords Temporal. The
Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of
London, Durham arid Winchester, and the 21 senior diocesan bishops of the
Church of England. The Lords Temporal consist of (1) all hereditary peers and
peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom who
have not disclaimed their peerages, (2) all life peers and peeresses, and (3) those
Lords of Appeal (‘law lords’) created life peers to assist the House in its judicial
duties. Hereditary peerages carry a right to sit in the House (subject to certain
disqualifications), provided the holder is 21 years of age or over, but anyone
succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession, disclaim that
peerage for his or her lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit in the House
but gain the right to vote at parliamentary elections and to offer themselves for
election to the House of Commons.
Temporal peerages, both hereditary and life, are conferred on the advice of the
Prime Minister. They are usually granted either in recognition of service in
politics or other walks of life or because the Government of the day wishes to
have the recipient in the House of Lords. The House also provides a place in
Parliament for men and women whose advice is useful to the State, but who do
not wish to be involved in party politics.
In mid-1984 there were 1,189 members of the House of Lords, including the
two archbishops and 24 bishops. The Lords Temporal consisted of 763
hereditary peers who had succeeded to their titles, 31 hereditary peers who have
had their titles conferred on them (including the Prince of Wales), and 369 life
peers, of whom 20 were ‘law lords’. Of the total, 96 peers were not in receipt of a
writ of summons and 158 peers were on leave of absence from the House (see
below). Of the 117 Irish peers 47 were entitled to sit in the House of Lords
because they were holders of an English, Scottish or United Kingdom peerage.
Other Irish peerages which pre-date the union of Great Britain and Ireland in
1800 do not entitle their holders to membership of the House of Lords.
Not all peers with a right to sit in the House of Lords attend the sittings.1 Peers
who frequently attend the House (the average daily attendance is about 300)
include elder statesmen and others who have spent their lives in public service.
They receive no salary for their parliamentary work, but can recover expenses
incurred in attending the House and certain travelling expenses (for which there
are maximum daily rates).
The House is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who takes his place on the
woolsack2 as ex-officio Speaker of the House. In his absence his place may be
taken by a deputy speaker, a deputy chairman or, if neither is present, by a
speaker chosen by the Lords present. The first of the deputy speakers is the Lord
Chairman of Committees, who is appointed at the beginning of each session and
takes the chair in all committees, unless the House decides otherwise. The Lord
Chairman and the Principal Deputy Chairman of Committees are salaried
officers of the House.
1 Some hereditary peers do not establish their claim to succeed and so do not receive a writ of
summons entitling them to sit in the House. Lords may apply for leave of absence for the
duration, or for the remainder, of a Parliament.
2 The woolsack is a seat in the form of a large cushion stuffed with wool from several
Commonwealth countries; it is a relic from the medieval period when wool was the greatest source
of the country’s wealth.
GOVERNMENT
35
The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments who is respon¬
sible for the records of proceedings, including judgments, and for the
promulgation of Acts of Parliament, and who is also the accounting officer for
money voted to the House; the other Clerks at the Table who, with the Clerk of
the Parliaments and the other officers and officials of the House, are collectively
known as the Parliament Office: the Gentlemen Usher of the Black Rod, who is
also Serjeant at Arms in attendance upon the Lord Chancellor and is responsible
for security and for accommodation and services in the House of Lords’ part of
the Palace of Westminster; and the Yeoman Usher who is Deputy Serjeant at
Arms and assists Black Rod in his duties.
The House of
Commons
The House of Commons is elected by universal adult suffrage and consists of 650
members of Parliament (MPs). At present 25 are women. Of the 650 seats, 523
are for England, 38 for Wales, 72 for Scotland, and 17 for Northern Ireland.
General elections are held after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new one
summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies or resigns1 or is given a peerage, a
by-election takes place. Members are paid an annual salary of £16,904 (from
January 1985) and an allowance of £12,000 for secretarial and research
expenses. They also have a number of other allowances, including travel
allowances, a supplement for London members and, for provincial members,
subsistence allowances. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 47.)
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, elected by MPs to
preside over the House. Other officers are the Chairman of Ways and Means, and
two deputy chairmen who act as Deputy Speakers, elected by the House on the
nomination of the Government. They, like the Speaker, neither speak nor vote
other than in their official capacity. The House is administered by a Commission
chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs) include the Clerk of the House of
Commons, who is the principal adviser to the Speaker of the House on its
privileges and procedures; his department has responsibilities relating to the
conduct of the business of the House and its many committees. The Clerk is also
accounting officer for the House. The Serjeant at Arms, who waits upon the
Speaker, carries out certain orders of the House, is the official housekeeper of
the Commons part of the building, and is responsible for its security. Other
officers serve the House in the Libraiy, the Department of the Official Report
(Hansard), the Administration Department and the Refreshment Department.
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies, each
of which returns one member to the House of Commons. To ensure equitable
representation four permanent Boundary Commissions, one each for England,
Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, make periodic reviews of constituencies
and recommend any redistribution of seats that may seem necessary in the light
of population movements or other changes. Their last recommendations were
submitted to Parliament in 1982-83 and formed the basis for the constituencies
in the 1983 general election.
Elections are by secret ballot. British citizens and citizens of other Common¬
wealth countries, together with citizens of the Irish Republic, may vote provided
they are aged 18 or over, resident in the United Kingdom, registered in the
annual register of electors for the constituency and not subject to any
disqualification. People not entitled to vote include members of the House of
Lords, patients detained under mental health legislation, sentenced prisoners
An MP who wishes to resign from the House can do so only by using the technical device of
yl?l f°r 0fflCe Under the Crown (Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds or Steward of the Manor
°i,- 0^thstead*• anciefit offices which disqualify the holder from membership of the House but
which carry no salary and have no responsibilities.
36
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Political
Party System
and people convicted within the previous five years of corrupt or illegal election
practices. Service voters (members of the armed forces and their spouses, Crown
servants and staff of the British Council employed overseas, together with their
wives or husbands if accompanying them) may be registered for an address in a
constituency where they would live but for their service.
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling station. Service
voters resident abroad and merchant seamen may vote by proxy or, if in the
United Kingdom at the time of the election, by post. Electors who are physically
incapacitated or unable to vote in person because of the nature of their work are
also entitled to vote by post.
Voting is not compulsory; nearly 73 per cent of a total electorate of some 42
million people voted in the general election of June 1983. The candidate who
polls the most votes in a constituency is elected.
British citizens and citizens of other Commonwealth countries, together with
citizens of the Irish Republic, may stand and be elected as MPs provided they are
aged 21 or over and are not subject to any disqualification. Those disqualified
include undischarged bankrupts, people sentenced to more than one year's
imprisonment, clergy of the Church of England, Church of Scotland, Church of
Ireland and Roman Catholic Church, peers, and holders of certain offices listed
in the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975. The latter include holders
of judicial office, civil servants, some local government officers, members of the
regular armed forces, or the police service, some members of public corporations
and government commissions, and in addition British members of the
legislature of any country or territory outside the Commonwealth. A candidate’s
nomination for election must be signed by two electors as proposer and
seconder, and by eight other electors registered in the constituency. He or she
does not require any party backing. A candidate must also deposit £150, which
is forfeited if his or her votes do not exceed 12-5 per cent of those validly cast.
The maximum sum a candidate may spend on an election campaign is £2,700
plus 2-3 pence for each elector in a borough constituency or 3 -1 pence for each
elector in a county constituency. A candidate may post an election address to
each elector in the constituency, free of charge. All election expenses, apart from
the candidate’s personal expenses, are subject to the statutory limit.
Legislation to change the electoral law is to be introduced in the 1984-85
session of Parliament. This would extend the franchise to many British citizens
resident abroad; enable holidaymakers unable to vote in person to apply for a
postal or proxy vote; and increase the deposit at parliamentary elections to
£1,000 while lowering the threshold for forfeiting the deposit to 5 per cent of the
votes cast.
The party system, existing in one form or another since the eighteenth century,
is an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system relies heavily upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying policies before the electorate for approval. The parties are
not registered or formally recognised in law, but in practice most candidates in
elections, and almost all winning candidates, belong to one of the main parties.
For the last 150 years a predominantly two-party system has operated, and
since 1945 either the Conservative Party, which can trace its origins to the
eighteenth century, or the Labour Party, which emerged in the last decade of the
nineteenth century, have held power. The Liberal Party, which last formed a
government on its own in 1906—16, can also trace its origins to the eighteenth
century, while the Social Democratic Party, which has formed an alliance with
the Liberal Party, was formed in 1981. Other parties include two nationalist
parties. Plaid Cymru (founded in Wales in 1925) and the Scottish National Party
(founded in 1934), and a number of Northern Ireland parties, the largest of
GOVERNMENT
37
which are the Ulster Unionist Party, formed in the early part of this century, and
the Democratic Unionist Party, founded in 1971 by a group which broke away
from the Ulster Unionists.
The percentages of votes cast for the main political parties in the general
election of June 1983 and the resulting distribution of seats in the House of
Commons are given in Table 3.
Table 3: Percentages of Votes Cast, and Members Elected, in the 1983 General
Election
Party
% of votes
cast
Conservative 42-4
Labour 27-6
Social Democratic-
Liberal Alliance a 25-4
Others 4-6
Party
Members
elected
Conservative 397
Labour 209
Liberal 17
Social Democratic 6
Scottish National 2
Plaid Cymru
(Welsh Nationalist) 2
Ulster Unionist
(Northern Ireland) 11
Democratic Unionist
(Northern Ireland) 3
Ulster Popular Unionist
(Northern Ireland) 1
Social Democratic and
Labour (Northern Ireland) l
Sinn Fein
(Northern Ireland) b 1
Total 650
“'The Liberal and Social Democratic Parties formed an alliance in 1981 to contest the general election
The Sinn Fein member has not taken his seat.
Note: On 1 August 1984 the state of the parties (excluding the Speaker and his three deputies) was as follows:
Conservative 394; Labour 207; Liberal 17; Social Democratic 7; Scottish National 2; Plaid Cymru (Welsh
Nationalist) 2; Ulster Unionist 11; Democratic Unionist 3; Ulster Popular Unionist 1: Social Democratic and
Labour 1; Sinn Fein 1.
The party which wins most seats (although not necessarily the most votes) at a
general election, or which has the support of a majority of members in the House
of Commons, usually forms the Government. By tradition, the leader of the
majority party is asked by the Sovereign to form a government; and about 100 of
its members in the House of Commons and the House of Lords receive
ministerial appointments (including appointment to the Cabinet—see p 47) on
the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes the official
Opposition with its own leader and ‘shadow cabinet’.
Leaders of the Government and Opposition sit on the front benches of the
Commons with their supporters (the back-benchers) sitting behind them.
Similar arrangements for the parties also apply to the House of Lords; however.
Lords who do not wish to be associated with either the Government or the
Opposition may sit on the ‘cross-benches’. The effectiveness of the party system
in Parliament rests largely on the relationship between the Government and the
opposition parties. Depending on the relative voting strengths of the parties in
the House of Commons, the Opposition might seek to overthrow the Govern¬
ment by securing its defeat on a matter of confidence’. In general, however, its
aims are to contribute to the formulation of policy and legislation by
38
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Procedure
constructive criticism; to oppose government proposals that it considers
objectionable; to secure concessions on government Bills; and to increase public
support and enhance its chances of electoral success.
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the two Houses, by the Chief ,
Government Whips in consultation with the Chief Opposition Whips. The Chief
Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to when the
question of finding time for debating some particular issue is discussed. The
Leaders of the two Houses are primarily responsible for the direction of business
and for providing facilities for the Houses to debate matters about which they
are concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include keeping members
informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining the party’s
voting strength by ensuring that members attend important debates, and
conveying to the party leadership the opinions of back-bench members. The
importance a party attaches to a vote on a particular issue is indicated to the
MPs by the underlining (once, twice or three times) on the notice sent to them;
failure to comply with a ‘three-line whip’ is usually seen as rebellion against the
party’s policy. Party discipline tends to be less strong in the Lords than in the
Commons.
The Chief Government Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury; of the other Government Whips, three (one of whom is Deputy
Chief Whip) are officers of the Royal Household, five hold titular posts as Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury and five are Assistant Whips. Salaries are also
paid to the Chief Opposition Whips in both Houses and to two of the Opposition
Assistant Whips in the Commons. The Government Whips in the Lords hold
offices in the Royal Household and act as government spokesmen.
Annual assistance from public funds helps opposition parties to carry out
their parliamentary work at Westminster. It is limited to parties which had at
least two members elected at the previous general election or one member elected
and a minimum of 150,000 votes cast. The amount is: £1,080 for every seat won
plus £216 for every 200 votes, up to a maximum of £325,000. Since 1945 there
have been six Conservative and six Labour Governments and the great majority
of members of the House of Commons have represented either the Conservative
or the Labour Party.
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom and precedent, partly formulated
in standing orders governing details of practice in each House. The system of
debate is much the same in the two Houses: the subject originates in the form of
a motion (a proposal made by a member in order to elicit a decision from the
House). When a motion has been moved, the Speaker proposes the question as
the subject of debate. At the end of each debate the question is decided by a vote
on a simple majority. The main difference between the two Houses is that in the
Lords the office of Speaker carries with it no authority to check or curtail debate,
such matters being decided by the general sense of the House, whereas in the
Commons the Speaker has full authority to give effect, promptly and decisively,
to the rules and orders of the House. The Speaker of the Commons must guard
against abuse of procedure or infringement of minority rights; has discretion to
allow or disallow a closure motion (to end discussion so that the matter may be
put to the vote); and has powers to check irrelevance and repetition in debate,
and to save time in other respects. In cases of grave disorder the House can be
adjourned or the sitting suspended by the Speaker. Voting in the Commons is
under the direction of the Speaker whose duty it is to pronounce the final result.
GOVERNMENT
39
Legislative
Proceedings
In the event of a tied vote the Speaker gives the casting vote, but only in
accordance with established conventions which preclude an expression of
opinion on the merits of the question.
The voting procedure in the House of Lords is similar to that in the Commons,
except that the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no casting, vote. Bills
and subordinate legislation are in general allowed to proceed in the form before
the House unless a majority votes to reject or amend them; on other motions the
question is decided in the negative unless there is a majority in favour. When the
House is sitting judicially (the Lords is the final court of appeal for civil cases in
Britain and for criminal cases in England, Wales and Northern Ireland) the
judgment under appeal is not changed if the votes are equal.
The Commons has a public register of MPs’ financial interests. Members with
a relevant pecuniary interest in a matter before the House, direct or indirect,
must declare it when taking part in a debate, though to operate as a
disqualification from voting the interest must be direct, immediate and
personal. In any other proceedings of the House or in transactions with other
members or with ministers or civil servants, MPs must also disclose any relevant
financial interest or benefit.
Proceedings of both Houses are public, except on extremely rare occasions; the
minutes (in the Commons called Votes and Proceedings and in the Lords,
Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches (The Official Report of Parliamentaiy
Debates, Hansard) are published daily. The records of the Lords from 1497 and
of the Commons from 1547, together with the parliamentary and political
papers of certain past members of the Houses, are available to the public in the
House of Lords Record Office. Parliament is not televised, but proceedings are
recorded and sound transmissions of some are made on television and radio,
either live or recorded. A Parliamentary Sound Archive has been established.
Debates on televising proceedings have taken place on several occasions and in
1968 an internal television experiment took place in the Lords. In late 1983 a
private member’s Bill to provide for the televising of Parliament was given a first
reading in the Commons, while the Lords voted in favour of televising some of its
proceedings for an experimental period.
The law undergoes constant reform in the courts as established principles are
interpreted, clarified or reapplied to meet new circumstances, but substantial
changes are the responsibility of Parliament and the Government through the
normal legislative process.
A draft law takes the form of a parliamentary Bill. Most Bills are public Bills
involving measures relating to public policy, but there are also private Bills
which deal solely with matters of individual, corporate or local interest. Public-
Bills can be introduced, in either House, by a government minister or by a
private member. Most public Bills that become law are in practice sponsored by
the Government.
Before a government Bill is finally drafted, there is normally considerable
consultation with professional bodies, voluntary organisations and other
agencies interested in the subject matter, such as major interest and ‘pressure’
groups which aim to promote a specific cause. Proposals for legislative changes
are sometimes set out in government ‘White Papers’ which may be debated in
Parliament before a Bill is introduced. From time to time consultative •
documents, sometimes called ‘Green Papers’, set out for public discussion
government proposals which are still at a formative stage.
Bills must, in principle, be passed by each House. As a rule government Bills
likely to raise political controversy go through the Commons before the Lords,
while those of an intricate but uncontroversial nature often pass through the
Lords first. (Consolidation Bills are always introduced in the House of Lords.) A
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Bill with a mainly financial purpose is nearly always introduced in the
Commons, and a Bill involving taxation must be based on resolutions agreed by
that House, often after debate, before it can be introduced. If the main object of a
Bill is to create a public charge, it can only be introduced by a minister or, if
brought from the Lords, be proceeded with in the Commons if taken up by ^
minister, an arrangement which gives the Government considerable control
over legislation.
At the beginning of each session private members of the Commons ballot for
precedence in introducing a Bill on one of the Fridays specially allocated; the
first 20 are successful. After the ballot a private member may also present a Bill
after question time (see p 43). or seek to introduce a Bill under the ‘ten minute
rule’ which allows two speeches, one in favour of and one against the measure,
after which the House decides whether to allow the Bill to be brought in. Private
members’ Bills do not often proceed very far, but a few become law each session.
If one secures a second reading, the Government usually introduces any
necessary money resolution. Private members Bills may be introduced in the
House of Lords at any time, but the time that can be given to them in the
Commons is strictly limited.
The process of passing a public Bill is similar in both Houses. The Bill receives
a formal first reading on introduction, is printed, and after a while (between one
day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) is given a second
reading after a debate on its general principles and merits. In the Commons a
non-controversial Bill may be referred to a second reading committee to decide
whether it should be read a second time. After a second reading in the
Commons, a Bill is usually referred for detailed examination to a standing
committee (see p 41). If the House so decides, the Bill may be referred to the
whole House sitting in committee. The committee stage is followed by the report
stage, during which further amendments may be considered. At the third
reading a Bill is reviewed in its final form. In the Commons this stage is taken
without a debate unless there is a motion in the name of six MPs that the
question be not put forthwith—a procedure frequently used. The House may
vote to limit the time devoted to examining a Bill by passing a government
timetable motion, commonly referred to as a ‘guillotine’. After the third reading a
Commons Bill is sent to the Lords where it goes through broadly the same
stages. In the Lords, after the second reading, a Bill is considered by a committee
of the whole House unless the House takes the rare decision to refer it to a Public
Bill Committee. It is then considered on report and read a third time; at all these
stages amendments may be made. A Bill which starts in the Lords and is passed
by that House is then sent to the Commons for all the stages there. Amendments
made by the second House generally must be agreed by the first, or a
compromise reached, before a Bill can become law.
Most government Bills introduced and passed in the Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature. How¬
ever, if a non-governmental Lords Bill were unacceptable to the Commons it
would generally not become law because no debating time would be allotted to it.
The Lords, on the other hand, do not in general prevent a Bill insisted upon by
the Commons from finally becoming law. Normally they either accept the Bill
without changes, or amend and return it for consideration by the Commons,
who frequently agree to the amendments made. In practice, the Lords pass
without amendment Bills authorising taxation or national expenditure. A Bill
that deals only with taxation or expenditure must become law within one month
of being sent to the Lords, whether or not they agree to it, unless the Commons
directs otherwise. If no agreement is reached between the two Houses on a
non-financial Commons Bill (or an amendment to it) the Lords can in practice
delay the Bill (with certain exceptions) for about 13 months. At the end of this
GOVERNMENT
41
Delegated
Legislation
Parliamentary
Committees
Committees of
the Whole House
Standing
Committees
time it may, in accordance with the Parliament Acts, be submitted to the Queen
for royal assent, provided it has again been passed by the Commons. A Bill to
lengthen the life of a Parliament would require the full assent of both Houses in
the normal way.
The limitations on the power of the Lords, contained in the Parliament Acts
1911 and 1949, are based on the belief that the principal legislative function of
the non-elected House nowadays is to act as a chamber of revision, comp¬
lementing, not rivalling, the elected House.
When a Bill has passed through all its parliamentary stages, it is sent to the
Queen for royal assent, after which it is part of the law of the land and known as
an Act of Parliament. The royal assent has not been refused since 1707.
Private Bills, promoted by people or organisations outside Parliament (often
local authorities) to give them special powers not granted by the general law, go
through substantially the same procedure as public Bills, but most of the work
is done in committee, where procedures follow a semi-judicial pattern: the
promotor must prove the need for the powers or privileges sought and the
objections of opposing interests are heard. Both sides may be legally repre¬
sented.
Delegated legislation, used to relieve pressure on parliamentary time, gives
ministers and other authorities the power to regulate administrative details
after a law has been passed. To minimise the risk that powers thus conferred on
the executive might supersede or weaken parliamentary government, they are
normally delegated to authorities directly responsible to Parliament. Moreover,
the Acts of Parliament by which particular powers are delegated normally
provide for some measure of parliamentary control over legislation made in the
exercise of these powers, for instance, by reserving to Parliament the right to
affirm or annul the orders themselves. Certain Acts also require direct
consultation with organisations affected before rules and orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports on the technical propriety of these
‘statutory instruments’. In order to save time on the floor of the House,'where
statutory instruments may be considered, the Commons also uses standing
committees to consider the merits of instruments, with any decisions reserved
to the House.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee (of the whole House) to consider
Bills in detail after their second reading. A committee of the whole House is
presided over by the Chairman of Ways and Means (the Chairman of Committees
in the House of Lords) or a deputy chairman.
House of Commons standing committees include those which examine public
Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the second reading and
report stages: two Scottish standing committees; the Scottish Grand Com¬
mittee; the Welsh Grand Committee; and the Northern Ireland standing
committee. Ordinary standing committees have no distinctive names, being
referred to simply as Standing Committee A, B, C, and so on, and are each
appointed specially to consider a specific Bill. Each has between 16 and 50
members with a party balance reflecting as far as possible that in the House as a
whole. The Scottish Grand Committee, which comprises all 72 Scottish
members and 10 to 15 others (and may be convened in Edinburgh), considers
the principles of Scottish Bills referred to it at second reading stage, the Scottish
estimates and other matters concerning Scotland only. The Welsh Grand
Committee, with all 38 Welsh members and up to five others, considers Bills
relerred to it at second reading stage, and matters concerning Wales only. The
Northern Ireland committee considers matters relating specifically to Northern
42
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Select
Committees
Joint
Committees
Party
Committees
Ireland. A standing committee on regional affairs attended by any of the 523
members from the English constituencies is occasionally appointed to consider
matters relating to the English regions. The Lords’ equivalent to a standing
committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely used.
In 1979 a new House of Commons select committee structure was set up in an
attempt to provide closer examination of government departments and policies,
and of the way ministers discharge their responsibilities.
This was in response to a recognition that Parliament was probably less
effective a check on the executive than it had been for much of the nineteenth
century. With the growth of mass political parties, the individual independence
of many MPs has tended to become subordinated to party interests, and with the
great extension of the range and complexity of central government activities,
and the parallel growth of bureaucracy, MPs have a more difficult task in
checking the actions of ministers and their departments.
The 14 committees examine the expenditure, administration and policy of the
main government departments and related bodies. The Foreign Affairs Com¬
mittee, for example, ‘shadows’ the work of the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, and there are select committees on Scottish and Welsh Affairs. The
committees are constituted on a party basis, in approximate proportions to
party strength in the House. Other regular committees include those on
European Legislation, Public Accounts, Members’ Interests, the Parliamentary
Commissioner for Administration, and Sound Broadcasting. The Committee of
Selection and the Standing Orders Committee have duties relating to private
Bills, and the Committee of Selection also chooses members to serve on standing
and select committees. A Liaison Committee to consider general matters relating
to select committees has been established. On rare occasions a parliamentary
Bill is examined by a select committee (a procedure additional to the usual
legislative process).
In their scrutiny of government policies, the committees question ministers,
senior civil servants and interested bodies and individuals. Through hearings
and published reports, they bring before Parliament and the public a body of fact
and informed opinion on many important issues, and build up considerable
expertise in their subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, besides the Appeal and Appellate Committees in which
the bulk of the House’s judicial work is transacted, there are select committees
on the European Communities, Science and Technology, House of Lords
Offices, Hybrid Instruments, Leave of Absence and Lords Expenses, Personal
Bills, Private Bills, Standing Orders, Privileges, Procedure, Selection and Sound
Broadcasting.
The two Houses may agree to set up joint select committees, and joint
committees are also appointed in each session to deal with Consolidation Bills
and delegated legislation.
In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several
unofficial party organisations or committees. The Conservative and Unionist
Members’ Committee (the 1922 Committee) consists of the back-bench mem¬
bership of the party in the House of Commons. When the Conservative Party is
in office, ministers attend its meetings by invitation and not by right, but when
the party is in opposition, the whole membership of the party may attend
meetings and the leader appoints a consultative committee which acts as the
party’s ‘shadow cabinet’. The Parliamentary Labour Party is a corporate body
comprising all members of the party in both Houses; when the Labour Party is in
office a liaison committee acts as a channel of communication between the
GOVERNMENT
43
Other Forms of
Parliamentary
Control
Government and its back-benchers in both Houses; when the party is in
opposition the Parliamentaiy Labour Party is organised under the direction of
an elected Parliamentary Committee which acts as the ‘shadow cabinet'.
The effectiveness of parliamentary control of the Government is a subject of
continuing discussion, both inside and outside Parliament. Control is exercised
finally by the ability ol the House of Commons to force the Government to resign
by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal which the
Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of
confidence or, ultimately, by refusing to vote the money required for the public
service. In addition to the system of close scrutiny by select committees, the
House of Commons offers a number of opportunities for a searching examin¬
ation of government policy by both the Opposition and the Government's own
back-benchers.
These include:
1. Question time when for an hour on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs' questions. Parliamentary questions are one
means of eliciting information about the Government’s intentions, as well as a
way of airing, and possibly securing redress of, grievances brought to MPs’
notice by constituents. MPs may also put questions to ministers for written
answers, which are published in Hansard, the official report. (At question
time in the House of Lords questions are addressed to the Government rather
than to a particular minister.)
2. The right of MPs to use motions for the adjournment of the House to open
discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern. There is a
half-hour adjournment period at the end of the business of the day; and
immediately before the adjournment for each recess (Christmas, Easter,
spring and summer), a full day is spent discussing matters raised by private
members. Moreover, an MP wishing to discuss a ‘specific and important
matter that should have urgent consideration’ may, at the end of question
time, ask leave to move the adjournment of the House. If the Speaker accepts
the terms of the motion, the MP asks the House for leave for the motion to be
put forward. Leave can be given unanimously, or it can be given if 40 or more
MPs support the motion or if fewer than 40 but more than ten support it and
the House (on a vote) is in favour. Once leave has been given, the matter is
debated for three hours, usually on the next day.
3-Tfie 19 Opposition days each session when the Opposition can choose
subjects for debate.
4. Debates on the occasion of the passage, three times a year, of Consolidated
Fund or Appropriation Bills, when members can exercise their traditional
right of raising grievances , on matters for which any minister is responsible,
when voting the necessary supplies (money) for the Crown.
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise during the
debate on the Queen s speech at the beginning of a session, during debates or
motions of censure for which the Government gives up part of its own time, and
during debates on the Qovernment’s legislative proposals.
Opportunities for criticism are provided in the House of Lords at daily
question time, during debates on specific motions and in questions (which can
be debated) at the end of the day’s business.
The main responsibilities of Parliament, and more particularly of the House of
Commons, in the management of the revenue of the State and payments for the
public service are to authorise the taxes and duties to be levied and the various
objects of expenditure and the sum to be spent on each. It also has to satisfy
44
Parliamentary
Commissioner
for
Administration
Parliamentary
Privilege
NORTHERN
IRELAND
ASSEMBLY
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
itself that the sums granted are spent only for the purposes which Parliament
intended. No payment out of the central Government’s public funds can be made
and no taxation, charges or loans authorised, except by Act of Parliament,
although interim payments can be made, within limits, from the Contingencies
Fund. Scrutiny of public expenditure is carried out by House of Commons Select
Committees (see p 42).
To keep the two Houses informed of European Community developments, and
to enable them to scrutinise and debate Community policies and proposals,
there are two select committees (see p 42), and ministers make regular
statements about Community business.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the Parliamentary
Ombudsman’) investigates, independently, complaints of maladministration
when asked to do so by MPs on behalf of members of the public. Powers of
investigation extend to administrative actions by central government depart¬
ments but not to policy decisions (which can be questioned in Parliament) nor to
matters affecting relations with other countries. Complaints by British citizens
arising from dealings with British posts overseas are open to investigation in
some circumstances. The Commissioner has access to departmental papers and
reports the findings to the MP who presented the complaint. The Commissioner
is required to report annually to Parliament. In addition he publishes details of
selected investigations at quarterly intervals and may submit other reports
where necessary. A Commons select committee has responsibility for overseeing
the Commissioner's work.
Each House of Parliament has certain rights and immunities to protect it from
unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties. The rights apply collectively
to each Hduse and individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally claims ‘their ancient and undoubted
rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each Parliament. These include
freedom of speech; freedom from arrest in civil actions; exemption from serving
on juries, attending as witnesses or serving as sheriffs; and the right of access to
the Crown, a collective privilege of the House. Further privileges include the
rights of the House to control its own proceedings (so that it is able, for instance,
to exclude ‘strangers’ if it wishes), to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for
membership and to declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and to penalise for
breach of its privileges and for contempt.
The privileges of the House of Lords closely resemble those of the House of
Commons.
Between 1921 and 1972 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament and
Government, subordinate to the Parliament at Westminster, but in the latter
year, following the resignation of the Northern Ireland Government, the British
Government assumed direct responsibility with a United Kingdom Cabinet
minister responsible for functions previously exercised by the Northern Ireland
Government. Attempts have been made by successive governments to find a
means of restoring devolved government to Northern Ireland. In 1982 elections
were held for membership of a Northern Ireland Assembly, to provide a means
for greater particiption by the people of Northern Ireland in the day-to-day
government of the region and to give them the opportunity to evolve for
themselves an acceptable form of government. The Assembly is composed of 78
members elected under the single transferable vote system of proportional
representation.
The principal task of the Assembly is to reach agreement on how devolved
functions will be exercised. Recommendations which have the support of 70 per
GOVERNMENT
45
cent of the Assembly’s total membership must be submitted to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for approval. The Secretary of State also has discretion to lay
before Parliament proposals which command less than 70 per cent support but
which, in his view, are acceptable to both parts of the community in Northern
Ireland. The essential criterion for devolution is that the Government will not
recommend any arrangements to Parliament unless it believes them to be
acceptable to both sides of the Northern Ireland community.
Prior to devolution the Assembly has important scrutinising, deliberative and
consultative lunctions, including the scrutiny of proposals for draft legislation
It also monitors the work of the six Northern Ireland departments by means of
committees corresponding to each of the departments. The composition of the
committees and the allocation of chairmanships and deputy chairmanships
reflects, as far as possible, the balance of parties in the Assembly.
Elections to the Assembly will normally be held every four years. The
distribution of seats at the end of July 1984 was as follows: Ulster Unionists 27,
Democratic Unionists 21, Social Democratic and Labour 13, Alliance 10 Sinn
Fein 5, and other Unionists 2.
The Privy Council
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was the
chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet
government developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent. Many
powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner committee of the Council,
and much of its work was handed over to newly created government depart¬
ments, some of which were originally committees of the Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy Council is to advise the Queen to
approve Orders in Council (those made under prerogative powers, such as
Orders approving the grant of royal charters of incorporation; and those made
under statutory powers). Members of the Privy Council attending meetings at
which Orders are made do not thereby become personally responsible for the
policy upon which the Orders are based; this rests with the minister responsible
for the subject matter of the Order in question, whether or not he or she was
present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclamations,
some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament). The Council’s own statutory responsi¬
bilities, which are independent of the powers of the Sovereign in Council,
include powers of supervision over the registering bodies for the medical and
allied professions.
Apart from Cabinet ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn
in on first assuming office, membership of the Council (retained for life) is
accorded by the Sovereign on the recommendation of the Prime Minister to
eminent people in independent monarchical countries of the Commonwealth.
There are about 380 Privy Counsellors. A full Council is summoned only on the
death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her intention to
marry.
Committees of
the Privy
Council
There are a number of advisory Privy Council committees whose meetings differ
from those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot consti¬
tutionally be present. These may be prerogative committees, such as those
dealing with legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man and with applications for charters of incorporation;
or they may be provided lor by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge and the Scottish universities.
Composition
Prime Minister
Departmental
Ministers
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal from
the courts of the United Kingdom dependencies, courts of independent
members of the Commonwealth which have not discontinued the appeal, courts
of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and certain other courts, some
professional and disciplinary committees and ecclesiastical sources.
Administrative work is carried out in the Privy Council Office under the Lord
President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
Her Majesty’s Government
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers responsible for the
administration of national affairs.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Queen, and all other ministers are
appointed by the Queen on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the Commons, although the
Government is also fully represented by ministers in the Lords. The Lord
Chancellor is always a member of the House of Lords.
The composition of the Government can vary both in the number of ministers
and in the titles of some offices. The creation of a paid ministerial office with
entirely new functions, the abolition of an office, the transfer of functions from
one minister to another, or a change in the designation of a minister may be
effected by Order in Council.
The Prime Minister is also, by tradition. First Lord of the Treasury and Minister
for the Civil Service. The head of the Government became known as the Prime
Minister during the eighteenth century. The Prime Minister’s unique position of
authority derives from majority support in Parliament and from the power to
choose ministers and to obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. By
modern convention, the Prime Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
The Prime Minister informs the Queen of the general business of the
Government, presides over the Cabinet, and is responsible for the allocation of
functions among ministers.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include recommending to the
Queen a number of appointments. These include: Church of England
archbishops, bishops and deans and some 200 other clergy in Crown ‘livings’;
high judicial offices, such as the Lord Chief Justice, Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
and the Lords Justices of Appeal; Privy Counsellors, Lords-Lieutenant and
certain civil appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner to the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower, and
some university posts; and appointments to various public boards and
institutions, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation, as well as various
royal and statutory commissions. Recommendations are likewise made for the
award of many civil honours and distinctions and of Civil List pensions (to
people who have achieved eminence in science and the arts and are in some
financial need). The Prime Minister also selects the trustees of certain national
museums and institutions.
The Prime Minister’s Office at 10 Downing Street (the official residence in
central London) has a staff of civil servants who attend to the day-to-day
discharge of the Prime Minister’s numerous responsibilities. The Prime Minister
may also appoint special advisers to the Office from time to time to assist in the
formation of policies.
Ministers in charge of government departments, who are usually in the Cabinet,
are known as ‘Secretary of State' or Minister’, or may have a special title, as in
the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
GOVERNMENT
47
Non-
Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
Ministers of
State
Junior Ministers
Ministerial
Salaries
The Cabinet
Cabinet
Meetings
The holders of various traditional offices, namely the Lord President of the
Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Lord Privy Seal (and from
time to time Ministers without Portfolio), may have few or no departmental
duties and are thus available to perform any special duties the Prime Minister
may wish to give them. The Lord President of the Council, for example,
co-ordinates the presentation of information on government policies.
The Lord Chancellor holds a special position, being a minister with departmen¬
tal functions and also head of the judiciary. The four Law Officers of the Crown
are: for England and Wales, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General; for
Scotland, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland.
Ministers of State usually work with ministers in charge of departments with
responsibility for specific functions, and are sometimes given titles which reflect
these particular functions. More than one may work in a department. A Minister
of State can be given a seat in the Cabinet and paid accordingly.
Junior Ministers (generally Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State or, where
the senior minister is not a Secretary of State, simply Parliamentary Secretaries)
share in parliamentary and departmental duties. They may also be given
responsibility, directly under the departmental minister, for specific aspects of
the department’s work. The Parliamentaiy Secretary to the Treasury and other
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different categoiy as Government
Whips (see p 38).
The salaries of ministers in the House of Commons range from £28,120 a year
(from January 1985) for junior ministers to £42,980 for Cabinet ministers. The
Prime Minister receives £53,600 and the Lord Chancellor £66,000.1
Ministers in the Commons, including the Prime Minister, receive a parliamen¬
tary salary of £11,709 a year (which is included in the above figures) in
recognition of their constituency responsibilities and are entitled to claim the
other allowances which are paid to all MPs.2
The Cabinet is composed of about 20 ministers chosen by the Prime Minister
and may include departmental and non-departmental ministers. Its origins can
be traced back to the informal conferences which the Sovereign held with
leading ministers, independently of the Privy Council, during the seventeenth
century. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an active role in politics in the
eighteenth century, and the development of organised political parties stimu¬
lated by successive extensions of the franchise from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet
assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of policies, the
supreme control of government and the co-ordination of government depart¬
ments. The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the
Cabrnet rs a group of party representatives, depending upon majority support in
the House of Commons.
The Cabrnet meets in private and its proceedings are confidential. Its members
are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose information about
its proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the publication of Cabinet as
show the salaries to which the holders are entitled; however, the Prime Minister
payable to otherajhine^minis^err01 G°Vernment have decided to draw ™ more than the salary
The Leader of the Opposition in the Commons receives a salary for the post as well as a
parliamentary salary; the Leader of the Opposition in the Lords also receives a salay
The Cabinet
Office
Ministerial
Responsibility
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
well as other state papers (although after they have been in existence for 30 years
they may be made available for inspection in the Public Record Office) and a
resigning minister wishing to make a statement involving disclosure of Cabinet
discussions should first obtain permission through the Prime Minister. Diaries
published by several former ministers have given the public an insight into
Cabinet procedures in recent times.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less often when Parliament is not sitting. To
keep the amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a
great deal of work is carried on through the committee system, which involves
the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned. The committee then
considers the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it to the
Cabinet with recommendations for action. The present Cabinet has four
standing committees: a defence and overseas policy committee and an economic
strategy committee both under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister; and a
home and social affairs committee and a legislation committee, both under the
chairmanship of the Lord President of the Council. Sub-committees of the
standing committees may be established. Membership and terms of reference of
all Cabinet committees are confidential.
Non-Cabinet ministers maybe invited to attend meetings on matters affecting
their departments, and may be members of Cabinet committees. The Secretary
of the Cabinet and other senior officials of the Cabinet Office also attend
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate.
The Cabinet Office, headed by the Secretary of the Cabinet, under the direction
of the Prime Minister, comprises the Cabinet Secretariat, the Central Statistical
Office, the Management and Personnel Office and the Historical Section.
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers collectively in the conduct of Cabinet
business and operates as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at the
highest level.
The Central Statistical Office is concerned with the preparation and interpret¬
ation of the statistics necessary to support economic and social policies and
management, and co-ordinates the statistical work ol other departments.
The Management and Personnel Office is responsible for the management and
organisation of the Civil Service and recruitment into it, training, efficiency,
personnel management and senior appointments.
The Historical Section of the Cabinet Office is in the process of completing the
official histories of the second world war, and is responsible for the preparation
of official histories of certain peacetime events.
‘Ministerial responsibility' refers both to the collective responsibility which
ministers share for government policy and actions and to ministers individual
responsibility to Parliament for their departments' work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility means that the Cabinet acts unani¬
mously even when Cabinet ministers do not all agree on a subject. The policy of
departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the Government as
a whole. Once- the Government's policy on a matter has been decided, each
minister is expected to support it or resign. On rare occasions, ministers have
been allowed free votes in Parliament on government policies involving
important issues of principle.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work ol his or her
department means that, as political head of that department, he or she is
answerable for all its acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any
defect of administration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect ol policy
GOVERNMENT
49
Non-
Departmental
Public Bodies
which may be criticised in Parliament, whether personally responsible or not.
Since most ministers are members of the House of Commons, they must answer
questions and defend themselves against criticism in person. Departmental
ministers in the House of Lords are represented in the Commons by someone
qualified to speak on their behalf, usually a junior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their responsi¬
bility, although on important political matters they usually consult their
colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. A decision
by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way of
keeping government under public control, for the knowledge that any depart¬
mental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament discourages the
taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
On assuming office ministers must resign directorships in private and public
companies, and must order their affairs so that there is no conflict between
public duties and private interests.
Government Departments
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to
government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation, and
for advising ministers. They may, and frequently do, work with and through
local authorities, statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations
operating under various degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments, although a radical change in policy may
be accompanied by some organisational change.
The work of some departments (for instance, the Ministry of Defence) covers
the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments (like the Department of
Employment) cover England, Wales and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland.
Others, such as the Department of the Environment, are mainly concerned with
affairs in England.
Some departments, such as the Department of Trade and Industry, maintain
a regional organisation, and some which have direct contact with the public
throughout the country (for example, the Department of Employment) also have
local offices.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in which
questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent official, and
a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament. For instance,
ministers in the Treasury are responsible for the Central Office of Information,
Her Majesty's Stationery Office, HM Customs and Excise, the Inland Revenue,
the Paymaster General s Office and a number of small departments including
the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Royal Mint, and the National Debt
Office. Departments generally receive their funds directly out of money provided
by Parliament and are staffed by the Civil Service.
A number of bodies with a role in the process of government are neither
government departments nor part of a department. Known as non-departmental
public bodies, but often popularly described as quangos’ (‘quasi-autonomous
non-governmental organisations', although there is no precise definition of the
term), they are of three kinds: executive bodies, advisory bodies and tribunals.
Executive bodies normally employ staff and have their own budget; they consist
of public bodies which carry out, among other duties, administrative, executive,
regulatory and commercial functions. They operate typically within broad policy
guidelines set by departmental ministers but are in varying degrees independent
50
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of government in carrying out their day-to-day responsibilities. Examples
include the Arts Council of Great Britain, the British Council, the Common¬
wealth Development Corporation, the Commission for Racial Equality and the
Civil Aviation Authority. Tribunals are a specialised group of judicial bodies
which are akin to courts of law. They are normally set up under statutofy powers
which also govern their constitution, functions and procedure. Tribunals often
consist of laymen, but generally have a legally qualified chairman. They tend to
be less expensive, and less formal, than courts of law. Independently of the
executive, tribunals decide the rights and obligations of private citizens towards
one another or towards a government department or other public authority.
Important examples are industrial tribunals, rent tribunals and social security
tribunals. Tribunals usually consist of an uneven number of people so that a
majority decision can be reached. Members are normally appointed by the
minister concerned with the subject. Tribunals and advisory bodies do not
normally employ staff or spend money themselves, but their expenses are paid by
government departments concerned; a note on advisory bodies is set out below.
As a result of a review of non-departmental public bodies undertaken by the
Government in 1979, several hundred have been wound up, and others reduced
in scale or scope; scrutiny of these bodies continues.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or committees
which undertake research and collect information, mainly to give ministers
access to informed opinion before coming to a decision involving a legislative or
executive act. In some cases a minister must consult a standing committee, but
usually advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the minister.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according to
the nature of the work involved, and may include civil servants and representa¬
tives of varying interests and professions.
In addition to the standing advisory bodies, there are committees set up by the
Government to examine and make recommendations on specific matters. For
certain important inquiries Royal Commissions, whose members are chosen for
their wide experience and diverse knowledge, may be appointed. Royal
Commissions examine written and oral evidence from government departments,
interested organisations and individuals, and submit recommendations. The
Government may accept the recommendations in whole or in part, or may decide
to take no further action or to delay action. Inquiries may also be undertaken by
departmental committees.
Distribution of An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments is
Functions given below. Departments are arranged in alphabetical order, except for the
Scottish and Northern Ireland departments which are grouped at the end of the
section and the Cabinet Office, which was described on p 48. Further
information on the work of some departments is given in later chapters under
the relevant subject headings.
Advisory
Bodies
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
The work of many departments listed on p 51 covers the United Kingdom as a
whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used: (GB) for
functions covering England, Wales and Scotland; (E, W & NI) for those covering
England, Wales and Northern Ireland; (E & W) for those covering England and
Wales; and (E) for those concerned with England only.
GOVERNMENT
51
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Ministry of Policies for agriculture, forestry, horticulture and fishing (E); food policies.
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
Office of
Arts and
Libraries
General promotion of arts (GB); library and information services (E with advice
to W and NI); national museums (E); public libraries and local museums (E);
British Library (E); national heritage. The Office is attached to the Privy Council
Office.
HM Customs Collecting and accounting for revenues of Customs and Excise, including value
and Excise added tax; agency functions including controlling certain imports and exports
and compiling overseas trade statistics.
Ministry of Defence policy and control and administration of the armed services.
Defence
Department of
Education and
Science
Department of
Employment
Department of
Energy
Department of
the
Environment
Export Credits
Guarantee
Department
Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office
Department of
Health and
Social Security
Home Office
General promotion of education (E); the Government’s relations with univer¬
sities (GB); fostering civil science in Britain and internationally.
Manpower policies, labour legislation, payment of unemployment benefit
through local offices and issue of work permits to workers from overseas (GB);
Race Relations Employment Advisory Service and policy for the Careers Service
(E); international representation on employment matters.
Policies for all forms of energy, including its efficient use and the development of
new sources; the Government’s relations with the nationalised energy indus¬
tries, the Atomic Energy Authority and the British National Oil Corporation.
Policies for planning, local government, new towns, housing, construction,
inner city matters, environmental protection, water, the countryside, sport and
recreation, conservation, historic buildings and ancient monuments (E), and
Property Services Agency (GB).
Provision of insurance for exporters against risk of not being paid for goods and
services, and access to bank finance for exports; insurance cover for new
investment overseas.
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations.
National Health Service, personal social services provided by local authorities,
and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene (E & W); the social
security system (GB).
Administration of law and order including criminal justice, police service,
prisons and probation services; conduct of elections; civil defence; fire services;
licensing laws; approval of local authority by-laws; regulation of firearms and
dangerous drugs (E & W). Gaming and lotteries (GB). Policies for immigration
52
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Central Office
of Information
Board of Inland
Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Department
Management
and Personnel
Office
Ordnance
Survey
Overseas
Development
Administration
Parliamentary
Counsel Office
Paymaster
General’s Office
Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor’s
Department
and nationality, race relations, broadcasting and sex discrimination. Responsi¬
bilities related to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
Provision of publicity material and of publicity and information services
required by other government departments.
Administration of the tax laws.
Provision of advice to the Government on English law and representation of the
Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases, both civil and criminal,
by the Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales—the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General (E & W). The Attorney General is also Attorney General
for Northern Ireland.
Administration of the Supreme Court (Court of Appeal, High Court, Crown
Court) and the county courts (E & W), together with certain other courts and
tribunals, and all work relating to judicial and quasi-judicial appointments.
Responsibility for promoting general reforms in the civil law and for operating
the Legal Aid and Advice Scheme. (The Home Office has important responsi¬
bilities for the criminal law.)
(Part of the Cabinet Office.) Organisation, management and efficiency of the
Civil Service (GB).
Official surveying and mapping, including geodetic surveys and associated
scientific work and topographic surveys covering all of Great Britain and some
overseas countries.
Administration of financial aid to, and technical co-operation in, developing
countries.
Drafting of government Bills (except those relating exclusively to Scotland);
advising departments on parliamentary procedure (E, W & NI).
Provision of banking services for government departments other than the
Boards of Inland Revenue and HM Customs and Excise, and the payment of
public service pensions.
Administration of the Marriage Acts and local registration of births, marriages
and deaths; population estimates and projections; compilation of health
statistics; censuses (E & W). Surveys for other government departments (GB).
Provision of a common legal service for a large number of government
departments. Duties include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and
drafting subordinate legislation; providing litigation and conveyancing services;
and giving general advice on the interpretation and application ol the law
(E & W).
GOVERNMENT
53
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Her Majesty’s Publication of parliamentary and government papers; procurement of office
Stationery supplies.
Office
Department of
Trade and
Industry
Overseas trade policy and commercial relations; export promotion; consumer
protection and safety; competition policy; companies legislation; insolvency; the
insurance industry; printing and publishing; patents; trade marks and
copyright; policies for quality and standards; tourism, films, distributive trades
and other service industries. Radio regulatory matters; industrial policy (GB);
financial assistance to industry other than through the tax system (GB);
sponsorship of private and state-owned manufacturing industries (GB).
Department of Overall responsibility for transport system. Responsibility for trunk and
Transport motorway network (E), for overseeing local authority transport plans and
expenditure (E), for sponsoring nationalised transport industries (GB), for ports
(GB), for regulation of transport (GB), for transport research (GB), and for
representing Britain’s transport interests internationally.
HM Treasury
Welsh Office
Broad economic strategy with particular responsibilities for public finance and
expenditure, including control of manpower and pay in the Civil Service.
Many aspects of Welsh affairs including health and personal social services;
education, except for terms and conditions of service, student awards and the
University of Wales; the Welsh language and culture; local government; housing;
water and sewerage; environmental protection; sport; agriculture and fisheries!
forestry; land use, including town and country planning; countryside and
nature conservation; new towns, ancient monuments and historic buildings;
roads; tourism; a range of matters affecting the careers service and the activities
of the Manpower Services Commission in Wales; selective financial assistance to
industry; the urban programme in Wales; the operation of the European
Regional Development Fund in Wales and other European Community matters:
non-departmental public bodies; civil emergencies; all financial aspects of these
matters including Welsh rate support grant; and oversight responsibilities for
economic affairs and regional planning in Wales.
Scotland has its own system of law and wide administrative autonomy. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has responsibility in
Scotland (with some exceptions) both for formulating and carrying out policy
relating to agriculture and fisheries, education, law and order, local government
and environmental services, social work, health, housing, roads and certain
aspects of shipping and road transport services.
The Secretary of State also has a major role in the planning and development
of the Scottish economy, and important functions relating to industrial
development, with responsibility for selective financial assistance to industry,
for the Scottish Development Agency, and the Highlands and Islands Develop¬
ment Board and for the work of the Manpower Services Commission and the
careers service. The Secretary of State plays a full part in determining energy
policy, particularly in relation to responsibility for the electricity supply industry
in Scotland.
On many domestic matters, the distinctively Scottish features and the
different conditions and needs of the country and its people are reflected in
54
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
separate legislation relating wholly to Scotland, or else in sections of special
application to Scotland alone inserted in Acts which otherwise apply to the
United Kingdom generally. The Secretary of State is also responsible for the
government interest in a range of other functions from fire services to sport.
The United Kingdom Government’s administrative functions arising from
these responsibilities are carried out principally by five Scottish departments
supported by Central Services, based in Edinburgh (although with some staff
dispersed over Scotland and with an office in London), known collectively as the
Scottish Office. The Scottish Office Management Group, whose membership
consists of the head of each of the departments and the Deputy Secretary,
Central Services, under the chairmanship of the Permanent Under-Secretary of
State, advises the Secretary of State on questions such as the allocation of
resources and forward planning, with which more than one of the Scottish
departments are concerned.
United Kingdom government departments with significant Scottish responsi¬
bilities have offices in Scotland with delegated powers and work closely with the
Scottish Office.
An outline of the main functions of the Scottish departments is given below.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Promotion of the agricultural and fishing industries.
Agriculture and
Fisheries for
Scotland
Scottish
Development
Department
Town and country planning; housing; roads; building control; water supplies
and sewerage; pollution control; general policy relating to local government
organisation; ancient monuments and historic buildings; certain transport
functions.
Industry Industrial and regional economic development matters; energy.
Department
for Scotland
Scottish Education (excluding universities); student awards; libraries; museums and
Education galleries; sport and recreation; the arts; social work services.
Department
Scottish Home
and Health
Department
Central administration of law and order (including police service, criminal
justice, legal aid and penal institutions); the National Health Service; fire, home
defence and civil emergency services.
Central
Services
Services to the five Scottish departments. These include the Office of the
Solicitor to the Secretary of State, the Scottish Information Office, and Finance
Divisions.
Lord Advocate’s Provision of legal advice to the Government on issues affecting Scotland and the
Department and principal representation of the Crown for litigation in Scotland by the Law
Crown Office Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General
for Scotland); control of all prosecution in Scotland.
Scottish Courts Organisation, administration and staffing of the courts and court offices;
Administration jurisdiction and procedure of civil courts; enforcement of judgments; and
programme of Scottish Law Commission.
GOVERNMENT
55
DEPARTMENT Functions
Other
Administrative
Departments
Department of the Registrar General for Scotland; Scottish Record Office;
Department of the Registers of Scotland.
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Department of
Agriculture
Department
of Economic
Development
Department
of Education
Department of
the
Environment
D
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, a Cabinet minister, is responsible
for the government of Northern Ireland. Through the Northern Ireland Office he
has direct responsibility for constitutional developments, law and order and
security, and electoral matters. The work of the Northern Ireland departments,
the functions of which are listed below, is also subject to the direction and
control of the Secretary of State.
DEPARTMENT Functions
epartment of
Finance and
Personnel
Department of
Health and
Social Services
Development of agricultural, forestry and fishing industries; administration of
agricultural grant schemes; advisory service to farmers; agricultural research,
education and training.
Development of industry and commerce, including tourism, energy, harbours
and minerals, and administration of schemes of assistance to industry,
especially through the Industrial Development Board for Northern Ireland;
administration of employment service and labour training scheme.
Central policy, co-ordination, legislation, oversight, and financial control of the
five education and library boards and education as a whole from nursery to adult
and continuing education, youth services, sport and recreation, cultural
activities and community services and facilities including the improvement of
community relations.
Housing (policy, programmes and finance); planning (regional strategy, develop¬
ment plans, development control and comprehensive development); construc¬
tion and maintenance of roads, transport and traffic management, and motor
taxation; water and sewerage; environmental protection; ordnance survey;
historic monuments and buildings; maintenance of public records; and certain
controls over local government.
Control of public expenditure; liaison with the United Kingdom Treasury and
the Northern Ireland Office on financial matters, economic and social planning
and research; general management and control of the Northern Ireland Civil
Service; valuation and Lands Service.
Health, personal social services and social security.
The Civil Service
The Civil Service is concerned with the conduct of the whole range of
government activities as they affect the community, ranging from policy
formulation to carrying out the day-to-day duties that public administration
demands.
Civil servants are servants of the Crown. They are responsible to the minister
m whose department they work for carrying out his or her policies. Ministers
56
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Northern
Ireland Civil
Service
Central
Management
and
Structure
alone are answerable to Parliament for their policies and the actions of their
staff. A change of minister, for whatever reason, does not involve a change of
staff. (Ministers sometimes appoint special policy advisers from outside the Civil
Service; the advisers are paid from public funds, but their appointments come to
an end when the Government's term of office finishes.)
Including part-time staff (two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent
to one full-time), in April 1984 there were almost 624,000 civil servants (nearly
half of them women), roughly half of whom were engaged in the provision of
public services, such as paying sickness benefits and pensions, collecting taxes
and contributions, running employment services, staffing prisons, and provid¬
ing services to industry and agriculture. About 199,000 were employed in the
Ministry of Defence, including the Royal Ordnance factories and Royal Dock¬
yards. The rest were divided between: central administrative and policy duties;
service-wide support services, such as accommodation, printing and informa¬
tion; and largely financially self-supporting services, for instance, those
provided by the Department for National Savings and the Royal Mint.
The total number includes about 119,700 ‘industrial' civil servants, mainly
manual workers in government industrial establishments.
Over three-quarters of civil servants work outside London. As part of its policy
of controlling the cost and size of the Civil Service and to improve its efficiency,
the Government set a target in 1980 of reducing the number of civil servants by
14 per cent to 630,000 by April 1984. This has now been achieved and the
present total is smaller than at any time since the end of the second world war.
The Government now plans to reduce the number by a further 6 per cent to
593,000 by 1988.
The Northern Ireland Civil Service is modelled on its counterpart in Great
Britain, and has its own Civil Service Commission. Interchange of staff between
the two Civil Services occurs to a minor extent only.
Responsibility for central co-ordination and management of the Civil Service is
divided between the Treasury and the Management and Personnel Office. In
addition to its other functions, the Treasury is responsible for controlling Civil
Service manpower, pay, pensions and allowances, while the Management and
Personnel Office, which is part of the Cabinet Office and under the control of the
Prime Minister, as Minister for the Civil Service, is responsible for the
organisation, management and overall efficiency of the Service. The function of
official Head of the Home Civil Service is combined with that of Secretary to the
Cabinet. At the senior levels of the Home Civil Service there is an open and
unified structure which, with few exceptions, covers all posts whatever the
nature of their duties. It comprises six grades (numbered 1 to 6). Grades 1, 2
and 3 replace the former grade titles of Permanent Secretary, Deputy Secretary
and Under-Secretary. Grades 4, 5 and 6 represent a unified grading structure
covering the senior levels of most of the occupational groups and classes down to
Senior Principal, Senior Principal Scientific Officer and Professional and
Technology Superintending level.
At other levels the structure of the non-industrial Civil Service is based on a
system of categories and occupational groups, which are the basic groupings of
staff for the purposes of pay, recruitment and personnel management. These
include the General Category (covering the Administration, Economist, Statis¬
tician, Information Officer and Librarian groups), the Science Category, the
Professional and Technology Category (including architects, surveyors, electri¬
cal and mechanical engineers, graphics officers and marine services staff), and
the Training, Legal, Police, Secretarial, Data Processing, Research Officer,
Social Security, Security and Museum Categories. These 12 categories account
GOVERNMENT
57
The Diplomatic
Service
Recruitment
and Training
Promotion and
Conditions of
Service
for some 75 per cent of non-industrial staff. Work requiring specialist skill is
always done by appropriately qualified individuals.
Personnel management policies encourage the flexible deployment of staff so
that talent can be used to the best advantage, and, with higher posts open to
people of outstanding ability (whatever their specialist background or original
method of entry into the Service), ensure that people with the necessary
qualities gain suitably wide experience to fit them for posts at the highest levels.
The Diplomatic Service, a separate service of some 4,700 or so people, provides
the staff for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at United Kingdom
diplomatic missions and consular posts abroad. Its functions include advising
on policy, negotiating with overseas governments and conducting business in
international organisations; promoting British exports and trade generally,
administering aid, presenting ideas, policies and objectives to the people of
overseas countries; and protecting British interests abroad.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with that
of the Home Civil Service, and conditions of work are in many ways comparable
while taking into account the special demands of the Service, particularly of
postings overseas. Members of the Home Civil Service and the armed forces, and
individuals from the private sector, may serve in the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office and at overseas posts on loan or attachment.
Recruitment of staff to the middle and higher levels of the Home Civil Service
and the Diplomatic Service is the responsibility of the Civil Service Commission
which, in conjunction with departments, ensures that staff are selected solely on
merit through fair and open competition. The selection of junior staff, such as
those engaged in clerical and manual work, is undertaken by the departments.
For the Administration Group, the central part of the Home Civil Service,
entry is at three levels relating broadly to the academic achievements of: a
second class honours degree, or better; GCE Advanced level; and GCE Ordinary
level. The selection procedure for the highest of these levels (the Administration
Trainee entry) comprises qualifying tests, followed by tests and interviews at the
Civil Service Selection Board and an interview by the Final Selection Board. For
the next level (the Executive Officer entry) selection involves qualifying tests
followed by an interview. For the lower level (the clerical entry) selection is
normally by interview of those holding the prescribed educational qualifications.
Entry to the professional and technical grades usually requires appropriate
qualifications, and selection is on the basis of past record and by interview.
Most government departments employ full-time training officers and tutors to
help to identify staff training needs and to organise training by the most
appropriate methods (for example, formal courses or self-instruction). The Civil
Service College provides training most efficiently undertaken centrally. Con¬
siderable use is also made of external institutions.
Civil servants under the age of 18 may continue their education by attending
appropriate courses usually for one day a week (‘day release’ schemes). Adult
stafl may be entitled to financial assistance to undertake, mainly in their own
time, private studies leading to recognised educational or professional qualifi¬
cations in approved subjects. There are also opportunities for civil servants in
mid-career to obtain fellowships or to go on sabbatical leave to undertake
research in areas of interest to themselves and their departments.
Promotions are made partly through centrally conducted competitions and
partly by the departments themselves. Normally promotion is from grade to
grade, but there can be accelerated promotion for staff who show exceptional
promise. Promotion or appointment to the grades of Permanent Secretary and
58
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Political and
Private
Activities
Security
Deputy Secretary and all transfers between departments at these levels are
approved by the Prime Minister, who is advised by the official head of the Home
Civil Service.
Civil servants may join the trade union which represents the grade to which
they belong. The National Whitley Council (for non-industrial grades) and the
Joint Co-ordinating Committee for government industrial establishments (for
industrial grades) each consists of senior officials (the Official Side) and
representatives of the unions (the Trade Union Side). Each discusses conditions
of service of staff and provides a forum for consultation. There are Whitley
committees in all government departments. Pay negotiations are conducted
directly with the individual unions or with the Trade Union Side of the National
Whitley Council or of the Joint Co-ordinating Committee.
An independent inquiry (the Megaw Inquiry) into future arrangements for the
determination of non-industrial Civil Service pay reported in mid-1982. Its
recommendations are the subject of consultations with the unions.
Civil servants are expected to serve loyally the Government of the day, regardless
of its political composition. To maintain their reputation for political impar¬
tiality, some restrictions are placed on their freedom to participate in political
activities. No civil servant may be a member of Parliament, or (with certain
exceptions corresponding to the ‘political free’ group shown below) be adopted as
a parliamentary candidate.
Civil Service rules place staff in three groups for the purpose of political
activities: (1) the ‘politically free’ group, consisting of industrial and non-office
grades, who are free to engage in any political activity including standing for
Parliament (although they would have to resign from the Service if elected):
(2) the ‘politically restricted’ group, consisting of all staff above Senior Executive
Officer level, who are debarred from national political activities but may apply for
permission to take part in local political activities: and (3) the ‘intermediate’
group, comprising staff at Senior Executive Officer level and below who may
apply for permission to take part in national or local political activity apart from
adoption as a parliamentary candidate.
Where required, permission is granted to the maximum extent consistent
with the reputation of the Civil Service for political impartiality and the
avoidance of any conflict with official duties. It is granted subject to a code of
discretion requiring moderation and the avoidance of embarrassment to
ministers.
Generally, there are no restrictions on the private activities of civil servants,
provided that these do not bring discredit on the Civil Service, and that there is
no possibility of conflict with official duties. For instance, a civil servant is
required to seek permission before taking part in any outside activity which
involves the use of official experience, or before accepting a directorship in any
company holding a contract with his or her department.
As a general rule the political views of civil servants are not a matter of official
concern. However, no one whose loyalty is in doubt may be employed on work
vital to the security of the State. For this reason certain posts are not open to
anyone known to be a member of a Communist or Fascist organisation, or
associated with such an organisation in a way that raises legitimate doubts
about his or her reliability, or to anyone whose reliability may be in doubt for any
other reason.
Each department is responsible for its own internal security, advised as
necessary by the Security Service. The Security Commission, if requested to do
so by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition,
may investigate and report on breaches of security in the public service and
advise on changes in security procedure.
GOVERNMENT
59
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
Local Government
A wide range of public services is provided by democratically elected local
authorities throughout the United Kingdom. The gradual expansion of local
services, particularly in the period between the late 1940s and mid-1970s, has
inevitably led to a steady rise in local government expenditure and in its support
from central funds. In recent years central government has sought to check this
growth as part of a general policy of reducing public expenditure, while at the
local level some sections of the electorate have protested at having to meet
considerable annual increases in ‘rates’ (local property taxes—see p 64).
Since staff costs form such a significant part of public expenditure, local
authorities have been urged to reduce staff levels. All local authorities in
England and Wales are therefore required to publish quarterly staffing levels for
particular services.
The specific powers and duties of local authorities are conferred on them by
Parliament, or by measures made under its authority. The actual adminis¬
tration, and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are the responsi¬
bility of the local authority. In the case of certain services, however, ministers
have powers to secure a measure of national uniformity in the standard of a
service provided, to safeguard public health, or to protect the rights of individual
citizens. For some services the minister concerned has wide powers of
supervision; for others there are strictly limited powers.
The main links between local authorities and the central government are: in
England, the Department of the Environment, although other departments are
concerned with various local government functions; in Scotland, the Scottish
Office; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland, the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland.
England and Wales (outside Greater London) are divided into 53 large county
authorities, within which there are 369 smaller district authorities. Both types
of authority have independent, locally elected councils, and have separate
functions to perform. County authorities normally provide the large-scale local
government services, while the districts are responsible for the more local ones
(see p 61). However, in six of the English counties, which are heavily populated
and known as ‘metropolitan’ counties, responsibility for some large-scale
services rests with the district authorities. English parish councils or meetings
are focuses for local opinion as bodies with limited powers of local interest. In
Wales community councils have similar functions.
Greater London (an administrative area of about 1,580 sq km (610 sq miles)
and a population of some 7 million) is administered by the Greater London
Council, the councils of 32 London boroughs and the Corporation of the City of
London.
The Government has announced proposals to create a more effective and
economical system of local government in Greater London and the six
metropolitan counties. Under these, the Greater London Council and the six
metropolitan county councils would be abolished, and the borough and district
councils would become the principal tier of directly elected local government in
metropolitan areas. A small number of services (namely, the police and fire
services and public transport in the metropolitan counties, and the fire service
in London) would require a statutory authority over areas wider than the
boroughs and districts; these services would be run by joint boards composed of
elected councillors nominated by the borough or district councils. Education in
inner London would become the responsibility of a new directly elected
authority. Legislation to give effect to these proposals is expected to be
introduced in 1984-85 and transfer of functions is to take place in April 1986.
60
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Election of
Councils
On the mainland of Scotland local government is on a two-tier basis: nine
regions are divided into 53 districts, each area having its own elected council.
There are three virtually all-purpose authorities for Orkney, Shetland and the
Western Isles. Provision is made for local community councils to be formed,
although they have no statutory functions and are not local authorities.
The areas and electoral arrangements of local authorities are kept under
review by the Local Government Boundary Commissions for England, Wales and
Scotland.
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils are responsible for local environmen¬
tal and certain other services. Statutory bodies and local offices responsible to
central departments administer major services such as housing, roads, water,
planning, education and health.
Local authority councils consist of a number of elected unpaid councillors
presided over by a chairman. Councillors can claim a flat-rate attendance
allowance or a financial loss allowance for performing council business; they are
also entitled to travelling and subsistence allowances. Parish and community
councillors cannot claim expenses for duties within their own areas.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland each council annually elects a
chairman and vice-chairman. Some districts have the ceremonial title of
borough, or city, both granted by royal authority (in Northern Ireland by the
Secretary of State). In boroughs and cities the chairman is normally known as
the Mayor (in the City of London and certain other large cities, he or she is
known as the Lord Mayor). In Scotland the chairman of the district council of
each of the four cities is called the Lord Provost. No specific title is laid down for
the chairmen of other councils, but some are known as conveners, while others
continue to use the old title of 'provost'.
Elections for any form of local government normally take place every four
years. Metropolitan district elections are held for a third of the seats in each year
when there is no county council election. Non-metropolitan district councils
may adopt the same procedure or opt for whole council elections every four
years.
Anyone is entitled to vote at a local government election in Great Britain
provided he or she is aged 18 years or over, is a British citizen, other
Commonwealth citizen, or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is not subject to any
legal incapacity and is registered as a local government elector for the area for
which the election is held. To qualify for registration a person must be resident
in the council area on the qualifying date. In Northern Ireland there are slightly
different requirements.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative of
one of the national political parties, or of some local interest, or as an
independent. Candidates must be British citizens, other Commonwealth
citizens or citizens of the Irish Republic and aged 21 or over. In addition, they
must be registered as local electors in the area of the local authority to which
they seek election; or have resided or occupied (as owner or tenant) land or other
premises in that area during the whole of the 12 months preceding the day on
which they are nominated as candidates or, in that 12 months, have had their
principal or only place of work there. No one may stand for election to a council of
which he or she is an employee, and there are a number of other disqualifi¬
cations.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local council
elections. Administrative counties in England and Wales are divided into
electoral divisions. Districts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are divided
into electoral wards’, returning one councillor or more. In Scotland the electoral
areas in the regions and islands areas are called electoral divisions, each
GOVERNMENT
61
Functions and
Services
returning a single member; the districts are divided into wards, similarly
returning a single member. For parish or community council elections in
England and Wales, each parish or community, or ward of a parish or
community, forms an electoral area which returns one member or more. For
elections to the Greater London Council, Greater London is divided into electoral
divisions, each returning one councillor.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that
for parliamentary elections, although postal voting is more restricted. There is
no postal voting for parish or community council elections. In Northern Ireland
local government elections are held on the basis of proportional representation
and electoral wards are grouped into district electoral areas.
Local authorities’ functions are far-reaching. Some are primarily duties, others
purely permissive.
Broadly speaking, functions in England and Wales are divided between county
and district councils on the basis that county councils are responsible for
matters requiring planning and administration over wide areas or requiring the
support of substantial resources. Within the metropolitan areas district
councils are responsible for functions needing substantial resources because
they have populations large enough to give such support. District councils as a
whole administer functions of more local significance. In London the division of
functions is slightly different.
English county councils are generally responsible for strategic planning,
transport planning, highways, traffic regulation, consumer protection, refuse
disposal, police and the fire service. Education, libraries and the personal social
services are functions of county councils in non-metropolitan areas and of
district councils in metropolitan areas. All district councils are responsible, for
instance, for environmental health, housing, decisions on most planning
applications, and refuse collection. They may also provide off-street car parks
subject to the consent of the county council. Powers to carry out some
functions—such as the provision of museums, art galleries and parks—are
available at both levels: arrangements depend on local agreement.
In Greater London the boroughs and the City Corporation are responsible for
the same range of functions as district councils in metropolitan areas (with the
addition of consumer protection). The Greater London Council (GLC) deals at
present with services which were seen as requiring unified administration and
control over the whole area. In inner London education is administered by the
Inner London Education Authority, an autonomous committee of the GLC.
Responsibility for highways in London is divided according to the type of road;
the main strategic road network is a matter for the GLC, while the boroughs look
after other roads. The boroughs have prime responsibility for the provision of
housing. The GLC has transferred most of its housing stock to the boroughs and
surrounding districts. London’s police force is directly responsible to the Home
Secretary.
In Wales the division of functions between county and district councils is
much the same as that between county and district councils in non¬
metropolitan areas of England.
Local authorities in England and Wales may arrange for any of their functions
to be carried out on their behalf by another local authority, other than functions
relating to education, police, the personal social services and national parks.
In Scotland the regional and district authorities discharge local government
functions in a way broadly similar to that of authorities in England and Wales.
Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, because of their isolation from the
mainland, have single, virtually all-purpose authorities.
In Northern Ireland, local environmental and certain other services are
62
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Internal
Organisation of
Local Authorities
Officers and
Employees
administered by the district councils, but responsibility for planning, roads,
water supply and sewerage services is exercised in each district by a local office
of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland working closely with
the district council and its staff. Area boards, responsible to central depart¬
ments, administer locally education, public libraries and the health and
personal social services. The Northern Ireland Housing Executive, responsible to
the Department of the Environment, administers housing.
Local authorities have considerable freedom to make internal arrangements for
carrying out their duties. Most use the committee system, whereby policy and
principle are decided in full council, and committees administer the various
services. Parish and community councils in England and Wales are often able to
do their work efficiently in full session although they appoint committees from
time to time as necessary. Some councils have policy advisory or co-ordinating
committees with powers to originate policy, subject to the approval of the full
council. The powers and duties of local authority committees (which may be
advisory or executive) are usually laid down in the appointing council’s standing
orders.
A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees, except those in
connection with raising loans, levying rates (see p 64), or making financial
demands on other authorities liable to contribute; these are legally reserved to
the council as a whole.
Local authorities can co-operate or share among themselves the discharge of
their functions.
The public and the press are admitted to all council and committee meetings
but may be excluded while a particular item is considered if the council or
committee decides that publicity would not be in the public interest.
Over 1-9 million people are employed by local authorities in Great Britain. These
include administrative, professional and technical staff, teachers, firemen,
those engaged on law and order services, and manual workers. Nearly half of all
local government workers are employed in the education service.
Although a few appointments must be made by all the authorities responsible
for the functions concerned, councils are individually responsible within
national policy requirements for determining the size, composition and
deployment of their workforces. In Northern Ireland, each council must by law
appoint a clerk of the council as its chief officer.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or chief
officers; administrative, professional, clerical and technical staff; and manual
workers. Senior staff appointments are usually made on the recommendation of
the committee or committees particularly concerned; most junior appointments
are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible for engaging
manual workers. Appointments and engagements always conform to the
council’s set establishment, and committees are informed of appointments
which they have not made themselves.
Pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are generally a matter for
each council, although there are scales recommended by national negotiating
machinery set up by the local authorities themselves.
Authorities differ in the degree to which they employ staff to carry out certain
functions (for example, building work, street cleaning or refuse collection) or use
private firms under contract. The Government’s policy of promoting value for
money is encouraging the use of private firms where there are resultant economies.
In the specific case of building and maintenance work, the Local Government,
Planning and Land Act 1980 obliges authorities' direct labour organisations to
bid for such work in open competition if they wish to undertake it.
GOVERNMENT
63
Local
Government
Finance
Current
Expenditure
Capital
Expenditure
In 1983-84 expenditure by local government in the United Kingdom was about
£32,800 million, 27 per cent of total public expenditure. Current expenditure
amounted to some £28,800 million, and capital expenditure to nearly £4,000
million. One-third of local government expenditure is for education. Housing,
transport, police and fire and social and environmental services also represent
significant proportions. Each local authority is responsible for its own
expenditure although in a few cases several authorities may decide to provide a
joint service if this is more economical.
Local government current expenditure in England and Wales is financed by a
combination of central government grants and local rates (a tax based on
property values). A few services such as the police, housing and transport and
the urban programme for inner city areas receive specific central government
grants towards their cost. However, most central government support for
current spending is provided through the rate support grant. This is a general
grant which is designed to compensate for variations in the needs which local
authorities have to provide for and for differences in the resources they may be
able to raise in local rates. Each local authority’s grant is, therefore, calculated to
be sufficient for it to provide a similar level of service to that of other authorities
while at the same time charging the same rate level. This system requires an
assessment of each authority’s need to provide services which takes account of
over 60 different factors and characteristics of an authority’s area and
population.
Within this system, local authorities are free to decide on their overall level of
spending and on their priorities between particular services. However, because
of the need to control the increase in total public expenditure the Government
has found it necessary to issue spending targets to individual authorities; if
authorities exceed them, they lose rate support grant. The Government has
power to fix upper limits on the rates of selected authorities whose spending it
considers to be excessive; it also has a reserve power to limit the rates of all
authorities.
In Scotland, the grant is distributed in three parts: the needs’ element,
designed to give most help to authorities whose spending needs are greatest; the
resources' element, used to supplement the rate income of authorities whose
rateable value per head of population falls below a standard figure, prescribed for
each year; and the ‘domestic’ element, which compensates authorities for loss of
rate income from reductions in rate poundage which they are required to give to
householders. Excessive and unreasonable expenditure levels by local auth¬
orities, however, are discouraged by central government which can make
selective grant and rate reductions in the case of individual authorities. Current
expenditure guidelines are issued and the grant payable to authorities may be
reduced where the level of expenditure planned by authorities is in excess of the
guidelines. The Government has power to set a general limitation on rates.
In Northern Ireland district councils receive certain specific grants (for
example, for the acquisition of open space) and grants to compensate them for
loss of rate income arising from the statutory derating of premises. In addition,
councils whose rating resources are below a standard level receive a resources
grant to bring them up to that level.
Local government capital expenditure is financed mainly by borrowing with the
remainder coming from grants and other income. The largest share—a
quarter—goes to housing. Each local authority receives from the Government a
capital expenditure allocation for the functions for which it is responsible. The
allocation may be supplemented to some extent from capital receipts achieved by
the authority. With other minor additions, these amounts constitute a ceiling
Rates
Loans
Control of
Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
on the authority’s permitted capital expenditure for the year. They may normally
be used for whatever services the authority wishes within its legal powers.
Rates are local taxes paid by the occupiers of land and property (with certain
exceptions, see below) to meet part of the cost of local services. Each occupier’s
payment is calculated annually by the rating authority by multiplying the
rateable value of a property (broadly equivalent to its annual rental value) by the
rate poundage—an amount per £ of rateable value fixed by the authority
according to its projected financial needs. Rateable values are assessed
periodically, and there is a system of appeals for disputed assessments. Crown
(government) property is not rateable but payments are made, based on values
assessed by the Treasury Valuer, in place of rates.
Government grants reduce domestic rates below the levels paid by commercial
concerns. Rating relief is available in certain circumstances on premises
adapted for the use of the disabled. Agricultural land and buildings (apart from
living accommodation) and places of religious worship are exempted from rates.
Charities pay half the full rate on premises occupied for charitable purposes and
may be given further relief by rating authorities, who can also reduce or remit
the rates for a wide range of non-profit-making bodies. In England and Wales a
maximum of 50 per cent of the full rate may be levied on empty non-domestic
properties, with complete exemption for empty industrial property. In enterprise
zones, which have been set up in certain areas to foster industrial and
commercial regeneration, commercial and industrial properties are exempted
from paying rates for ten years.
In Scotland industrial (including freight transport) premises are rated at a
half of net annual value. There is rating on empty properties.
In Northern Ireland all industrial premises are fully derated as are commercial
premises in enterprise zones. Certain other properties, such as freight transport
and recreational premises, are partially derated.
Each year, local authorities receive a borrowing approval which enables them to
raise loans under their general powers to finance capital expenditure up to the
limit given in the approval. The GLC applies annually for parliamentary sanction
to raise the money needed for capital expenditure. In Northern Ireland long-term
borrowing by district councils is subject to central approval; in Scotland central
approval is given to capital expenditure, not to loans.
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by means of private mortgages,
issuing stock upon The Stock Exchange and bonds which may or may not be
quoted on The Stock Exchange. Local authorities also have right of access to the
Public Works Loan Board, financed by the Exchequer, or, in Northern Ireland, to
the Government Loans Fund, for long-term borrowing to finance a proportion of
their reckonable capital payments, and may borrow temporarily for a limited
proportion of their current outstanding loan debt.
Local councils normally have a finance committee to keep their financial policy
under constant review. They must have their accounts audited annually by
independent auditors appointed by the Audit Commission.
A complaints system for local government in England and Wales involves
independent statutory Commissions for Local Administration comprising local
commissioners (local government Ombudsmen). The English Commission
consists of three local commissioners and the Welsh of one. In Scotland the
statute provides for a single commissioner. All commissioners are responsible in
their particular area for investigating citizens’ allegations of injustice resulting
from maladministration by local authorities. In normal circumstances, the
GOVERNMENT
65
Fire Prevention
Commissioners can only initiate an investigation at the request of a local
councillor.
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with complaints
alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by district councils
and certain other public bodies.
The Fire Services
Every part of Britain is covered by a local fire service, which is subject to a
measure of central control. Other than in Northern Ireland, the cost is borne by
local authorities aided by central government through the rate support grant.
Each of the 64 fire authorities must by law make provision for fire-fighting,
and maintain a brigade of sufficient strength to meet all normal requirements
(in some parts of Scotland, authorities combine to provide fire cover). Other
fire-fighting organisations are maintained, for instance, by the Army and Air
Force Departments of the Ministry of Defence; by the Department of Trade and
Industry at certain establishments; and by some large industrial and commer¬
cial concerns.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility in England and Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central
control is concerned mainly with ensuring the operational efficiency of brigades.
Ministers have statutory powers to make regulations on such matters as
appointments and promotions, standards of training and equipment, pensions
and disciplinary matters. Their approval is also required for reductions in the
operational establishments of fire brigades. Each minister is advised by a
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, consisting of officers of the respective
home departments, representatives of local authorities and of the associations
representing members of fire brigades and other people with special qualific¬
ations, appointed by the minister concerned. Inspectorates of fire services
advise on operational and technical matters. Most fire brigades include
part-time personnel to augment and support the full-time strength in return for
a retaining fee and call-out and attendance fee. Fire authorities also employ
people for duties in controls communications and mobilising and staff duties.
There are about 34,500 full-time and 16,000 part-time operational members of
fire brigades in Britain.
Every fire authority must buy appliances and equipment to meet all normal
fire-fighting requirements in its area. Certain equipment is standardised so that
there is complete interchangeability when a fire is attended by more than one
brigade. The principal types of fire-fighting appliances are bought by fire
authorities to specifications approved by central government on the advice of the
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. The specifications ensure that
minimum standards are maintained, and allow sufficient freedom of design to
meet special circumstances and encourage further developments.
Each fire authority must appoint a Chief Fire Officer (Firemaster in Scotland)
who exercises central control from brigade headquarters. Divisional officers in'
charge of the geographical divisions into which most brigade areas are divided
are responsible for mobilising forces to deal with outbreaks of fire. Constant
communication is maintained between divisional and brigade headquarters
and, if a fire should be beyond the capabilities of a division, help is sent from one
or more neighbouring divisions, or even from another fire authority. The
nearest available force is sent to a fire, regardless of area boundaries.
Fire authorities are concerned in some way with fire precautions in most
buildings used by the public and have major responsibility for enforcing
legislation concerning fire precautions. They must also make efficient arrange-
Research
Special
Services
Fire Losses
Fire Casualties
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
merits for giving advice on fire prevention, restricting the spread of fires, and
means of escape. Courses in fire prevention are held at the Fire Service College
for fire brigade officers. In addition to their enforcement and advisory duties,
brigades are also involved in education and publicity to promote fire safety,
particularly in the home. The Government is advised on prevention by the Joint
Fire Prevention Committee of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils,
representing the fire service and central and local authorities.
Research into health hazards to firemen, fire prevention and protection, fire
brigade organisation and fire-fighting equipment is conducted by the Home
Office with the help of the fire service under the auspices of the Joint Committee
on Fire Research of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. Individual
research projects are undertaken by the Home Office Scientific Research and
Development Branch or, under contract to the Home Office, by other govern¬
ment agencies, notably the Fire Research Station, which is part of the Building
Research Establishment of the Department of the Environment, or by private
consultants. The Fire Research Station is the principal organisation studying
and investigating technical aspects of fire.
Fire authorities have discretion to use their brigades and equipment, free of
charge, in a variety of non-fire emergencies (such as rail, road and aircraft
accidents, collapse of buildings, flooding of premises, leakage of harmful gas or
liquids and the rescue of people or animals from dangerous situations).
The direct cost of damage to buildings and goods destroyed by fires in Great
Britain in 1983 amounted to an estimated £565-6 million (consequential losses
from the interruption of business are not included in this total). Most fires
involving heavy losses occur when the premises are unattended; and fires are
more likely to start in storage areas than in production departments. Industries
which suffer most severely include engineering and electrical firms, textiles,
food, drink and tobacco, warehousing, chemical and allied industries, paper,
printing and publishing firms, and retailing.
About 900 people, particularly the elderly and young children, die in fires every
year (most of them at home) and a further 9,000 or so suffer injuries. Among the
chief causes of fatal fires are ignition of upholstery, bedding and clothing by
smokers’ materials and heaters.
3
Administration
Overseas
Relations
Britain's overseas relations reflect both its traditional position as a major
trading and maritime power whose people have settled throughout the world,
and its concern to help to maintain peace and to secure world-wide economic
and social progress through international co-operation. It has diplomatic
relations with over 160 countries, and with about 20 of these has common
security arrangements, principally through the North Atlantic Treaty Organisa¬
tion. Commercial activities have helped Britain to maintain its position as a
world financial centre. It has considerable overseas investments, imports over a
third of its food and more than half of its raw material requirements, and
exports account for over a quarter of its gross national product. Britain provides
development assistance to over 120 independent countries as well as to its
remaining dependencies.
In an increasingly interdependent world, the attainment of overseas objectives
and the ability to exert influence in support of them are seen as best achieved
through co-operation with other nations on a regional or global basis. Britain is
a member of some 120 international organisations ranging from the world-wide
United Nations concerned with problems of world peace, international economic
co-operation and social issues to regionally based and technically orientated
bodies. In particular, it is a member of the European Community and is
increasingly co-ordinating its overseas policies through the Community’s
political co-operation mechanism. As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain
is a part of a representative cross-section of the international community, which
has evolved from the British Empire (since 1945 Britain has progressively, and
largely peacefully, dismantled its Empire and prepared nearly 50 countries for
independence) and whose 49 members share a common language, common
technical standards, similar systems of law and close professional, academic
and commercial links.
Britain also has strong ties with the United States, including a common
language and similar political and cultural traditions.
A long involvement in world affairs has given Britain both a vital interest and a
firm belief in the maintenance of international order governed by respect for a
generally accepted system of law. As a permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council it makes support for the United Nations a central feature of its
foreign policy.
The general conduct of overseas relations is the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs acting through the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office and over 210 British diplomatic posts overseas. The latter
comprise embassies and high commissions in over 130 countries,1 together
with subordinate consulates general and consulates, and missions at ten
1 A few embassies are accredited to more than one country; for example, the embassy at Dakar in
Senegal is also accredited to Mauretania, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and Cape Verde.
68
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British
Council
multilateral organisations. These posts, like the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, are staffed by members of the Diplomatic Service and locally engaged
staff. Excluding supporting administrative and communications services, the
staff are employed on political and economic work, export promotion and other
commercial matters, consular and immigration work, aid administration, and
information and cultural work. Other departments which have a primary
concern with overseas relations include the Ministry of Defence, the Department
of Trade and Industry, the Treasury and the Overseas Development Administra¬
tion which is part of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office; but the involvement
of most has increased in recent years with the growing dependence of domestic
economic policy on international decisions and with Britain’s membership of
the European Community.
Where questions of overseas policy involve matters within the responsibility of
other departments, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office formulates policy in
consultation with the departments concerned. The balance of responsibilities is
a matter of constant adjustment, and the department with the predominant
functional interest, even though it may be primarily domestic, takes the lead.
This is particularly so in policy concerning the European Community and
international monetary matters. In the case of policy towards the Community,
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office exercises its co-ordinating role at official
level through the machinery of the Cabinet Office.
Other bodies whose work has an overseas dimension include the British
Overseas Trade Board and the Export Credits Guarantee Department which
provide export services for industry; the Crown Agents for Oversea Governments
and Administrations which helps to arrange purchases from British aid funds
and appointments under technical co-operation programmes: and the British
Council.
The British Council, which celebrated its fiftieth anniversary in 1984, aims to
promote overseas an enduring understanding and appreciation of Britain
through cultural, educational and technical co-operation. The activities of the
Council, which has staff in over 80 countries, include the teaching of English
and the recruitment of British teachers for posts overseas; administering the
Government’s educational assistance and technical co-operation training pro¬
grammes; fostering personal contacts between British and overseas people,
especially in the educational, professional and scientific areas; running, or
helping to maintain, libraries of British books and periodicals overseas and
providing information through touring exhibitions and bibliographical services;
and presenting overseas the best of British arts. In Britain, the Council is
concerned mainly with arranging programmes for professional visitors and with
the placing, administration and welfare of overseas students. A basic principle is
that the Council’s work should be of benefit both to Britain and to the receiving
country.
About 80 per cent of funds for the Council’s total programme, which
amounted to an estimated £181-8 million in 1984-85, is provided by the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (including the Overseas Development
Administration) and on its behalf the Council is responsible for the implementa¬
tion of more than 30 cultural agreements with other countries. Overseas it acts
as education adviser to Britain’s diplomatic missions and is responsible for
educational assistance in developing countries in which it is represented; the
Council is also responsible for all links and exchanges in higher education
which require official support. Increasingly, the Council is undertaking
education projects paid for by overseas clients and is providing English classes
abroad; these activities are expected to produce income of about £18-6 million in
1984-85.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
69
Membership of the European Community
Britain joined the European Community on 1 January 1973 and its mem¬
bership was endorsed in a national referendum in 1975. The other members are
Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the
Netherlands, the original six members; Denmark and the Irish Republic which
joined with Britain in 1973; and Greece which became a member in 1981. With
its partners, Britain seeks to develop the Community in the interests of all its
members. It supports the membership applications of Portugal and Spain,
seeing enlargement as a means of strengthening democracy in Europe.
The European Community consists of three communities set up by separate
treaties: the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), the European
Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom). The Community is the world's largest trading bloc, accounting for
about a third of world trade. Designed to lay the foundations for a closer union
between the peoples of Europe and to promote economic expansion by means of
a common market and the gradual approximation of member states’ economic
policies, the Community has moved towards these objectives by abolishing
internal tariffs and certain other trade barriers, establishing a common customs
tafiff, and making provision for the free movement of labour, capital and
services. An increasing proportion of British trade is with the other nine
member states, their percentage of British visible exports having increased from
35 per cent in 1972 to almost 44 per cent in 1983. There are also common
policies for agriculture and fisheries. Overseas countries having special links
with Community member states are accorded preferential treatment in aid and
the development of trade.
The European Community
Norway
Denmark
Netherlands.
Britain
''h Federal
p Be|giurn( Republicwl
v^anf Germany
Luxembourg v~7
France
Irish
Republic
| j Members
I] Applicant members
Portugal / / Spain
Greece ^ ^
70
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Community
Institutions
A common market for coal and steel is designed to ensure an orderly supply of
these commodities to member states. The Coal and Steel Community’s funds are
raised by a levy on production, and investment grants are given to encourage the
modernisation of the industries, for research, and for social measures to help to
re-deploy coal and steel workers. Loans are also raised which promote workers’
housing and aid capital investment.
One of the Community’s aims is to co-ordinate member states’ nuclear energy
industries and their other peaceful nuclear activities. Since 1959 there has been
a common market for all nuclear materials, and a common control system
prevents their diversion to purposes other than those declared. There is also a
co-ordinated research programme in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The separate institutions established by the treaties for each of the three
communities were merged in 1967. Each state has one representative on the
Council of Ministers; in the other institutions Britain’s representation is in line
with that of the other large member states (France, the Federal Republic of
Germany and Italy). English is one of the Community’s official languages.
The Council of Ministers is the principal decision-making body for all major
Community questions, member states being represented on it by foreign or
other ministers as appropriate to the subject under discussion. The Presidency
of the Council changes at six-monthly intervals. Most Council decisions are
taken on the basis of a proposal by the Commission. Some issues may be
decided by majority, or qualified majority, with votes weighted according to
provisions in the Community treaties. Where very important interests of
member states are involved, however, the Council’s practice is to proceed on the
basis of unanimity. Britain supports the retention of this arrangement as the
basis of Community decision-making on major issues.
The Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER), composed of
member states’ ambassadors to the Community, assists the Council by
preparing its meetings and co-ordinating the work of other subordinate bodies.
The Commission formulates policy proposals for submission to the Council of
Ministers, promotes Community interests, attempts to reconcile national
viewpoints and implements the provisions of the treaties and Community
measures. Certain executive powers of decision are delegated to it, for example,
in the areas of agriculture and trade and competition policy. It is composed of 14
commissioners nominated by member governments; two are from Britain. Each
of the commissioners is responsible for one or more of the main Community
activities. The Commission is pledged to act independently of national or
sectional interests and to formulate its proposals and administer policy in the
interests of the Community as a whole. Its proposals are made only after
extensive consultation with officials of the national governments and with
producers, trade unions, employers’ associations and many others.
The Court of Justice interprets and adjudicates on the meaning of the treaties
and of any measures taken by the Council of Ministers and Commission under
them, hears complaints and appeals brought by or against Community
institutions, member states or individuals and gives preliminary rulings on
questions referred to it by courts in the member states. As a court of final appeal,
its procedure in such cases is broadly similar to that of the highest courts in
member states; its rulings are binding on member countries. Community
institutions and individuals. The Court consists of 11 judges assisted by five
advocates-general who make reasoned submissions concerning cases brought
before the Court to help it in its interpretation of Community law.
The European Parliament is composed of 434 directly elected members, 81
from Britain, who sit according to party affiliation and not nationality. Elections
to the Parliament are held every five years, the last in June 1984. The Parliament
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
71
Community
Policies
External
Relations
is consulted on and debates all major policy issues of the Community. Members
may question the Council of Ministers and Commission, and have the power by
a two-thirds majority to dismiss the Commission. The Parliament can also reject
in its entirety the draft annual budget as presented by the Commission and
approved by the Council. A formal conciliation procedure has been adopted for
use in the event of disagreement between the Parliament and the Council of
Ministers on matters with major budgetary or financial implications.
The European Court of Auditors examines all Community revenue and
expenditure to see that it has been legally received and spent, and to ensure
sound financial management. It draws up an annual report, and may submit
observations on specific questions at the Community institutions’ request.
The Economic and Social Committee is a consultative body representing a
cross-section of economic interests. Its members (representing employers’
organisations, trade unions and other interests) are consulted by the Council of
Ministers and the Commission during the formulation of policy. Britain is
entitled to send 24 members out of a total of 156.
In addition to, and separately from, the institutions operating within the
Community framework established by treaty, the member states have set up
machinery under which they consult each other before taking up final positions
on important questions of foreign policy. Known as political co-operation, these
consultations include regular meetings of foreign ministers, monthly meetings
of senior officials, and contacts at working level among those concerned with
particular questions. In addition, the ten foreign ministries are linked by a
secure communications system. Representatives of member states serving in
other countries and international organisations maintain regular contact.
The Community’s heads of State or of Government meet three times a year as
the European Council which operates outside the treaty framework and
considers both Community matters and those arising in the context of political
co-operation. It discusses issues unresolved in the Council of Ministers as well
as general Community problems and lays down guidelines and political
direction for future work.
Community policies are implemented by regulations, which are legally
binding and directly applicable in all member countries; directives, which are
binding, as to the result to be achieved, on member states to which they are
addressed but allow national authorities to decide on means of implementation;
decisions, which are binding on those to whom they are addressed (for example,
member states, firms or individuals); and recommendations and opinions,
which have no binding force. The Council can also indicate a general policy
direction through resolutions.
The ten member states discuss a wide range of foreign policy issues and, where
possible, reach common positions. At the United Nations their actions are
closely co-ordinated and they vote together on most major issues. Their cohesion
has played a key role in the process initiated at the 1975 Helsinki Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe (see p 78), and especially in the setting up
of the Conference on Disarmament in Europe which opened in Stockholm in
January 1984. In 1981 they condemned the imposition of martial law in Poland
and the suppression of the independent trade union, ‘Solidarity’, as a violation
of the principles agreed upon at Helsinki.
In July 1980, the European Council’s Venice Declaration stated that a lasting
solution to the problem of the Middle East required the mutual acceptance of
two basic principles—the right of all countries in the area, including Israel, to
secure existence within guaranteed borders and the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. After Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982, Britain,
France and Italy contributed to the multinational force deployed there from the
72
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
end of that year until early 1984. Member states have consistently emphasised
the importance to any future settlement of the complete withdrawal of foreign
forces from Lebanon except those whose presence is requested by the Lebanese
Government. In May 1984, following attacks on shipping as a result of the
conflict between Iraq and Iran, member states emphasised the need to preserve
freedom of navigation in the Gulf.
The problems of Central America are also frequently discussed, member states
having made clear their willingness to contribute to finding a peaceful solution.
They stress, however, that any lasting solution can only come from the area itself
and strongly support the efforts of the Contadora group of countries (Colombia,
Venezuela, Panama and Mexico) to achieve a peaceful settlement and a solution
to Central American problems.
Member states have condemned strongly the Soviet Union’s invasion and
continued occupation of Afghanistan and called for the immediate withdrawal of
the occupying forces in order that a permanent settlement can be reached
restoring the right of the Afghan people to self-determination.
In 1983, member states rejected the purported declaration of independence by
the Turkish community in northern Cyprus.
On most international trade matters the Council of Ministers agrees a
common position, with the Commission speaking, and, where necessary,
negotiating on behalf of the Community (for example, in the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade and under the Multi-Fibre Arrangement). Association or
co-operation agreements giving preferential access to Community markets have
been concluded with most countries in the Mediterranean basin. Non-
preferential co-operation agreements have been concluded with individual
countries in South Asia and Latin America and also with two regional
organisations—the Association of South East Asian Nations and the Andean
Pact. Regular discussions covering trade and other matters are held with
regional groupings of Latin American, Arab and South-East Asian countries.
The Community has also improved progressively its generalised scheme of
preferences, which gives duty-free access for almost all manufactures and
semi-manufactures exported by developing countries and preferential access for
agricultural products, with the aim in particular of benefiting the poorest of
them. The latest scheme started in 1981 and runs for ten years.
The second Lome Convention, which governs aid, trade and co-operation
between the Community and 64 developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean
and the Pacific (ACP), came into operation in 1981: over half the ACP countries
are members of the Commonwealth. The Convention provides for aid and
European Investment Bank lending of about £3,200 million, industrial and
agricultural co-operation, a scheme designed to stabilise the commodity export
earnings of the ACP countries, assistance for ACP mineral producers whose
production and income suffer from temporary disruptions beyond their control,
and duty-free access to the Community for ACP countries’ exports of all
industrial and most agricultural goods, including privileged access for sugar,
bananas, rum and beef. All British dependent territories (with the exception of
Bermuda, Gibraltar and Hong Kong), together with the overseas territories of
other Community members, are formally associated with the Community under
conditions parallel to those in the Lome Convention and have similar aid and
trade benefits. Negotiations for a third Convention, which would come into
operation in 1985, began in October 1983.
Britain played a leading part in urging the Community to adopt an aid
programme encompassing those developing countries (many of which are
among the world's poorest) not covered by the Lome Convention or having any
other special relationship with the Community. The programme for these
non-associated states has grown steadily since 1976 and was worth £140
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
73
Finance
Internal Policies
million in 1983. Priority is given to rural development and agricultural
production in the poorest countries. The Community also has a food aid
programme, worth about £330 million in 1983.
The Community is financed by a system of levies on agricultural imports,
customs duties and the product of a notional rate of value added tax (VAT) levied
on a Community harmonised basis at a rate not exceeding 1 per cent. These are
known as ‘own resources’.
Without some form of adjustment Britain’s contributions under the system
would be much higher than its receipts from Community policies. The main
reasons for this are that the Common Agricultural Policy absorbs the major
share of Community spending and that Britain’s agricultural sector is relatively
small. (Expenditure on agriculture accounts for about 68 per cent of the 1984
Community budget while regional policy takes 5-7 per cent, social policy 6-5 per
cent, aid to developing countries 3-5 per cent, and projects concerned with
research, energy, industry and transport 6-9 per cent.) This problem was
foreseen during the accession negotiations, and Britain was given an assurance
that, if unacceptable situations arose, the very survival of the Community would
demand that its institutions found equitable solutions.
In 1980 the Community recognised that there was a problem for Britain and
refunds were made in 1980, 1981 and 1982. A further refund of £440 million
was agreed for 1983 but was subsequently blocked by France and Italy pending
the outcome of negotiations on a longer-term solution to the Community’s
budgetary problems. In June 1984 the European Council (meeting in
Fontainebleau) reached agreement on a fairer and more soundly based system
for Britain’s contributions to the Community. This provided for the release of
the blocked 1983 refunds, a refund of £600 million for 1984, and a new system
for later years under which Britain would obtain a rebate of 66 per cent of the
gap between Britain's share of VAT payments and its share of Community
expenditure. There was also agreement on measures to introduce budgetary
discipline and to curb agricultural spending. Finance ministers are working on
the precise measures to guarantee the effective application of these principles.
Once these have been drawn up, and national parliaments have given their
consent, the VAT ceiling of 1 per cent will be increased to 1 -4 per cent for the
Community as a whole.
As the expenditure figures indicate, the Common Agricultural Policy is the main
Community policy and is designed to ensure food supplies at reasonable prices
for consumers and a fair standard of living for farmers. Producers’ returns are
supported by a combination of charges on imports and internal support prices
maintained by intervention buying where necessary. In January 1983 the
Community agreed a new fisheries policy providing for arrangements governing
access to coastal waters, conservation of stocks, the allocation of quotas among
member states, and enforcement of these measures.
The European Social Fund assists areas of high unemployment by providing
grants towards schemes of training, job creation and geographical mobility of
workers. The European Regional Development Fund provides grants for
industrial and infrastructure projects in the less-developed or industrially
declining regions of the Community with the aim of reducing existing
imbalances or preventing the creation of new ones. Britain has received
substantial grants from the two funds, together with loans and grants from the
European Coal and Steel Community.
Britain also receives about a fifth of the lending of the European Investment
Bank which was set up in 1958 to provide finance on a non-profit-making basis
for investment to develop the Community's less-favoured regions, to modernise
industry and to help projects of common interest to two or more member states.
74
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Community industrial policy includes measures designed to deal with the
collapse of demand for steel; temporary mandatory production quotas have been
introduced in order to cut back production to the level of demand, thereby
allowing economic price levels to be obtained. Efforts are also being made to
restructure and modernise the industry so that it can become profitable without
government aid.
Other areas of action include energy, environment and transport policies.
The European Monetary System was established in 1979 to promote monetary
stability in Europe. It consists of an exchange-rate mechanism, a monetary unit
known as the European Currency Unit (ECU—based on a ‘basket’ of national
currencies including sterling, the value of which is recalculated daily) which is
used within the Community for budgetary and other purposes, and enlarged
Community short- and medium-term credit facilities. The member states are
also committed to the establishment of a European Monetary Fund. Britain has
participated in the system from the outset, although not in the exchange-rate
arrangements, and has deposited 20 per cent of its gold and dollar currency
reserves with the European Monetary Co-operation Fund in exchange for ECUs.
The Government intends that Britain should join the exchange-rate mechanism
when conditions permit.
Britain has put forward a number of proposals for the Community’s future
development, notably the removal of non-tariff barriers to Community trade,
agreed Community standards for industrial products, the creation of a genuine
common market in capital and services (particularly insurance), free lorry
movement, greater competition in Community air services, more industrial
co-operation and Community promotion of new technologies on the model of the
ESPRIT programme, launched in 1984, for research and development in
information technology.
The Commonwealth
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 49 independent states with a
combined population of over 1,000 million, about a quarter of the world total.
Britain participates fully in all its activities and values it as a means of
consulting and co-operating with peoples of widely differing cultures, thereby
contributing to the promotion of international understanding and peace.
Commonwealth members are a representative cross-section of mankind in all
stages of social and economic development. Their peoples are drawn from
practically all the world’s main races and from all continents. As some of its
members are very rich and others very poor, the Commonwealth acts as a bridge
between rich and poor nations.
The members are Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Britain, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica, Fiji,
The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati,
Lesotho, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Nauru, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Maldives, Nauru,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tuvalu are special members entitled to
take part in all functional Commonwealth meetings and activities but not the
two-yearly Commonwealth heads of Government meetings. The Queen is
recognised as head of the Commonwealth; she is also head of State in 18
countries.
The origin of the Commonwealth lies in the gradual granting of self-
government to the older-established British colonies (later known as the
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
75
Consultation
The Common¬
wealth
Secretariat
Dominions) in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa1 where
European settlement had occurred on a large scale. Their fully independent
status in relation to Britain was legally formulated in the Statute of Westminster
of 1931. The main expansion in Commonwealth membership, however, took
place after the second world war following Britain’s decision to guide its other
dependent territories towards self-government and independence. This process
began in 1947 with the independence of India and Pakistan,2 and in 1957
Ghana became the first African dependency to become independent. By the end
of the 1960s nearly all the British dependencies in Africa had gained their
independence as had many in the Caribbean and in Asia.
As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain participates in a system of mutual
consultation and co-operation. The Commonwealth does not formulate central
policies on, say, economic or foreign affairs. Nevertheless the considerable
consultation and co-operation is of benefit to member countries and contributes
to international understanding. It led, for instance, to the Commonwealth
playing a significant role in the events leading to Zimbabwe’s independence in
April 1980, and to Commonwealth involvement in Uganda when a team
observed the 1980 elections and when a military training team was sent there in
1982.
Consultation takes place through diplomatic representatives known as High
Commissioners, meetings of heads of Government, specialised conferences of
other ministers and officials, expert groups, and discussions at international
conferences and the United Nations. Trade and cultural exhibitions and
conferences of professional and unofficial medical, cultural, educational and
economic organisations are other ways in which frequent contacts are made.
Heads of Government usually meet every two years, most recently in New Delhi
in 1983; they will next meet in the Bahamas in 1985. Proceedings are normally
in private which facilitates a frank and informal exchange of views. On
international affairs no formal decisions are taken and no attempt is made to
formulate specifically Commonwealth policies, although, on occasion, common
views on matters of major international concern are formulated and reflected in
the communiques issued at the end of the meetings. Occasionally separate
declarations are made on particular issues, for instance, the 1971 declaration of
Commonwealth principles, the 1977 statement which commits member govern¬
ments to take every practical step to discourage sporting contacts with South
Africa, the 1979 declaration on racism and racial prejudice, the 1981 declara¬
tion on the economic and other problems facing developing countries and the
1983 declarations on international security and international economic action.
One of the most important Commonwealth activities is consultation and
co-operation in economic affairs, and finance ministers meet annually to
discuss world economic problems. In recent years, they have paid particular
attention to the problems of development and the establishment of a fairer
international economic order. Other ministerial meetings include those of
agriculture, education, health and law ministers which take place every two or
three years.
The Commonwealth Secretariat, established in London in 1965 and financed by
member states, is the main agency for multilateral communication between
them. It is headed by a Secretary-General appointed by heads of Government
and responsible to member states collectively.
The Secretariat promotes consultation, disseminates information on matters
of common concern, and organises meetings and conferences, including those
1 South Africa ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth in 1961.
2 Pakistan left the Commonwealth in 1972.
76
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of heads of Government and of ministers. It co-ordinates many Commonwealth
activities related to international economic, social and political affairs, includ¬
ing food production and rural development, the role of women in development,
youth programmes, management development, science and technology, law and
health. The Secretariat also administers the Commonwealth Fund for Technical
Co-operation.
Because of its neutral position the Secretariat has been able to make its good
offices available in cases of dispute, and has carried out, on request, special
assignments requiring demonstrable impartiality.
Technical
Co-operation
Commonwealth
Foundation
and Other
Organisations
Expenditure by Britain on technical co-operation with Commonwealth develop¬
ing countries in 1983 was nearly £109 million, the greater part being spent on
financing staff for service for Commonwealth governments and in financing
training places in Britain for people from Commonwealth countries; volunteers
are also sent from Britain to serve overseas. Other help includes consultancy
services, the supply of training and research equipment and the provision of
advice by British scientific and technical institutions. (Financial aid to Common¬
wealth developing countries totalled £317 million in 1983 and some received
investment finance from the Commonwealth Development Corporation.)
Britain plays an active part in the work of the Commonwealth Fund for
Technical Co-operation established within the Commonwealth Secretariat to
provide technical assistance for economic and social development in Common¬
wealth developing countries. It is financed by contributions from developed and
developing states, Britain contributing about a third of its income. The Fund
provides experts to undertake advisory assignments or fill specific posts and
uses consultancy firms to make studies for governments. Its education and
training programme is of particular help in raising levels of technical and
managerial skill, and makes wide use of training facilities within developing
member countries for the benefit of other developing countries. It has a special
programme to help countries develop their exports, another on food production
and rural development and a small technical assistance group to give advice in
key areas. An industrial development unit, the main executive agency of the
Commonwealth Action Programme of Industrial Co-operation established in
1979, investigates the feasibility of establishing new industries in developing
countries and helps to prepare and initiate agreed projects.
Britain is a major contributor to the Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan, a system of awards for people of high intellectual promise to
study in Commonwealth countries other than their own. It was agreed in 1984
that the number of awards would be increased to about 1,650 of which Britain
would provide some 800.
The Commonwealth Foundation was established in 1966 and reconstituted as
an international organisation in 1983. The Foundation is financed by member
governments and administers a fund for promoting closer co-operation among
professional and other non-governmental organisations within the Common¬
wealth. It has assisted in the creation of 22 Commonwealth professional
associations and in the creation and growth of many national ones; it has also
supported 16 multi-disciplinary professional centres.
The Commonwealth Institute, financed largely by the British Government,
promotes knowledge about the Commonwealth through films, library services,
lecture tours by members of the staff and study conferences for students: its
headquarters in London has a permanent publicity exhibition depicting the life
of member states, each country financing its own stand. The Royal Common¬
wealth Society, which is over 100 years old, is a centre for study and discussion,
its library in London having one of the largest collections on the Commonwealth.
The Society has branches in many countries.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
77
In keeping with the fact that the Commonwealth is an association of peoples
as well as governments, many unofficial organisations, professional bodies and
voluntary societies provide machinery for co-operation. Professional bodies
include associations of architects, doctors, engineers, lawyers, librarians,
magistrates, museum curators, nurses, pharmacists, planners, surveyors and
veterinary surgeons. Other organisations include the Commonwealth Par¬
liamentary Association which organises an annual conference of parliamenta¬
rians, the Commonwealth Press Union, the Commonwealth Broadcasting
Association, the Commonwealth Youth Exchange Council, the Commonwealth
Games Federation and the Commonwealth Arts Association.
DEPENDENCIES There are 15 remaining British dependent territories: Anguilla: Bermuda;
British Antarctic Territory; British Indian Ocean Territory; British Virgin
Islands; Cayman Islands; Falkland Islands; Falkland Islands Dependencies;
Gibraltar; Hong Kong; Montserrat; Pitcairn, Ducie, Henderson and Oeno; St
Helena; St Helena Dependencies (Ascension, Tristan da Cunha); and the Turks
and Caicos Islands. They have a combined population of 5-5 million, of which
5 3 million live in Hong Kong. Few are rich in natural resources, and some are
scattered groups of islands. There are no permanent inhabitants in the British
Antarctic Territory or British Indian Ocean Territory.
Most dependencies have considerable self-government with their own legisla¬
ture and civil service. Britain is generally responsible, through a Governor, for
defence, internal security and foreign affairs.
It is Britain s policy to give independence to those dependencies that want it,
and not to force it on those which do not. The Falkland Islands and Gibraltar are
the subject of territorial claims by Argentina and Spain respectively. In both
cases the inhabitants wish to retain the link with Britain, which does not accept
that British sovereignty is in doubt. The Government is therefore pledged not to
grant any transfer of sovereignty against their wishes since this would be
contrary to the principle of self-determination. It was in fulfilment of this
responsibility, and in exercise of its right to self-defence under the United
Nations Charter, that Britain, after diplomatic efforts had failed, resorted to
military force to restore British administration in the Falkland Islands and the
Falkland Islands Dependencies following their illegal invasion and occupation by
Argentina in April 1982. Argentina and Chile have claims to territory which
overlaps part ol the British Antarctic Territory. Claims to territorial sovereignty
in the Antarctic, however, are suspended by the provisions of the 1959 Antarctic
Treaty. The future of Hong Kong is being discussed in talks between Britain and
the People’s Republic of China.
International Peace and Security
Britain is concerned to protect its territorial integrity and political independ¬
ence, as well as the interests of its dependencies and of its allies, and pursues
these objectives through a national security policy in which defence is coupled
with strenuous efforts towards removing or alleviating the causes of internation¬
al tension and achieving balanced and verifiable international arms control and
disarmament.
British defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO)1 which member countries regard as their guarantor of security, freedom
1 NATO's 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain. Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland. Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal.
Spain, Turkey and the United States. France does not participate in NATO's integrated military
structure. Negotiations on the inclusion of Spain in NATO's integrated military structure have
been frozen pending a referendum in Spain.
78
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
East—West
Relations
and well-being, and as an important contribution to international peace and
stability. The purpose of NATO is to enable its member countries to maintain
peace with freedom. It pursues a strategy of deterrence, designed to convince
any potential aggressor that the use of force, or the threat of it, carries risks far
outweighing any likely advantage. At the same time NATO countries seek
through international negotiations significant reductions in the level of nuclear
and conventional forces.
Although Britain’s defence resources are concentrated on key NATO tasks, its
defence policy is also designed to help, whenever possible, its own and more
general Western interests outside the NATO area. Britain also supports United
Nations and other peacekeeping efforts. In addition it provides military
assistance and training to a number of friendly countries and carries out
peacetime exercises and deployment in many different parts of the world.
Britain favours genuine improvements in East—West relations based on a
broader understanding and on the recognition that East and West have a
common interest in peace and security at a lower level of weapons. The basic
prerequisite is that both sides should avoid policies which risk provoking
confrontation, aiming instead for mutual accommodation and co-operation
while exercising restraint in the conduct of international relations in both
Europe and the rest of the world. This is explicitly recognised in the Final Act of
the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe which
states that European security has to be considered in the broader context of
world security and that the pursuit of security should extend to other parts of
the world. Britain is committed to doing everything possible to reduce the risks
of war and to avoid misunderstanding, and has expressed readiness, in the right
circumstances, to pursue a sensible dialogue with the Soviet Union and the
countries of Eastern Europe without any compromise on principles of freedom
and democracy. The Soviet Union’s invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979
and its continued occupation of that country, however, has been a major
obstacle to improved relations, as was the imposition of martial law in Poland in
1981.
Britain attaches great importance to the full and balanced implementation by
all participants of the provisions of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act for increased
stability in Europe and improved co-operation between the 35 European and
North American signatory states. While not a legally binding document, the
Final Act is a charter and code of conduct of behaviour for what the participants
hope will in time become a more normal and open relationship between both
governments and peoples in East and West. To this end it contains undertak¬
ings about security, respect for human rights, and co-operation in economic,
humanitarian and other matters. Follow-up meetings took place in Belgrade
(1977-78) and Madrid (1980-83). At the Madrid meeting the participants
agreed that renewed efforts should be made to give full effect to the Final Act,
and that a Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and
Disarmament in Europe should be convened in Stockholm in January 1984. It
is hoped that such measures, which would be militarily significant, binding,
verifiable and applicable to the whole of Europe, will complement arms control
negotiations by reducing tension and the dangers of surprise attack through
increased openness about military behaviour. At the Stockholm conference
Britain and its allies have proposed measures to reduce secrecy through the
observation and inspection of military activities, and the establishment of clear
guidelines for notification and reporting of military activities.
Together with France, the United States and the Soviet Union, Britain is a
signatory to the 1972 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin which reaffirms the
four countries’ rights and responsibilities in Berlin, and provides for greatly
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
79
improved travel and communications facilities between Berlin and both the
Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, and for the
maintenance and development of the ties between West Berlin and the Federal
Republic.
Arms Control Britain has played a prominent part in all the major multilateral disarmament
and negotiations and is a party to all, and a depository government for most, of the
Disarmament treaties concluded as a result. It participates in the arms control and
disarmament work of the United Nations including its Conference on Disarma¬
ment. In these discussions Britain has stressed the need for a realistic approach
to arms control and for agreements to include adequate verification provisions if
they are to enhance security and build up confidence between states. Britain
also considers regional agreements to be particularly useful.
A nuclear-weapon state, Britain is committed to negotiating in good faith to
halt the nuclear arms race and to move towards nuclear disarmament. The
negotiation of a comprehensive test ban treaty, which in Britain’s view would
help to curb the development of new types of nuclear weapons, is a British goal,
and Britain participated in a working group of the United Nations Committee on
Disarmament (now the Conference on Disarmament) to examine the verification
and compliance problems relating to a comprehensive ban.
Britain strongly supports the efforts of the United States in negotiations with
the Soviet Union to limit and reduce the levels of strategic and intermediate-
range nuclear weapons and has regretted the Soviet Union’s withdrawal from
talks on both categories of weapons. Britain regards the discussions as
fundamental to improving East—West relations and maintaining peace in
Europe and has taken an active part in formulating NATO’s position for the
negotiations on intermediate-range nuclear forces through which the United
States is seeking an agreement providing for equal limits on United States and
Soviet warheads. Britain also welcomed the October 1983 United States
proposal for a mutual guaranteed build-down' of strategic nuclear missile
warheads.
Believing that it is possible to improve international access to the benefits of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy while minimising the risk of the spread of
nuclear-weapon technology, Britain has played a leading part in strengthening
the regime of non-proliferation through the International Atomic Energy Agency
and other organisations. Britain is a party to the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty
which is designed to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and provides an
assurance, through international safeguards, that nuclear facilities of non-
nuclear-weapon states will not be used for making such weapons. Britain
reaffirmed its full support for the Treaty at a review conference in 1980.
Preparations are being made for a further review conference in 1985. It has also
undertaken not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states
which have internationally binding commitments not to manufacture or acquire
nuclear explosive devices (except in the case of an attack on British interests by
such a state in association with a nuclear-weapon state). Britain believes that
limiting the security assurances to these states provides further support for
nuclear non-proliferation.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of the world
can contribute to non-proliferation and regional security, and Britain supports
proposals for such zones where nuclear weapons do not play a part in existing
security arrangements. It was the first nuclear-weapon state to ratify the
protocols to the 1967 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (the Treaty of Tlatelolco).
As a result of a British initiative, another category of weapons of mass
destruction, biological weapons, is the subject of the 1972 Convention on
80
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction. Britain took an active
part in a conference in 1980 which reviewed the operation of the Convention.
Britain, which has no chemical weapons, has also encouraged efforts to agree on
a ban on them, and in 1976 put forward a draft convention on the prohibition of
their development, production and stockpiling which has served as a focus of
discussion. In 1982, Britain tabled a working paper on verification, the main
subject of contention, and in March 1983 presented proposals for the inspection
of civil chemical plants to ensure that commercial chemicals are not diverted to
military use. In February 1984 the British Government submitted to the
Conference on Disarmament further proposals on challenge (on-site) inspection
in cases of suspected non-compliance.
Conventional weapons are by far the largest component of national armouries,
and Britain is participating in a study by the United Nations on ways to halt the
world-wide build-up which it believes increases regional tension. In particular it
believes in the value of regional agreements as a means of facilitating this. In the
talks on Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions, Britain, together with its NATO
allies, is working for an agreement with the Warsaw Pact participants which
would contribute to a more stable relationship and strengthen peace and
security in Europe. This requires an approximate parity between NATO and
Warsaw Pact forces in central Europe where the Warsaw Pact troops currently
outnumber those of NATO by about 180,000. Western participants tabled a new
proposal in April 1984 designed to facilitate a solution of the data problem—the
difference between Eastern and Western estimates of the current size of Eastern
forces—and containing a comprehensive set of verification measures.
Britain played a key role in securing agreement in 1980 on a UN Convention
establishing a legal framework for prohibitions and restrictions on the use of
particularly inhumane and injurious weapons together with protocols restrict¬
ing the use of mines, booby traps and incendiary weapons and prohibiting the
use of weapons which cause injury by fragments not detectable by X-ray. Britain
was among the first to sign the Convention when it opened for signature in April
1981.
Concerned about the rising scale of military expenditure in the world, Britain
has supported proposals at the United Nations for a multilateral, balanced and
verifiable reduction of military budgets. Britain and the other European
Community member states have participated actively in developing a standar¬
dised system for reporting military expenditure. British experts have taken part
in United Nations studies on the relationship between disarmament and
development and on disarmament initiatives and are participating in studies on
military research and development and on nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Britain and the United Nations
Support for the United Nations (UN) and the purposes and principles of its
Charter has been a cornerstone of British policy since 1945, for Britain sees a
strong and effective United Nations as the best framework for pursuing and
achieving many of its foreign policy objectives (the peaceful resolution of
disputes, disarmament and arms control, the protection of human rights, the
promotion of the rule of law) designed to contribute both to its own well-being
and security and to the development of a more harmonious international
community.
The United Nations and its various agencies also provide an important
framework for discussing such issues as disaster relief, the sea-bed, terrorism,
the world environment, energy development and world resources.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
81
Keeping the
Peace
Human Rights
Economic and
Social Affairs
The maintenance of international peace and security was the primary purpose
envisaged for the United Nations at the time of its establishment. Britain
believes that it is appropriate for the United Nations, as the only forum in which
almost the whole international community is represented, to seek to resolve
disputes which threaten peace and stability whether on a regional or world
scale. With other members, it has worked to strengthen and make more effective
the machinery ot the Security Council, the organ with primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and for preventing and settling
disputes. As a permanent member of the Security Council, Britain plays an
active role in the Council s work and has sought to develop and improve the
United Nations’ role in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Another British concern is that the United Nations should have an effective
peacekeeping capacity. It contributes to the UN force in Cyprus and provides
logistic support for the UN Interim Force in Lebanon.
Britain has supported the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights since its
adoption by the General Assembly in 1948. While not legally binding, the
Declaration has inspired many other international instruments designed to
secure the observance of its provisions. These include the two international
covenants adopted by the General Assembly in 1966 which impose legal
obligations on those who ratify them: the Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Both came into
force, and were ratified by Britain, in 1976. Under the latter Britain also
recognises the competence of the UN Human Rights Committee (set up by the
Covenant to monitor the implementation of the human rights protected by it) to
receive and consider state-to-state complaints.
Britain is also a party to conventions aimed at implementing particular rights
contained in the Universal Declaration, including those on the elimination of
racial discrimination, on the status of refugees and stateless persons and on
slavery.
The adoption of conventions and covenants in itself is insufficient to secure
the protection ol human rights, and Britain believes it is necessary to develop
effective procedures to ensure the implementation of such agreements. It also
believes that the practice of the United Nations has established human rights as
a legitimate matter for international concern and that the UN Charter imposes
on member governments an obligation to pursue policies which observe human
rights and to co-operate with the United Nations to that end.
The Economic and Social Council has general responsibility within the United
Nations for human rights activities. The bodies directly concerned are the
Commission on Human Rights, its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discri¬
mination and Protection of Minorities, and the Commission on the Status of
Women. Britain is represented on all these bodies and is active in their work.
The Charter states that ‘the promotion of the economic and social advancement
of all peoples’ is one of the principal aims of the United Nations, and an
estimated 90 per cent of the organisation s efforts, in terms of resources and
personnel, is now employed to this end. With the growing concern for the
problems of development, the main emphasis has become increasingly the
provision of direct assistance for member states. The UN system is now the
largest single source of technical assistance lor developing countries, as well as
providing considerable emergency and relief aid and assistance for refugees.
(The provision of capital assistance has been generally confined to the World
Bank group and regional development banks whose operations are usually
considered separately from those of the rest of the UN system.)
Successive British governments have affirmed their support for the functional
and developmental work of the United Nations. Britain is the sixth largest
82
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
contributor to the UN's regular budget, providing some £17-7 million. 4-67 per
cent of the total, in 1983. In addition, it contributed some £6-9 million to the
World Health Organisation, £3-7 million to the International Labour Organisa¬
tion, £6-2 million to the Food and Agriculture Organisation and £5-7 million to
the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation. Britain provides a
considerably larger proportion of the UN’s voluntary funds, donating in 1983
£18-5 million for the UN Development Programme, £3-7 million for the UN High
Commission for Refugees, £5 million for the UN Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees, £61 million for the UN Children's Fund, £2-7 million for
the UN Fund for Population Activities, and about £08 million for the World Food
Programme.
In the deliberations of the governing bodies of the various agencies and
programmes, Britain encourages the deployment of the resources towards the
poorest countries and the poorest communities in the developing world. It also
seeks to promote the most efficient use of UN development resources and
improvements in the co-ordination, control and effectiveness of the system, in
order to avoid unnecessary duplication by the various agencies.
Other International Organisations
Britain is a member of many other international organisations, including those
concerned with the management of the world economy. It is a founder member
of the International Monetary Fund, established in 1945 (along with the World
Bank) to regulate the international financial system and to provide a source of
credit for member countries facing balance of payments problems, and has
welcomed the creation by the Fund of facilities to provide special assistance to
developing countries experiencing financial or trading difficulties. It is a strong
supporter of efforts under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to
liberalise further, and promote the growth of, world trade, and to improve the
developing countries’ participation in it.
Britain is also a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD). An instrument for intergovernmental co-operation among
24 industrialised countries, the OECD's aims are to promote policies designed
to achieve the highest sustainable economic growth and employment, and a
rising standard of living in member countries while maintaining financial
stability, and thus to contribute to the development of the world economy; to
assist developing countries; and to contribute to the expansion of world trade on
a multilateral, non-discriminatory basis in accordance with international
obligations.
Other organisations to which Britain belongs or extends support are more
restricted in their operations and include the regional development banks in
Africa, the Americas and Asia and specialist technical, agricultural and medical
institutions.
With 20 other nations Britain is a member of the Council of Europe, which
aims to provide the widest possible European forum for the discussion of
political, economic, social and scientific issues with a view to achieving greater
unity between its members. Membership is open to any European parliamentary
democracy which accepts the principles of the rule of law and the protection of
human rights. The Council was responsible for the adoption in 1950 of the
European Convention on Human Rights, to which Britain is a party.
Development Co-operation
The basic objective of Britain’s aid programme is to help developing countries’
efforts to raise their living standards, the emphasis being on assisting the
poorest countries and the poorest communities within them. It is these
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
83
Official and
Other Flows
Bilateral Aid
countries which find it most difficult to generate investment funds domestically
or attract external private flows. Britain's ability to support development
overseas is dependent on the state of its own economy, and alongside
development objectives, due weight is given to political, commercial and
industrial considerations in the deployment of aid resources.
Official aid is only one aspect of Britain’s support for overseas development.
Private investment is a much larger component and one which has benefited
from the abolition of exchange controls in 1979. Britain is the world’s second
largest overseas investor, with over a fifth of its overseas assets located in
developing countries. Similarly, trade is important, developing countries
providing nearly a fifth of Britain's imports in recent years. Aid is also provided
by private voluntary societies which concentrate their activities in the poorest
countries. Some of these societies' activities receive substantial support from
the official aid programme.
In 1983 total official flows1 of aid amounted to some £1,195 million net, of which
£1,058 million represented official development assistance and £137 million
other official flows. Of the former, bilateral aid accounted for £566 million
including technical co-operation funds of £232 million; some £492 million was
provided through multilateral agencies. Repayments of capital and payments of
interest on loans came to £73 million and £46 million respectively; another £21
million of capital repayments and £2 million of interest were cancelled.
Aid performance is commonly measured as a proportion of gross national
product (GNP), particularly with reference to the two United Nations targets for
resource transfers to developing countries: that net official development
assistance should equal 0-7 per cent of GNP and that combined private and
official flows should equal 1 per cent of GNP. Britain accepts in principle the first
of these but is not committed to a timetable for reaching it. Successive
governments have made it clear that progress must depend on Britain’s
economic condition and upon other calls on its resources. In 1983 net official
development assistance amounted to £1,058 million, 0-35 per cent of GNP. The
average of donor countries belonging to the Development Assistance Committee
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development was 0-36 per
cent. The 1 per cent target has never received the publicity accorded to the 0-7
per cent target. For many years, however, Britain has exceeded it, and in 1983
total net financial flows from Britain to developing countries amounted to
£3,776 million, 1-25 per cent of GNP.
Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its responsibilities
towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis remains on the
Commonwealth which includes among its members some of the world’s poorest
countries. In 1983, £693 million of gross public expenditure on overseas aid1
was disbursed bilaterally. Some £425 million (73 per cent of that directly
allocated to countries) went to the Commonwealth, including £26 million to
Britain’s remaining dependencies, which are a first charge on the aid
programme. Aid was disbursed regionally as follows: Africa £236 million; Asia
£245 million; the Americas and the Caribbean £68 million; Oceania £25
million; and Europe £9 million. (A further £111 million was not allocable by
region.)
1 'Total official flows’ is an international reporting concept. Its main component—official
development assistance—is defined as olficial flows for development purposes with a grant
(concessional) element of 25 per cent or more. The main British reporting concept is ‘public
expenditure on overseas aid' which differs from total official flows by excluding certain British
flows which benefit developing countries but are not considered developmental, and by recording
some contributions to multilateral agencies at a different time. All concepts can be measured
before (gross) or after (net) deducting capital repayments.
84
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Financial Aid
Technical
Co-operation
The country receiving the largest amount (£128 million) was India. Other
major recipients included Sudan, Kenya, Tanzania, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and
Zimbabwe. In line with the policy of concentrating aid on the poorest countries,
£365 million of gross bilateral aid went to the poorest 50 developing countries
(excluding states with a population under 10,000 and dependencies).
Gross bilateral financial aid in 1983 totalled £428 million. Aid for individual
projects totalled £326 million, the principal sectors supported being manufac¬
turing (£20 million), energy (£112 million), transport and communications (£42
million), social and community services (£22 million), and renewable natural
resources (£56 million). Non-project aid totalled £102 million, of which nearly
£51 million was for import financing, £13 million for food aid, £23 million for
debt relief, £11 million for budgetary support and £3 million for emergency relief
(funds for which are channelled through the Overseas Development Administra¬
tion's Disaster Unit which provides immediate assistance in disaster relief
operations). About 80 per cent of financial aid was provided in grants and the
rest in concessionary loans. Most development aid, and all provided to the
poorest countries (which include India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and many
African countries), is in grant form only. In 1983 loan commitments, excluding
investments by the Commonwealth Development Corporation, totalled £17
million. Where loans bear interest it is at fixed concessionary rates ranging from
2 per cent to 6 per cent, and nearly all loans carry from three to seven years' grace
periods for repayments of capital. The average maturity of loans is 25 years.
Britain has more than fulfilled the 1972 and 1978 recommendations of the
OECD's Development Assistance Committee on easing the terms of financial
aid. Britain has concluded agreements to remove the burden of past aid loans
worth over £993 million from 21 of the poorest countries.
Loans and grants are normally tied to the purchase of goods, equipment and
services from Britain, although there may be an element for local costs and a
foreign content in contracts financed from tied aid in appropriate cases. New
loan commitments can be untied, if the recipient agrees, to the extent that goods
can be purchased either from the poorest developing countries or from Britain.
Under the Aid-Trade Provision funds are made available to support sound
developmental projects of commercial and industrial importance in order to
allow British exporters to compete for contracts in developing countries. The
Commonwealth Development Corporation plays an important role in develop¬
ment assistance by investing in most Commonwealth countries and, with
British Government approval, in some other countries. By the end of 1983 some
£507 million had been invested out of a total commitment of £776 million. Of
the latter, £195 million was in Asia, £77 million in the Pacific, £116 million in
the Caribbean and virtually all of the remainder in Africa. Commitments
approved in 1983 totalled over £100 million.
Technical co-operation, the transfer of specialised knowledge and skills from
country to country, complements financial aid, expertise often being essential to
the success of a programme of financial aid or investment. Expenditure on it has
increased in recent years and was £232 million, 33 per cent of gross bilateral
aid, in 1983. Of this, £83 million was for the provision of expert personnel,
including volunteers, £45 million for students and trainees in Britain and
overseas, £19 million for research services and projects, £22 million for
consultancy services, and £10 million for the provision of equipment and
supplies.
At the end of 1983 there were 2,517 people financed by Britain (other than
volunteers) working in developing countries, of whom some 1,030 were engaged
in the field of education, 449 in agriculture and allied fields, and 182 in health
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
85
Multilateral
Aid
Voluntary
Agencies
services. In addition, under the British Volunteer Programme there were 1,041
volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified, working in developing
countries, the majority of them teaching. Recruitment, training and placing
overseas is undertaken by four voluntary bodies (Catholic Institute for Interna¬
tional Relations, International Voluntary Service, United Nations Association
International Service and Voluntary Service Overseas), 90 per cent of their costs
being met by the British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Some 11,850 were financed in Britain in 1983 under regional
programmes of technical co-operation, by awards under the Commonwealth
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, and under British Council schemes. Britain
also financed another 640 students attending courses outside Britain. In early
1983 the Government decided to make an additional £46 million available over
the next three years for the support of overseas students.
To support development overseas, the Government maintains three specialist
scientific organisations (the Overseas Surveys Directorate of the Ordnance
Survey, the Land Resources Development Centre, and the Tropical Development
and Research Institute) and provides support for many others. The latter
include overseas units/divisions of the government-financed Transport and
Road Research Laboratory, the Building Research Establishment and the
Institute of Geological Sciences, and of the Hydraulics Research Station Ltd.
These organisations provide specialist information, advice and experts for
service overseas, and undertake field and laboratory research investigations.
Britain is a major subscriber to the World Bank group of institutions—the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Development Association (IDA) and the International Finance Corporation. The
resources of the IDA, which provides interest-free loans to developing countries
unable to service loans on conventional terms, are replenished at roughly
three-year intervals. The British commitment to its Seventh Replenishment
(July 1984 to June 1987) is £403 million towards a total of $9,000 million and
Britain is willing to participate in supplementary financing of up to $3,000
million on the same burden-sharing arrangements among donors: its share
could be a further £133 million. Britain contributes to the resources of the Asian
Development Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Caribbean
Development Bank and the African Development Bank. Its contribution to the
United Nations Development Programme for 1983 was £18-5 million, and it is
the largest source for expertise and fellowships provided under the Programme.
There is also a major British contribution to other UN agencies and programmes
and an increasing proportion of British aid is now channelled through the
European Community’s aid programme. Britain's contribution to the fifth
European Development Fund established by the second Lome Convention,
covering the period from 1981 to 1985, is about £500 million.
Voluntary agencies provided an estimated £55 million for work in developing
countries in 1983, mainly on agriculture, health and nutrition, and education
projects, and on emergency relief operations.
There are about 200 agencies in all, including church and missionary
societies: among the best known are Oxfam, Christian Aid, War on Want, the
Save the Children Fund, the British Red Cross Society and the Catholic Fund for
Overseas Development. The funds are raised largely through appeals in the
media, both on a regular basis and in response to specific emergencies: the
latter, in particular, meet with a good response. The Government co-operates
with the agencies in various ways, especially in immediate post-disaster relief
and rehabilitation operations and through its Joint Funding Scheme. Under
THE
INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMY
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
this it meets half the cost of selected development projects undertaken by the
agencies and aimed at helping the poorest. Such projects include community
health, non-formal education, the improvement of food supplies, agricultural
training, water supply and irrigation. Expenditure on the Scheme in 1983 was
some £2-6 million.
Voluntary agencies’ work on behalf of refugees overseas also receives official
support.
The British Government recognises that the interests of developing and
industrialised countries are mutual and that all will benefit if the problems of
the world economy can be effectively tackled. Despite the recession Britain seeks
to defend the open trading system. Although domestic priorities have obliged
the Government to adopt restrictive measures in certain highly sensitive areas,
it is conscious of their exceptional character. Moreover, a substantial aid
programme has been maintained and Britain shares the priority the interna¬
tional community attaches to providing special assistance to the poorest
developing countries. In addition, direct investment and private financial flows
to the developing world have been encouraged.
Britain favours the continuing evolution of the existing world economic
system with its free flow of trade and capital, and has defended the independ¬
ence of efficient international institutions like the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. As constituted
these institutions serve the vital interests of all nations and their work reflects
the growing interdependence of developed and developing countries.
Britain also supports the important role of the International Monetary Fund in
providing financial assistance, the level of which has recently been substantially
increased, to help developing countries to carry out adjustment measures to
overcome balance of payments difficulties.
Britain has long recognised the importance of commodities to the economies
of many developing countries and has played a full part, in company with other
European Community member states, in negotiating the commodities agree¬
ments called for by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in
its 1976 resolution establishing the Integrated Programme for Commodities
(IPC). It is a member of agreements covering tin, rubber, cocoa and coffee, the
purpose of which is to stabilise prices and supplies at levels fair and
remunerative both to producers and consumers. Britain has also taken part in
negotiations for a new type of agreement for jute. As a member of the
Community Britain belongs to agreements covering wheat and olive oil designed
to improve market conditions by consultations between producers and consum¬
ers, and has consistently urged Community membership of the International
Sugar Organisation. It has also ratified the Common Fund for Commodities,
a key element of the IPC, and has agreed to contribute to the voluntary as well
as to the obligatory part of its work. A substantial British contribution is made
to the STABEX scheme operated by the Community which compensates
commodity-producing Lome Convention countries for shortfalls in commodity
revenue.
In 1964 Britain was the first major developing country to support the idea of
extending tariff preferences to all developing countries on a non-reciprocal and
non-discriminatory basis. This led to a generalised system of preferences
operated by the European Community and the other developed countries. It also
strongly supported the objectives of the last round of multilateral trade
negotiations. Set out in the 1973 Tokyo Declaration, these were the further
liberalisation of world trade through the progressive dismantling of tariff and
non-tariff barriers, and within this, the provision of special and more favourable
treatment for the developing countries where possible.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
87
Community trade arrangements are among the most liberal applied by
industrial nations, and Britain has played a significant role in determining their
nature. It took a major part in the negotiations for the first and second Lome
Conventions, both to safeguard the trading interests of Commonwealth
developing countries and to ensure that reciprocal preferences would not be
demanded from the developing countries, and is now participating in negotia¬
tions for the third. In addition, Britain has supported improvements to the
Community’s Generalised System of Preferences scheme, especially with regard
to more liberal access into the Community for imports of manufactured and
processed agricultural products and in its application to the poorest developed
countries, particularly those in south Asia. Before entering the Community,
Britain secured a commitment to expand and reinforce Community trade
relations with the Commonwealth countries of Asia, and this has led to the
conclusion of commercial co-operation agreements with India, Sri Lanka and
Bangladesh.
4 Defence
Organisation
and
Management
Britain’s defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO) whose collective defence provides each of its members with far greater
security than any could achieve alone. Britain is fully committed to NATO and its
strategy of deterrence and, in assigning the greater part of its military forces to
it, makes a major contribution to the full range of the North Atlantic Alliance’s
deterrent capabilities, the only European nation to do so.1 It also plays a full part
in the Alliance’s efforts, complementary to its defence preparations, to negotiate
balanced and verifiable arms control agreements and to reduce tension so as to
achieve a more just and lasting peaceful order in Europe.
Britain is committed to the NATO target of securing real increases in defence
spending in the region of 3 per cent annually up to 1985-86. The defence budget
for 1984—85, just over £17,000 million, makes provision for such an increase. In
1983, Britain’s defence expenditure as a proportion of gross domestic product
was 5-4 per cent, the third largest in NATO after the United States and Greece,
while in both absolute and per capita terms it was larger than that of any other
European member of the Alliance. Britain has consistently spent a higher
proportion of its defence budget on new equipment (46 per cent in 1983-84)
than any other NATO member.
Britain’s defence programme is designed to ensure the most effective use of
these resources in pursuit of its commitment to Western security, the main
threat to which is posed by the nuclear and conventional forces of the Warsaw
Pact. Following the 1981 defence review,2 which, in the light of this threat,
examined the defence implications of rising equipment costs and advancing
technology, the structure and balance of the defence forces have been improved
to increase the combat effectiveness of front-line forces and thereby enhance
Britain s already major contribution to NATO. These improvements have also
provided the flexibility to enable Britain, as in the Falklands crisis in 1982, to
respond quickly and effectively to challenges to its interests outside the NATO
area.
The organisation of defence management within the Ministry of Defence is being
restructured in order to draw a clearer distinction between the formulation of
advice on operations, defence policy and resource allocation and the day-to-day
management of the armed forces. The new structure, which will be introduced
in January 1985, will include a unified military/civilian defence policy and
operations staff responsible to the Chief of Defence Staff and the Permanent
Under-Secretary of State, and an Office of Management and Budget concerned
with resource management. The management of the individual Services,
including that of personnel, training, logistics and supply, will be the
responsibility of executive committees of the Service Boards acting in accord¬
ance with centrally determined policy directives and budgets. Each Board will be
chaired by the Service Chief of Staff reporting through the Chief of Defence Staff
to the Secretary of State for Defence.
1 France, which also has nuclear forces, does not participate fully in NATO's integrated military
structure.
2 The United Kingdom Defence Programme: The Way Forward. Cmnd 8288. HMSO. ISBN 0 10
182882 0.
NATO’s
Strategy
Britain’s
NATO
Contribution
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Government attaches high priority to making the most effective use of
defence resources, and a system has been introduced to enable ministers and
senior management to scrutinise the activities, costs and efficiency of all aspects
of the Ministry. Cost-effectiveness is also being promoted by rationalising
logistic and support functions, including their transfer to the private sector
where appropriate, and by increasing commercial competition in procurement.
Substantial savings have been achieved, releasing resources to strengthen
front-line forces.
NATO's strategy is based on the principle that peace and stability can be
maintained only if a potential aggressor is convinced that it would lose far more
than it could ever hope to gain by the use of force. NATO neither needs nor
intends to match the Warsaw Pact weapon for weapon, but seeks to deter
aggression by having enough forces to respond effectively to an attack at any
level and, if necessary, to raise the level of conflict to make clear the Alliance’s
ability and determination to go on resisting. For this it needs a wide range of
conventional and nuclear forces, these being closely linked to provide a chain of
options from which to choose the appropriate method of countering aggression.
This concept of flexible response is complemented by that of forward defence,
the stationing of members' forces well forward in Europe to emphasise the allies’
collective determination and commitment to defend the whole of NATO territory.
It is to maintain the Alliance’s defence and deterrent capacity in the face of the
build-up in Warsaw Pact military strength that NATO members have agreed,
among other things, to work towards a more effective and balanced framework
of transatlantic co-operation and to make the best use of the potential offered by
new technological developments. NATO’s intermediate-range nuclear forces are
also being modernised. Britain is actively involved in these measures, and is also
updating its own strategic nuclear capability. In addition, in the Eurogroup,
Britain and 11 other European members are working to improve the effective¬
ness of their contribution to the Alliance and to achieve better co-ordination, in
order to make the best possible use of the available resources.
NATO is concerned to deter Soviet exploitation of instability outside Europe,
and to demonstrate its resolve to defend essential interests, but, at the same
time, to recognise the rights and views of regional countries and their primary
responsibility for their own defence. In Britain’s view these requirements can be
best reconciled through the provision of military aid, including the sale of arms,
the periodic deployment of NATO member nations’ forces in strategically
important areas, and the maintenance of a capability to intervene militarily
where necessary.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is concentrated in areas where it can best help to
maintain Alliance security, principally NATO’s strategic nuclear deterrent and
the defence of the Central Region of Europe, the Eastern Atlantic and English
Channel, and the British ‘home’ base and its immediate approaches.
Britain’s Polaris strategic force with its improved Chevaline missile (to be
replaced by a Trident force in the 1990s) represents a unique European
contribution to NATO’s nuclear deterrent, providing a second and independent
centre of decision-making within the Alliance. At a time of strategic parity, this
provides an important assurance against any Soviet misconception that the
United States would not be prepared to use its nuclear forces in Europe’s
defence. Britain has also committed its intermediate-range nuclear systems to
NATO, and is providing bases for 160 of the 464 ground-launched cruise
missiles which, with 108 Pershing II missiles, the United States began deploying
in Europe from December 1983, in order to modernise NATO’s intermediate-
range nuclear forces.
DEFENCE
91
Outside the
NATO Area
Northern
Ireland
Britain’s decision in 1980 to update its strategic deterrent has led to increased
calls from some groups within the country for unilateral nuclear disarmament,
both on the grounds of cost and as an example to others. While the Government
understands the widespread concern regarding nuclear war, it believes such
apprehensions to be misplaced so long as the policy of nuclear deterrence and
efforts to relax East—West tensions, including the pursuit of arms control, which
have helped to maintain peace in Europe for nearly 40 years, are maintained. It
also believes that unilateral nuclear disarmament by Britain would not
significantly alter the views on arms control of other states which maintain, or
may think of acquiring, nuclear weapons, and that such action would weaken
NATO’s ability to deter aggression in the face of the continuing Soviet nuclear
and conventional threat.
Virtually all of the Royal Navy, the largest NATO navy in Western Europe, is
earmarked for assignment to the Alliance and permanent contributions are
made to NATO’s two standing naval forces, in the Atlantic and the Channel, and
to its Mediterranean force when activated. The British Army of the Rhine
(BAOR) and Royal Air Force (RAF) Germany are stationed in the Federal Republic
of Germany. BAOR’s combat element has been reorganised into three stronger
divisions, with supporting artillery; two divisions comprise three armoured
brigades each and a third is made up of an armoured brigade, an air-mobile
brigade and an infantry brigade (the latter being located in Britain in
peacetime). A reinforcing division, comprising one regular and two Territorial
Army brigades, is also located in Britain. On mobilisation, BAOR’s peacetime
strength of around 55,000 would be almost trebled by reinforcements from
Britain. Nearly all the RAF’s combat and support aircraft are assigned to NATO.
RAF Germany’s 14 squadrons (two of helicopters) are equipped for strike/attack,
reconnaissance, close support, air defence and air transport roles, while RAF
Strike Command, which is based in Britain, provides forces for these and for the
maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare roles.
Britain also provides important elements to NATO’s specialist reinforcement
forces, including ground and air units for the United Kingdom Mobile Force and
for its contribution to the Allied Command Europe Mobile Force, several
squadrons for NATO’s Strategic Air Reserve, and naval, marine and some Army
units for a British—Netherlands amphibious force.
Forces from all three Services are stationed at Gibraltar, which, positioned at
the western entry to the Mediterranean, is an important base for NATO.
In support of other defence commitments, and with a view to playing a part in
collective responses by the West to threats to its world-wide interests, Britain is
maintaining and improving its ability to operate outside the NATO area without
diminishing its central commitment to the Alliance. It has an airborne brigade
which can move up to 4,500 men and their equipment to trouble spots should
the need arise. The ability to deploy its forces world-wide, both quickly and
effectively, was shown when, after diplomatic efforts had failed, Britain sent a
task force to expel Argentine forces and restore British administration to the
Falkland Islands in May—June 1982. British garrisons are maintained in Berlin,
Belize, Brunei, Cyprus, the Falkland Islands, Hong Kong and Gibraltar. Britain
also makes a contribution to the United Nations Force in Cyprus and provides
support for the United Nations Force in Lebanon. In addition it contributes to
the Multinational Force and Observers in Sinai. Considerable effort is also
devoted to the provision of military assistance and training to a large number of
friendly countries outside the NATO area, and Britain deploys its forces on visits
and exercises in important areas.
In 1969 additional units of the Army were sent to Northern Ireland at the request
of the then Northern Ireland Government to assist in the maintenance of law
92
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE ARMED
FORCES
Personnel
Reserve Forces
and order in the face of the growing civil disorder and terrorist violence. Since
1977 the police have resumed their primary role of maintaining law and order,
the number of regular soldiers has been progressively reduced and the locally
recruited and largely part-time Ulster Defence Regiment has been restructured
to increase its effectiveness in supporting the Royal Ulster Constabulary in
combating terrorism.
The total strength of the armed forces, all volunteers, was 324,700 on 1 January
1984: 71,400 in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines, 161,100 in the Army and
92.200 in the Royal Air Force. The Ministry of Defence employs about 200,000
civilians (based in the United Kingdom).
The three women's Services, with a combined strength of 16,000, are integral
parts of the armed forces, and servicewomen serve alongside servicemen in
Britain and overseas, mainly in support roles.
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks range from 3 to 22 years, with a
wide freedom of choice on the length and terms of service. Subject to a minimum
period of service (varying from three to nine years, excluding training), entrants
may leave at any time, at 18 months’ notice. Discharge may also be granted on
compassionate grounds, by purchase, or on grounds of conscience. Commis¬
sions, either by promotion from the ranks or by direct entry based on
educational and other qualifications, are granted for short, medium and long
terms. All three Services have schemes for school, university and college
sponsorships.
Non-commissioned personnel receive basic training supplemented by further
and specialist training throughout their careers. Study for educational qual¬
ifications is encouraged and Service trade and technical training, highly valued
by industry, leads to nationally recognised qualifications for large numbers of
Service personnel.
Commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth: the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst; or the Royal Air
Force College, Cranwell. This is followed by specialist training, often including
degree courses at university or Service establishments. Higher training for
officers is provided by the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, the Army Staff College
at Camberley, and the Royal Air Force Staff College at Bracknell. Selected senior
officers and civilian officials from Britain and other countries attend the Joint
Services Defence College, Greenwich, and the Royal College of Defence Studies,
London, which provides the wider background necessary for those destined to
fill higher appointments.
Operational training includes joint-Service and inter-allied exercises. Train¬
ing is provided for the armed forces of allied. Commonwealth and other
countries.
Reserve and auxiliary forces are an integral part of the armed forces. In addition
to supplementing the regular forces on mobilisation with trained personnel able
immediately to take their places either as formed units or as individual
reinforcements, they form an important link between the Services and the civil
community. Some members of these forces have a reserve liability following a
period of regular service (regular reserve); others are volunteers who train in
their spare time. Volunteer reserve forces include the Territorial Army whose
role is to reinforce the ground forces committed to NATO and help to maintain a
secure home base in the United Kingdom; its strength is being increased to
86,000 over the remainder of the decade. A Home Service Force, linked to the
Territorial Army and with a strength of up to 5,000, is being established to
assist in guarding important civilian and military installations on mobilisation.
Other volunteer forces include the Royal Naval Reserve, the Royal Marines
DEFENCE
93
COMBAT
FORCES
Strategic
Nuclear Forces
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Army Combat
Forces
Reserve, the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve.
The Ulster Defence Regiment, with locally recruited and mostly part-time
members, supports the police and the Army in Northern Ireland. On 1 January
1984 regular reserves totalled 199,600, and volunteer reserves and auxiliary
forces 85,100. Cadet forces, which make a significant contribution to recruit¬
ment to the regular forces, totalled 142,300.
The Royal Navy's Polaris force comprises four nuclear submarines, each of which
can remain on underwater patrol for long periods and is capable of carrying 16
nuclear-armed Polaris missiles. Improved (Chevaline) Polaris missiles, designed
to maintain the force’s effectiveness until its replacement in the 1990s by a
Trident nuclear submarine force, entered service in 1982. The Trident
programme is expected to cost about £8,700 million; over the period of its
procurement it will absorb on average some 3 per cent of planned defence
expenditure, reaching about 6 per cent at its peak.
Britain’s naval forces, while capable of operating throughout the world when
required, are concentrated in the Eastern Atlantic and English Channel where
they constitute the majority of forces immediately available to NATO. They
include two new Invincible class anti-submarine warfare carriers (with a third
due to enter service in 1985), carrying Sea King anti-submarine helicopters. Sea
Harrier aircraft, and Sea Dart and Sea Wolf defence missile systems; 12
nuclear-powered attack submarines (with another 5 on order) equipped with the
anti-ship missile Sub-Harpoon, and 15 diesel-powered submarines; and (as at
December 1983) 55 destroyers and frigates for air defence, anti-submarine and
general purpose duties. Most of these have weapon-carrying helicopters (the
Lynx, Wasp or Wessex), and armaments installed include the Exocet surface-to-
surface, Sea Wolf point air defence, Sea Dart area air defence and Sea Skua
anti-ship missile systems, and the Ikara anti-submarine guided weapons
system. There is also an amphibious capability comprising two assault ships,
Fearless and Intrepid, and the Royal Marines, while the anti-submarine warfare
carrier Hermes retains a secondary role as a commando ship. Other ships
include 45 mine counter-measures vessels, including six of the new Hunt class,
and offshore patrol vessels for protecting fishing interests and oil and gas
installations.
In coming years Britain’s contribution to NATO’s maritime defence will be
based increasingly on an enhanced anti-submarine warfare element made up
principally of nuclear-powered attack submarines, a newly designed general
purpose frigate with a strong anti-submarine warfare capability (the Type 23)
and Nimrod maritime patrol aircraft equipped with Searchwater radar. These
apart, the surface fleet is being renewed through a major construction
programme involving the third Invincible class carrier, three Type 42 destroyers
and eighjt Type 22 frigates (increasing the number to 14). The destroyer/frigate
element committed to NATO will be reduced to about 50 ships by the late 1980s
as older and more manpower-intensive ships are disposed of. New weapon
programmes include the Sting Ray lightweight torpedo for ships, aircraft and
helicopters, a heavyweight torpedo (Spearfish) for submarines, and the Sea
Eagle anti-ship missile.
Most of the Army’s combat forces, consisting of BAOR and the forces stationed
in Britain, have primary roles in support of NATO. Others are stationed overseas
in support of treaty commitments.
All armoured regiments in BAOR are equipped with the Chieftain main battle
tank. A new tank. Challenger, fitted with Chobham armour to provide greatly
improved protection, is entering service in 1984 and enough have been ordered
94
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Royal Air
Force General
Purpose Forces
to equip four regiments. An additional 62 Challenger tanks have been ordered to
equip a fifth regiment. Those Chieftains replaced by Challenger will be placed in
the war maintenance reserve. An improvements programme is planned for both
tanks, which will be fitted with thermal imaging sights and a new 120-mm
high-pressure gun. Tracked combat reconnaissance vehicles include Scorpion,
a light tank with a 76-mm gun; Scimitar, a reconnaissance vehicle with a
30-mm cannon; and Striker, which mounts the Swingfire long-range anti-tank
missile. The primary tracked armoured personnel carrier for mechanised
infantry units is the FV432. The mobility of infantry will be improved with the
introduction of the Saxon (a four-wheeled armoured personnel carrier) and,
later in the decade, the mechanised combat vehicle, MCV80. The crew-portable
Milan anti-tank missile system is widely deployed with BAOR infantry units and
will be joined in a few years by the man-portable light anti-tank weapon, LAW80.
Lynx helicopters are being fitted with the TOW long-range anti-tank weapon.
Artillery units have been strengthened by the introduction of the towed
howitzer, FH70, and the purchase of additional Ml09 self-propelled guns, both
of which fire 155-mm ammunition. Another 155-mm gun, the SP70, will enter
service later in the decade, as will the Multiple Launch Rocket System. Tactical
nuclear support is provided by the Lance missile and dual capable artillery.
Integral air defence is based on the Rapier missile system, a tracked version of
which is being introduced, and the Blowpipe man-portable missile. Both
systems are undergoing qualitative improvement.
Aircraft of the Royal Air Force fulfil various operational roles.
Phantom and Lightning aircraft, together with Rapier and Bloodhound
surface-to-air missiles, provide Britain’s air defence, assisted by Shackleton
airborne early warning aircraft and the ground radars of the United Kingdom Air
Defence Ground Environment system. The Tornado GR1 is replacing Buc¬
caneers and some Jaguars in the strike/attack role and will, in due course,
replace Canberras and Jaguars in the reconnaissance role. Harrier GR3s and
some Jaguars provide close air support to ground troops. Nimrod aircraft form
part of Britain’s anti-submarine warfare capability, their duties also involving
long-range maritime patrol against surface ships, offshore surveillance and
fishery protection. Buccaneers are now employed in an anti-ship role and are
equipped with the Sea Eagle missile. Victor tankers, together with some
converted Hercules aircraft, are used for in-flight refuelling. Tactical transport is
provided by VC 10 and Hercules aircraft, medium and light support being given
by Chinook, Puma and Wessex helicopters. Sea King and Wessex helicopters
perform search and rescue duties around the British Isles. Weapons in service
include Skyflash, Sparrow, Sidewinder, Martel and Sea Eagle missiles, and
guided and cluster bombs.
The Royal Air Force is undergoing a comprehensive re-equipment programme.
Improvements to Britain’s air defences include the replacement from the
mid-1980s of the Lightning and some of the Phantom squadrons with the air
defence version of the Tornado (of which 165 aircraft have been ordered); the
entry into service in 1984 of the Nimrod airborne early warning aircraft which
will replace the Shackleton as Britain’s contribution to NATO’s integrated
airborne early warning force; and modernisation of the radars and command,
control and communications systems for the United Kingdom Air Defence
Ground Environment. In addition, 72 Hawk trainer aircraft are being equipped
with air-to-air missiles and cannon for local air defence. An increased air-to-air
refuelling capability will be achieved with the introduction into service of
converted VC 10s and TriStars in the tanker role. The offensive power of the
Royal Air Force has been substantially enhanced by the introduction into service
of the Tornado GR1 (of which 220 have been ordered), and the procurement of
DEFENCE
95
Research and
Development
Production
60 Harrier GR5s, an Anglo-American improved version of the existing aircraft,
which will be delivered in the late 1980s. All strike/attack and offensive support
aircraft will be installed with advanced electronic warfare equipment to increase
their ability to survive, and the Tornado GR1 will carry the British JP233 airfield
attack weapon and ALARM, an all-British anti-radiation missile.
Defence Procurement
Responsibility for the planning of research, development and production of
defence equipment, which takes nearly half of the defence budget, lies with the
Ministry of Defence’s Procurement Executive. The Executive works with the
Service users and industry to achieve cost-effectiveness in equipment procure¬
ment.
Most research is undertaken by the Ministry’s research and development
establishments, which have a very wide technological capability, but the
Ministry also sponsors a substantial amount of research by industry and the
universities. Increased emphasis is being placed on joint funding with industry.
The establishments are switching resources from design and development—
already carried out primarily by industry—to longer-term innovative research. In
addition, encouragement is given to extending benefits from defence technology
to civil projects.
The development of modern defence equipment requires a high initial
investment; the cost of British equipment research and development in
1984-85 is estimated at over £2,100 million, of which £371 million will be
devoted to research. The search for a more efficient use of resources has
encouraged collaboration within NATO, which is one of the principal aims of the
Alliance’s Conference of National Armaments Directors in which Britain plays a
full part. Nevertheless, the importance of maintaining a sound national
industrial base for defence procurement is recognised, and there is close
consultation between government and industry in the National Defence
Industries Council and other specialised bodies.
The Independent European Programme Group, although not coming under
the auspices of NATO, seeks to promote intra-European co-operation in arms
procurement and on questions concerning the transatlantic defence trade.
Successful European collaborative projects have included the Jaguar and
Tornado aircraft, a number of helicopters, and the Martel missile. At present
Britain is working with the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy on a
self-propelled gun (SP70), with Italy on the EH101 helicopter, and with France
and the Federal Republic of Germany on a new generation of anti-tank guided
weapons. Moreover, the air staffs of Britain, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Italy and Spain have reached agreement on the framework of a
common requirement for a future European fighter aircraft and the five
countries are exploring the possibilities for collaborative development and
production.
Britain also favours increased transatlantic co-operation and, together with
other European countries, is working with the United States on the Multiple
Launch Rocket System and the development of advanced air-to-air missiles.
Equipment is manufactured by private firms and publicly owned industries,
including the Royal Ordnance Factories. Alternatively, procurement may be
undertaken on a collaborative basis or by purchase from overseas. It is intended
that the Royal Ordnance Factories will become companies from October 1984
and the introduction of private capital into their assets thereafter is being
96
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
considered. Servicing and repairs are carried out by industries as well as in
Ministry-owned facilities such as the Royal Dockyards.
Defence Sales Sales of British defence equipment enable allies and friendly governments to
take advantage of Britain’s extensive research and development programmes to
improve their own defence. The Defence Sales Organisation of the Ministry of
Defence provides a wide range of assistance to industry in promoting equipment
and negotiating contracts with overseas customers. This includes collecting
market information, demonstrating equipment, providing expert military
advice, training and support, staging exhibitions, negotiating with overseas
governments, and other services. Government and private companies employ
International Military Services Ltd to obtain and carry out export contracts for
British defence equipment and associated services. It is estimated that receipts
from defence sales in 1984-85 will amount to £2,600 million.
Civil Defence
Civil defence arrangements are based on the extended and adapted use of the
peacetime resources of government departments, local authorities, emergency
services and nationalised industries, supplemented by the efforts of voluntary
organisations and individual volunteers. New civil defence regulations intro¬
duced in 1983 require local authorities to make and keep up to date plans for a
range of essential functions in the event of war; to arrange training and
exercises for civil defence staff and volunteers; and to provide suitable control
centres for direction of civil defence in wartime.
Following a review of existing arrangements by the Home Office in 1980,
expenditure on civil defence has been growing steadily and reached £68 million
in 1984—85. This is being used to improve the quality and readiness of central
and local government planning; increase training opportunities arranged by the
Home Office on staff college lines at the Civil Defence College, Easingwold; help
local authorities to plan for better community involvement in civil defence; and
improve the emergency system for decentralised government control and
communications. Improvements are also being made in the communications,
equipment and administrative facilities of the United Kingdom Warning and
Monitoring Organisation. This includes the civilian Royal Observer Corps,
which is organised to provide public warning of an attack, of the location and
strength of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level of radioactive
fall-out.
5 Justice and the
Law
The Law
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, England and Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland each have their own legal systems and law courts. There is
substantial similarity on many points, but considerable differences remain in
law, organisation and practice. In Northern Ireland procedure closely resembles
that of England and Wales but there are often differences in enacted law.
However, a large volume of modern legislation applies throughout the United
Kingdom and there is a common distinction between criminal law concerned
with wrongful acts harmful to the community and civil law concerned with
individuals' rights, duties and obligations towards one another.
The main sources of law are legislation, common law and European
Community law. Legislation consists of Acts of Parliament, orders (rules and
regulations made by ministers under the authority of an Act of Parliament) and
by-laws made by local government or other authorities exercising powers
conferred by Parliament. Common law, the ancient law of the land deduced from
custom and interpreted in court cases by the judges, has never been precisely
defined or codified but forms the basis of the law except when superseded by
legislation. European Community law is confined mainly to economic and social
matters; in certain circumstances it takes precedence over domestic law. It is
normally applied by the domestic courts, but the most authoritative rulings are
given by the European Court of Justice.
Criminal Justice
There are four distinct stages in British criminal justice: making laws which
define prohibited acts and provide for the treatment of offenders; preventing
crime and enforcing the law—largely matters for the police; determining in the
courts the guilt or innocence of people accused of crimes, and sentencing the
guilty; and dealing with convicted offenders.
Action being taken by the Government in pursuit of its general strategy for the
criminal justice system is aimed at maintaining and encouraging public
confidence in the system, achieving greater efficiency in the police service and in
courts procedures, and retaining the proper balance between the rights of the
citizen and the needs of the community as a whole.
With continuing concern in Britain, as in many other countries, over rising
crime rates, public expenditure on the law and order programme reflects the
special priority given by the Government to these services. Recent increases have
been made to cover, in particular, greater police manpower and extra spending
on prison building. More than two-thirds of total expenditure is initially
incurred by local authorities (with the help of central government grants),
mainly on the police service.
The Criminal The criminal law, like the law generally, undergoes constant development in the
Law courts but changes in the law are matters for Parliament. In practice most
legislation affecting criminal law is government-sponsored, but there is usually
consultation between government departments and the legal profession, the
98
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Crime Statistics
Criminological
Research
police, the probation service (in Scotland, the social work agencies), and
voluntary bodies.
Chief constables in England and Wales must supply statistics relating to
offences, offenders, criminal proceedings and the state of crime in their areas.
Crime statistics are published annually by the Home Office and further
information about crime trends (as well as about police matters) is contained in
the annual reports of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary and (for
London) the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis. Similar arrangements
operate in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Differences in the legal systems, police recording practices and statistical
classifications in the countries of the United Kingdom make it impracticable to
analyse in detail trends in crime for the country as a whole. Nevertheless, it is
clear that, as in Western Europe generally, there has been a substantial increase
in crime since the early 1950s. However, official statistics cover only crime
recorded by the police and may thus be affected by changes in the proportion of
crimes which are undiscovered or unreported. The level of police manning and
deployment of the force may also affect recording.
Table 4 shows the rate of notifiable offences recorded by the police in 1983 in
England and Wales. While The British Crime Survey (published in 1983-84 by
the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department) found that the
incidence of crime was much higher than the official statistics suggested, it also
showed that the risks which people in Britain faced of being victims of serious
crime were remarkably small. Following the introduction in 1983 of new
measures to deal with crime in England and Wales, the number of notifiable
offences in London recorded by the police fell by 4 per cent while there was an
increase in clear-up rates for several groups of offences.
Table 4: Notifiable Offences Recorded by the Police, per 100,000 Population
(England and Wales) 1983
Offence group 1983
Homicide 1
Violence against the person (excluding homicide) 223
Sexual offences 4 \
Burglary li640
Robbery 45
Theft and handling stolen goods 3,439
Fraud and forgery 246
Criminal damage3 539
Other offences'5 18
Source: Home Office.
a Excluding criminal damage of the value of £20 or under.
Including from the beginning of 1983 offences of trafficking in controlled drugs.
The number of notifiable offences recorded by the police in England and Wales
in 1983 was 3,071,000. The number cleared up was 1,143,200 or 37 per cent.
The Scottish police recorded 447,700 crimes, of which 31 per cent were cleared
up.
A wide range of research into criminal and social policies is carried out by the
Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department. Research is also
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
99
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Scheme
Measures to
Combat
Terrorism
THE POLICE
SERVICE
carried out in university departments, much of it financed by the Government.
The principal university criminological research establishment is the Institute
of Criminology at Cambridge.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme provides ex gratia compensation
to victims of violent crimes (including violence within the family), to people hurt
in attempting to arrest offenders and prevent offences and to those bereaved as a
result of violence. Compensation is assessed on the basis of common law
damages and usually takes the form of a lump-sum payment. In 1982—83,
19,733 awards were made and the total compensation was nearly £29-5 million.
In Scotland a court may make a compensation order against a person
convicted of an offence requiring him to pay compensation for any personal
injury, loss or damage caused by the acts which constituted the offence.
In Northern Ireland there is separate, statutory provision in certain circum¬
stances for compensation from public funds for criminal injuries, and for
malicious damage to property including losses of profits arising from the
damage.
Legislation to deal with terrorism in Northern Ireland has affected some aspects
of British criminal justice. The measures include: special powers to search,
arrest and detain suspected terrorists: the proscription of organisations
engaged in terrorism connected with Northern Ireland affairs and occurring in
the United Kingdom: and the exclusion from Great Britain and Northern Ireland
of people involved in terrorism. There are also controls at ports on passengers
travelling between Great Britain and Ireland. The legislation also provides for
trials of terrorist offences in Northern Ireland criminal courts to be heard by a
judge without a jury to obviate the danger of intimidation of jurors.
The emergency laws are temporary and must be renewed regularly; they have
also been subject to independent examination, most recently in 1984. No one
can be imprisoned for political beliefs: all prisoners except those awaiting trial
have been found guilty in court of criminal offences. While acknowledging that
the special powers make inroads into civil liberties the Government believes they
should continue as long as a substantial terrorist threat remains. As a result of
recommendations made in 1983 for further safeguards in the operation of the
legislation, both for the safety of the public and for the rights of suspects, a new
Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act was passed in 1984; this
will have a limited life of five years and contains powers for dealing also with
international terrorists.
The security forces in Northern Ireland are subject to the law and can be
prosecuted for criminal offences. Procedures for handling complaints against
the police involve two independent elements: the Director of Public Prosecutions
if allegations of criminal conduct are made; and the Police Complaints Board for
Northern Ireland when complaints relate only to disciplinary offences.
The Criminal Jurisdiction Act 1975 makes it possible to try in Northern
Ireland a person accused of certain offences committed in the Irish Republic. It
also enables evidence to be obtained in Northern Ireland for the trial of offences
in the Irish Republic. Reciprocal legislation is in force in the Irish Republic.
British police action in enforcing the law rests mainly upon common consent,
for there are only a small number of officers in relation to the population
(roughly one officer to every 400 or so people). Officers do not normally carry
firearms (their only weapon is a truncheon) and there are strict limitations on
police powers.
New proposals in the Police and Criminal Evidence Bill before Parliament
would modernise and clarify the powers of the police in England and Wales while
100
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Forces
Police
Authorities and
Chief
Constables
Central
Authorities
simultaneously providing enhanced safeguards for the citizen. Similar provi¬
sions were enacted for Scotland in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980.
Each of Britain's 52 police forces is responsible for law enforcement in its area,
but there is constant co-operation among them. In order to improve their
effectiveness, forces pay particular attention to ensuring that manpower and
other resources are used as efficiently as possible.
Outside London most counties (regions in Scotland) have their own police
forces, though in the interests of efficiency several have combined forces. The
policing of London is in the hands of the Metropolitan Police Force, with
headquarters at New Scotland Yard, and the City of London force. As part of the
Government’s commitment tp the law and order services, the strength of the
regular police force in Great Britain has continued to grow, and at the end of
1983 was almost 132.500 (including over 11,700 policewomen); in Northern
Ireland the strength of the Royal Ulster Constabulary is just over 8,000. The size
of individual police forces depends on the area and population served. The
strength of the Metropolitan Police Force, 26,800, is at its highest ever. It is
recognised that the composition of the police force should reflect the make-up of
a multiracial society and efforts are being made to encourage more members of
the ethnic minorities to join the forces.
Each regular police force is maintained by a police authority, a committee of
local councillors and, in England and Wales, magistrates. The police authority
for the Metropolitan Police Force is the Home Secretary. In Northern Ireland the
police authority is appointed by the Secretary of State.
The police authority’s primary duty is to provide an efficient police force for its
area. Its functions, some subject to ministerial approval, include appointing the
chief constable, deputy chief constable and assistant chief constables: fixing the
maximum permitted strength of the force; and providing buildings and
equipment. In the Metropolitan Police area the commissioner of police and his
immediate subordinates are appointed on the recommendation of the Home
Secretary. The police authorities are financed by central and local government.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police forces
and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below assistant
chief constable. They are generally answerable to the police authorities on
matters of efficiency, and must submit a report every year.
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland are concerned with the organisation, administration and operation of
the police service. They approve the appointment of chief, deputy and assistant
chief constables, and may require a police authority to retire a chief constable in
the interests of efficiency, call for a report from a chief constable on matters
relating to local policing or institute a local inquiry. They can make regulations
covering such matters as police ranks; qualifications for appointment, promo¬
tion and retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave, pay and allowances; and
uniform. Some of these regulations are first negotiable within the Police
Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom, which has an independent chairman
and representatives of the police authorities, police staff associations and the
home departments. Matters of a non-negotiable kind and general questions are
discussed by the Police Advisory Boards.
All police forces (except the Metropolitan Police for which the Home Secretary
is responsible) are subject to inspection by inspectors of constabulary reporting
to the Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland or the Secretary of
State for Northern Ireland. Inspectors also maintain close touch with forces
under their responsibility, and have advisory functions.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
101
Status and
Duties
Common
Services
A British police officer is an agent of the law of the land, not of the police
authority nor of the Government, and may be sued or prosecuted for any
wrongful act committed in carrying out duties. Statutory procedures, normally
including an independent element, govern the way in which complaints are
handled. Under legislation before Parliament substantial reforms would be
introduced into the complaints and disciplinary system in England and Wales.
Relations between the police and the community have been the subject of public
discussion, and a major study on the police in London was published in 1983.1
It is recognised that the action of the police in enforcing the law rests mainly on
their ability to secure the consent and support of the public. There are
guidelines for consultative arrangements between the community and the police
to stimulate joint efforts to discourage and prevent crime, and under the
legislation before Parliament these arrangements in England and Wales would
be placed on a statutory basis.
Police work ranges from the protection of people and property, road or street
patrolling (the trend in many places is increasingly away from the car patrol and
back to ‘community' policing on foot) and traffic control to crime prevention,
criminal investigation and arresting offenders. In urban areas, particularly,
police officers have to deal with social problems and may bring in other social
agencies and expert help. In England and Wales (but not in Scotland) the police
also prosecute accused people and may decide whether to grant bail before the
court proceedings (see p 102). The main departments in all forces are the
uniform department, criminal investigation department, traffic department and
specialised departments, including river or marine police, mounted police, and
dog handlers.
In order to release as many uniformed police officers as possible for
operational duties, police authorities employ over 38,000 civilians (including
part-time employees) on administrative and technical duties in England and
Wales and nearly 3,000 in Scotland. The number of civilian support staff has
been growing as forces secure economies by replacing police officers with
civilians where posts do not require police powers and training. Traffic wardens
(of whom there are nearly 5,000 in England and Wales and about 560 in
Scotland) carry out specified duties concerned with traffic and parking.
Wardens are under the control of the chief constable.
Each force has an attachment of volunteer special constables who perform
police duties in their spare time, without pay. In England and Wales they act as
auxiliaries to the regular force. In Scotland they are retained mainly for
emergency use. In Northern Ireland there is a part-time and full-time paid
reserve.
Members of the police service may not belong to a trade union nor may they
withdraw their labour in furtherance of a trade dispute. All ranks, however, have
their own staff associations to represent their interests.
A number of common services are provided by central government departments
and by arrangements between forces. The most important are: training services;
a Forensic Science Service in England and Wales (the Metropolitan Police
maintains its own laboratory); telecommunications services which provide
police radio equipment; and central and provincial criminal records available to
all forces. Regional crime squad teams of detectives from several forces
investigate major crimes involving inquiries in more than one police area. The
Scottish Crime Squad assists forces in crime investigation and prevention.
Certain special services such as liaison with the International Criminal Police
Organisation (Interpol) are provided for other British forces by the Metropolitan
Police and People in London (4 vols). Policy Studies Institute.
102
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Powers of
Arrest
Police. The services of the Fraud Squad, run jointly by the Metropolitan Police
and City of London Police to investigate company frauds, are available in
England and Wales.
In all areas of police work the use of scientific aids is widespread. A national
police computer helps to rationalise records and speed up the dissemination of
information.
In England and Wales arrests may be made with or without a warrant issued by a
magistrate. An arrested person is entitled to ask the police to notify a named
person, such as a relative or a solicitor, about the arrest. The police may delay
notification in the interests of the investigation, prevention of crime or
apprehension of offenders and may question an arrested person in custody, so
long as he or she has not been charged with the offence or informed that he or
she may be prosecuted for it. Answers to such questions are admissible as
evidence in any subsequent proceedings, provided that they have been given
voluntarily.
Guidance on the questioning of arrested persons is contained in the Judges’
Rules and Administrative Directions to the Police; although these do not have
the force of law, the police are required to comply with them.
The Judges' Rules also require the police to caution an arrested person before
charging him or her. Once a person has been charged with an offence, the police
may not ask further questions, except in exceptional circumstances, to prevent
or minimise harm or loss to some other person or to the public or to clear up an
ambiguity in a previous answer or statement. The Police and Criminal Evidence
Bill would require the Home Secretary to issue codes of practice for the
detention, treatment, questioning and identification of suspects and would
make obligatory the tape recording of police interviews.
If the police decide not to charge the arrested person (for example, because of
insufficient evidence) he or she may be released immediately. Alternatively, the
police may decide to release the person and proceed by way of summons, or to
issue a caution (reprimand). If the police need to make further inquiries they
may release the arrested person on bail (after he or she has found sureties) to
return to the police station where the person may be charged on reappearance.
(The establishment of a prosecution service in England and Wales independent
of the police has been proposed by the Government.)
Anyone arrested without a warrant must be released by the police on bail if he
or she cannot be brought before a magistrates' court within 24 hours, unless the
alleged offence is serious. If detained in custody, the defendant must be brought
before a magistrates’ court as soon as practicable. (Under the Police and
Criminal Evidence Bill there would be a new absolute limit of 96 hours on
detention without charge.) On appearance before a magistrates' court, a
defendant charged with an imprisonable offence may be refused bail in certain
specified circumstances only, the most important being substantial grounds for
believing that he or she might abscond, commit further offences or otherwise
interfere with the course of justice. If bail is refused, the defendant can apply to a
judge of the High Court and, if committed to the Crown Court, may apply for bail
to that court. The majority of people remanded by magistrates are given bail.
A person who thinks that the grounds for detention are unlawful1 may apply
to the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus against the person who detained
him or her, requiring the person to appear before the court to justify the
detention. An application for this writ is normally made by the person detained
1 Detention is lawful in pursuance of criminal justice, for contempt of court or of either House of
Parliament and when expressly authorised by Parliament. It is also sometimes lawful in the case
of the mentally disordered.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
103
CRIMINAL
COURTS
England and
Wales
Scotland
or by someone acting on his or her behalf. Similar procedures apply in Northern
Ireland.
In Scotland, the police may detain and question a suspected person for a
period of up to six hours. Thereafter the person must either be released or
charged. Police powers of arrest are similar to those in England and Wales but an
arrest must be accompanied by a criminal charge. Once a person has been
charged there is little scope for questioning and only voluntary statements will
normally be allowed in evidence at the trial. The court will reject statements
unless satisfied that they have been fairly obtained. Anyone arrested must be
brought before a court with the least possible delay. Where a prosecution on
indictment is intended (that is, where an accusation of a more serious offence is
to be made), the accused is brought before the sheriff to be committed, either for
further examination or until liberated in due course of law. A judicial
examination may take place. Eight days may elapse between commitment for
further examination and commitment until liberated in due course of law.
Anyone accused of a crime, except murder or treason, is entitled to apply for
release on bail. Money bail has been virtually abolished and the courts, or the
Lord Advocate, may release an accused person on conditions.
Breach of any of the conditions without reasonable excuse is a separate
offence. There is a right of appeal to the High Court by the accused person
against the refusal of bail, or by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by
either party against the conditions imposed. The writ of habeas corpus does not
apply in Scotland but if a person is to be prosecuted on indictment and has been
kept in custody pending trial, the trial must begin within 110 days of the date of
full committal. The trial of a person charged with a summary offence and held in
custody must begin within 40 days.
The decision to prosecute normally rests, in England and Wales, with the police
and in Scotland with public prosecutors. In Northern Ireland there is a Director
of Public Prosecutions. In England and Wales (and exceptionally in Scotland) a
private person may institute criminal proceedings. Police may issue cautions
and in Scotland the public prosecutor may warn, instead of prosecuting.
In England and Wales some offences can be prosecuted only with the consent of
the Attorney General, others only with his consent or by, or with the consent of,
the Director of Public Prosecutions, who acts under his superintendence. Such
crimes as bribery and corruption of officials, and the use and possession of
explosives, are offences requiring the Attorney General’s consent; in the case of
incest, for example, the Director’s consent is sufficient. The Director always
prosecutes crimes such as treason and murder. The police must report to the
Director s office a further list of offences, including serious offences against the
person, sedition, criminal offences by police officers, and offences relating to
obscene or indecent publications. The Director does not necessarily prosecute
all such cases but may do so in any that appear to be important or where
intervention is thought necessary; otherwise proceedings are conducted by
solicitors employed by the police. The Director also considers whether proceed¬
ings should be taken in cases reported by the government departments, and
advises the police and others concerned with administration of the criminal law.
When cases go for trial, barristers in private practice appear on the Director’s
behalf; at the Central Criminal Court in London they are drawn from a panel of
Treasury Counsel' appointed by the Attorney General.
The prosecution process in Scotland is different from that in the rest of the
United Kingdom. The Lord Advocate is responsible for the prosecution of all
104
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
Courts in
England and
Wales
suspects but delegates most of the work to the Solicitor General (see p 118). to
12 advocates depute and to procurators fiscal. The permanent adviser to the
Lord Advocate on prosecution matters is the Crown Agent who is head of the
procurator fiscal service and is assisted by a staff of civil servants with legal
qualifications known as the Crown Office. Prosecutions in the High Court of
Justiciary are prepared by the Crown Office while crimes tried before the sheriff
and district courts are prosecuted by the procurators fiscal who are lawyers and
full-time civil servants and who operate from offices within the various sheriff
court districts. The police investigate offences and report to the procurator fiscal
who decides whether to prosecute, subject to the directions of the Crown Office.
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland, who is responsible to
the Attorney General, prosecutes all offences tried on indictment, and may do so
in summary cases of a serious nature. Other summary offences are prosecuted
by the police.
Magistrates’ courts deal with nearly all criminal cases in England and Wales, and
conduct preliminary investigations into more serious offences. The Crown
Court, situated in a number of towns and cities, takes all criminal work above
the level of magistrates’ courts and trials are held before a juiy.
Magistrates’ courts hear charges against people accused of ‘summary
offences’, those that can be legally disposed of by magistrates sitting without a
jury. There are some 700 courts and some 25,000 magistrates (‘justices of the
peace’, JPs) who are advised on points of law and procedure by a clerk to the
justices (or an assistant) who is normally legally qualified and is also in charge of
the court’s administrative arrangements. Each court normally consists of three
unpaid lay magistrates who ascertain the facts of a case and apply the law to
them. Magistrates are appointed by the Lord Chancellor. In inner London and
other large urban areas where work is heavy, professional ‘stipendiary’
magistrates, full-time, salaried and legally qualified, usually preside alone.
Magistrates must as a rule sit in open court, but when they make preliminary
inquiries into a serious case to see whether there is evidence to justify committal
for trial in the Crown Court the proceedings must not be reported in the press at
the time except at the defendant’s request, unless the person is discharged.
Magistrates cannot usually impose a sentence of more than six months'
imprisonment or a fine exceeding £2,000. If an offence carries a higher
maximum penalty, they may commit the offender for sentence at the Crown
Court if they consider their own power inadequate.
Cases involving people under 17 are heard in juvenile courts, specially
constituted magistrates' courts which sit apart from other courts, or at a
different time; only limited publicity is allowed. If a young person under 17 is
charged jointly with someone of 17 or over, the case is heard in the ordinary
magistrates’ court. If the young person is found guilty, the court may transfer
the case to a juvenile court, unless it wishes to pass sentence itself.
The Crown Court deals with trials of the more serious cases, the sentencing of
offenders committed for sentence by magistrates' courts, and appeals from
magistrates’ courts. It sits at about 90 centres and is presided over by High
Court judges, full-time ‘circuit judges' and part-time recorders. All contested
trials take place before a jury. Magistrates usually sit with a circuit judge or
recorder to deal with appeals and committals for sentence and, on occasion, for
the trial of less serious cases.
The Crown Court may impose a fine of any amount on a convicted offender
and, within the maximum penalty determined for the offence by Parliament, any
other custodial or non-custodial penalty.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
105
Appeals
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
A person convicted by a magistrates’ court may appeal to the Crown Court
against the sentence and, if contesting a finding of guilt, against the conviction
itself. Where the appeal is on a point of law, either the prosecutor or the
defendant may appeal from the magistrates’ court to the High Court (see p 114).
Appeals from the Crown Court, either against conviction or against sentence,
are made to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division). A further appeal from the
Court of Appeal to the House of Lords can be brought if the court certifies that a
point of law of general public importance is involved and it appears to the court
or the Lords that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House. A
prosecutor or defendant may appeal to the Lords from a decision of the High
Court in a criminal case.
The Attorney General may seek the opinion of the Court of Appeal on a point of
law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is acquitted;
the court has power to refer the point to the House of Lords if necessary. The
acquittal in the original case is not affected, nor is the identity of the acquitted
person revealed without his or her consent.
In Scotland the High Court of Justiciary tries such crimes as murder, treason
and rape; the sheriff court is concerned with less serious offences and the
district court with minor offences. Criminal cases are heard either under solemn
procedure, when proceedings are taken on indictment and the judge sits with a
jury of 15 members, or under summary procedure, when the judge sits without a
jury. All cases in the High Court and the more serious ones in sheriff courts are
tried by a judge and jury. Summary procedure is used in the less serious cases in
the sheriff courts, and in all cases in the district courts. District courts are the
administrative responsibility of the district and the islands local government
authorities. The judges are lay justices of the peace including up to one-quarter
of the elected members of the authorities appointed as ex-officio justices. In
Glasgow there are three stipendiary magistrates who are full-time salaried
lawyers. Children under 16 who have committed an offence or are considered to
need compulsory care may be brought before an informal children’s hearing
comprising three members of the local community (see p 112).
Scotland’s six sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court districts, each
of which has a sheriff or sheriffs, who are the judges of the court.
The High Court of Justiciary, Scotland's supreme criminal court, is both a
trial and an appeal court. Any of the following judges is entitled to try cases in
the High Court: the Lord Justice General (the head of the court), the Lord
Justice Clerk (the judge next in seniority) or one of the Lord Commissioners of
Justiciary. The main seat of the courts is in Edinburgh, although the High
Court on circuit also tries cases in other towns.
All appeals are dealt with by the High Court in Edinburgh. In both solemn and
summary procedure, an appeal may be brought against conviction, or sentence,
or both. The Court may authorise a retrial if it sets aside a conviction. There is
no further appeal to the House of Lords.
The structure of Northern Ireland courts is broadly similar to that in England
and Wales. The day-to-day work of dealing summarily with minor cases is
carried out by magistrates’ courts presided over by a full-time, legally qualified
resident magistrate. Young offenders under 17 and young people under 17 who
need care, protection and control are-dealt with by juvenile courts consisting of
the resident magistrate and two lay members (at least one of whom must be a
woman) specially qualified to deal with juveniles. Appeals from magistrates’
courts are heard by the county court.
The Crown Court deals with criminal trials on indictment. It is served by High
Court and county court judges. Proceedings are heard before a single judge, and
106
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trial
The Jury
Scotland
all contested cases, other than those involving offences specified under
emergency legislation, take place before a jury. Appeals from the Crown Court
against conviction or sentence are heard by the Northern Ireland Court of
Appeal. Procedures for a further appeal to the House of Lords are similar to those
in England and Wales.
Criminal trials in the United Kingdom take the form of a contest between the
prosecution and the defence. Since the law presumes the innocence of an
accused person until guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not granted any
advantage, apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant has the right to
employ a legal adviser and may be granted legal aid from public funds. If
remanded in custody, the person may be visited by a legal adviser to ensure a
properly prepared defence. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland during the
preparation of the case, the prosecution usually tells the defence of relevant
documents which it is not proposed to put in evidence and discloses them if
asked to do so. The prosecution should also inform the defence of witnesses
whose evidence may help the accused and whom the prosecution does not
propose to call. The defence or prosecution may suggest that the defendant’s
mental state renders him or her unfit to be tried. If the jury decides that this is
so, the defendant is admitted to a specified hospital.
Criminal trials are normally in open court and rules of evidence (concerned
with the proof of facts) are rigorously applied. If evidence is illegally admitted, a
conviction can be quashed on appeal. During the trial the defendant has the
right to hear and cross-examine witnesses for the prosecution, normally
through a lawyer; to call his or her own witnesses who, if they will not attend
voluntarily may be legally compelled to attend; and to address the court in
person or through a lawyer, the defence having the right to the last speech at the
trial. The defendant cannot be questioned without consenting to be sworn as a
witness in his or her own defence. When he or she does testify, cross-
examination about character or other conduct may be made only in exceptional
circumstances and generally the prosecution may not introduce evidence of
such matters.
In jury trials the judge decides questions of law, sums up the evidence for the
jury, and discharges the accused or passes sentence. Only the jury decides
whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty. If the jury cannot reach a
unanimous verdict, the judge may direct it to bring in a majority verdict
provided that, in the normal jury of 12 people, there are not more than two
dissentients. If the jury returns a verdict of not guilty’, the prosecution has no
right of appeal and the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. If
‘guilty’ the defendant has a right of appeal to the appropriate court. A jury is
completely independent of the judiciary. Once members are sworn in, they are
protected from all interference. Both the prosecution and the defence can object
to particular jurors. People between the ages of 18 and 65 whose names appear
on the electoral register, with certain exceptions, are liable for jury service and
their names are chosen at random. Ineligible persons include the judiciary,
priests, certain sufferers from mental illness and people who have within the
previous ten years been members of the legal profession or of the police, prison
and probation services.
At summary trials in Scotland accused people are asked to plead to the charge at
the first calling of the case and, if they plead guilty, the court may dispose of the
case. Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court appoints a date for the trial.
In indictment cases, unless the accused is pleading guilty, a diet (date on
which a person must appear in court) will be fixed for trial in the High Court or
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
107
Coroners’
Courts
TREATMENT
OF
OFFENDERS
Sentencing
Non-custodial
Treatment
the Sheriff Court. Any special pleas or matters to be dealt with which may affect
the trial can be disposed of beforehand at a preliminary diet.
The accused may plead guilty at the trial diet and be dealt with there and then.
In the case of a plea of not guilty, trial is before a judge of the High Court or the
sheriff and 15 jurors. Evidence is presented without opening speeches, and
there are closing speeches for the prosecution and for the defence, followed by
the judge’s charge to the jury. The jury may return a verdict of‘not guilty’ or ‘not
proven’, both of which result in acquittal, or it may find the accused ‘guilty’, in
which case the court delivers sentence. The verdict may be reached by a simple
majority. With a few minor statutory exceptions, no person may be convicted
without the evidence of at least two independent witnesses, or corroboration of
one witness by facts and circumstances which clearly implicate the accused.
Where the accused has given prior notice of a plea of guilty an early diet will be
arranged, and there will be no trial. The judge or sheriff will sit alone to deal with
the matter.
Coroners’ courts investigate violent and unnatural deaths or sudden deaths
where the cause is unknown. Cases may be brought before the local coroner (a
senior lawyer or doctor) by doctors, the police, various public authorities or
members of the public, and it is the coroner's duty to hold an inquiry into how,
when and where the deceased died. If the death is sudden and the cause
unknown, the coroner need not hold an inquest in court, but may order a
post-mortem examination to determine cause of death. Where there is reason to
believe that the deceased died a violent or unnatural death or died in prison or in
other specified circumstances the coroner must hold an inquest. In Scotland the
office of coroner does not exist. The local procurator fiscal inquires privately into
all sudden and suspicious deaths and may report the findings to the Crown
Agents. In a minority of cases a fatal accident inquiry may be held before the
sheriff.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a person who has not previously served
a custodial sentence of a particular kind may not be sentenced to custodial
treatment of that kind unless he or she is legally represented or has chosen not
to be, and unless the court is satisfied that no other sentence will suffice. In
England and Wales, extended sentences longer than the normal maximum term
may be imposed on persistent offenders. In the case of murder there is a
mandatory penalty of life imprisonment. This is the maximum penalty for a
number of serious offences such as robbery, rape, arson and manslaughter.
Although the death penalty may still, in theory, be imposed for certain offences,
such as treason, it is no longer used.
In Scotland, unless the sentence is limited by statute, the maximum penalty is
determined by the status of the court trying the accused. In trials on indictment,
the High Court may impose a sentence of imprisonment for any term up to life,
and the sheriff court any term up to two years but may send any person to the
High Court for sentence if the court considers its powers are insufficient. In
summary cases, the sheriff may impose up to six months' imprisonment except
in certain cases where his powers are extended by statute.
The Government's policy is to maintain and develop an effective range of
non-custodial sentences including fines, probation and absolute discharge. In
England. Wales and Northern Ireland the court may impose conditional
discharge when it considers there is no need to impose punishment; and
‘binding over' where the offender pledges money, with or without sureties, to
keep the peace and be of good behaviour.
108
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Probation
Offenders aged 16 or over (17 in Northern Ireland) convicted of imprisonable
offences can, with their consent, be given community service orders. The court
may order between 40 and 240 hours' unpaid service to be completed within 12
months. (This does not apply in Northern Ireland.) Examples of work done
include decorating the houses of old or disabled people and building adventure
playgrounds. The number of community service orders increased by 135 per
cent between 1978 and 1982, in England and Wales. In Scotland the number of
community service orders made by the courts has increased from 492 in 1980 to
2,012 in 1982.
The Government is concerned that young offenders should be given non¬
custodial sentences whenever possible. To this end, juveniles (aged under 17)
may be given supervision orders, requiring them to participate in supervised
activities (or to refrain from other activities which may lead them astray). These
may be vigorous and demanding, and offer the courts a realistic alternative to
custodial sentences.
The sentence imposed on an offender in England, Wales and Northern Ireland
may also, with his or her consent, be deferred for up to six months to enable a
court to take into account conduct after some expected change in circum¬
stances. In Scotland sentence may also be deferred with or without the
offender’s consent.
The courts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland may order an offender to
pay compensation for personal injury, loss or damage resulting from an offence.
Where the loss amounts to £15,000 or more they may make a criminal
bankruptcy order against an offender. In Scotland there is also a system of
compensation by offenders.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a judge is free to pass a suspended
sentence of not more than two years. The sentence is not served unless the
offender is convicted of a further offence punishable with imprisonment; in that
event the suspended sentence normally takes effect and another sentence may
be imposed for the new offence. An offender receiving a suspended sentence of
more than six months may be placed under the supervision of a probation officer
for all or part of the period. Courts in England and Wales have the power, when
passing a sentence of between three months' and two years’ imprisonment, to
order that part should be served and the rest held in suspense.
In certain circumstances courts may order forfeiture of property involved in
the commission of crime. An offender convicted of a serious crime may be
disqualified from driving if a motor vehicle was used in its commission.
In most circumstances, after a rehabilitation period of from six months to ten
years depending on the nature of the sentence imposed, a person convicted of a
criminal offence need not disclose it, and the offence will not be held against him
or her. This does not apply to those with a prison sentence of more than 2V2
years.
Probation is designed to rehabilitate an offender, who continues to live an
ordinary life with the supervision, advice and assistance of a probation officer.
In England and Wales the number of probation orders made increased by about
50 per cent between 1978 and 1982. Before making a probation order which
lasts between six months (12 months in Scotland) and three years, the court
must explain its effects and make sure that the probationer understands that
failure to comply with it will make him or her liable to be dealt with again for the
original offence. An order can be made only if the offender is aged 17 years (16
years in Scotland) or over and has given consent, and usually requires the
probationer to keep in regular touch with the probation officer, and to be of good
behaviour. In Northern Ireland an order can be made for anyone over the age of
criminal responsibility (ten years), but consent is required where the offender is
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
109
Prisons
Remission of
Sentence and
Parole
aged 14 or over. The order may require the offender to live in a specified place
(such as an approved hostel), or receive psychiatric treatment.
In England and Wales the probation service is administered locally by
probation committees of local magistrates and co-opted members with legal and
specialist interests. In Scotland it is administered by local authority social work
departments. In Northern Ireland it is administered by a probation board whose
membership is broadly based and representative of the community. Probation
officers are usually members of small teams, although each has much
independence in undertaking casework.
Probation committees may provide and maintain day centres, bail hostels,
probation hostels and other rehabilitation centres. The service also administers
the community service scheme. In Scotland, projects of this kind may be
provided by local authority social work departments, who are also responsible
for administering the community service scheme.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the services of probation officers are
available to every criminal court. In Scotland, officers of the local authority social
work department are similarly available.
Although the courts have made less use of prison as a penalty for criminal
activity, there has been an increase in the prison population as a result of the
rise in recorded crime. The daily average inmate population in 1983 in England
and Wales was nearly 43,500. Taking into account the reduction in the
minimum qualifying period for parole, the population is expected to rise to
about 47,400 by 1990. In Scotland the average population in custody has
remained fairly steady for the last decade at around 4,900. In Northern Ireland
the daily average inmate population in 1983 was 2,453 and is expected to fall to
2,250 in 1986-87.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are known as
local prisons ; all are closed. Other prisons, open or closed, receive prisoners on
transfer from local prisons (open prisons do not have physical barriers to
prevent escape). Sentenced prisoners are classified into groups for security
purposes. There are separate prisons for women. There are no open prisons in
Northern Ireland, where the majority of offenders are serving sentences for
terrorist offences.
People awaiting trial are entitled to privileges not granted to convicted
prisoners and, as far as practicable, are separated from convicted prisoners.
Prisoners under 21 awaiting trial are separated from older prisoners.
Many British prisons were built during the nineteenth century and are now
unsatisfactory and overcrowded. The Government aims to end overcrowding by
1990. Existing establishments are being refurbished, four new prisons are
under construction and ten more are being planned or designed. In Northern
Ireland two new prisons are under construction at the same site—one for men
and one for women prisoners.
Most prisoners in Great Britain are eligible for remission of one-third of their
sentence provided it does not reduce the sentence to less than five days.
However, people sentenced to life imprisonment for certain categories of
murder, including terrorist murders and the murder of police officers, must
serve a minimum of 20 years’ imprisonment. In Northern Ireland the Secretary
of State reviews life sentence cases in such a way as to reflect fully their gravity
and to take account of the special circumstances of Northern Ireland. The
average time served under sentence in prisons in England and Wales by people
discharged in 1980-82 from custodial sentences for murder was 10V2 years.
Remission may be forfeited for serious misconduct. There is no remission for
prisoners serving sentences under civil law and those serving sentences of
110
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prison
Industries
and Education
Medical and
Psychological
Services
unspecified length (for example, the criminally insane, whose release depends
upon improvement in their mental condition).
Prisoners serving fixed sentences of more than 18 months become eligible for
release on parole after six months. However, for those serving sentences of more
than five years for violence or drug smuggling, parole is only granted in
exceptional circumstances. The parole licence remains in force until the date on
which the prisoner would have been released but for the parole. It prescribes the
conditions with which the offender must comply. About 9-5 per cent of prisoners
granted parole in England and Wales and about 5-5 per cent of those in Scotland
in 1983 were recalled to prison.
Prisoners serving life sentences are also eligible for release on licence, after
consideration by the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland who
consults the judiciary, and on the recommendation of the appropriate Parole
Board. Those released remain on licence for the rest of their lives subject to recall
at any time should the circumstances warrant. Similar arrangements exist in
Northern Ireland except that the recommendations are made to the Secretary of
State by an internal review body.
In Northern Ireland most prisoners serving a sentence of more than five days
are eligible for remission of half of their sentence. A prisoner serving a sentence
of more than 12 months who is released with remission is liable, if convicted of a
fresh imprisonable offence at any time before the expiry of the full term of the
sentence, to be ordered to serve the remaining balance of the sentence in
addition to the sentence for the fresh offence.
Prison industries aim to give inmates work experience which will assist them
when released and to secure a return which will reduce the cost of the prison
system. The main industries are clothing and textile manufacture, engineering,
woodwork, laundering, electro-mechanical production, farming and horticul¬
ture. Most production caters for internal needs and for other public services but
much of it is for the commercial market. A few prisoners are employed outside
prison. Small payments are made for work; in some prisons, incentive schemes
provide an opportunity for higher earnings on the basis of output and skill.
Education is financed by the prison service and provided by local education
authorities. Prison education officers are assisted by teams of teachers.
Education is compulsory, full-time, for young offenders below school-leaving age
and, in England and Wales, part-time for those between 16 and 21. For older
offenders it is voluntary. Some prisoners study for public examinations
(including those of the Open University). Within the resources available there is
teaching in recreational and leisure pursuits. Vocational training is provided
directly by the prison service. Physical education is voluntary but offenders
under 21 have to attend a certain number of classes. Many establishments lack
the proper facilities, although there have been recent improvements.
Education in Northern Ireland prisons is traditionally an evening activity, but
governors may and do permit prisoners who need help in basic education and
those preparing for public examinations to spend part of their working week on
educational pursuits. Prison education is provided by full-time and part-time
staff. A wide range of educational and vocational training facilities, from
remedial education to Open University level, is available.
The prison medical service has a general responsibility for the physical and
mental health of all those in custody. Each establishment has accommodation
for sick people and patients can also be transferred to National Health Service
hospitals. Psychiatric care is available.
The work of psychologists includes evaluating treatment programmes,
studying management practices, contributing to the management and treat-
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
111
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare
Discharge and
After-care
Children in
Trouble
England and
Wales
ment programmes of individuals and groups, taking part in advisory and
training work with staff and making assessments for treatment or allocation
purposes.
Prisoners are entitled to write and receive letters and to be visited by relatives
and friends. Privileges include a personal radio, books, periodicals and
newspapers, and the right to make purchases from the canteen with money
earned in prison. Depending on facilities prisoners may be granted the further
privileges of dining and recreation in association and watching television.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or by the boards
of visitors (visiting committee in Scotland), who have power to order forfeiture of
remission and forfeiture of privileges. Boards of visitors (and visiting commit¬
tees) consist of lay people, two of whom must be magistrates.
The welfare of prisoners is the concern of all prison staff. Much of this work is
the responsibility of probation officers (in Scotland social workers) stationed in
prisons who help prisoners in their relations with individuals and agencies
outside and play a leading part in helping prisoners to make constructive
resettlement plans before their release. Prisoners may also receive visits from
specially appointed prison visitors whose work is voluntary.
Chaplains give spiritual help and advice to inmates and are increasingly
involved in management decisions affecting their needs and quality of life.
All prisons in England and Wales arrange pre-release preparations. Prisoners
serving four years or more are considered for outside employment before release.
For those selected, work is found outside the prison for about the last six
months of sentence; during the period prisoners may live in a separate part of
the prison or in a hostel outside. Normal wages are paid so that they can resume
support for their families. (In Scotland pre-release arrangements differ from
these in some respects.) Periods of home leave may be granted in the last nine
months of sentence to those serving two years or more to assist them with their
resettlement. Similar pre-release leave arrangements exist in Northern Ireland.
The aim of after-care, run by the probation and after-care service (in Scotland,
the local authority social work departments), is to assist offenders on return to
society. Compulsory supervision is given to most offenders under 21 when
released, adult offenders released on parole, and those released on licence from a
life sentence. A voluntary system is offered to others. After-care is also provided
by voluntary societies, most of which are members of the National Association
for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders. There is also a Scottish Association
for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders. Hostels and accommodation may be
provided, often with government financial help. The Northern Ireland Associa¬
tion for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders, also a voluntary group, is
mainly concerned with assisting petty criminals and alcoholics towards
rehabilitation and social awareness.
In England and Wales no child under ten years can be held guilty of an offence. A
child aged 10 to 16 years who is alleged to have committed an offence may be the
subject of criminal proceedings or of ‘care' proceedings, both of which normally
take place in juvenile courts. In both criminal and care proceedings the fact that
a child is found guilty of an offence is not in itself sufficient justification for
making an order; the court must also consider the child to need care or control
which he or she is unlikely to receive unless an order is made.
A number of orders are available to courts in both care and criminal
proceedings. Under a care order a local authority becomes responsible for
deciding where the child should be accommodated; whether, for example, to
112
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
leave the child at home under supervision or to place him or her with foster
parents or in a community home. For children too severely disturbed or
disruptive to be treated in local authority homes, there are two special Youth
Treatment Centres run by the Department of Health and Social Security. The
authority must review each care order every six months and consider whether
an application should be made to the court to end it; the order normally expires
when the child reaches 18 or 19. The courts have powers to make a charge and
control condition when a child who is already under a care order as a result of an
offence commits a further offence (for which an adult could be punished by
imprisonment). This suspends for six months the local authority’s discretion to
place the child in his or her own home, but does not oblige the authority to place
the child in a community home. The local authority may, for example, place the
child with foster parents.
Under a supervision order (usually valid for three years or less) a child
normally remains at home under the supervision of a social worker or a
probation officer, but may have to live with a specified person or to comply with
directions of his or her supervisor. The child may have to undergo ‘intermediate
treatment’, a compromise between measures involving complete removal from
home and those which do not, and consisting of participation, under a
supervisor, in a variety of constructive and remedial activities through a short
residential course or, more usually, attendance at a day or evening centre.
Government finance is available to help individuals, groups or organisations to
set up intermediate treatment facilities.
A court may also make an order requiring a parent or guardian to take proper
care of the child and to exercise proper control; the order may be made only with
the consent of the parent or guardian. In care proceedings, the court may order a
stay in hospital in accordance with the mental health legislation.
The courts may also order payments of compensation, or impose fines or grant
a conditional or absolute discharge. When a fine, compensation or costs, are
awarded against a juvenile offender the courts generally order that the parent or
guardian should pay. Offenders, both boys and girls, may be ordered to spend a
total of up to 24 hours of their spare time on Saturdays at an attendance centre
(up to three hours on any one occasion). The centres, which provide physical
education and instruction in practical subjects, are for those found guilty of
offences for which older people could be sent to prison. Boys aged 14 to 16 may
be sent to a junior detention centre, where the regime is similar to that in senior
detention centres (see p 113). Boys and girls aged 15 or 16 may also be
sentenced to a term of youth custody. In the case of a very serious crime,
detention in a place approved by the Home Secretary may be ordered, and must
be ordered in the case of homicide.
In Scotland the age of criminal responsibility is eight years but prosecution of
children in the sheriff court is rare and can take place only as instructed by the
Lord Advocate; court proceedings normally take place only where the offence is of
a serious nature, or where a child is prosecuted together with an adult. Instead,
children under 16 (or in certain circumstances those aged between 16 and 18 if
subject to a supervision requirement) who have committed an offence or are
considered to be in need of care and protection may be brought before a
children's hearing. The hearing, which consists of three lay people drawn from a
panel for each region or islands area, determines in an informal setting whether
compulsory measures of care are required and, if so, the form they should take.
An official reporter’ decides whether a child should come before a hearing. If the
grounds for referral are not accepted by the child or parents, or if for any reason
the child is not capable of understanding the explanation of the grounds, the
case goes to the sheriff for proof. If he finds the grounds established, the sheriff
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
113
Northern
Ireland
Young Adult
Offenders
The Civil Law
CIVIL COURTS
England and
Wales
remits the case to the reporter to arrange a hearing. The sheriff also decides
appeals against any decision of a children's hearing.
The age of criminal responsibility in Northern Ireland is ten. Children under the
age of 17 charged with committing a criminal offence may be brought before a
juvenile court. If the child is found guilty of an offence punishable by
imprisonment if committed by an adult, he or she may be sent to a training
school, placed in the care of a fit person-, possibly the area health and social
services board, or put under supervision. Alternatively the court can order a
period at an attendance centre or a remand home, or impose a fine or
compensation. A conditional or absolute discharge is also possible. Whatever
other order it makes, a juvenile court can also make an order requiring parents
to ensure the child s good behaviour. Children brought before the courts in need
of care and protection may be placed in care locally.
Offenders aged 17 to 20 years (16 to 21 years in Scotland) are recognised as a
category distinct from child and adult offenders. The custodial sentences
available in England and Wales are: detention centre orders for males for from
three weeks to four months and youth custody sentences for both sexes. The
senior detention centres are for young male offenders who need to be taught
respect for the law through some form of custody. Life in a centre demands high
standards of discipline. Training comprises a full working week, including an
hour a day of physical training, with considerable attention paid to education.
Young offenders are eligible for parole on a similar basis to adults and all are
supervised after discharge.
Courts may impose a custodial sentence only when no other measure is
appropriate; a number of alternatives to custody are open to the courts.
Community service orders (see p 108) are available from the age of 16 and courts
may order young offenders to give up Saturday afternoon leisure at attendance
centres. The courts may also attach conditions to probation orders on offenders.
In Scotland young offenders sentenced to detention serve their sentences
either in a detention centre or a young offenders' institution, depending on the
length of the sentence. Remission of part of the sentence for good conduct,
release on parole, and supervision after release are available. In Northern
Ireland, no offender under 21 sentenced to three years or less may be sent to
prison. Such offenders would serve their sentences in a young offenders’ centre.
Civil Justice
The main sub-divisions of the civil law of England. Wales and Northern Ireland
are: family law, the law of property, the law of contract and the law of torts
(covering injuries suffered by one person at the hands of another irrespective of
any contract between them and including concepts such as negligence,
defamation and trespass). Other branches of the civil law include constitutional
and administrative (particularly concerned with the use of executive power),
industrial, maritime and ecclesiastical law. Scottish civil law has its own, often
analogous, branches.
The limited civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial
proceedings for custody and maintenance orders, adoption orders and affilia¬
tion and guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction concerning
nuisances under the public health legislation and the recovery of rates.
Committees of magistrates license public houses, betting shops and clubs.
The jurisdiction of the 300 or so county courts covers actions founded upon
contract and tort (with minor exceptions); trust and mortgage cases; and
114
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Appeals
Scotland
actions for the recovery of land. Cases involving claims exceeding set limits may
be tried in the county court by consent of the parties, or in certain
circumstances on transfer from the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase, the Rent
Acts, landlord and tenant and adoption cases. Undefended divorce cases are
determined in those courts designated as divorce county courts (defended cases
are transferred to the High Court) and outside London bankruptcies are dealt
with in certain county courts. The courts also deal with complaints of race and
sex discrimination. Where small claims are concerned (especially those involving
consumers), there are special arbitration facilities and simplified procedures.
All judges of the Supreme Court (comprising the Court of Appeal, the Crown
Court and the High Court) and all circuit judges and recorders have power to sit
in the county courts, but each court has one or more circuit judges assigned to it
by the Lord Chancellor, and the regular sittings of the court are mostly taken by
them. The judge normally sits alone, although on request the court may,
exceptionally, order a trial with a jury.
The High Court of Justice is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s
Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction is both original and
appellate and covers all civil and some criminal cases. In general, particular
types of work are assigned to a particular division. The Family Division, for
instance, is concerned with all jurisdiction affecting the family, including that
relating to adoption and guardianship. The Chancery Division deals with the
interpretation of wills and the administration of estates. Maritime and
commercial law is the responsibility of admiralty and commercial courts of the
Queen’s Bench Division.
Each of the 80 or so judges of the High Court is attached to one division on
appointment but may be transferred to any other division while in office. The
Lord Chancellor is president of the Chancery Division, administered by the
vice-president, the Vice-Chancellor. The Queen’s Bench Division is presided over
by the Lord Chief Justice of England, who ranks next to the Lord Chancellor in
the legal hierarchy, and the Family Division is headed by the President. Outside
London (where the High Court sits at the Royal Courts of Justice) sittings are
held at 24 Crown Court centres. For the hearing of cases at first instance, High
Court judges sit alone. Appeals in civil matters from lower courts are heard by
courts of two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of the appropriate
division, nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption and guardianship proceedings heard by
magistrates’ courts go to a divisional court of the Family Division of the High
Court. Affiliation appeals are heard by the Crown Court, as are appeals from
decisions of the licensing committees of magistrates. Appeals from the High
Court and county courts are heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) and
may go on to the House of Lords, the final court of appeal in civil cases.
The ex-officio members of the Court of Appeal are the Lord Chancellor, the
Lord Chief Justice, the President of the Family Division and the Master of the
Rolls; the ordinary members are 18 Lords Justices of Appeal.
The judges in the House of Lords are the nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and
sometimes even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of appeals (which
normally take place in a committee room and not in the legislative chamber), but
peers who hold or have held high judicial office may also sit. The president of the
House in its judicial capacity is the Lord Chancellor.
The main civil courts are the sheriff courts and the Court of Session. The civil
jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to most kinds of action (including
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
115
Northern
Ireland
Civil
Proceedings
divorce actions) and is normally unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the
work is done by the sheriff, against whose decisions an appeal may be made to
the sheriff-principal or directly to the Court of Session.
The Court of Session sits only in Edinburgh, and in general has jurisdiction to
deal with all kinds of action. The main exception is an action exclusive to the
sheriff court, where the value claimed is less than a set amount. It is divided into
two parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House,
mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions of equal
status, each consisting of four judges—the first division being presided over by
the Lord President and the second division by the Lord Justice Clerk. Appeals to
the Inner House may be made from the Outer House and from the sheriff court.
From the Inner House an appeal may go to the House of Lords. The judges of the
Court of Session are the same as those of the High Court of Justiciary. The Lord
President of the Court holds the office of Lord Justice General in the High Court
(see p 105).
The Scottish Land Court, a special court dealing with agricultural tenancies
and similar matters, consists of a judge and four lay specialists in agriculture.
Minor civil cases in Northern Ireland are dealt with in county courts, though
magistrates’ courts also deal with certain classes of civil case. The superior civil
law court is the High Court of Justice from which an appeal may be made to the
Court of Appeal. These two courts, together with the Crown Court, comprise the
Supreme Court of Judicature of Northern Ireland and their practice and
procedure are similar to those in England. The House of Lords is the final civil
appeal court.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved person:
no preliminary inquiry on the authenticity of the grievance is required. An
action in a magistrates’ court is begun by a complaint on which the court may
serve the defendant with a summons. This contains details of the complaint and
the date on which it will be heard. Parties and witnesses give their evidence at
the court hearing. Domestic proceedings are heard by not more than three lay
justices including, where practicable, a woman; members of the public are not
allowed to be present. The court may order provision for the custody and
supervision of children, as well as maintenance payments for spouses and
children. Actions in the High Court are usually begun by a writ of summons
served on the defendant by the plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim. A
defendant intending to contest the claim informs the court. Documents setting
out the precise question in dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the
court. Cpunty court proceedings are initiated by a summons served on the
defendant by the court; subsequent procedure is simpler than in the High
Court.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced in open court, but a procedure for
most undefended cases dispenses with the need to give evidence in court and
permits written evidence to be considered by the registrar.
Civil proceedings, as a private matter, can usually be abandoned or ended by
compromise at any time. Actions brought to court are usually tried without a
jury, except in defamation, false imprisonment, or malicious prosecution cases,
when either party may, except in certain special circumstances, insist on trial by
jury, or a fraud case, when the defendant may claim this right. The jury decides
questions of fact and damages awarded to the injured party; majority verdicts
may be accepted.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Most are for sums of money and may be enforced, in cases of default, by seizure
of the debtor’s goods or by attachment of earnings (a court order requiring an
employer to make periodic payments to the court by deduction from the debtor’s
116
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Restrictive
Practices Court
Administrative
Tribunals
wages). Other judgments can take the form of an injunction restraining
someone from performing an illegal act. Refusal to obey judgment may result in
imprisonment for contempt of court. Arrest under an order of committal may be
effected only on a warrant.
The general rule is that the costs of the action (lawyers’ charges, court fees and
other payments) are within the discretion of the court. Normally, the court
orders them to be paid by the party losing the action, but in the case of family
law maintenance proceedings a magistrates’ court can order either party to pay
the whole or part of the other’s costs.
In Scotland proceedings in the Court of Session or ordinary actions in the
sheriff court are initiated by serving the defender with a summons (an initial
writ in the sheriff court). In Court of Session actions the next step is the
publication of the action in the court lists. A defender who intends to contest the
action must inform the court; if he or she does not appear, the court grants a
decree in absence in favour of the pursuer. In ordinary actions in the sheriff
court the defender is simply required to give notice of intention to defend within
a certain number of days after service of the initial writ, and this is followed by a
formal appearance in court by the parties to the dispute or their solicitors.
In summary causes (involving small sums) in the sheriff court the procedure is
less formal. The statement of claim is incorporated in the summons. The
procedure is designed to enable most actions to be carried through without the
parties involved having to appear in court. Normally they (or their representa¬
tives) need appear only when an action is defended.
Proceedings in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and Wales.
County court proceedings are commenced by a civil bill served on the defendant;
there are no pleadings in the county court. Judgments of civil courts are
enforceable through a centralised procedure administered by the Enforcement
of Judgments Office.
The Restrictive Practices Court is a specialised United Kingdom court which
deals with monopolies and restrictive trade practices. It comprises five judges
and up to ten other people with expertise in industry, commerce or public life.
Administrative tribunals consist of people or bodies exercising judicial func¬
tions outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a rule, they are set up
under statutory powers which also govern their constitution, functions and
procedure. Their composition and procedures vary greatly. Compared with the
courts, they tend to be less expensive, less formal and more accessible; they also
have expert knowledge of their particular subjects. The expansion of the
tribunal system is comparatively recent, most tribunals having been set up since
1945. Independently of the executive, tribunals decide the rights and obliga¬
tions of private citizens towards each other or towards a government depart¬
ment or other public authority. A number of important tribunals (notably the
rent and industrial tribunals) decide disputes between private citizens. Some
(such as those concerned with social security) resolve claims by private citizens
against public authorities. A further group (including tax tribunals) decide
disputed claims by public authorities against private citizens, and still others
decide issues in dispute which do not directly affect financial rights or liabilities,
such as entitlements to licences or the right to enter the United Kingdom.
Tribunals usually consist of an uneven number of people so that a majority
decision can be reached; some consist of one person sitting alone. Members are
normally appointed by the minister concerned with the subject but other
authorities have the power of appointment in appropriate cases. The Lord
Chancellor (or the Lord President of the Court of Session in Scotland) makes
most appointments where a lawyer chairman or member is required.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
117
GOVERNMENT
RESPONSI¬
BILITIES
England and
Wales
Appeals on a point of law from all the more important tribunals may be made
in England and Wales to the High Court, in Scotland to the Court of Session and
in Northern Ireland to the Court of Appeal. In some cases an appeal may be made
to a specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a government minister or to an
independent referee. The Employment Appeal Tribunal, which hears appeals on
questions of law from decisions of industrial tribunals, has High Court and
Court of Session status in Great Britain. The Council on Tribunals (an
independent body, established in 1958) exercises general supervision over
tribunals, advising on draft legislation and rules of procedure, monitoring their
activities and reporting on particular matters; those peculiar to Scotland are
dealt with by the Scottish Committee of the Council. The Council has
responsibility with regard to public inquiries.
Administration of the Law
The United Kingdom judiciary is entirely independent of the Government and is
not subject to ministerial direction or control. There is no minister of justice.
Responsibility for the administration of justice rests with the Lord Chancellor,
the Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland. Also concerned is the Prime Minister, who recommends the highest
judicial appointments to the Crown.
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the judiciary (and sometimes sits as a judge
in the House of Lords); he is concerned with court procedure, is responsible for
the administration of all courts other than magistrates’ and coroners’ courts,
appoints magistrates, and has general responsibility for the legal aid and advice
scheme. He is also responsible for the administration of civil law reform.
The Home Secretary is concerned with the criminal law (including law
reform), the police service, prisons, and the probation and after-care service;
and has general supervision over magistrates’ courts, together with some
specific responsibilities (such as approving the appointment of justices’ clerks).
On matters relating to crime prevention and the treatment of offenders, the
Home Secretary is advised by the Advisory Council on the Penal System. Prison
policy and the administration of custodial centres are functions of the Home
Office Prison Department, and the Home Secretary appoints to each centre a
board of visitors representing the local community to investigate and advise on
the state of prison premises, administration and treatment of inmates. The
boards have disciplinary powers in relation to serious breaches of discipline and
hear applications or complaints from inmates. The Home Secretary is advised by
a special Parole Board on the release of prisoners on licence.
Responsibility for the treatment of offenders under 17 is shared between the
Home Office and the Department of Health and Social Security. The Home
Secretary is also responsible for advising the Queen on the exercise of the royal
prerogative of mercy to pardon a person convicted of a crime or to cancel all or
part of a penalty imposed by a court.
The Secretary of State for the Environment is responsible for providing
accommodation for all the superior courts in England and Wales, except the
Central Criminal Court, which is the responsibility of the City of London.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General (the Law Officers of the Crown
for England and Wales) are the Government’s principal advisers on English law,
and represent the Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases. They
are senior barristers, elected members of the House of Commons and hold
ministerial posts. The Attorney General is also Attorney General for Northern
Ireland. As well as exercising various civil law functions, the Attorney General
118
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
THE
PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
The Legal
Profession
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
has final responsibility for enforcing the criminal law; the Director of Public
Prosecutions is subject to the Attorney General’s superintendence. The Attorney
General is concerned with instituting and prosecuting certain types of criminal
proceedings, but must exercise an independent discretion, and must not be
influenced by government colleagues. The Solicitor General is, in effect, the
deputy of the Attorney General.
The Secretary of State for Scotland recommends the appointment of all judges
other than the most senior ones, appoints the staff of the High Court of
Justiciary and the Court of Session and is responsible for the composition,
staffing and organisation of the sheriff courts. District courts are staffed and
administered by the district and islands local authorities. The Secretary of State
is also responsible for the criminal law of Scotland, crime prevention, and the
police and the penal system, and is advised on parole matters by the Parole
Board for Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland are the chief legal
advisers to the Government on Scottish questions and the principal representa¬
tives of the Crown for the purposes of litigation in Scotland. The Lord Advocate
is closely concerned with questions of legal policy and administration and is also
responsible for the Scottish parliamentary draftsmen, and for the public
prosecution of all major crimes.
In Northern Ireland the judiciary is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the
Lord Chancellor. The administration of all courts is the responsibility of the
Lord Chancellor, while the Northern Ireland Office, under the Secretary of State,
deals with the police and the penal system. The Lord Chancellor has general
responsibility for the legal aid and advice scheme in Northern Ireland.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts since the Crown is the
historic source of all judicial power. The Queen, acting on the advice of
ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary.
Full-time judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor, who is
head of the judiciary, speaker of the House of Lords and a Cabinet minister. With
the exception of lay magistrates, judges are normally appointed from practising
barristers, advocates (in Scotland) or solicitors (see below). The judiciary is not a
career service as in many other countries. Lay magistrates in England and Wales
need no legal qualifications but on appointment undergo basic training to give
them sufficient knowledge of the law, including the rules of evidence, and to
enable them to understand the nature and purpose of sentencing. The Scottish
district court justices of the peace likewise need no legal qualifications. In
Northern Ireland lay magistrates serving on juvenile courts undertake training
courses; resident magistrates are drawn from practising solicitors or barristers.
In certain circumstances (for instance, in cases of misconduct or proven
incapacity) judges of the inferior courts may be removed from their positions
but, in order to safeguard the independence of the judiciary from the executive,
superior judges in England and Wales and Northern Ireland (other than the Lord
Chancellor who changes with the Government) are subject to removal only by the
Queen on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament; in Scotland there
is no statutory provision for removing judges of the Court of Session or High
Court of Justiciary from office and special legislation would probably be needed
to secure a dismissal.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Barristers are known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
119
LEGAL AID,
ADVICE AND
ASSISTANCE
Advice and
Assistance
Law Centres
Aid in Civil
Proceedings
collectively and individually as ‘counsel’. Solicitors undertake legal business for
lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems submitted through
solicitors and present cases in the higher courts; certain functions are common
to both. Although people are free to conduct their own cases, most people prefer
to be legally represented in the more serious cases.
The professional organisations for barristers are: the Senate of the Inns of
Court and the Bar (in England and Wales),1 the Faculty of Advocates (in
Scotland) and the General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. For solicitors
they are: the Law Society, the Law Society of Scotland and the Law Society of
Northern Ireland.
A person in need may be entitled to help from public funds to meet the costs of
legal advice and legal representation in court. The State is entitled to be
reimbursed from contributions which assisted people may have to pay according
to their means, and from costs and money or property recovered or preserved in
the legal proceedings.
People with moderate means may obtain help from a solicitor on any legal matter
concerning British law, either free or subject to a contribution. The solicitor’s
help includes giving advice, writing letters, drafting wills, obtaining opinions
from a barrister or advocate and, where specifically authorised by the legal aid
authorities, representing the client in certain civil proceedings in magistrates’
courts, mental health appeal tribunals and certain disciplinary hearings before
prison boards of visitors. A solicitor may act for a client until costs and expenses
reach a total of £40 (£75 for divorce or judicial separation cases in England and
Wales) after which the agreement of the legal aid authorities must be obtained. A
person seeking help must give details about income and savings, which must be
below a certain calculated figure.
In a number of urban areas law centres provide free advice to people of limited
means. Most law centres (voluntary organisations financed from various
sources, including government grants) have at least two full-time salaried
lawyers and many employ community workers. Much of their time is devoted to
tenant-landlord disputes and other housing problems. Free legal advice is also
available in Citizens Advice Bureaux, consumer and housing advice centres and
in specialist advice centres run by various voluntary organisations.
Legal aid for civil proceedings is available to people whose disposable incomes
and capital fall below certain prescribed amounts, but a contribution may be
payable according to the level of the applicant’s income and capital; if they are
below prescribed amounts, legal aid is given free.
An applicant for legal aid must also show reasonable grounds for taking or
defending the proceedings. If the application is successful the case is conducted
in the ordinary way, except that no money passes between the assisted person
and the solicitor—payments being made in and out of the legal aid fund. The
costs of an action which an assisted litigant loses against an unassisted
opponent may also, subject to certain conditions and if the court so orders, be
met out of the fund. Solicitors and counsel must review the case at each stage to
see that it is not being pursued unreasonably at public expense. Legal aid is not
generally available in cases where redress is sought for alleged defamation or for
representation in proceedings in most administrative tribunals.
1 In England and Wales every barrister and every student wishing to become a barrister must be a
member of one of the four Inns of Court in London (Lincoln's Inn, Inner Temple, Middle Temple
and Gray's Inn).
120
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aid in Criminal
Proceedings
LAW REFORM
The civil legal aid schemes are run by the Law Society, the Law Society of
Scotland and the Law Society of Northern Ireland, under the general guidance of
the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary of State for Scotland.
In criminal proceedings in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made by
the court concerned if it appears to be in the interests of justice and if a
defendant qualifies for financial help. An order must be made when a person is
committed for trial on a murder charge or where the prosecutor appeals or
applies for leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) to the
House of Lords. No person who is unrepresented can be given a custodial
sentence for the first time unless given the opportunity to apply for legal aid.
Voluntary duty solicitor schemes at many magistrates’ courts provide
‘standby’ help for unrepresented defendants.
The criminal legal aid scheme in England and Wales is administered by the
courts, under the overall responsibility of the Lord Chancellor.
The arrangements for aid in criminal proceedings in Scotland and Northern
Ireland are broadly similar, but in Scotland there is a statutory duty solicitor
scheme for accused people in custody in sheriff, and district, court cases and the
‘interests of justice' test applies only in summary cases. In Northern Ireland a
duty solicitor scheme has been introduced at the principal magistrates’ court in
Belfast. Legal aid for criminal cases in Northern Ireland is free; the assisted
person is not required to make any contributions towards the cost of his or her
legal representation.
While changes in the law are matters for Parliament, the duty of keeping the law
under review lies with the Law Reform Committee, the Criminal Law Revision
Committee and the Law Commission in England and Wales, and with the
Scottish Law Commission in Scotland. The Law Reform Committee and the
Criminal Law Revision Committee comprise judges and practising and
academic lawyers, appointed respectively by the Lord Chancellor and the Home
Secretary, to examine aspects of the civil and criminal law in England and Wales.
The Law Commission, a permanent body of five lawyers of high standing
reporting to the Lord Chancellor, scrutinises the law with a view to its
systematic development and reform, and its simplification and modernisation.
The Scottish Law Commission is similar, and reports to the Lord Advocate. Law
reform in Northern Ireland is a matter for the Law Commission and the Office of
Law Reform.
B Social Welfare
The British social welfare system comprises the National Health Service, the
personal social services and social security. The National Health Service provides
a comprehensive range of medical services which are available to all residents,
irrespective of means. Local authority personal social services and voluntary
organisations provide advice and help to elderly people, disabled people and
children in need of care. The social security system is designed to secure a basic
standard of living for people in financial need by providing income during
periods of inability to earn, help for families and compensation for disablement.
Central government is responsible directly for the National Health Service,
administered by health authorities and boards acting as its agents, and for the
social security system. It has an indirect responsibility for the personal social
services administered by local government authorities. Joint finance and
planning between health and local authorities aims to prevent overlapping of
services and to encourage the development of community services.
Spending on social welfare in 1983 was: health £16,000 million (11-6 per cent
of general government expenditure): personal social services £3,000 million (2-2
per cent); and social security £33,700 million (24-4 per cent).
Expenditure on the health service increased in real terms by some 8-5 per cent
between 1979 and 1984 and current spending is planned to grow by a further 3
per cent over the next three years. Spending on social security is rising because
of increased numbers of beneficiaries, especially retirement pensioners and the
unemployed. Spending on the personal social services is determined by local
authorities within the reduced levels that they have been asked to achieve.
National Health Service
The National Health Service (NHS) is based upon the principle that there should
be a comprehensive range of publicly provided services designed to promote
improvement in the health of the people and in the prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of illness. All taxpayers, employers and employees contribute to its
cost so that those members of the community who do not require health care
help to pay for those who do. Some forms of treatment, such as hospital care, are
provided free of charge; others (see p 122) may be charged for. Growth in real
spending on the health service is being used to meet the needs of increased
numbers of elderly people (over 40 per cent of health authority expenditure on
hospital and community services is spent on care of the elderly); to provide for
advances in medical treatment, including new surgical techniques: to improve
standards of long-term care, particularly for mentally ill and mentally handicap¬
ped people; and to remedy imbalances in provision between health regions.
In considering the future use of resources, the Government has emphasised
the importance of preventive services, the responsibility of individuals for their
own health, the role of the family in providing care and support, and the whole
network of support available within the community and through the voluntary
services. It stresses the need for a partnership between the public and private
health sectors and for improving efficiency in order to secure the best value for
money and the maximum patient care. (In many areas, for example, private
contractors are being used for ancillary services such as cleaning, catering and
122
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ADMINIS¬
TRATION
Health Service
Commissioners
Finance
laundry where it is more effective to do so.) Following an inquiry in 1983 which
made recommendations for improving the management of the National Health
Service in England, general managers drawn from inside and outside the
Service are being appointed.
The health ministers (the Secretary of State for Social Services in England and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are responsi¬
ble for all aspects of the health services in their respective areas. The health
departments (the Department of Health and Social Security in England, the
Scottish Home and Health Department, the Welsh Office and the Department of
Health and Social Services in Northern Ireland) are responsible for national
strategic planning. District health authorities in England and Wales and health
boards in Scotland are responsible for planning and operational control of all
health services in their areas. In England, because of its greater size and
population, a tier of regional authorities is responsible for regional planning,
resource allocation, major capital building work and certain specialised hospital
services best administered on a regional basis. The authorities and boards
co-operate closely with local authorities responsible for social work, environmen¬
tal health, education and other services. Family practitioner committees (health
boards in Scotland), accountable to the Secretary of State, arrange for the
provision of services by doctors, dentists, pharmacists and opticians. Commun¬
ity health councils in each district health authority area represent public
opinion on the health services provided. (In Scotland this function is exercised
by local health councils.)
In Northern Ireland health and social services boards are responsible for
health and personal social services in their areas. The representation of public
opinion on these services is provided for by district committees.
There are three Health Service Commissioner posts (for England, Scotland and
Wales) for dealing with complaints from members of the public about the health
service. All three posts are held by the Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration. The jurisdiction of the Health Service Commissioner covers the
failure of a health authority to carry out its statutory duties, a failure in a service
provided, or maladministration causing injustice or hardship, but not actions
taken solely in the exercise of clinical judgment or the actions of family
practitioners, for which separate complaints procedures exist. The Commis¬
sioner reports annually to ministers who lay the reports before Parliament, and
may make other reports when necessary. In Northern Ireland the Commissioner
for Complaints has a similar role.
About 85 per cent of the cost of the health services is paid for through general
taxation; the rest is met from the National Health Service contribution paid with
the National Insurance contribution and from the charges towards the cost of
certain items such as drugs prescribed by a family doctor, and dental treatment.
Health authorities may raise funds from voluntary sources.
The charges for medical prescriptions do not apply to children under 16 years,
expectant mothers and mothers with a child under the age of one, women aged
60 and over and men aged 65 and over, patients suffering from certain medical
conditions, war and armed forces disablement pensioners (for treatment of their
disability), and families with very low incomes. Some 70 per cent of prescription
items are supplied free of charge. Exemptions from charges for dented treatment
are made for examinations and denture repairs. Some groups of patients receive
free dental treatment, for example, women who are pregnant or who have had a
baby in the last year, anyone under the age of 18, or 19 if in full-time education,
and people receiving supplementary benefit (see p 137) or family income
SOCIAL WELFARE
123
PRIMARY
HEALTH
CARE
Family
Practitioner
Services
Health Visitors,
District
Nurses and
Midwives
Group Practices
and Health
Centres
HOSPITALS
AND
SPECIALIST
SERVICES
supplement (see p 138). Patients with low incomes may have their charges
remitted. Some groups also receive free spectacles.
Provision is made at certain hospitals for private patients who pay the whole
cost of their accommodation and treatment.
Hospital medical staffs are salaried and can be employed full-time or part-time.
Hospital doctors can accept private patients. General medical practitioners are
self-employed, paid by a system of fees and allowances designed to reflect
responsibilities, work load and practice expenses.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed
scale of fees. Pharmacists dispensing on their own premises are reimbursed for
the cost of the items supplied together with professional fees. Ophthalmic
medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the general
ophthalmic service receive approved fees for each sight test made; opticians who
dispense spectacles are paid according to the number and type of pairs supplied.
Primary health care is in the hands of doctors, dentists, opticians and
pharmacists working within the Service as independent practitioners, and
health visitors, district nurses and midwives employed by the health author¬
ities; a wide range of other services is also available, including the school health
service and the chiropody service.
The family practitioner services are those given to patients by doctors, dentists,
opticians and pharmacists of their own choice. Family doctors who are under
contract to the National Health Service have on average about 2,155 patients.
They provide the first diagnosis in the case of illness and either prescribe a
suitable course of treatment or refer a patient to the more specialised services
and hospital consultants. Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic
and dispensing opticians test the sight and supply spectacles; patients
requiring treatment are dealt with through the Hospital Eye Service. (Non¬
opticians may sell glasses to adults under carefully prescribed conditions.)
Health visitors are responsible for the preventive care and health education of all
families, particularly those with young children. They work closely with general
practitioners, district nurses and other professions. District nurses give skilled
nursing care to people at home or elsewhere outside hospital; they also play an
important role in preventive care and health education. Although almost all
babies are born in hospital, there is a domiciliary service for mothers having
their babies at home, with midwives and general practitioners giving both
antenatal and postnatal care. Midwives also assist births in hospital.
About four-fifths of family doctors in Britain work in partnerships or group
practices, often as members of health-care teams which also include health
visitors and district nurses and sometimes midwives, social workers and other
professional staff. About a quarter in Great Britain and over a half in Northern
Ireland work in modern and well-equipped health centres, where medical and
nursing services are provided. Health centres may also have facilities for health
education, family planning, speech therapy, chiropody, assessment of hearing,
physiotherapy and remedial exercises. Dental, pharmaceutical and ophthalmic
services, hospital out-patient and supporting social work services may also be
provided.
A full range of hospital services is provided by district general hospitals,
including treatment and diagnostic facilities for in-patients, day-patients and
out-patients, maternity departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and
geriatric facilities, rehabilitation facilities, convalescent homes and all forms of
specialised treatment. There are also specialist hospitals for children, the
124
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Private
Medical
Treatment
Organ
Transplants
mentally ill, mentally handicapped and elderly people, and for treatment of
specific diseases; examples include the world-famous Hospital for Sick Children,
Great Ormond Street, and the Brompton Heart and Chest Hospital in London.
Hospitals designated as teaching hospitals combine treatment facilities with
training medical and other students and research work.
Many of the hospitals in the National Health Service were built in the
nineteenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier charitable
foundations, such as the famous St Bartholomew’s and St Thomas’ hospitals in
London. Much has been done to improve and extend existing buildings and
many new hospitals have been or are being opened; by June 1984, 39 major
hospital schemes had been started in England since 1979 and some 140
developments, costing over £1,000 million, were being planned, designed or
constructed.
Recent policy in England has been to provide smaller hospitals for local areas
in preference to large district hospitals which may be remote from local
communities. The latest development in hospital design is the ‘nucleus’ hospital
of some 300 beds which makes more intensive use of space and facilities; it can
be used either as the first stage of a new hospital or as an extension of an
existing hospital. The world’s first low-energy nucleus hospital, which is
expected to use less than half the energy of an ordinary nucleus hospital, is to be
built on the Isle of Wight.
National Health Service hospitals provide nearly half a million beds and have
over 480,000 medical, nursing and midwifery staff. The hospital service is
catering for steadily increasing numbers of in-patients, day-cases and out¬
patient attendances, and is making newer forms of treatment and diagnosis
(such as kidney dialysis, hip replacement and body scanning) more widely
available. Community services such as the psychiatric nursing service, day
hospitals, and local authority day centres have expanded so that more patients
remain in the community and others are discharged sooner from hospital.
It is the Government's policy to encourage the private sector to meet a larger
share of the nation’s health needs in the belief that this will benefit the National
Health Service by relieving pressure on it. Some health authorities have plans to
share facilities and equipment with private hospitals. The scale of private
practice in relation to the Service is, however, small. Some 6 per cent of acute
hospital beds are in private hospitals and nursing homes and about 1,300 beds
in health service hospitals in England are occupied by private patients. It is
estimated that about half of those receiving acute treatment in health service
pay beds or private hospitals are covered by provident schemes which make
provision for private health care in return for annual subscriptions. In 1983
there were some 1 -97 million subscribers to such schemes of whom the majority
were involved in group schemes, some arranged by firms on behalf of employees.
Subscriptions often cover more than one person (for example, members of a
family) and a total of 4-2 million were covered. Private practice is also
undertaken by family doctors and dentists. Many overseas patients come to
Britain for treatment in private hospitals and clinics, and Harley Street in
London is an internationally recognised centre for medical consultancy.
There is growing interest in alternative therapies such as homeopathy,
osteopathy and acupuncture, which are mainly practised outside the National
Health Service.
Over the past 20 years there have been significant developments in transplant
surgery in Britain. Since 1972 the United Kingdom Transplant Service has pro¬
vided a centralised kidney matching and distribution service. At the end of 1982
about 4,000 people were living with functioning kidney transplants and during
SOCIAL WELFARE
125
Blood
Transfusion
Ambulance
Services
Rehabilitation
1983 some 1,160 more kidney transplants were performed. (It is planned to
double this number by 1990.) In 1983 a similar service was initiated for
corneas, about 2,000 being transplanted each year. Heart transplant operations
have been conducted since early 1979, mainly at Papworth Hospital in
Cambridgeshire and Harefield Hospital, West London. By August 1984 over 200
transplants had been performed and 128 patients were still alive. Several
combined heart and lung transplant operations have been carried out since the
first was performed at Harefield in December 1983. Other organs and tissues
which are now successfully being transplanted include the pancreas, the liver
and bone marrow. A voluntary organ donor card system enables people to
indicate their willingness to become organ donors in the event of their death.
Several million people now participate in the scheme.
The blood transfusion service receives over 2 million donations of blood each
year from voluntary unpaid donors. Regional transfusion centres recruit donors
and organise donor sessions in towns and villages, factories and offices, and
within the armed forces. Donors must be between the ages of 18 and 65. The
centres are also responsible for blood grouping and testing, maintaining blood
banks, providing a consultancy service to hospitals, teaching in medical
schools, and instructing doctors, nurses and technicians. Four laboratories
prepare blood products and undertake research.
Where necessary on medical grounds free transport by ambulance is provided by
the health authorities. The ambulance service performs emergency work,
dealing with sudden illness, urgent maternity cases, and accidents of all kinds;
and non-urgent work, providing transport for people needing out-patient
treatment at hospitals, clinics and day hospitals. In some areas the service for
non-urgent cases is augmented by voluntary organisations using their own
vehicles or by volunteers using their own cars. In Scotland an air ambulance
service is available in the islands and in the remoter parts of the mainland.
Treatment and rehabilitation, beginning at the onset of illness or injury and
aimed at helping people to live as normally as possible, are important for people
of all ages who have physical disability or mental illness or who are mentally
handicapped. The work is carried out by teams of doctors, nurses, physiotherap¬
ists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, social workers and volunteers.
Facilities are provided in most hospitals and at some special centres but
rehabilitation takes place wherever it is relevant for an individual person,
including his or her own home. The rehabilitation teams co-operate closely with
the disablement resettlement services of the Manpower Services Commission
(the Department of Economic Development in Northern Ireland) and with local
authorities.
Medical services may include the provision, free of charge, of artificial limbs
and eyes, hearing aids, surgical supports, wheelchairs, and other appliances.
Very severely physically handicapped patients may be provided with electrical
control equipment which enables them to operate devices such as alarm bells,
radio and television, a telephone, and heating. Nursing aids can be borrowed for
use in the home.
Social workers, home helps and occupational therapists employed by local
authorities help patients and their families who, owing to illness or disability,
have difficulties in coping at home. Occupational therapists increase the safety
and personal independence of disabled people by assessing the need for and
organising the provision of aids and adaptations to their homes. Many voluntary
organisations such as the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation
(RADAR) and the Spinal Injuries Association also provide valuable help.
126
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hospices
Parents and
Children
Family
Planning
Abortion
Drug
Dependence
A number of hospices provide care for the dying either directly in residential
homes or through the provision of nursing and other assistance in the patient’s
own home. Control of symptoms and psychological support for patients and
their families form the central features of the modern hospice movement, which
originated in Britain and is now world-wide. Some hospices are administered
entirely by the National Health Service; the remainder, some of which receive
support from public funds, are run by independent charities.
Special preventive services are provided under the health service to safeguard
the health of expectant mothers and mothers with young children. Services
include free dental treatment, dried milk and vitamins; vaccination against
certain diseases (see p 130); and health education, which is available to parents
before and after childbirth through talks, discussion groups and demonstra¬
tions. Pregnant women may also visit antenatal clinics or their family doctor for
medical check-ups, and working women have the right to visit the clinics during
working hours. The majority of women, some 98 per cent, have their babies in
hospital, returning home shortly afterwards to be attended by the family doctor,
a midwife and a health visitor. The Government attaches great importance to
improving the quality of maternity services, and to making them more sensitive
and sympathetic to mothers and their families. A Maternity Services Advisory
Committee set up in 1981 has reported on antenatal care and care during
childbirth. The perinatal mortality rate (the number of stillbirths and deaths in
the first week of life) has been dropping in recent years and in 1983 stood at 11 -2
per thousand births in England and Wales, compared with 21 per thousand in
1973.
A network of child health centres provides facilities for surveillance by doctors,
dentists and health visitors of the physical and mental health and development
of pre-school-age children. Information about the preventive services is given
and welfare foods are distributed. About 95 per cent of babies under one year are
taken to the centres. The school health service organises health care for
schoolchildren, including medical surveillance and dental inspection and
treatment where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services provide help and advice for
children who have psychological or emotional problems.
Free family planning facilities are available to everyone through family planning
clinics, hospitals and a domiciliary service. Most family doctors provide a similar
service for women only.
The Abortion Act 1967 allows the termination of pregnancy by a registered
doctor if two registered doctors consider that its continuance would involve a
greater risk to the life of the pregnant woman (or injury to her physical or mental
health or that of any existing children in the family) than if the pregnancy were
ended. Termination may also be allowed if two doctors consider that there is a
substantial risk that if the child were born it would suffer from such physical or
mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. Abortions are carried out
in National Health Service hospitals or in private premises approved for the
purpose by the Secretary of State. About half of the legal abortions to women
resident in Great Britain in 1983 were performed in private hospitals and
clinics. The Act does not apply in Northern Ireland.
Treatment for narcotic drug dependence is provided mostly on an out-patient
basis in the National Health Service, although some addicts have a period of
in-patient treatment when necessary. Some hospitals have special drug
treatment units. An increasing number of general practitioners also treat
SOCIAL WELFARE
127
Solvent Abuse
Alcoholism
HEALTH
EDUCATION
Smoking and
Health
addicts, but only specially licensed doctors are allowed to prescribe heroin,
cocaine and certain other drugs for the treatment of drug addiction. All doctors
must notify the authorities of any patient they consider to be addicted to certain
controlled drugs. A number of unofficial agencies work with and complement
the health service provision. Rehabilitation facilities and advice services, for
example, are mainly provided by voluntary organisations, some of which receive
financial help from local authorities. Social work help is given by the probation
service and local social services departments.
The Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs advises ministers on a wide
range of matters associated with the prevention and treatment of drug mis¬
use and connected social problems. In 1982 it made recommendations for
strengthening and developing treatment and rehabilitation services, and in
response the Government is making additional funds available to encourage
new initiatives at local level.
Following a further report by the Council in 1984 on prevention policy, the
Government set up an interdepartmental group to develop its general strategy in
the fight against drug misuse. This is based on measures to stem the flow of
illicit drugs into Britain in co-operation with producer and transit countries; to
provide for effective enforcement of and adequate deterrents in the law; and to
make available help and guidance to those who are misusing or are tempted to
misuse drugs.
Measures were announced by the Government in 1983 to tackle the growing
problem of solvent abuse (the sniffing of glue, lighter fuel and other solvents) by
young people. In co-operation with retailers it drew up voluntary guidelines to
curb the sale of solvents, and is giving more information and guidance to
parents and professional staff involved with young people.
Treatment and rehabilitation for problem drinkers include in-patient and
out-patient services in general hospitals, hospital psychiatric units and
specialised alcoholism treatment units. Primary care teams (general practition¬
ers, nurses and social workers), and voluntary organisations providing hostels,
day centres and counselling services, also play an important role. Preventive
measures including publicity campaigns designed to change attitudes and
behaviour, run mainly by the Health Education Council, are central to the
Government's policy for tackling the problem. There is close co-operation
between statutory and voluntary organisations and in 1983 a new national
voluntary body. Alcohol Concern (the National Agency on Alcohol Misuse), was
established to replace and develop the work of three existing voluntary agencies.
The Government is giving greater emphasis to health education as part of its
policy of preventive medicine. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland health
education is promoted by the government-financed Health Education Council,
which works on the development of programmes with the health authorities,
professional organisations, voluntary bodies and industry. Health education in
Scotland is promoted by the Scottish Health Education Group. Major themes of
publicity campaigns are family planning, dental health, the importance of
vaccination for children, correct diet and exercise, and the dangers of cigarette
smoking and excessive consumption of alcohol.
Action to discourage cigarette smoking has been taken by the Government on
the grounds that the habit presents serious risks to health. Apart from the
publicity campaigns conducted by the Health Education Council and the
Scottish Health Education Group it seeks the co-operation of a wide range of
organisations in banning or restricting smoking in trains, buses, airports,
128
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SAFETY OF
MEDICINES
RESEARCH
THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
theatres and other public places. Cigarette advertising is banned on television
and radio. The tobacco industry has signed a series of voluntary agreements
which place controls on the advertising and promotion of cigarettes. The
agreements cover restrictions on the extent of advertising and expenditure on it;
the wording and presentation of government health warnings on packets and
advertisements; and the reduction of tar yields of cigarettes. A separate
agreement controls the sponsorship by tobacco firms of sporting events. Since
1964 the cigarette manufacturers have applied a voluntary code of practice
designed to prevent excessive glamorisation of cigarette advertisements.
The number of people who smoke has declined steadily in recent years; in
1972, 52 per cent of men and 41 per cent of women were regular smokers; by
1982 this had fallen to 38 and 33 per cent respectively. Sales of cigarettes in
Britain fell by some 20 per cent over the four years to 1982.
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are
responsible for licensing the manufacture, marketing and importation of
medicines for human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission advises
the ministers on policy regarding medicinal products. The Committees on
Safety of Medicines, on Dental and Surgical Materials and on the Review of
Medicines advise on the safety, quality and efficacy of medicinal products. The
Committee on Safety of Medicines also monitors adverse drug reactions. The Act
also controls the advertising, labelling, packaging, distribution, sale and supply
of medicinal products.
In 1983—84 the health departments spent about £23 million on research and
development, in addition to expenditure by the Medical Research Council (the
main government agency for the support of biomedical research). Priority areas
include primary care, mental health and handicap, physical handicap and
rehabilitation, services for the elderly and children, and dental and nursing
research. The programme is administered in England and Wales by the Chief
Scientist of the Department of Health and Social Security (in Scotland by the
Chief Scientist of the Scottish Home and Health Department) who is supported
by independent advisers covering a wide range of scientific disciplines. The
Department is involved in international research and development, and all the
health departments participate in the European Community’s medical and
public health research programme.
Only people whose names are on the medical or dentists’ registers may practise
as doctors or dentists in the National Health Service. University medical and
dental schools are responsible for teaching; the National Health Service provides
hospital clinical facilities for training. Full registration as a doctor requires five
or six years’ training in medical school and hospital, with an additional year’s
experience in a hospital; for a dentist, four or more years’ training at a dental
school is required. The regulating body for the medical profession is the General
Medical Council and for dentists, the General Dental Council. The main
professional associations are the British Medical Association and the British
Dental Association.
The minimum period of training required to qualify for registration as a first
level nurse in general, mental or mental handicapped nursing (and sick
children’s nursing in Scotland) is normally three years. Registration as a second
level nurse (enrolled nurse) takes two years (in Scotland 18 months). Midwifery
training for registered general nurses takes 18 months, and for all other student
midwives three years. Health visitors are registered general nurses with
midwifery or approved obstetric experience who have successfully completed a
one-year course in health visiting. District nurses are registered general nurses
SOCIAL WELFARE
129
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
ENVIRON¬
MENTAL
HEALTH
Safety of Food
who have successfully completed a six-month course followed by a period of
supervised practice in district nursing. The examining bodies for all nurses,
midwives and health visitors are the National Boards for Nursing, Midwifery and
Health Visiting established in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The regulation and registration of these professions is the responsibility of the
United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting.
Pharmacists in general practice and in hospital must be registered with the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain or the Pharmaceutical Society of
Northern Ireland. A three-year degree course approved by the Pharmaceutical
Society followed by a year’s approved training is necessary before registration.
The majority of medicines can be sold or dispensed only by, or under the
supervision of, a registered pharmacist.
The General Optical Council regulates the professions of ophthalmic optician
and dispensing optician; only registered ophthalmic opticians (or registered
medical practitioners) may test sight. Training of ophthalmic opticians takes
four years including a year of practical experience under supervision. Dispens¬
ing opticians take a two-year full-time course with a year's practical experience
or a part-time day-release course while employed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physiother¬
apists, radiographers and remedial gymnasts. The governing bodies are eight
boards, corresponding to the professions, under the general supervision of the
Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine. Training lasts two or four
years and only those who are state registered may be employed in the National
Health Service and some other public services.
Dental therapists (who have undergone a two-year training course) and dental
hygienists (who have undergone a training course of about a year) may carry out
some simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist.
The member states of the European Community have special health arrange¬
ments under which Community nationals resident in a member state are
entitled to receive any immediately necessary treatment either free or at a
reduced cost, during visits to other Community countries. There are also
arrangements to cover people who go to work or live in other Community
countries. In addition there are reciprocal arrangements with some other
countries under which emergency medical treatment is available. Otherwise,
with some exceptions, visitors are expected to pay if the purpose of their visit is
to seek treatment, and also if they should fall ill while in the United Kingdom.
Environmental health officers employed by local authorities are responsible for
the control of air pollution, noise, food hygiene and quality, the inspection of
offices and shops, the investigation of unfit housing, and in some instances for
refuse collection. Doctors who specialise in community medicine and are
employed by the health authorities advise local authorities on the medical
aspects of environmental health, infectious diseases and food poisoning. They
may also co-operate with the authorities responsible for water supply and
sewerage. Environmental health officers at ports and airports carry out duties
concerned with shipping, inspection of imported foods and disease control. In
Northern Ireland district councils are responsible for noise control, collection
and disposal of refuse, clean air, and food composition, labelling and hygiene.
It is illegal to sell food unfit for human consumption or to apply any treatment,
process or additive to food which makes it injurious to health. Premises where
food or drink is prepared, handled, stored or sold must conform to certain
hygiene standards. Environmental health officers may take for analysis or for
130
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Control of
Infectious
Diseases
The Elderly
bacteriological or other examination samples of any food on sale or in the
distribution chain. Special regulations control the safety of particular foods
such as milk, meat and ice-cream. The Department of Health and Social
Security, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Office,
the Welsh Office and the Department of Health and Social Services in Northern
Ireland are the central departments responsible for giving advice and making
regulations.
District health authorities (health boards in Scotland) carry out programmes of
vaccination and immunisation against diphtheria, measles, rubella (women and
girls only), poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough. Vaccina¬
tion is voluntary, but parents are encouraged to protect their children by
immunisation against infectious diseases. The proportion of children being
vaccinated has been increasing since the end of 1978 following an earlier
decline.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological and
virological laboratories throughout England and Wales conducting research and
assisting in the diagnosis, prevention and control of communicable diseases. Its
largest establishment is the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale, in
north-west London, which includes the National Collection of Type Cultures, the
Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories specialising in the identi¬
fication of infective micro-organisms. Two surveillance centres, one in England
and one in Scotland, investigate and monitor human communicable diseases.
Microbiological work in Scotland and Northern Ireland is conducted mainly in
hospital laboratories.
Personal Social Services
Responsibility for personal social services rests with the social services
authorities (local authority social services departments in England and Wales,
social work departments in Scotland and health and social services boards in
Northern Ireland). Many of their services are directed towards the same groups
of people as those needing health services, for example, elderly or disabled
people. Other groups helped include young families with social problems,
children deprived of a normal home life, the mentally ill or handicapped and
young offenders. Close co-operation is maintained between local authority social
services departments and health authorities. In Scotland local authorities also
undertake duties similar to those of the separate probation and prison after-care
service in England and Wales.
Much of the care given to the elderly and disabled is provided in the
community itself, by their families, self-help groups and through voluntary
agencies. The statutory sector offers the special skilled care needed in particular
services. The importance of the contribution made by the voluntary organisa¬
tions is recognised especially when economies are being made in public
expenditure and the demand on the statutory services is heavy.
The demand for personal social services is expected to rise over the next few
years, owing to the number of elderly people and the changing pattern of care for
the mentally ill, the mentally handicapped and the chronically sick. The
Government’s policy is to speed up the transfer from hospital to care in the
community of patients who do not specifically need hospital care. It believes that
groups such as the elderly, the disabled, and the mentally ill or handicapped can
lead more normal lives in the community, given appropriate support and
facilities.
Services for elderly people are provided by statutory and voluntary bodies to help
them to live at home whenever possible. These may include the advice and help
SOCIAL WELFARE
131
Disabled
People
The Mentally
111 and the
Mentally
Handicapped
Help to
Families
of social workers, domestic help, delivery of cooked meals, sitters-in, night
attendants and laundry services as well as day centres, clubs and recreational
workshops. (Such services are also available to the disabled and the mentally
and physically handicapped—see below.) In many areas ‘good neighbour’ and
friendly visiting services are arranged by the local authority or a voluntary
organisation. Social services authorities also provide residential accommoda¬
tion for the elderly and infirm and have powers to register homes run by
voluntary organisations or privately.
Local authorities, as part of their responsibility for public housing, build flats
specially designed for elderly people; some of these blocks have resident
wardens. Housing associations also build this type of accommodation.
Social services authorities provide a range of personal social services for disabled
people, including residential homes. They are also required to establish the
number of disabled people in their area and to publicise services. A wide range of
services may be available including advice on personal and social problems
arising from disability, assistance in overcoming the effects of disability,
adaptations to people s homes (such as ramps for wheelchairs, and ground-floor
toilets) and various aids to daily living. In certain circumstances assistance may
be given with the installation of a telephone or a television set, and with travel,
educational, leisure and other activities. Some authorities make arrangements
for the teaching of handicrafts and other occupations. Voluntary organisations
also provide many of these services to complement and support those provided
by the statutory bodies.
Help available from other sources includes social security benefits, medical
treatment, special education, employment and training services, and specially
designed housing. Adequate provision of means of access for disabled people is
encouraged at an early stage in the design, development, or construction of
public buildings.
Social services authorities must arrange for the provision of services for both
mentally ill and mentally handicapped people in the community. These include
training centres for the mentally handicapped and day centres for the mentally
ill, as well as social centres and a variety of residential care for mentally ill and
mentally handicapped people of all ages. Social workers help patients and their
families to deal with social problems arising from mental illness or handicaps
and in certain circumstances can make an application for a mentally disordered
person’s compulsory admission to and detention in hospital.
Two recent priorities have been to transfer mentally handicapped children
from long-stay hospitals to community care, and, through a number of special
projects, to improve care for elderly mentally ill people.
An important role in provision of services is played by the many voluntary
organisations concerned with mental health and handicap (see Voluntary
Organisations, p 141).
Social services authorities, through their own social workers, give practical help
and advice to families facing special problems. They also help lone parents,
including unmarried mothers, divorced or separated women and others with
dependent children. Many authorities also contribute to the cost of social work
with families carried out by voluntary organisations.
An initiative was launched by the Government in 1983 to increase voluntary
sector provision in England for disadvantaged families with children under five.
In the same year the Family Policy Studies Centre was established with official
funding to review the impact of public policies on the family and to bring
together research findings.
132
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Child Care
Day care facilities for children under five are provided by local authorities and
voluntary agencies and privately. In allocating places in day nurseries and other
facilities they themselves provide, local authorities give priority to children with
special social or health needs for day care. They also register, and provide
support and advice services for, childminders, private day nurseries and
playgroups operating in their areas.
The authorities must offer advice, guidance and assistance to families in
difficulties to promote the welfare of children. The aim is to intervene early to
reduce the need to receive children into care or bring the case before a court.
The recognition, prevention and management of cases of child abuse are the
concern of many authorities, agencies and professions, and area review
committees provide a forum for discussion and co-ordination and draw up
policies and procedures for handling these cases.
Authorities must receive into their care any child under the age of 17 who has
no parent or guardian, who has been abandoned, or whose parents are unable to
provide for him or her, if they are satisfied that such intervention is in the
interests of the child. The child remains in care until the age of 18 unless
discharged to the care of parents, other relatives or friends. The local authority
may find it necessary to assume the rights and duties of one or both parents.
The parents must be notified and if they object the matter must be decided in a
court of law. When taking a decision on a child in care, the authorities have to
give first consideration to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the
child. Where children are in care, efforts are made to work with their families in
order, where appropriate, to enable the children to return home.
Children in England and Wales may be brought before a juvenile court if they
are neglected or ill-treated, exposed to moral danger, are beyond the control of
parents, not attending school or (if ten years or over) have committed an offence
other than homicide. At the same time it must be shown that the children need
care or control which they are unlikely to receive unless a care or other relevant
order is made by the court. Local authorities are responsible for undertaking
inquiries through social workers and consultation with parents, schools and the
police. Children may be committed to the care of a local authority under a care
order if the court considers this appropriate. As an alternative the court may
order supervision by a social worker or a probation officer for up to three years.
In Northern Ireland the court may send children to a training school, commit
them to the care of a fit person (which includes a health and social services
board), or make a supervision order. The law relating to children is being
reviewed and the intention in future is to make a distinction between young
offenders and children in need of care and protection. Strong emphasis is placed
on preventive work.
In Scotland children in trouble or in need may be brought before a children's
hearing which can impose a supervision requirement on a child if it thinks that
compulsory measures of care are appropriate. Under these requirements most
children are allowed to remain at home under the supervision of a social worker
but some may be sent to a residential establishment while under supervision.
Supervision requirements are reviewed at intervals of not more than one year
until terminated by a children's hearing or by the Secretary of State.
When appropriate, children in care are boarded out with foster parents, who
receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If foster homes are not
considered appropriate or cannot be found, the children may be placed in
children’s homes, voluntary homes or other suitable residential accommoda¬
tion. Community homes for children in care in England and Wales comprise
local authority and some voluntary children’s homes, and include community
homes with education on the premises which provide long-term care usually for
the more difficult children. In Scotland local authorities are responsible for
SOCIAL WELFARE
133
Adoption
Social Workers
placing children in their care in foster homes, in local authority or voluntary
homes, or in residential schools. In Northern Ireland there are residential homes
for children in the care of the health and social services boards; training schools
and remand homes are administered separately. Regulations concerning
community homes, registered voluntary homes and the boarding out of children
in care are made by central government.
Adoption of children is strictly regulated by legislation and some 10,000
adoption orders are made in Britain each year. The Registrars-General keep
confidential registers of adopted children. Local authorities can act as adoption
agencies and eventually will be obliged to offer such a service. Adoption societies
must be approved by the respective social services minister.
The effective operation of the social services largely depends on the availability of
professionally qualified social workers trained in the methods of social work.
Training courses in social work are provided by universities, polytechnics (in
Scotland, central institutions) and colleges of further education; their length
depends upon previous educational qualifications and can extend from one to
four years. The Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work
recognises social work courses and offers advice to people considering entry to
the profession.
Professional social workers (including those working in the National Health
Service) are employed by the social services departments of local authorities.
Others work in the probation service, the education welfare service, or in
voluntary organisations.
Social Security
National Insurance, industrial injuries benefits, child benefit, family income
supplement, supplementary benefit and war pensions constitute a comprehen¬
sive system of social security. The payment of many benefits depends on prior
payments to the National Insurance scheme, while others are available without
contribution conditions. The former are paid from the National Insurance Fund
which consists of contributions from employed people and their employers,
self-employed people and the Government. Non-contributory benefits are
financed from general taxation revenue. Appeals relating to claims for the
various benefits are decided by independent tribunals.
Expenditure on the social security programme has nearly doubled in real
terms since 1970 and now costs the equivalent of about £1,700 a year for every
household. Part of the increase has been due to the rising numbers of the
elderly, and part to the growth in unemployment; much, however, has been due
to real improvement in the level of benefits, new benefits and increased family
support.
The Department of Health and Social Security administers the services in
Great Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the Department of
Health and Social Services. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners
and their dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Health and
Social Security throughout the United Kingdom. Advice on social security is
given to the Government by the Social Security Advisory Committee.
The Government has changed a number of aspects of the social security
system both to make it more comprehensible and to reduce the rate of growth of
its cost to public funds. Major reviews were conducted during 1984 of four main
elements of the system: supplementary benefit; benefits for children; provision
for retirement; and housing benefits. A survey was also made of disabled people
and their needs.
134
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONTRI¬
BUTIONS
BENEFITS
Retirement
Pension
Mothers and
Children
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits such as retirement pension,
sickness and invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit, widow’s benefit,
maternity allowance, death grant and child's special allowance is dependent
upon the payment of contributions. Industrial injuries benefits are non-
contributory, but are also payable from the National Insurance Fund. There are
four classes of contributions. Class 1 contributions, which are related to
earnings, are paid by employees and employers. The contribution is lower if the
employer operates a ‘contracted-out’ occupational pension scheme (see below).
Self-employed people pay a flat rate Class 2 contribution and a Class 4
contribution which is assessed as a percentage of profits or gains within certain
limits; they are not eligible for unemployment and industrial injuries benefits.
Voluntary Class 3 contributions are made by people wanting to safeguard rights
to some benefits.
Employees who continue working after pensionable age (60 for women and 65
for men) do not pay contributions but the employer continues to be liable. People
earning less than the lower earnings limit are not liable for contributions;
neither are their employers. Self-employed people with earnings below a set
annual amount may apply for exemption and those over pensionable age are
excused payment of contributions.
For most benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before benefit
can be paid at all, a certain number of contributions has to be made; secondly,
the full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless contributions have been made or
credited up to a specific level over a specified period. Benefits are increased each
November, the uprating being linked to increases in retail prices. The main
benefits (payable weekly) are summarised below. The rates shown in Tables 5—9
are those effective from November 1984.
A state retirement pension is payable on retirement to women at the age of 60
and to men at the age of 65. People still at work five years after the minimum
pension age are eligible to receive the pension even if they continue working. In
1978 the new state pension scheme came into operation and will mature fully
after 20 years of contributions: the retirement pension will consist of the basic
pension plus an additional (earnings-related) pension.
Rights to basic pension are safeguarded for mothers who are away from work
looking after children or for people giving up work to care for severely disabled
relatives. Women contributors receive the same pension as men with the same
earnings.
Employers are free to ‘contract-out’ their employees from the state scheme for
additional pension and provide their own occupational pension in its place,
provided that the latter is at least as good as the state additional pension. The
State remains responsible for the basic pension. ]
A non-contributory retirement pension is payable to people over the age of 80
who have not qualified for a contributory pension or who qualified for one at a
lower rate than the non-contributory pension.
A non-contributory maternity grant of £25 is payable for each living child born
and for a stillborn child if the pregnancy lasts for at least 28 weeks. Maternity
allowance is a weekly benefit normally paid for 18 weeks, starting 11 weeks
before the baby is expected. A working mother is entitled to paid maternity leave
if she has been working for the same firm for at least two years (five years in the
case of part-time workers). The payment is calculated at 90 per cent of weekly
earnings, less the standard maternity allowance, and is paid for the first six
weeks of absence.
Non-contributory child benefit is the main social security benefit for children.
Tax free and normally paid to the mother, it is payable for children up to the age
SOCIAL WELFARE
135
Widows
Sick and
Disabled
People
Other Benefits
of 16 and for those up to the age of 19 if they continue in full-time non-advanced
education. A sum in addition to child benefit, called one-parent benefit, is
payable to certain people, whether parents or not, bringing up one or more
children on their own. A weekly contributory child’s special allowance is payable
to a mother on the death of a former husband if the marriage was dissolved or
annulled and he was contributing to the support of the children. A non¬
contributory guardian’s allowance for an orphaned child is payable to a person
who is entitled to child benefit for that child. In certain circumstances it can be
paid on the death of only one parent.
A widow’s allowance may be payable for the first 26 weeks of widowhood, and an
additional sum is often payable for each child. After this a widowed mother with
a young family receives a widowed mother’s allowance with an addition for each
child. Widow s pension is payable to a widow who is 40 years or over when her
husband dies or when her entitlement to widowed mother’s allowance ends.
Payment continues until the widow remarries or begins drawing retirement
pension. Widows also benefit under the industrial injuries scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her husband’s rights.
There is a large variety of benefits for people unable to work because of sickness
or disablement. Statutory sick pay is payable by an employer for the first eight
weeks of an employee’s illness in any tax year; contributory sickness benefit is
payable by the State for up to 28 weeks, with additions for a wife or other adult
dependants. Employees not covered for statutory sick pay can claim sickness
benefit instead, as can those people who do not work for an employer.
An invalidity pension with additions for a wife and children is payable when
sickness benefit ends if the beneficiary is still incapable of work. An invalidity
allowance is paid with the pension to those people who become sick more than
five years before minimum retirement age.
Various benefits are payable for disablement caused by an accident at work or
a prescribed disease. Disablement benefit is usually paid after a qualifying
period of 15 weeks if, as a result of an industrial accident or a prescribed
disease, there is a loss of physical or mental faculty. (During the qualifying
period sick pay or sickness benefit is payable.) The amount depends on the
extent of the disablement as assessed by a medical board but for disablement of
less than 20 per cent a gratuity is normally paid. In certain circumstances
disablement benefits may be supplemented by unemployability supplement;
constant attendance allowance; an additional allowance payable in certain cases
of exceptionally severe disablement; a special hardship allowance for a person
who is unfit to return to his or her regular job or to do work of an equivalent
standard; and hospital treatment allowance which raises the disablement
pension or gratuity to the 100 per cent assessment rate during hospital
treatment for the industrial injury. Increases of disablement benefit for
dependants may be payable with unemployability supplement.
A non-contributory, tax-free attendance allowance may be payable to severely
disabled people at either a higher or a lower rate depending upon the amount
of care and attention they require. A severe disablement allowance is pay¬
able to people of working age who are unable to work and do not qualify
for the National Insurance invalidity pension; it is also payable to disabled
housewives.
A weekly invalid care allowance may be payable to certain categories of people
(aged between 16 and pension age) who cannot go to work because they are
caring for a severely disabled person receiving an attendance allowance.
136
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
U nemployment
Benefit
Death Grant
Physically disabled people unable or virtually unable to walk may be entitled to
a tax-free mobility allowance to help to pay their transport costs. People aged
between 5 and 66 may claim and payment can continue up to the age of 75.
An independent organisation called Motability assists disabled drivers and
passengers wanting to use their mobility allowance to obtain a vehicle.
Unemployment benefit is payable for up to a year in any one spell of unem¬
ployment. Periods covered by unemployment or sickness benefit, maternity
allowance or some training allowances, which are eight weeks or less apart, are
linked to form one period of interruption of employment. Generally anyone
claiming unemployment benefit has to be available for employment, but
unemployed people wishing to do voluntary work in the community can do so in
certain circumstances without loss of entitlement to benefit.
A death grant is payable on the death of a contributor or a contributor’s near
relative. It is normally £30 for an adult and a smaller sum for a child.
Table 5: Benefit Rates
£
Category Weekly rate
Retirement and widow’s pensions and widowed mother’s allowance
Single person 35-80
Wife or other adult dependant 21 -50
Child 7-65
Non-contributory retirement pension for people over 80
Higher rate 21-50
Lower rate 12-85
Maternity allowance 27-25
Child benefit 6-85
One-parent benefit (for the first or only child) 4-25
Guardian’s allowance, child’s special allowance 7-65
Widow’s allowance (first 26 weeks of widowhood) 50-10
Unemployment benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person 28-45
Wife or other adult dependant 17-55
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person 35-80
Wife or other adult dependant 21-50
Child 7-65
Statutory sick pay (depending on level of earnings) 27-20 to 40-25
Sickness benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
For beneficiaiy over pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
27-25
16-80
34-25
20-55
7-65
COMPUTERS AT HOME AND SCHOOL
Above: A new
‘teleshopping’
service in
Gateshead,
Tyne and Wear,
enables
elderly and
disabled
people to order
goods from the
comfort of
their
armchairs.
Information
from certain
local shops can
be called up on
the screen; the
customer ‘keys
in’ details of
items required
and the goods
are delivered
to the home.
Left: Computer
studies occupy
a growing part
of the school
day. By 1984
all secondary
schools and
nearly all
primary
schools had
computers.
LIVERPOOL’S INTERNAll
The International Garden Festival held in Liverpool in 1984 was the most
important horticultural event of the year in the world. The festival incorporated
over 30 special theme gardens as well as pavilions and displays from some 20
The Jam Garden,
The Festival Hall, the centrepiece
of the exhibition.
Inside the Festival Hall.
■■
..
The International Pavilion for
temperate and tropical displays
Zhen
replica
of the
Luan
Park
Peking
Pavilion
Beihai
in
dnal garden festival
countries. The site, reclaimed from derelict and under used docklands on the
banks of the River Mersey (see background view below), will continue to provide
facilities and amenities for the people of Merseyside. provide
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
Above: The Thames Barrier, shown here at central London. Six of its ten movable gates
the inauguration ceremony in 1984, is a rise into the closed position (lower picture)
unique flood defence system which protects from concrete sills on the river bed.
Left: This crash,
staged in July 1984,
between a 140-tonne
locomotive travelling
at 160 km/h (100 mph)
and a 48-tonne
container used for
transporting spent
nuclear fuel from
power stations, was
televised live as part
of a four-year
programme to
demonstrate the
safety of the
containers. Irradiated
fuel has been safely
transported by road
and rail for more than
20 years in Britain.
SOCIAL WELFARE
137
SUPPLEMEN¬
TARY
BENEFIT
Table 5: Benefit Rates (continued) £
Category Weekly rate
Invalidity pension
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Invalidity allowance payable with retirement on invalidity
pension
Disablement benefit (100 per cent assessment)
Unemployability supplement
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
Special hardship allowance (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance (normal maximum)
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Industrial death benefit
Widow’s pension (first 26 weeks of widowhood)
Widow’s pension (higher rate)
Widow’s pension (lower rate)
Increase for each child
Attendance allowance
Higher rate
Lower rate
Severe disablement allowance, invalid care allowance
Wife or other adult dependant
Child
Mobility allowance
Supplementary benefit is payable to people of the age of 16 and over who are not
in full-time work or at school and whose financial resources fall below a certain
level. The amounts shown in the table are the weekly levels laid down for the
requirements of married couples, single householders and others. The benefit
payable amounts to the difference between a person’s existing resources and
these levels. The long-term rates apply to people aged 60 or over, most disabled
people, and to those people aged less than 60 who have received supplementary
benefit or long-term incapacity benefit continuously for one year, provided that
the award is not subject to the condition of being available for employment.
Families receiving supplementary benefit (as with family income supplement)
are automatically entitled to a number of other benefits including housing
benefit (see p 138), free spectacles, free school meals, milk and vitamins for
expectant mothers and for children under school age, and exemption from
National Health Service prescription charges and charges for dental treatment.
As part of its supplementary benefit responsibilities the Department of Health
and Social Security runs resettlement units in which people without a settled
way of living are provided with temporary board and lodging to help them to lead
a more settled life. The Department also makes grants to voluntary organis¬
ations providing similar services. In addition, the Department runs
re-establishment centres where men who have been unemployed for long periods
are given help to fit them again for work.
34-25
20-55
7-65
2-40 to 7-50
58-40
34-25
20- 55
23-36
23-40
23-40
50-10
36-35
10-74
7-65
28-60
19- 10
21- 50
12-85
7-65
20- 00
138
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
FAMILY
INCOME
SUPPLEMENT
HOUSING
BENEFIT
Table 6: Supplementary Benefit
Category
Weekly rate
Ordinary rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17
11-15
Under 11 years
Long-term rate
Husband and wife
Person living alone
Any other person aged
18 and over
16-17
45-55
28-05
22-45
17-30
13-70
9-15
57-10
35-70
28-55
21-90
Family income supplement is a cash benefit for families with small incomes
where one of the parents is in full-time work, subject to certain exceptions, and
where there is at least one dependent child. It is payable when the gross weekly
income of a family falls below a prescribed amount, which varies according to
the number of children in the family but is the same for single- and two-parent
families. ‘Full-time’ work means, for the purpose of the benefit, work of at least
30 hours a week by either parent in two-parent families or 24 hours a week for
one-parent families. The weekly rate of the supplement is half the difference
between the family’s income and the prescribed amount, up to a maximum
figure depending on the number of children in the family.
Table 7: Family Income Supplement
Weekly rate
Prescribed amount for family with one child (income below
which supplement is payable) 90-00
Increase in prescribed amount for each additional child 10-00
Maximum weekly amount for a one-child family 23-00
Increase in maximum amount for each additional child 2-00
People with low incomes, whether in work or not (for example, those who have
retired, or are sick or unemployed) who have difficulty in paying their full rent
and rates (local property taxes) may qualify for housing benefit, which is
administered by local authorities (in Northern Ireland by the Department of the
Environment for owner-occupiers and by the Housing Executive for tenants).
Council (public sector) tenants may apply for a rent rebate, and private tenants
for a rent allowance. Both tenants and owner-occupiers may apply for rate
rebates. The amount of benefit depends on four considerations: income (some of
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
which may be disregarded); the amount of rent and rates paid; the size of the
family; and the presence of other people in the household. Benefit is worked out
by comparing a ‘needs allowance’, which is intended to cover basic weekly living
expenses (the amounts are shown in Table 8), against income. Where income
equals the needs allowance, entitlement will be equal to 60 per cent of the eligible
rent and rates. This amount is progressively increased or decreased if income is
less than or greater than the needs allowance. Deductions from benefit are
usually made if a non-dependant lives in the same household. People receiving
supplementary benefit are entitled to a 100 per cent rebate or allowance of their
eligible rent and rates subject to certain deductions.
Table 8: Housing Benefit Needs Allowances
£
Weekly rate
Single person 45 10
Couple/single parent ' 66-50
Single handicapped person 50-30
Couple (1 handicapped) or single handicapped parent 71-70
Couple (both handicapped) 74-15
Dependent child addition 12-85
WAR
PENSIONS
AND
RELATED
SERVICES
The war pensions scheme is administered throughout the United Kingdom by
the Department of Health and Social Security. Pensions are payable to people
disabled as a result of service in the armed forces or by certain injuries received
in the merchant navy or civil defence during war-time, or to civilians injured by
enemy action. The amount varies according to the degree of disablement and
rank; an allowance is paid for dependants.
There is a wide range of supplementary allowances, the main ones being for
unemployability, the need for constant attendance, the provision of extra
comforts, and as a compensation for a lower standard of occupation. An age
allowance is payable to disabled pensioners aged 65 or over and whose
assessment is 40 per cent or more. Pensions are also paid to war widows and
orphans.
The Department of Health and Social Security maintains a welfare service for
war pensioners, war widows and war orphans. It works closely with many
voluntary and ex-Service organisations who give financial aid and personal help
to disabled ex-Service men and women and their families.
Table 9: War Pensions
£
Category Weekly rate
Disablement benefits
Pension for a private at 100 per cent rate 58-40
Unemployability allowances
Personal allowance 38-00
Wife or other adult dependant 21-50
Addition for each child 7-65
TAXATION
OTHER
BENEFITS
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 9: War Pensions (continued)
Category
Weekly rate
Comforts allowance
Allowance for lowered standard of occupation (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance
(depending on attention needed)
Age allowance (depending on degree of disability)
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Severe disablement occupational allowance
Clothing allowance (per year)
Death benefits
Widow's pension (private’s widow)
Childless widow under 40
Rent allowance (maximum)
Age allowance for elderly widows
Ages 65—69
Aged 70-79
Aged 80 and over
Adult orphans
5 05 or 1010
23-36
11-70 to 46-80
4-05 to 12-70
23-40
11- 70
50-00 to 79-00
46-55
10-74
17-70
5-00
10-00
12- 50
35-80
Social security benefits, other than child, maternity, sickness, invalidity and
disablement benefit, are included in the taxable income on which income tax is
assessed. On the other hand various income tax reliefs and exemptions are
allowed on account of age or liability for the support of dependants. Sup¬
plementary benefit (except that paid to the unemployed), family income
supplement, attendance allowances, mobility allowance, war disability pensions
including supplementary allowances, and war widow's pension and allowances
are not taxable.
Other benefits for which unemployed people and those on low incomes may be
eligible include exemption from health service charges (see p 122), free
spectacles, free school meals and legal aid. Reduced charges are often made to
the unemployed, for example, for adult education and public entertainments,
and pensioners usually enjoy concessionary transport fares.
As part of the European Community's efforts to promote the free movement of
labour, there are regulations providing for equality of treatment and the
protection of social security rights for employed and self-employed people
working in another member state. The regulations also cover retirement
pensioners and other beneficiaries who have been employed, or self-employed,
as well as dependants. Benefits affected include child benefit and those for
sickness and maternity, unemployment, retirement, invalidity, accidents at
work and occupational diseases.
Britain also has reciprocal social security agreements with a number of other
countries. Their scope and the benefits they cover vary, but the majority cover
most National Insurance benefits and benefits for families.
SOCIAL WELFARE
141
Voluntary
Organisations
Voluntary Social Services
There is a long tradition of voluntary service to the community in Britain, and
the partnership between the voluntary and statutory agencies is encouraged by
the Government. It has been estimated that nearly a quarter of all adults take
part in some form of voluntary work during the course of a year. Voluntary
organisations derive their income from several sources including voluntary
contributions, central and local government grants, earnings from commercial
activities and investments. Public authorities plan and carry out their duties
taking account of the work of voluntary organisations, and include them in the
planning process whenever possible. Voluntary provision enables local author¬
ities to continue the trend towards local community care rather than institu¬
tional care for the elderly, the mentally ill and mentally handicapped people.
An Opportunities for Volunteering Scheme, started by the Government in
1982, and an Unemployed Voluntary Action Fund in Scotland have provided
support for some 600 schemes by voluntary agencies to enable unemployed
volunteers to help disadvantaged groups in the community. Voluntary organisa¬
tions also participate in several other government schemes, including the
Community Programme, the Voluntary Projects Programme, and the Youth
Training Scheme.
Some 450 voluntary organisations receive direct grants from government
health and social services departments: total funding amounted to some £30
million in 1983—84. Tax changes in recent budgets have helped the voluntary
movement to secure a larger flow of funds.
Co-ordination of government interests in the voluntary sector throughout
Britain is the responsibility of the Home Office Voluntary Service Unit.
Many voluntary organisations are registered charities, and in England and
Wales the Charity Commission, a government agency, gives free advice to
trustees of charities, making schemes to modify their purposes or facilitate their
administration when necessary. Voluntary organisations qualify for charitable
status if their activities are concerned with the relief of poverty, the advance¬
ment of education, the advancement of religion, or other purposes beneficial to
the community. In December 1983, the Commission announced an important
extension of charitable status to include the promotion of good community
relations, the prevention of discrimination on the grounds of race or sex, and
the promotion of equal opportunity.
The Charities Aid Foundation, an independent body, aids the flow of funds to
charity from individuals, companies and grant-making trusts.
There are thousands of voluntary organisations concerned with social welfare,
ranging from national bodies to small individual local groups; ‘self-help’ groups
have been the most rapidly expanding part of the voluntary sector in the last
decade—examples include playgroups for pre-school children, groups which
help their members to cope with a particular disability, and those run by
members of the ethnic minorities. Many organisations belong to larger
associations or are represented on local or national co-ordinating councils or
committees. Some are chiefly concerned with giving personal service, others
with the formation of public opinion and exchange of information. Some cany
out both functions. They may be staffed by both professional and voluntary
workers.
The main voluntary body in England, which aims to provide central links
between voluntary organisations and official bodies, is the National Council for
Voluntary Organisations, which acts as a resource and development agency for
the voluntary sector. It works to extend the involvement of voluntary organisa¬
tions in dealing with social issues, to protect the interests and independence of
142
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
voluntary agencies, and to provide them with a range of advice, information and
other services. The Scottish Council of Social Service, the Wales Council for
Voluntary Action and the Northern Ireland Council of Social Service perform
similar functions.
The Volunteer Centre is a national voluntary organisation and centre for
information and research on voluntary work. There are many full-time and
part-time local volunteer bureaux which direct volunteers to opportunities for
voluntary service in both the voluntary and statutory sectors.
Specialist voluntary organisations concerned with personal and family
problems include the family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Associa¬
tion, Family Service Units and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to the National Marriage
Guidance Council; the National Council of Voluntary Child Care Organisations;
the National Council for One Parent Families; Child Poverty Action Group and
the Claimants’ Union, both of which provide expert advice on social security
benefits; and the Samaritans, who help the lonely, the depressed and the
suicidal.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people; this is often
channelled through national and local organisations such as Community
Service Volunteers. Pensioner's Link, Scouts and Girl Guides.
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled is given by—among others—the
British Red Cross Society, St John Ambulance, the Women’s Royal Voluntary
Service and the Leagues of Hospital Friends. Societies which help people with
particular disabilities and difficulties include the Royal National Institute for the
Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the Royal Association for
Disability and Rehabilitation, the Disabled Living Foundation, the Disablement
Income Group, MIND (National Association for Mental Health), MENCAP (Royal
Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults), the Spastics Society,
Alcoholics Anonymous, Age Concern, Help the Aged and their equivalents in
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
National organisations whose work is specifically religious in inspiration
include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Committee on Social
Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s Society, the
Church of England Council for Social Aid, the Young Men’s Christian
Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Catholic Marriage
Advisory Council and the Jewish Welfare Board.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service, which brings ‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and
old people, provides flatlets and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with
family problems, and assists in hospitals and clinics and in emergencies.
Over 900 Citizens Advice Bureaux give explanation and advice to people who
are in doubt about their rights or who do not know about the state or voluntary
services available. There are law centres and housing advisory centres in some
areas.
7 Education
Policies
British education aims to develop fully the abilities of individuals, both young
and old, for their own benefit and that of society as a whole. Compulsory
schooling takes place between the ages of 5 and 16, although some provision is
made for children under 5, and many pupils remain at school beyond the
minimum leaving age. Post-school education (mainly at universities,
polytechnics and colleges of further and higher education) is organised flexibly
to provide a wide range of opportunities for academic and vocational education
and continuing study throughout life.
For many years British education has been characterised by change, and
much of the post-1945 period has also been marked by growth: large increases
in the number of pupils, the expansion of higher educational opportunities, and
increased expenditure. Although the process of change continues, recent years
have seen increasing reassessment and consolidation with a view to making the
best use of resources in the light of difficult economic circumstances and a
substantial drop in the birth rate. The number of primary schoolchildren has
already fallen sharply, and the decline in numbers is now affecting secondary
schools, although this is partly offset by the greater numbers staying on at
school because of the high level of unemployment. This has led to a reduced
demand for new teachers (although there is still a need for more teachers of
certain subjects such as mathematics) and teacher training has been reorga¬
nised to cope with the new situation while retaining flexibility for future
expansion. Rationalisation of courses in higher education is being undertaken
with the aim of encouraging institutions to become more efficient, and more
flexible and responsive to the economic and social needs of the country.
The Government s education policies for schools are designed to increase
parental choice of school and involvement in school organisation, to allow local
authorities to organise publicly maintained schools according to local needs,
and to assist gifted children from less well-off homes to benefit from attendance
at certain independent schools. A major priority is to raise standards of
achievement both by securing a broader and more balanced curriculum for all
pupils and by reforming the system of examinations taken at about the age of
16. Measures are also being taken to improve the quality of teaching by better
selection, training and deployment of teachers.
Special attention is also being given both to the provision of better
pre-vocational education and training in schools and colleges for the 14- to
18-year-old age-group, and to the 40 per cent of pupils in the final years of
compulsory education for whom public examinations at 16-plus are not
appropriate. It is recognised that co-operation between the education system
and industry can help young people to acquire the skills necessary to maintain
Britain s position as a leading exporter of manufactured goods. Many organisa¬
tions already work to improve such links, and further contacts are being
encouraged. An important objective has been to extend the knowledge and use of
microcomputers in schools.
In line with the Government's concern to maintain British expertise in science
and technology, a shift in provision towards these areas is occurring in higher
144
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
Finance
SCHOOLS
education. The vocational element of courses in the non-advanced further
education sector is being increased.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science is responsible for all aspects of
education in England, and for the Government’s relations with and support for
universities throughout Britain. (He is also responsible for basic civil science.)
The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have
responsibility in their respective countries for non-university education, and are
consulted about (but do not carry formal responsibility for) education in
universities and civil science.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is decen¬
tralised. Responsibilities are divided between the central government depart¬
ments (the Department of Education and Science, the Welsh Office, the Scottish
Education Department, and the Department of Education for Northern Ireland),
local education authorities (education and library boards in Northern Ireland),
and various voluntary organisations. Increased responsibilities in the field of
work-related further education have been given to the Manpower Services
Commission.
The provision of maintained school education and most post-school education
outside the universities is the responsibility of local education authorities. They
employ teachers and other staff, provide and maintain buildings, supply
equipment and materials and, in England and Wales, provide grants to students
proceeding to further and higher education. In Scotland the central institu¬
tions, which provide most vocational further education to degree level, and
colleges of education, which provide teacher training, are administered by
independent governing bodies. Apart from three central institutions financed by
the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, these institutions and
the colleges of education are financed directly by the Scottish Education
Department, which also pays grants to students on advanced courses. In
Northern Ireland colleges of education are controlled by the Department of
Education or by voluntary agencies.
More than four-fifths of education expenditure is incurred by local authorities,
to which grants are made by central government, and which plan their spending
according to local needs and circumstances. Support for the universities and
certain other higher education institutions, and grants to students, account for
most of the direct expenditure by central government. Spending on education
was some £15,600 million in 1983, about 11 per cent of general government
expenditure.
Reductions in spending in the years to 1983—84 took into account the
declining number of schoolchildren, local authorities’ plans to take surplus
school places out of use, and considerable savings in the provision of school
meals and milk. Additional provision is being made to meet the cost of a large
expansion in the number of young people staying on at school after 16. The
Government plans to introduce from 1985 an education support grant scheme
for England and Wales which will enable it to direct a small percentage of total
education spending towards certain priority subjects in schools and in further
education.
Parents are required by law to see that their children receive efficient full-time
education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16.
Some 10-1 million children attend Britain’s 37,000 schools. Most receive free
education financed from public funds, but a small proportion (roughly 6 per
cent) attend schools wholly independent of direct public financial support.
EDUCATION
145
Management
Nursery and
Primary
Schools
Boys and girls are taught together in most primary schools, and some 86 per
cent of pupils in maintained secondary schools in England and Wales and nearly
61 per cent in Northern Ireland attend mixed schools. In Scotland nearly all
secondary schools are mixed. Most independent schools for younger children are
co-educational; the majority providing secondary education are single-sex,
although the number of mixed schools is growing.
No fees are charged to parents of children at maintained schools, and books
and equipment are free, although in Northern Ireland a small proportion of
grammar school pupils is admitted on a fee-paying basis.
Schools supported from public funds are of two main kinds in England and
Wales: county schools and voluntary schools. County schools are provided and
maintained by local education authorities wholly out of public funds. Voluntary
schools, mostly established by religious denominations, are also wholly main¬
tained from public funds but the governors of some types of voluntary school
contribute to capital costs. Nearly a third of the 27,000 or so primary and
secondary schools supported by public funds in England and Wales are
voluntary schools, most of them Anglican or Roman Catholic. Each publicly
maintained school has a governing body, which includes governors appointed
by the local education authority. There is statutory provision for the representa¬
tion of parents and teachers on school governing bodies and from September
1985 most schools will have at least two parent and two teacher governors
normally elected by parents and teachers. In the interests of raising standards
the Government has proposed to give parents a majority representation on most
school governing bodies so that they may contribute more fully to the life of the
schools.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided by
education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this term is
used for a type of independent school, see p 146). There is a statutory
requirement to establish school councils whose membership includes teachers,
parents, people interested in religious education, and in certain cases repre¬
sentatives of further education and of the community at large.
In Northern Ireland there are three main categories of grant-aided school:
controlled schools, owned and managed by the area education and library
boards and having all their expenditure met from public funds; voluntary
schools, mainly under Roman Catholic management and also fully supported by
public funds: and voluntary grammar schools, which may be under either
Roman Catholic or non-denominational management and receive grants from
the Department of Education. By the end of 1985 all grant-aided schools will
include elected parents and teachers on their boards of governors. It is
government policy to encourage integrated education, providing for both
Protestant and Roman Catholic pupils, where there is a local desire for it.
In England, Wales and Scotland parents have a statutory right to express a
preference for a particular school for their children, and have an effective
channel of appeal at local level. Schools also have to publish basic information
about themselves and their public examination results.
Successive governments have expanded nursery education within the con¬
straints of limited resources, and current plans allow for some further
expansion, mainly by converting surplus primary school accommodation to
nursery use. In England some 40 per cent of three- and four-year-olds are
receiving education in nursery schools or classes or in infants’ classes in
primary schools. In addition many children attend informal pre-school play¬
groups organised by parents and voluntary bodies such as the Pre-School
Playgroups Association.
146
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Secondary
Schools
Independent
Schools
Compulsory education begins at five when children in England and Wales go
to infant schools or departments; at seven many go on to junior schools or
departments. The usual age for transfer from primary to secondary schools is 11
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, but a number of local authorities in
England have established ‘first’ schools for pupils aged 5 to 8, 9 or 10 and
middle’ schools covering various age-ranges between 9 and 14. In Scotland the
primary schools take children from 5 to 12, normally having infant classes for
children under seven, although in a few areas there are separate infant schools.
The publicly maintained system of education aims to give all children an
education suited to their particular abilities. Some 91 per cent of the
maintained secondary school population in England and Wales attend compre¬
hensive schools, which take pupils without reference to ability or aptitude and
provide a wide range of secondary education for all or most of the children of a
district. The schools can be organised in a number of ways, including those that
take the full secondary school age-range from 11 to 18; middle schools whose
pupils move on to senior comprehensive schools at 12, 13 or 14, leaving at 16 or
18; and schools with an age-range of 11 or 12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form
or a tertiary college for pupils over 16. Tertiary colleges provide a full range of
further education courses for students over 16, as well as academic courses.
Most other children receive secondary education in ‘grammar’ or ‘secondary
modern’ schools to which they are allocated after selection procedures at the age
of 11.
Scottish secondary education is almost completely comprehensive; almost all
pupils are in schools with a non-selective intake. The majority of schools are
six-year comprehensives. Because of local circumstances there are some
comprehensive schools at which courses may last only four years or less; pupils
may transfer at the end of their second or fourth years to a six-year
comprehensive.
In Northern Ireland secondary education is organised largely along selective
lines according to children’s abilities.
Independent schools are outside the publicly maintained sector, but they must
register with the appropriate government education department and are open to
inspection. Notice can be served on them to remedy serious shortcomings in
their premises, accommodation or instruction and to exclude anyone regarded
as unsuitable to teach in or to be the proprietor of a school.
There are some 2,520 registered independent schools catering for pupils of all
ages. Among these are about 500 ‘public schools’,1 most of which have boarding
pupils and are single sex (with roughly equal numbers of boys’ and girls’
schools). Pupils are usually accepted at about 12 or 13 years of age. A number of
preparatory schools prepare children for the entrance examination which most
public schools set. Almost all independent schools charge fees at or near the cost
of provision, many of them operating bursary funds to help pupils from less
well-off families. Local education authorities may assist with the payment of
fees, and the Government runs a scheme under which assistance is given with
fees, in relation to parental income, to a proportion of the pupils admitted to the
287 schools participating in the scheme. The Government also gives income-
related assistance with fees to pupils at certain specialist music and ballet
schools. A number of independent schools have been established by religious
and ethnic minorities, and by those with an ‘experimental’ approach to
education.
1 Public schools’ are usually taken to mean those schools in membership of the Headmasters' Conference, the
Governing Bodies Association or the Governing Bodies of Girls’ Schools Association. They should not be confused
with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
EDUCATION
147
Special
Educational
Needs
Teachers
The
Curriculum
Special educational needs embrace learning difficulties arising from emotional
or behavioural disorders as well as physical or mental handicap. Local education
authorities in England and Wales must ensure that children with special needs
are educated in ordinary schools provided that the parents’ wishes have been
taken into account and that this is compatible with meeting the needs of the
child, with the provision of efficient education for the other children in the
school, and with the best use of resources. In Scotland, school placing is a
matter for agreement between education authorities and individual parents.
There are nearly 2,000 special schools (both day and boarding), including
those run by voluntary organisations, which cater for a wide variety of handicap.
Teachers in publicly maintained schools are appointed by local education
authorities or school governing bodies. There are more than 500,000 teachers
(including the full-time equivalent of part-time teachers) in publicly maintained
and assisted schools in Britain, and the pupil—teacher ratio in primary and
secondary schools is about 18 to 1. Teachers in these schools must hold
qualifications approved by the appropriate education department.
The secular curriculum in maintained schools in England and Wales is the
responsibility of the local education authority and of the schools’ governors. In
practice, responsibility is largely devolved on head teachers and their staff. In
order to ensure a broad and balanced education which is relevant to the needs of
the modern world, and to widen educational opportunities as much as possible,
the Government has issued guidance on the curriculum for both primary and
secondary school pupils. It considers that secondary pupils up to the age of 16
should follow a broad curriculum including English, mathematics and science,
some study of the humanities including history, religious and physical
education, and opportunities for both practical and aesthetic activities. Most
pupils should also study a foreign language. A programme of development
projects has been introduced to provide a more effective education with a
practical slant for lower-attaining pupils who do not benefit fully from existing
courses.
In Wales, the Welsh language is taught and is used as either the main or
secondary medium of teaching in some schools. The content and management
of the curriculum in Scotland is the responsibility of education authorities and
individual head teachers. Provision is made where appropriate for teaching in
Gaelic. A new curriculum structure for 14- to 16-year-olds has been established
which includes the study of English, mathematics and science. In 1984, as part
of a development programme for 16- to 18-year-olds, new vocational courses
were introduced which complement those provided by the further education
sector.
In Northern Ireland a major curriculum review and development programme is
being initiated for pupils in the ll-to-16 age-group. The objective will be to
provide a broader, more practical range of curriculum, with the emphasis on
participation and inquiry.
Over the last 20 years much has been done by the educational authorities to
meet difficulties encountered by the ethnic minorities. English language
teaching has received priority, but attention has been increasingly directed at
the issue of mother-tongue teaching. Emphasis has been placed on the need for
schools to take account of the different ethnic and cultural backgrounds of
pupils.
The monitoring of curriculum content and promotion of curriculum develop¬
ment are performed in England and Wales by the Schools Curriculum
Development Committee, in Scotland by the Consultative Committee on the
Curriculum and in Northern Ireland by the Council for Educational Develop-
148
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technical
and Vocational
Education
Initiative
Religious
Education in
Schools
Examinations
ment. At some 500 teachers' centres in England and Wales, teachers meet for
curriculum development work, discussion and in-service training.
Launched by the Manpower Services Commission in stages starting in
September 1983, the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative is a pilot
scheme which will provide some 60,000 young people aged 14 to 18 with courses
of technical, pre-vocational and general education as well as work experience in
a variety of skills.
In England and Wales all children in county or voluntary schools receive
religious education by law and take part in a daily corporate act of worship
unless their parents choose otherwise. In county schools, and sometimes in
voluntary schools, non-denominational religious instruction is given in accord¬
ance with a locally agreed syllabus which may include the study of comparative
religions. Syllabuses have been revised in many areas to take account of the
faiths of the local population. In all kinds of voluntary schools there is
opportunity for denominational instruction. In Scotland religious instruction
must be given, the content being determined by education authorities and
schools in accordance with the wishes of the local community. Certain schools
provide for Roman Catholic children but in all schools there are safeguards for
the individual conscience. In controlled schools in Northern Ireland clergy have a
right of access which may be used for denominational instruction; in voluntary
schools corporate worship and religious education are controlled by the
management authorities.
The principal examinations taken by secondary school pupils in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland at the age of 16 and over are those leading to the General
Certificate of Education (GCE) at Ordinary (O) level and to the Certificate of
Secondary Education (CSE). Both are normally taken after five years of
secondary education. The GCE Advanced (A) level is normally taken after a
further two years' study. The highest grade (grade 1) in the CSE is accepted as
equivalent to the standard of a higher grade pass (grades A to C) at GCE O-level,
and these are the qualifying grades for entry to further education and training.
The A-level examination is the standard for entrance to university and other
higher education, and to many forms of professional training. Entries for GCE
examinations are also accepted from private candidates and those attending
further education establishments.
The number of pupils achieving success in O- and A-level examinations has
risen considerably in recent years, partly as a result of the raising of the
school-leaving age. Nearly nine in ten pupils left school with at least one graded
result in 1983. Some 10 per cent of pupils achieved five or more higher grades at
O-level or CSE equivalent, while over 17 per cent achieved at least one A-level.
Slightly more girls than boys sit for A-levels. In order to raise standards of
achievement, the Government has expressed the view that these examinations
should measure absolute standards of performance rather than relative
standards between different candidates. The main objective of this and other
policies is to bring 80 to 90 per cent of all pupils at least to the level expected or
achieved by pupils of average ability in individual subjects (CSE grade 4), and to
do this over a broad range of skills and competence in a number of subjects.
In view of certain defects in the present dual examination system at about the
age of 16, the Government has decided to replace the GCE O-level and the CSE
by a single qualification, the General Certificate of Secondary Education
(GCSE). The new two-year courses will be introduced in England and Wales in
the autumn of 1986. The Government also plans to introduce from 1986 a new
examination, the Advanced Supplementary (AS) level, to broaden the scope of
schools’ sixth-form curricula.
EDUCATION
149
Educational
Standards
Educational
Aids
Computers
A new qualification introduced in 1982, the Certificate of Pre-vocational
Education, is intended for those at school or college who wish to continue in
full-time education for a year after the age of 16 to prepare either for work or for
vocational courses.
A further plan under discussion is to provide pupils with a written record of
school achievement and performance, which would be of particular benefit to
those who leave school without formal qualifications.
A Secondary Examinations Council (SEC) has been established to co-ordinate
and supervise systems of examination and assessment in England and Wales
designed principally for pupils in secondary education.
In Scotland pupils in the fourth year of secondary education (equivalent to the
fifth year in England and Wales) normally sit examinations for the Ordinary
grade of the Scottish Certificate of Education (SCE). As from 1984-85 the
Ordinary grade will be replaced over a three-year period by a new system of
syllabuses at three levels—Foundation, General and Credit—leading to a new
Standard grade of the SCE which will cover the whole ability range. Pupils in the
fifth and sixth year sit for the Higher grade of the Certificate. Passes at this
grade are the basis for entry to university or professional training. For those who
have completed their main studies at the Higher grade but wish to continue
their studies in particular subjects there is a Certificate of Sixth Year Studies
(CSYS). A review of Higher grade and the CSYS is under way which will take
account of the changes in the Ordinary grade.
Her Majesty s Inspectors report to ministers on the quality of education provided
in all schools (and in most further education establishments outside the
universities) and advise local education authorities, schools and the Govern¬
ment; their reports on individual establishments are published (except in
Northern Ireland). Local education authorities also employ inspectors or
advisors to guide them on maintained schools.
There is general concern that there should be an effective means of assessing
the standards of pupils’ performance. The Assessment of Performance Unit of
the Department of Education and Science promotes the development of methods
of assessment and monitors the achievement of schoolchildren. Programmes of
monitoring have been undertaken in English language and mathematics at the
ages of 11 and 15, and in science at the ages of 11, 13 and 15. Monitoring of
science and the first foreign language is continuing. New assessment techni¬
ques have been developed in Scotland.
In most schools teachers and pupils use a range of aids to assist the processes of
teaching and learning, and educational broadcasting is of major importance.
Almost all schools can receive radio and television programmes and most have
audio-visual equipment such as slide-projectors. In addition the British
Broadcasting Corporation produces radiovision programmes which, in effect,
are low-cost tape/slide units. Teachers’ notes and pupils’ pamphlets accompany
many broadcast series. Each year more than 600 hours of school radio and
1,000 hours of school television are transmitted by the BBC and the indepen¬
dent broadcasting companies.
The autonomous Council for Educational Technology for the United Kingdom
is the central organisation for promoting the application of audio-visual,
technological and other aids to education and training.
Great importance is attached to the knowledge and use of computers in schools,
in view of the growing importance to the economy and society of information
technology. As a result of the Government’s Micros in Schools and Micros in
Primaries schemes, every secondary and primary school in Britain now has at
150
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Careers
Education and
Guidance
Health and
Welfare of
Schoolchildren
POST-SCHOOL
EDUCATION
least one microcomputer. A six-year Microelectronics Education Programme in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland which began in 1980, and the separate
Scottish Microelectronics Development Programme, aim to give young people a
better understanding of the new technology and its applications. Priority has
been given to curriculum development (especially in subjects such as science,
mathematics, crafts, design and technology) including the production and
supply of more and better computer software; in-service teacher training; and
the creation of regional information centres. Britain has developed a world lead
in several aspects of computer education, including educational software.
Increasing importance is being attached by schools (and by further education
establishments) to careers education to increase young people’s awareness of
further education and careers opportunities and generally help them to prepare
for post-school life. The work of careers officers at local level is supported by
careers information material produced by the Government’s Careers and
Occupational Information Centre.
Physical education, including organised games, is part of the curriculum of all
maintained schools, and playing fields must be available for pupils over the age
of eight. Most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
The government health departments are responsible for the medical inspec¬
tion of schoolchildren and for advice on, and treatment of, specific medical and
dental problems associated with children of school age.
Local education authorities have discretion to decide what milk, meals or
other refreshment to provide at their schools, and what charges to make.
Provision has to be made free of charge, however, for pupils from families
receiving certain social security benefits. Under certain conditions the author¬
ities must provide free school transport, and they have discretionary powers to
assist with the cost of travel to school.
Post-school education for young people above school-leaving age is provided at a
range of levels. More than a third of young people receive some form of
post-school education, compared with a fifth in 1965, while some 13-5 per cent
of young people in the 18-year-old age-group entered full-time higher education
courses in 1982—83. The number of degrees awarded per age-group is
comparable with that of other developed countries. The proportion of people in
all further and higher education in Britain also compares well, taking into
account the large proportion of part-time students and the large group of
students receiving professional training in firms rather than in educational
institutions.
Higher education (postgraduate, first degree and other courses of a standard
higher than GCE A-level) is provided at universities, polytechnics and other
colleges. The term further education' is used to define all post-school education
outside the universities, and includes non-advanced courses for 16- to
19-year-olds who have left school. Much of the provision outside the universities
is broadly vocational in purpose; it extends from lower-level technical and
commercial courses to specialised courses of various kinds and advanced
courses for those aiming at higher-level posts in commerce, industry and
administration, or taking up a variety of professions (for example, town
planning or estate management). The system is flexible and permits the student
to acquire whatever qualifications his or her capabilities and time allow.
A particular feature of the further education system is its strong ties with
commerce and industry: co-operation between the business world and colleges
is encouraged by the Government and its agencies, and employers are often
involved in designing courses. There is also an important link between further
EDUCATION
151
Institutions
Finance
education colleges and industrial training schemes: the colleges provide, for
example, much of the education element in such programmes as the Youth
Training Scheme, which is sponsored by the Manpower Services Commission.
(The Scheme offers the opportunity of a year’s planned work experience and
training to all 16- and 17-year-old school-leavers who are unemployed.)
The need to reduce public expenditure on higher education, while maintain¬
ing provision of a high standard, relevant to national needs, has necessitated
some restructuring of courses and departments. It remains an accepted
principle, however, that any suitably qualified school-leaver should be able to
find a place in higher education. A decline in the intake of new students by
universities has been balanced by expansion elsewhere, so that in 1984 there
were some 50,000 more full-time students in higher education (excluding
overseas students) than in 1979.
Because of the need to maintain British expertise in science and technology, a
three-year programme was launched in 1982 to expand education and research
in information technology and related fields, with extra student places,
additional staff in universities and polytechnics, and more research fellowships.
Additional researchers and lecturers in natural science and technology have also
been appointed.
The principal institutions of post-school education are the universities, the
polytechnics, the Scottish central institutions and some hundreds of other
colleges which are maintained or assisted from public funds; these have a
variety of titles including colleges of higher or further education, colleges of
technology, colleges of art, agricultural colleges and adult education centres.
There are also many independent specialist establishments, such as secretarial
and correspondence colleges and colleges teaching English as a foreign
language; a number of voluntary and private bodies providing cultural and
general education, sometimes with assistance from local education authorities;
and a large number ot other education and training schemes run by public or
private organisations, or firms.
Most establishments for post-school education are either maintained or assisted
from public funds. Some undertake training, research or consultancy for
commercial firms, making charges which broadly reflect the economic cost of
provision, and a number have endowments or receive grants or gifts from
foundations and benefactors.
Nearly 90 per cent of universities’ expenditure is financed by the Government,
the major part being made available through a block grant to the University
Grants Committee, which allocates the funds to individual universities, the
London Graduate School of Business Studies and the Manchester Business
School. The Department of Education and Science finances directly the Open
University, the Royal College of Art and the Cranfield Institute of Technology.
The independent University of Buckingham receives no assistance from public
funds although its students can apply for mandatory grants (see p 152). The
Northern Ireland Department of Education makes grants direct to the universi¬
ties on recommendations from the University Grants Committee.
Funds for advanced courses in polytechnics and other colleges of further
education maintained by local authorities are allocated centrally. The National
Advisory Body for Local Authority Higher Education advises the Government on
how these resources should be allocated in England; a Welsh Advisory Body has
a similar function in Wales.
Local education authorities are directly responsible for the funding of most
non-advanced further education courses. In order, however, to make training
and vocational education more relevant to employment needs, responsibility for
152
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Students
Universities
a quarter of the budget spent by the authorities in England and Wales on
work-related courses has been placed with the Manpower Services Commission.
Some 990,000 students take full-time courses, including sandwich courses
(where substantial periods of full-time study alternate with periods of supervised
experience on a relevant job), at universities and major establishments of
further education in Britain (1982—83 figures). Of these about 304,000 are at
universities while another 264,000 follow advanced courses outside universi¬
ties, at colleges of further and higher education, polytechnics and Scottish
central institutions. More than 422,000 take non-advanced courses, most of
them studying for recognised vocational or educational qualifications.
There are in addition about 31 million part-time students, over 436,000 of
whom are released by their employers for further education during working
hours. Many of the remainder take part in adult education classes (see p 154).
Over 90 per cent of full-time students on advanced courses are helped by
grants from public funds, which are mandatory for those students taking first
degree and other comparable courses who qualify under national rules. (Grants
for other courses may be given at the discretion of a local education authority.)
Grants cover tuition fees and maintenance, but where parents can afford to
contribute this is taken into account. They are awarded by local education
authorities in England and Wales up to first degree level; in Scotland by the
Scottish Education Department; and in Northern Ireland mainly by the
education and library boards. For postgraduate study and research, grants are
offered by the education departments and the research councils. Some
scholarships are available from endowments and from particular industries or
companies.
There are 47 universities in Britain, including the Open University, compared
with 17 in 1945. They are governed by royal charters or in some cases by Act of
Parliament, and enjoy complete academic freedom, appointing their own staff
and deciding which students to admit, what and how to teach, and which
degrees to award. The English universities are: Aston (Birmingham), Bath,
Birmingham, Bradford, Bristol, Brunei (London), Cambridge, City (London),
Durham, East Anglia, Essex, Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury, Lancaster,
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough, Manchester, Manchester
Institute of Science and Technology. Newcastle upon Tyne, Nottingham, Oxford,
Reading, Salford, Sheffield, Southampton, Surrey, Sussex, Warwick, York, and
the independent University of Buckingham, which received its royal charter in
1983. The Royal College of Art, the Cranfield Institute of Technology, the London
Graduate School of Business Studies, and the Manchester Business School also
have university status. The federated University of Wales comprises seven
constituent institutions. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee,
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Heriot-Watt (Edinburgh), St Andrews, Stirling, and
Strathclyde (Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there are the Queen's University of
Belfast and the University of Ulster (formed by the merger of the New University
of Ulster in Coleraine and the Ulster Polytechnic in August 1984).
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, and the Scottish universities of St Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities were founded in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Admission to universities is by examination or by selection. Of the 295,000
full-time university students in 1982-83, about 45,000 were postgraduate.
About half lived in colleges and halls of residence.
There are some 30,700 full-time university teachers paid wholly from
university funds. The ratio of staff to students is about one to nine, one of the
most favourable in the world.
EDUCATION
153
The Open
University
Polytechnics
and Other
Institutions
Council for
National
Academic
Awards
Except at the Open University, first degree courses are mainly full-time and
usually last three or four years, though medical and veterinary courses usually
require five or six. Degree titles vary according to the practice of each university;
in England, Wales and Northern Ireland the most common titles for a first degree
are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of Science (BSc) and for a second degree
Master of Arts (MA). Master of Science (MSc), and Doctor of Philosophy (PhD); in
Scotland Master is used for a first degree in arts subjects. Uniformity of
standards between universities is promoted by the practice of employing
external examiners for all university examinations, and the general pattern of
teaching is fairly similar throughout Britain.
Research is an important feature of university work; many staff combine
research with their teaching duties and about half of postgraduate students are
engaged on research projects.
The Open University is a non-residential university which provides part-time
degree and other courses, using a combination of television and radio
broadcasts, correspondence texts and summer schools, together with a network
of study centres for contact with part-time tutors and counsellors and with
fellow students. No formal academic qualifications are required to register for
these courses, but the standards of its degrees are the same as those of other
universities. The university’s first degree, the BA (Open), is a general degree
awarded on a system of credits for each course completed. The first courses
began in 1971, and in 1984 some 100,000 students were following courses,
about two-thirds at degree level. The University also has a programme of higher
degrees, BPhil, MPhil and PhD, available mainly through research. Courses
started in 1983 for English-speakers in Belgium, and the university has advised
many other countries on the setting-up of similar institutions. A Continuing
Education Programme, including short courses of community education,
in-service training for teachers, and updating courses for managers, scientists
and technologists, is the fastest-growing aspect of the University’s work.
A major contribution to post-school education in England and Wales is made by
the 30 polytechnics which have been established since 1967. They provide
courses in a wide range of subjects at all levels, though the trend is towards a
concentration on advanced work. Courses may lead to first and higher degrees,
certain graduate-equivalent qualifications, the examinations of the main
professional bodies, and to qualifications such as those of the Business and
Technician Education Council (see p 154). Polytechnics have close links with
commerce and industry, and many polytechnic students have jobs and attend
on a part-time basis.
Similar provision is made in Scotland in the 14 central institutions and a
number of further education colleges, and in Northern Ireland by the University
of Ulster (which replaced the Ulster Polytechnic in 1984).
Institutes and colleges of higher education, formed by the integration of
teacher training with the rest of higher education, also account for a significant
proportion of higher education students, and other further education colleges
run some, usually specialised, higher education courses.
An increasing proportion of students on advanced courses in Great Britain
outside the universities are taking courses leading to the qualifications of the
Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA). The Council awards degrees
and other academic qualifications comparable in standard with those granted
by the universities. The courses range from science and technology to the
arts, social studies, business studies and law, but the proportion of technologi¬
cal, business or other broadly vocational courses is much higher than in
universities.
154
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Business and
Technician
Education
Council
Teacher
Training
Adult and
Continuing
Education
The Business and Technician Education Council (BTEC) plans and administers
a unified national system of courses at technician or equivalent level for
students in industry, commerce and public administration in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland. Courses leading to BTEC awards are widely available at
polytechnics, colleges and other institutes of further and higher education, and
certain other establishments. The main BTEC qualifications are awarded at two
levels: national certificate and diploma and higher national certificate and
diploma. In addition, BTEC offers pre-vocational preparation and awards for
people already in employment who need additional qualifications. The Scottish
equivalents of the Council, the Scottish Technical Education Council and the
Scottish Business Education Council, are planning to merge during 1984.
Qualifications in a wide range of craft skills are offered by the City and Guilds
of London Institute, and a variety of qualifications in commercial and office
practice are awarded by the Royal Society of Arts.
All new entrants to teaching in England and Wales must have taken a recognised
course of teacher training. Courses are offered by most universities and by many
polytechnics and other institutions of higher education. Non-graduates usually
qualify by way of a three- or four-year course leading to the Bachelor of
Education degree; graduates take a one-year Postgraduate Certificate of
Education.
In response to demographic trends the number of teachers to be trained to
teach in secondary schools is being greatly reduced, except in a few subjects (in
particular, mathematics, physics, and craft, design and technology) where there
have been long-standing shortages. At the same time arrangements have been
made to meet the increase in the number of primary schoolchildren expected in
the second half of the decade. The Government is taking steps to improve the
quality of teaching by revising selection, training and placement procedures for
new teachers, and by providing more in-service training opportunities. Manage¬
ment training courses for head teachers are also being provided.
In Scotland all teachers in education authority schools must be registered
with the General Teaching Council for Scotland and all teachers of academic
subjects in secondary schools must be graduates. College of education courses
lead to the award of a Teaching Qualification (Primary Education or Secondary
Education). Graduates and holders of specialist diplomas take a one-year
course; courses in practical and aesthetic subjects for non-graduates extend to
two, three or four years. Most Scottish colleges of education also offer four-year
courses leading to the degree of Bachelor of Education. In Northern Ireland,
teacher training is provided by the two universities and the two colleges of
education. The principal courses are the same as those in England and Wales.
The scope of adult and continuing education has widened in recent years and
now includes, in addition to the development of the individual through cultural,
physical and craft pursuits, such subjects as basic education (for example, in
literacy and numeracy); education for disadvantaged groups and those with
special needs; consumer education; health education; and pre-retirement
education. Continuing education includes training for those in employment, to
enable them to keep pace with technological change. The Government has
launched a Professional, Industrial and Commercial Updating Programme,
(PICKUP), designed to help colleges, polytechnics and universities to meet the
need for updating and broadening the skills of those in mid-career in industry,
commerce and the professions.
Apart from university provision for mature students, courses are provided by
local education authorities, residential colleges, extra-mural departments of
universities, the Open University and various other bodies including a number
EDUCATION
155
Teaching
Methods
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
of voluntary organisations. Most of the provision is made by the local education
authorities in a wide variety of establishments, including schools used for adult
evening classes and in some cases in ‘community schools’ which provide
educational, social and cultural opportunities for the wider community. Most
courses are part-time. Local authorities also maintain or aid many of the
short-term residential colleges or centres which provide courses lasting between
a weekend and a fortnight. Long-term residential colleges, grant-aided by central
government departments, provide courses of one or two years. They aim to
provide a liberal education without academic entry tests. Most students
admitted are entitled to full maintenance grants.
University extra-mural departments and the Workers’ Educational Associa¬
tion (WEA), the largest recognised voluntary body, are grant-aided to provide
extended part-time courses of liberal studies; they also run short courses for
special (including vocational) interests. Many other organisations, national and
local, provide various kinds of education and training. Several, such as the
National Federation of Women’s Institutes, the National Federation of Women’s
Organisations and the Pre-Retirement Association, receive government grants;
others are commercially or privately financed.
The National Institute of Adult Continuing Education is a centre of
information, research, development work and publication for adult and
continuing education, as well as a channel of co-operation and consultation for
the many interested organisations in England and Wales. Financed mainly by
local education authorities and a government grant, the Institute administers
the government-funded Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit which covers
proficiency in literacy, numeracy and communications skills. The Institute’s
counterpart in Scotland is the Scottish Institute of Adult Education.
In Scotland the Scottish Community Education Council advises the Govern¬
ment on all community education matters and administers the Scottish Adult
Basic Education Unit. In Northern Ireland the Council for Continuing Educa¬
tion also has advisory functions.
The general pattern of teaching and learning on full-time courses at institutions
of higher education remains a mixture of lectures, prescribed or suggested
reading, seminars and tutorials, exercises and tests, and, where appropriate,
practical work or work experience. Educational aids are widely available at most
establishments.
Radio and television programmes, both specifically educational and general,
are important media for continuing education and are often linked to a range of
supplementary publications, courses and activities. BBC radio study program¬
mes are transmitted late at night on weekdays and on Sunday afternoons.
Educational television programmes are shown on Saturday and Sunday
mornings, with some early morning and late evening transmissions on
weekdays. The BBC, the independent television companies, and Channel 4
provide programmes which range from basic education and progressive
vocational training to domestic, social and craft skills. The BBC also works with
the Open University (see p 153), producing and broadcasting radio and
television programmes as part of the University’s courses.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of
educational services is supported financially by central and local government,
the Economic and Social Research Council, philanthropic organisations,
universities and teachers associations. Some research is also sponsored at
further education institutions and by a few independent organisations.
The major research institute outside the universities is the autonomous
National Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales, with
156
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
income mainly from funds received from research projects and from corporate
members, including local education authorities, teachers’ organisations and
universities; it also receives a small government grant. The Scottish Council for
Research in Education and the Northern Ireland Council for Educational
Research have similar functions.
EDUCATIONAL
LINKS
OVERSEAS
Schoolchildren, students, teachers and others concerned with education come
to Britain from overseas to study, and British people work and train overseas.
Many opportunities for such movement are the result of international co¬
operation at government level within the European Community and within the
Commonwealth, and of educational schemes, courses and professional contacts
organised in Britain by officially funded and voluntary organisations. The
British aid programme encourages links between educational institutions in
Britain and developing countries.
British membership of the European Community is creating closer ties with
other countries. Both in schools and in the colleges and universities there has
been an expansion of interest in European studies and languages, and
exchanges of teachers, schoolchildren and students take place. Britain has
adhered to the Statute of the European Schools (nine of which have been
established throughout the Community including one at Culham, Oxfordshire)
to provide education for children of people employed in Community institutions.
Educational
Exchanges
The promotion of cultural and educational relations with other countries is a
major concern of the British Council, which plays an important part in the
management of the aid programme to education. It recruits teachers for work
overseas, organises short visits overseas by British experts, and encourages
cultural exchange visits. It is also responsible for schemes to promote academic
interchange between universities and higher education institutions in Britain
and other countries, and exchange schemes in other scientific, educational and
cultural areas. The promotion of co-operation between universities in Britain
and developing countries is undertaken by means of recruiting staff for overseas
universities, the secondment of staff from British universities, interdepartmen¬
tal faculty link schemes, local staff development, short-term teaching and
advisory visits, and general consultancy services.
The Central Bureau for Educational Visits and Exchanges, an independent
foundation financed by the Government, aims to enrich British education
through international contact and exchange. It is responsible, with the League
for the Exchange of Commonwealth Teachers, for teacher exchanges with most
est European countries, a number of Commonwealth countries and the United
t11 arranges links and exchanges between schools, further education
establishments and local authorities, and organises study visits for teachers,
education administrators, and young workers. It also administers the language
assistants scheme in Britain and develops opportunities for exchange in special
areas such as sport and the performing arts, as well as between disabled people.
The Association of Commonwealth Universities promotes co-operation be¬
tween member universities in 28 Commonwealth countries. It organises
meetings, provides information and academic appointments services, adminis¬
ters the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan in Britain, and
generally promotes the movement of academic and administrative staff and of
students from one country to another.
The Commonwenlth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth The
United Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs is an independent body
serving overseas students, and organisations and individuals concerned in
EDUCATION
157
Overseas
Students in
Britain
English as a
Foreign
Language
udents come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at
universities or other educational institutions or for professional training. In the
academic year 1982-83 there were some 27,000 overseas students at universi-
hes and about 24,000 at polytechnics and other establishments of higher and
urther education. A further 27,000 were training for such occupations as
nursing law, banking and accountancy, and service and other industries.
out 42 per cent of all overseas students were from the Commonwealth and
British overseas dependencies. Many come to Britain for advanced training:
some 35 per cent (16,200) of students enrolled for full-time postgraduate study
or research at British universities in 1982 came from overseas. British
universities, polytechnics and other further education establishments have
ui t up their reputation overseas by offering tuition of the highest standards
maintaining low student-to-staff ratios, and providing courses and qualifica-
10ns to meet present-day and possible future needs. First degree courses tend to
^ mare ^tensive than in many countries (three years is the normal
length in England and Wales; four years in Scotland).
The majority of overseas students pay their own fees and expenses or hold
awards from their own governments. Those following courses of higher or
further education are charged fees which cover the full cost of their courses
There is, however, a bursaiy scheme to provide financial help for overseas
research students of high ability. Nationals of other member countries of the
European Community are generally charged the lower level of fees that applies to
British students.
Some 12,500 students and trainees from developing countries were fully
supported in 1983 under programmes of technical co-operation, by awardl
under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, and under British
Council and other schemes (see below). The total cost of these measures was
some £45 million. The Government is increasing its financial support for
overseas students by £46 million over the three years 1983-84 to 1985-86
using the money to finance a number of new measures including provision for
some five to six thousand additional scholarships and awards each year
Many public and private scholarships and fellowships are available to students
from overseas (and to British students who want to study overseas). Among the
best known are the British Council Scholarships, the Commonwealth Schol¬
arship and Fellowship Plan, the Fulbright Scholarship Scheme, the Marshall
Scholarslups, the independently funded Rhodes Scholarships, and the
urchiH Scholarships for men and women in all walks of life. Most
British universities and colleges offer scholarships for which graduates of any
nationality are eligible. (The British Council and the Association of
Commonwealth Universities are involved in the selection of British students for
awards offered by many overseas countries.) The Atlantic College at St Donat’s
south Wales (one of the colleges of the United World Colleges) provides two-
year residential courses for overseas students before they enter university
The continuing increase in interest in English as a foreign language is reflected
in the growth of the number of private language schools in Britain and the larger
proportion of these recognised by the British Council. At the same time the
British Council has expanded the volume of its own teaching of English overseas
by opening new centres in many countries and extending existing ones, and has
instituted a programme for teaching English related to specific jobs and skills.
Publications and other material relating to English language teaching have also
increased in number and are now a large component in many publishers’ lists
constituting a major export.
The BBC s English by Radio and English by Television services provide a
world-wide facility for the individual learner at home.
158
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Youth Workers
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
The Youth Service
The aims of the youth service are to promote the social and informal education of
young people by offering them opportunities in their leisure time to mix socially,
and develop and enlarge their range of interests, and to support their
development to adulthood. The service is provided by a partnership between
public authorities and a large variety of voluntary organisations. Membership of
groups is voluntary and there is no attempt to create anything in the nature of a
national youth movement. The youth service forms part of the education system.
Government education departments formulate broad policy objectives and
encourage their achievement through financial assistance and advice.
Proposals to achieve better planning and management in the youth service in
England were put forward in an official review published in 1982. The National
Youth Bureau, which is mainly government-funded, acts as a centre for advice,
training and research for the service.
Local education authorities provide and run their own youth clubs and
centres (some of which are residential) which may be purpose-built or associated
with schools. They also assist local voluntary youth groups by lending premises
and equipment and by contributing to their capital and running costs. Many
authorities have youth committees on which official and voluntary bodies are
represented, and employ youth officers to co-ordinate youth work and to arrange
in-service training. There are also youth councils which are representative
bodies of young people from local youth organisations.
National voluntary organisations promote the larger share of youth activities
through local groups which raise most of their day-to-day running expenses by
their own efforts. These have an estimated combined membership of over 6
million. They vary greatly in character, some ■ concentrating on social and
recreational pursuits, others on educational or religious activities. Most
national organisations in England are members of the National Council for
Voluntary Youth Services, a consultative body. There are similar representative
bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Among the largest of the voluntary youth organisations are the Scout and Girl
Guides Associations (with about 500,000 and 800,000 members), the National
Association of Youth Clubs (about 500,000), the National Association of Boys’
Clubs (some 150,000), the Youth Hostels Association (about 250,000) and clubs
run by the churches. The three pre-service organisations (the Sea Cadet Corps,
Army Cadet Force and Air Training Corps), with a membership of some 100,000,
combine social, educational and physical development with training for possible
entry to the armed forces.
In England and Wales a basic two-year training course at certain universities
and higher education colleges leads to the status of qualified youth and
community worker. A number of colleges of higher education include study of
youth work within teacher-training courses. In Scotland one-, two- and
three-year courses are provided at certain colleges of education and in Northern
Ireland courses are provided by the University of Ulster.
Full-time youth workers are supported by some 500,000 part-time workers,
many of them unpaid. Part-time workers usually have no professional qualifica¬
tion in youth work but some have allied qualifications, for instance as teachers,
and a large number attend short courses and conferences on youth work.
Qualified school teachers are recognised as qualified youth workers.
A substantial sum of money is awarded by the many grant-giving foundations
and trusts each year for activities involving young people. The Royal Jubilee
Trusts, formed in 1978 from King George's Jubilee Trust (started in 1935 at the
time of the Silver Jubilee of King George V) and the Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust,
EDUCATION
159
Voluntary
Service by
Young People
which arose from the 1977 Queen’s Silver Jubilee Appeal, support work
involving young people aged 8 to 25 (King George's Jubilee Trust) and young
people up to the age of 25 involved in voluntary community service work (the
Queen's Silver Jubilee Trust). King George’s Jubilee Trust has distributed over
£5 million since 1935 and the Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust over £9 million since
1978.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through bodies such
as local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms, enables
young people from Britain and other Commonwealth countries to take part with
the voluntary assistance of adults in a variety of challenging activities in four
areas: community service, expeditions, the development of personal interests
and social and practical skills, and physical recreation.
Thousands of young people voluntarily take part in community service designed
to assist those in need, including the elderly and the disabled, and many others
work on conservation projects. Organisations providing opportunities for
community service such as International Voluntary Service, Task Force and
Community Service Volunteers receive grants from the Government. Many
schools also organise community service activities as part of the curriculum.
The Community Projects Foundation is an independent body which advises
interested organisations on methods of involving young people in community
service. The Foundation receives a government grant and employs teams of
young people who are available on request to assist in promoting voluntary
service.
8 The
Environment
By comprehensive land-use planning and development control Britain has had
considerable success in resolving the conflicting demands of industry, com¬
merce, housing, transport, agriculture and recreation and in reducing environ¬
mental pollution. There is no ‘national plan' for urban and land development,
but there is a statutory system of land-use planning applying over the whole
country and to virtually every kind of development, and there are laws dealing
specifically with environmental health and the control of pollution. In general all
development requires local ‘planning permission', and applications for permis¬
sion are dealt with in the light of development plans which set out strategies for
each area on such matters as housing, transport, industry and open land. The
underlying approach is to promote efficiency, economy and amenity in the use
and development of land, respecting both the needs of development and the
interests of conservation. Throughout Britain voluntary organisations take an
active interest in planning, conservation and the control of pollution.
Planning
The system of land-use planning in Great Britain involves a centralised
structure under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Wales and
Scotland, and compulsory planning duties for local planning authorities. The
Department of the Environment brings together the major responsibilities in
England for land-use planning, housing and construction, countryside policy
and environmental protection. The Welsh Office and the Scottish Development
Department have broadly equivalent responsibilities. Large-scale planning in
England and Wales is primarily the responsibility of the county councils and the
Greater London Council while district councils and the councils of the London
boroughs and the City of London are responsible for most local plans and
development control, the main housing functions and many environmental
health matters. In Scotland, planning functions are undertaken by regional and
district councils whose responsibilities are divided on a basis broadly similar to
that in England and Wales. In the more rural regions and the islands, all
planning responsibilities are carried out by the regional and islands councils
respectively. In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland is responsible for planning matters through six divisional
planning offices which work closely with the district councils. The councils have
local environmental health responsibilities.
General problems of industrial development are dealt with jointly by a number
of government departments, but each development scheme, as a rule, requires
the local planning authority’s consent. Financial incentives encourage the
location of industry in areas with special needs for additional employment. (The
range of incentives and the areas to which they apply are being reviewed.) For
some planning purposes England is divided into eight regions, each with a
planning board. Wales has an Economic Planning Board and Northern Ireland
has an Economic Council.
Development The development plan system in England and Wales involves ‘structure’ and
Plans ‘local’ plans. Structure plans are prepared by county planning authorities and
require ministerial consent. They set out broad policies for the development and
162
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public
Participation
Major
Schemes
New Towns
other use of land (including measures for the improvement of the physical
environment and traffic management). Local plans containing detailed propos¬
als, including plans for ‘action areas’ where comprehensive development is
expected to start within a specified period, are normally prepared by district
planning authorities, although sometimes by county planning authorities, and
must conform generally to the approved structure plan. In exceptional cases,
with ministerial approval, the adoption of a local plan may precede the approval
of a structure plan. Local plans are adopted by the planning authorities without
being subject to ministerial approval unless the Secretary of State calls in a plan
for his own decision. All plans are kept under review and may be altered from
time to time. Scotland has a broadly similar system which can also include the
production of a regional report by regional and islands authorities, outlining
their priorities and policies. In Northern Ireland there is a single-tier system;
plans are prepared by the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity to
express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative stages of
the structure and local plans. The local planning authorities must ensure
adequate publicity for matters proposed for inclusion in the plans; representa¬
tions may be made about them to the authorities. These opportunities for public
participation are additional to provisions for objecting to prepared plans. In the
case of structure plans the Secretary of State normally holds an examination in
public of matters on which he requires more information in order to reach a
decision. In the case of local plans objectors have a right to be heard at a public
local inquiry held by the planning authorities.
Where specific proposals for development differ substantially from the
intentions of a development plan, they must be publicised locally. Other
schemes affecting a large number of people are usually advertised by the local
planning authority and applications seeking permission for certain types of
development must also be advertised. The applicant has a right of appeal to the
Secretary of State if planning permission is refused or is granted subject to
conditions. Most appeals are transferred for decision to inspectors (in Scotland
reporters) appointed by the Secretary of State.
Similar provision is made in Northern Ireland for public participation in the
planning process and for the hearing of objections. There is a right of appeal to
an independent Planning Appeals Commission.
The Secretaries of State can direct that a planning application be referred to
them for decision. This power is exercised sparingly and usually only in respect
of proposals of national or regional importance, for example the proposal to
construct a new passenger terminal at Stansted Airport, Essex. The applicant
and the local planning authority have the right to be heard by a person
appointed by the Secretary of State and a public inquiry is normally held for this
purpose. In the case of development schemes of exceptional importance the
departments concerned have set up procedures to aid the progress of the inquiry
itself by helping the parties to resolve peripheral matters beforehand. Where
highway development is proposed, the government minister concerned can hold
such inquiries as he considers appropriate; these generally relate to the
compulsory acquisition of land.
The 32 new towns designated since 1946 (see map, p 163) represent one of the
most significant achievements in recent British planning. Twenty-one of them
are in England, two in Wales, five in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland. Most
of them had an existing town or village as a nucleus. The policy behind their
creation was mainly one of encouraging the gradual dispersal of industry and
New Ibwns
164
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Inner City
Policies
Urban
Programme
population from congested cities to new areas, planned in advance to become
self-contained towns with their own industry, services and amenities within
convenient distance of the whole community.
The new towns have a total population of over 2 million. Young people form a
somewhat higher proportion than in the population of the country as a whole.
Several of the more developed towns are becoming regional centres and, as the
populations grow large enough to give the necessary support, offices, hotels and
department stores, as well as arts centres and entertainment and recreational
facilities, are gradually being provided.
In England eight of the new towns have been substantially completed and the
development corporations, which supervised the planning and development of
the towns, dissolved. Target dates have been announced for the dissolution of a
further eight new town development corporations by the mid-1980s and of the
remainder by the late 1980s. The dissolution of the five Scottish development
corporations is not expected before the end of the 1980s. In Wales responsibility
for one of the two new towns (Newtown) has been taken over by the Development
Board for Rural Wales (known as ‘Mid-Wales Development ) while the corporation
of the other is to be dissolved in 1988. In Northern Ireland, development of the
new towns has been incorporated in a new District Towns Strategy which is the
responsibility of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. The
Government is making substantial disposals of the completed assets of the new
towns to the private sector in order to release resources for investment and to
reduce the involvement of the public sector.
Town development (or ‘expanding town') schemes, introduced in 1952 in
England and Wales and 1957 in Scotland, involved the transfer of people and
industry from overcrowded areas to existing towns suitable for expansion; these
were arranged directly between the local authorities of the towns concerned. As
with the new towns, the schemes are now being wound up; the programme has
resulted in the provision of new homes for over 300,000 people.
Revitalising the inner areas of many towns and cities is one of the most
important tasks in modern planning. Past policies have produced many
successes (most of the slums have been replaced, much old housing has been
improved and the clean air legislation has enhanced the general environment
and public health) but other problems remain. They include high unemploy¬
ment, decay and dereliction, and population structures with relatively large
proportions of the disadvantaged and the elderly. It is the Government’s policy to
work out, in co-operation with local authorities, a package of measures for the
most badly affected areas that is most likely to improve conditions and
encourage, as far as possible, local voluntary action, notably by means of
‘partnerships’ (see p 165), and the co-operation of the private sector in
regenerating local economies. Various special measures, aimed at increasing
employment opportunities and the involvement of residents in the rejuvenation
of their areas, have been introduced.
The inner city areas have been given greater resources and priority by central
government for a number of years. The ‘urban programme’ has been increased
from a 1977-78 level in England and Wales of under £30 million to £348 million
in 1984-85. The programme complements the main social, environmental and
economic programmes of local authorities, often by providing extra facilities
which would otherwise not be available such as day nurseries, centres for the
elderly and language classes for immigrants, and covers industrial, commercial,
environmental and recreational provision as well. The urban programme
represents only a part of the central assistance to urban, and other, local
authorities. The main contribution is through the annual ‘rate support’ grant,
THE ENVIRONMENT
165
Enterprise
Zones
transport supplementary grant (in England and Wales only), housing subsidy
and other programmes.
In certain places, special schemes are in operation. A co-ordinated ‘part¬
nership' approach has been running for some years in seven English areas in
which central and local government work together to tackle urban problems
where they are at their most severe. Each partnership has a three-year action
programme rolled forward annually, which is based on the needs of the area and
its particular priorities. Partnerships receive allocations of urban programme
resources ranging from £10 million to £25 million a year. To meet the particular
problems and opportunities of the London docklands and the Merseyside dock
area following large-scale dock closures, the Government has set up urban
development corporations modelled on the new town development corporations,
and these are to receive some £75 million in 1984-85. Elsewhere in England 23
areas have been identified where the problems are on a slightly smaller scale but
still merit special attention. These areas prepare their own inner city program¬
mes and like the partnerships receive special allocations of urban programme
resources. Additional resources are also made available to a further 17 English
and eight Welsh districts designated under the Inner Urban Areas Act 1978.
Since 1982 an arrangement has operated with the urban programme to attract
more private sector investment into urban areas. Local authorities were invited
to prepare a range of investment projects in co-operation with private interests
which can qualify for an Urban Development Grant from the Government. A key
feature of the scheme is that the grant is available only for projects which involve
substantial private funds and will make a significant impact on the area. Since
the scheme was launched some 125 projects have been approved, representing a
total capital investment of over £300 million. National Garden Festivals, based
on the European idea of garden shows, are being introduced with the aim of
rejuvenating inner city areas and reclaiming derelict sites. Following the first
festival in Liverpool in 1984, which had international status, the second festival
will be held in Stoke-on-Trent in 1986.
In Scotland, where the urban programme amounts to £27 million in 1984-85,
a major urban renewal exercise in Glasgow to regenerate the city’s east end (the
Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal Project) is organised on somewhat similar lines
to the partnership areas in England, and a further eight Scottish districts have
been designated under the Inner Urban Areas Act. In Northern Ireland a special
effort is being made to tackle Belfast’s inner city problems.
Since 1981 the Government has set up 25 ‘enterprise zones’ which will last for
ten years (see map, p 166). The aim of this experimental policy is to see how far
industrial and commercial activity can be stimulated by the removal of certain
tax burdens and by relaxing or speeding up the application of a number of
administrative controls. The zones, which vary widely but all contain land
suitable for development, range in size from about 50 to 450 hectares (about 120
to over 1,100 acres). Benefits in the zones include exemption from rates (the
local property tax) and development land tax; 100 per cent allowances for
corporation and income tax purposes for capital expenditure on industrial and
commercial buildings; a much simplified planning system in which most forms
of development are automatically permitted; and a reduction in government
requests for statisticad information.
Housing
The significant general improvement in housing supply and conditions during
the last 35 years has resulted, in national terms, in a slight excess of supply over
demand, while needs and problems have become increasingly specific and local.
Enterprise Zones
0 20 40 60 80 100 kilometres
L
40 60 80 miles
® Enterprise zones
Boundaries of economic
planning regions
THE ENVIRONMENT
167
The emphasis of public sector housing policy is being shifted from new building
to modernisation, improvement and making better use of the existing stock. In
the private sector encouragement of home ownership and of rented housing are
central policy aims.
Housing There are over 21 million dwellings, houses being much more common than
Characteristics flats (the ratio is roughly four to one). More than two families in every five live in
a post-1945 home, and many of the large number of older dwellings have been
kept in good repair and modernised.
Throughout this century pressure on housing accommodation has been
increased more by the rapid rise in the number of separate households than by
the increase in population. While the number of people has increased by about
two-fifths, the number of households has more than doubled. The 1981 Census
showed the total number of households in Great Britain as 19-5 million.
Improvements in living standards were continuing; only 1 -3 per cent were not in
self-contained accommodation, 4-3 per cent lived at an average density of more
than one person per room and 3 -2 per cent were lacking or sharing use of a bath.
Over half of all dwellings are owned by their occupiers, nearly a third are
rented from public housing authorities, and most of the remainder are rented
from private landlords. There are variations, however, in the distribution of
tenure between different parts of the country; in Scotland more than half the
dwellings are rented from public authorities while in Wales nearly two-thirds of
dwellings are owner-occupied. Private rented accommodation is generally more
common in the central parts of large towns, while owner-occupation is more
frequent in outer suburbs and in country areas.
New house construction is undertaken by both public and private sectors but
over the past few years the private sector has built more dwellings than the
public sector. In addition, about 7 per cent of the new building in 1982 was
carried out by voluntary housing associations and societies. Public authorities
provide dwellings mainly for renting while private interests build mainly for sale
to owner-occupiers. There has been very little building of private dwellings to
rent but the provisions in the Housing Act 1980 for ‘assured' tenancies have
encouraged some new building for private letting by such bodies as building
societies, pension funds and insurance companies.
Administration As with environmental planning, responsibility for formulating housing policy
and supervising the housing programme is borne by the Secretary of State for
the Environment in England and by the Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland. Although the policies are broadly similar throughout
Britain, provisions may differ slightly in Northern Ireland and Scotland from
those in England and Wales.
The construction or structural alteration of housing is subject to building
regulations laid down by the Government. For building in the private sector the
National House-Building Council sets standards and enforces them by inspec¬
tion and certification. Almost all new private houses are covered by the Council’s
insurance scheme which provides ten-year guarantees against major structural
defects. A two-year guarantee is also given against faulty workmanship. Most
lenders will not make a loan for the purchase of a new house unless it is covered
by a Council certificate.
Local authorities are responsible for the payment of house renovation grants
and the implementation of housing renewal programmes. Many have housing
advisory centres to provide information on aspects of housing.
Research into building materials and techniques, as well as into the social,
economic and design aspects of housing, is undertaken by the Department of
168
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
Public Sector
Housing
the Environment, the Scottish Development Department, the Welsh Office and
the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
The number of people owning their own homes has more than doubled in the
last 20 years, and the number of owner-occupied homes now amounts to over
12-8 million. Most public sector tenants have the right to buy the homes they
occupy at discounts which vary according to the length of their occupancy. Local
authorities have been asked to encourage low-cost home ownership by selling
land to builders to construct homes for ‘first-time’ buyers, or to individuals or
groups to build their own ‘first-time’ homes in partnership with private
builders; by improving homes for sale; by selling dilapidated homes for
improvement by the purchaser (‘homesteading’); by offering shared ownership
(part owning, part renting); and by using local authority guarantee powers to
facilitate lending by building societies.
In Northern Ireland the concept of shared ownership has been developed in
the public sector by the Northern Ireland Housing Executive and in the private
sector by the Northern Ireland Co-ownership Housing Association. The Execu¬
tive has offered most of its homes for sale to the tenants.
Most people buy their homes through a mortgage which is a system of
instalment purchase through loans (for which the properties are regarded
as securities) from such sources as building societies, banks, insurance
companies, industrial and provident societies and local authorities. Some
companies also make loans for house purchase to their own employees.
Building societies are by far the largest sources of such loans, their share of
the market being about 80 per cent. For first-time buyers they usually advance
about 90 per cent of their valuation of a property with the help of an appropriate
insurance guarantee but it is possible to borrow up to 100 per cent. Loans are
normally repayable over periods of 20 or 25 years (up to 30 or 35 years in certain
circumstances) by equal monthly instalments to cover capital and interest.
Ordinary mortgage loans from building societies are usually available to
purchasers on average income or above. People with insufficient income to
obtain a mortgage for outright purchase may be able to participate in a scheme
in which a housing association buys the home and sells a share in it to them,
allowing them to rent the remainder and to purchase it at a later stage if they
wish.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on interest payments arising on up
to £30,000 of their mortgage loans (on their main home only). Under the Home
Loan Scheme first-time home buyers who have saved for two years and are
buying a home in the lower price range may qualify for an extra loan of £600
interest-free for up to five years, and a tax-free bonus of up to £110.
Most of the public housing in Great Britain is provided by 459 local housing
authorities. The authorities are: in England and Wales (outside London), the
district councils: in London, the London borough councils and the Common
Council of the City of London; and in Scotland, the district and islands councils.
Other public housing authorities are the new town authorities, the Scottish
Special Housing Association, which supplements building by local authorities
in Scotland, and the Development Board for Rural Wales. The Northern Ireland
Housing Executive is responsible for the provision and management of public
housing in Northern Ireland.
Subsidies may be made available to the authorities to assist them with
housing costs, and guidance is given on design and layout. Public housing
authorities own more than 6 million houses and flats. The number of homes
owned by each authority varies widely, several of the larger authorities having a
stock of well over 100,000.
THE ENVIRONMENT
169
Privately
Rented
Housing
Local authorities meet the capital costs of new house construction and of
modernisation of their existing stock by raising loans on the open market or by
borrowing from the Public Works Loan Board (an independent statutory body
set up to make loans to local authorities). Current expenditure, including
maintenance and management costs and loan interests and repayments, is met
from rents, which may be supplemented by subsidies from the Government and,
where required to balance housing revenue accounts, from the rates. Local
authorities are required to charge their tenants reasonable rents (which keep a
balance between the interests of tenants and ratepayers).
Sheltered accommodation (with an alarm system and resident warden) is
provided for many elderly people who need this degree of support. Increasing
importance is also being placed on the housing needs of physically handicapped
people, and a small but growing proportion of the new housing stock is suitable
for them. Also receiving attention are the needs of other ‘disadvantaged' groups
such as one-parent families, those who have suffered from mental illness, and
victims of violence within the family. Local authorities have a statutory duty to
ensure that accommodation (not necessarily an authority house) is available for
homeless people who have dependent children or are vulnerable on grounds
such as age or disability.
The Housing Act 1980 established a charter for public sector tenants in
England and Wales, giving them statutory rights which include security of
tenure, provision for a resident member of the tenant’s family to succeed to the
tenancy on the death of the tenant, rights of subletting and taking in lodgers,
and, at the landlord’s discretion, reimbursement for improvements made by the
tenant. With a few exceptions, public sector tenants of at least two years'
standing can buy the freehold of their house, or a long lease of their flat, at a
discount which depends on the length of occupation. Similar provisions are
made for Scotland and Northern Ireland under separate legislation.
A National Mobility Scheme, sponsored by the Department of the Environ¬
ment, the Scottish Development Department and the principal bodies con¬
cerned with public sector housing, has been introduced to assist tenants who
need to move to another area for employment or social reasons. Tenants who
wish to move by exchanging homes are able to make use of a computer-based
national information scheme.
During the last quarter of a century there has been a steady decline in the
number of rented dwellings available from private landlords (including tied
accommodation)—from over 50 per cent of the housing stock to about 12 per
cent (2-5 million). Major factors have been the increased demand for owner-
occupation, the greater availability of public rented housing, and the operation
of rent restriction. Privately rented dwellings form a high proportion of older
housing. Many landlords are individuals with small holdings, but some rented
housing is provided by larger property owners, including property companies.
Most privately rented dwellings are subject to rent restriction, of which there
are two kinds: regulated tenancies, where a ‘fair rent’ is fixed by independent
rent officers; and tenancies where there is a resident landlord and in a few other
types of furnished accommddation, where a reasonable rent is fixed by a rent
tribunal (in Scotland, by a rent assessment committee). Tenants have a wide
degree of security of tenure, and may not be evicted without a court order.
Harassment of residential occupiers is a criminal offence. The Housing Act 1980
(and similar legislation for Scotland and Northern Ireland) introduced a system
of ‘shorthold’ lettings, giving tenants security of tenure for an agreed period
between one and five years, but not for life. In London and in Scotland a fair rent
must be registered for a shorthold; elsewhere it is optional. Lettings previously
regulated are not affected. In England and Wales building of private dwellings to
170
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Housing
Associations
Improving
Older Homes
let is encouraged by the system of ‘assured’ tenancies, which allows approved
bodies to let property at freely negotiated rents outside the provisions of the Rent
Acts. Tenants with incomes up to average levels are eligible for assistance with
their rent under a national scheme of rent allowances which is operated by local
authorities and financed mainly by government subsidies.
In Northern Ireland, only pre-1956 properties subject to rent restriction come
under statutory control, and rent levels are linked to those of the Northern
Ireland Housing Executive. Rent increases are permitted only for properties
which meet a prescribed standard. There is an uncontrolled rent sector,
comprising mostly furnished accommodation.
Housing associations extend the choice of housing by providing accommodation
available for rent through new building or the rehabilitation of older property.
The associations normally cater for people who would otherwise look to a local
authority for a home. In addition to normal family housing, they provide
particularly for the special needs of elderly, disabled and single people.
The associations, which are non-profit-making, have grown under govern¬
ment encouragement and now own some 500,000 homes. Individual associa¬
tions range in size from a group of ‘almshouses' for fewer than ten old people to
associations with more than 10,000 homes. In Great Britain rented housing
schemes carried out by associations qualify for government grant if the
association is one of the nearly 3,000 registered with the Housing Corporation, a
statutory body. Rented homes owned by housing associations come within the
fair rent and rent allowance arrangements, and most housing association
tenants have rights under the tenants’ charter in the Housing Act 1980,
including the right to buy. Housing associations also provide accommodation
on a shared ownership basis, allowing the occupier to part-rent and part-own a
home, and they can purchase improved older properties for outright sale. Both
activities are eligible for government grants.
In Northern Ireland assistance is available to associations registered with the
Department of the Environment. Rent levels are linked to those of the Northern
Ireland Housing Executive; tenants have rights under a tenants’ charter, but not
the right to buy.
Modernisation and conversion of sub-standard homes, with the help of grants
from public funds, has increasingly been encouraged as an alternative to
clearing and rebuilding and as a way of preserving established communities and
of making more economic use of resources.
Nearly 1-7 million home improvement grants were paid to householders in
Great Britain between 1967 and 1983. There are four types of grant:
improvement grants, for carrying out improvements to a good standard or for
conversion into flats; intermediate grants, for the provision of standard
amenities (such as a bath and an inside lavatory) and associated repairs; grants
for substantial and structural repairs to pre-1919 houses (pre-1957 in Northern
Ireland); and special grants (not available in Scotland) for providing standard
amenities, repairs and means of escape from fire in houses which are in multiple
occupation.
Declaring ‘general improvement areas’ and ‘housing action areas’ enables local
authorities in England and Wales to tackle the improvement of whole areas of
older housing systematically. General improvement areas (of which there are
more than 1,500) consist of fundamentally sound houses and a stable
population. Housing action areas (nearly 400) are characterised by relatively
poor housing and bad physical conditions combined with social stress. Local
authorities have special powers to bring about an improvement in living
conditions for the benefit of residents within a five-year period. In both types of
THE ENVIRONMENT
171
area government financial aid for environmental improvement (such as
tree-planting) is available to local authorities. Grants to householders may range
up to 75 per cent of the eligible expense limit, and in certain cases of hardship
up to 90 per cent. ‘Enveloping’, introduced in England and Wales in 1982,
involves the renovation of the external fabric of whole terraces or streets of
mainly privately owned property in housing action areas which has deteriorated
beyond routine maintenance. It is carried out by local authorities at public
expense, and the encouragement it gives to residents is reflected in the
increased take-up of grants for improvements to the interiors after enveloping.
An improvement-for-sale scheme has also been introduced; the Government
helps to meet any loss a local authority may make in buying, improving and
selling rundown or neglected housing.
In Scotland housing action area powers are available for areas in which at
least half the houses fail to meet prescribed physical standards and there is no
time limit on the period within which improvement must be carried out.
Outside housing action areas in Scotland local authorities have power to require
the improvement of houses below the statutory tolerable standard, or lacking a
bathroom, by improvement orders. In housing action areas or where an
improvement order has been made grants of up to 75 per cent of the eligible
expense limit (up to 90 per cent in cases of hardship) may be made.
Northern Ireland has a major problem of derelict and unfit housing, especially
in Belfast, the situation having been made worse by civil disturbance. Concerted
measures are being taken in housing action areas, and there is a continuing
programme of rehabilitation in Belfast. Housing receives priority in Northern
Ireland s social and environmental programme. A strategy has been designed to
ensure a reduction in the amount of unfit housing by 1 per cent a year and in the
urgent element of the waiting list by a third by 1988.
Slum Clearance In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and redevelopment have been major
features of housing policy. Large-scale clearance is now almost at an end and
greater emphasis is placed on renewal and modernisation. Local authorities
receive special financial assistance from the Government.
Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation exists, or
can be provided by them, for people displaced by slum clearance. Owners of land
compulsorily acquired during slum clearance programmes receive as compensa¬
tion either the full market value or, if the property consists of unfit houses, a
sum based on the value of the cleared site; additional payments are, however,
made to most owner-occupiers of unfit houses to bring their compensation up to
market value.
Redevelopment of slums has presented considerable problems. Many of the
areas were seriously overcrowded and lacked social facilities but usually had the
advantages of the basic utilities, local employment and easy access to town-
centre facilities. In order to house as many people as possible on the sites, large
areas were cleared and ‘high-rise’ flats built. In some cases the design of the
buildings and building maintenance have presented problems and the flats have
not proved satisfactory for some types of tenant, particularly families with
children, because of the lack of safe and convenient play space. Where there is
need to build to a high density in inner city areas it is now met by carefully
grouped ‘low-rise’ blocks (usually not more than four storeys), including
individual houses.
Conservation
Britain is one of the leading countries in the conservation movement. A wide
range of groups, including many voluntary organisations, are active in it. The
172
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Historic
Buildings and
Conservation
Areas
Architectural
Standards
Council for Environmental Conservation is a national coalition of non¬
governmental organisations which focuses attention on major issues.
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historical interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for the Environment and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; over 325,000 buildings are
already listed. It is against the law to demolish or alter the characfer of any listed
building without special consent from the local planning authority or the
appropriate Secretary of State; where consent is given to demolish a building,
the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (for England) and similar
bodies for Scotland and Wales have an opportunity to make a photographic
record of the building. Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served
by the local planning authority to protect buildings not yet listed.
Maintaining royal parks (which are open to the public) and palaces is the
responsibility of the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Scotland and
Wales. The Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England (known
as English Heritage), set up in 1984 and incorporating the Ancient Monuments
Board and the Historic Buildings Council, manages ancient monuments and
gives grants for ancient monuments, historic buildings and buildings in
conservation areas in England. In Scotland and Wales Ancient Monuments
Boards and Historic Buildings Councils perform similar functions. Local
authorities can make grants and loans for any building of architectural or
historic interest even if it is not listed. The National Heritage Memorial Fund,
financed by the Government, provides assistance towards the cost of acquiring,
maintaining or preserving land, buildings, works of art and other items of
importance to the national heritage; since 1984, for example, the Fund has
played a major part in the preservation of Calke Abbey (Derbyshire), for which it
is providing some £4-5 million. The Architectural Heritage Fund, with the
capital derived from private contributions matched by contributions from the
Government, provides loans for local trusts to preserve historic buildings.
Local planning authorities have designated for special protection over 5,000
‘conservation areas’ of particular architectural or historic interest. Grants and
loans are available for works which make a significant contribution towards the
preservation or enhancement of such an area.
In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland
has 154 historic monuments in its care. The Department is responsible for
listing buildings of special architectural or historic interest and for the
designation of conservation areas; there are some 6,500 listed buildings and 20
conservation areas. It may also provide grants and loans to help with the repair
and maintenance of listed buildings and to preserve or enhance conservation
areas. It has the advice of a Historic Buildings Council and a Historic
Monuments Council.
Among the voluntary organisations which campaign for the preservation of
buildings are the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and the Ancient
Monuments Society; the Georgian Group and the Scottish Georgian Society; the
Ulster Architectural Heritage Society; and the Victorian Society. The National
Trust (for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty) is an independent
charity which has more than 1 million members and owns and protects about
200 historic buildings in addition to 230,000 hectares (560,000 acres) of land
and large stretches of coastline in England, Northern Ireland and Wales.
Scotland has its own National Trust.
Besides helping to conserve the best buildings inherited from the past, the
Government encourages high standards in new building. The Secretary of State
for the Environment, in collaboration with the independent Royal Institute of
THE ENVIRONMENT
173
Tree
Preservation
Green Belts
The Coast
British Architects (RIBA) and the National House-Building Council, makes
awards for good design in housing, with categories for renovation as well as new
building. Wales has a similar but separate awards scheme. The Government has
also encouraged the use of architectural competitions, and has set an example
in the award of some of its own contracts. Royal Fine Art Commissions for
England and Wales and for Scotland advise government departments, planning
authorities and other public bodies on questions of public amenity or artistic
importance.
The RIBA, which is the principal professional body for architects, exercises
control over standards in architectural education. The Royal Incorporation of
Architects in Scotland is allied to it. The Civic Trust, with associate trusts in
Scotland, Wales and north-east and north-west England, encourages high
standards in urban design and the protection and improvement of the
environment.
The local planning authorities have power to protect trees and woodlands in the
interest of amenity by means of tree preservation orders. When granting
planning permission for development, a local planning authority must, where
appropriate, impose conditions to secure the preservation or planting of trees.
Landowners generally must replace trees which die or are removed or destroyed
in contravention of a preservation order.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent
neighbouring towns merging into one another, or to preserve the special
character of a town and the amenities of the countryside, ‘green belts’ (areas
where it is intended that the land should be left open and free from further
building development and where people can seek recreation) have been
established on the fringes of certain urban areas. Much of London’s green belt,
for example, is agricultural land or woodland, some of which is used for
recreation. There are also areas specifically for recreational use, such as country
parks, public open spaces, playing fields and golf courses.
The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land use at
the coast providing, for example, recreational facilities and amenities for
holidaymakers and local residents; at the same time they attempt to safeguard
and enhance the coast’s natural attractions and preserve areas of scientific
interest.
A comprehensive study of the coastline of England and Wales, undertaken by
the Countryside Commission (see p 174) in 1966-70, recommended that
certain stretches of undeveloped coast of particular scenic beauty should be
treated as heritage coast. Jointly with local authorities, the Commission has
defined 37 of these coasts so far, protecting nearly 1,200 km (750 miles).
In 1965 the National Trust launched its Enterprise Neptune campaign to raise
funds for the nation to acquire stretches of coastline of great natural beauty and
recreational value. More than £6 million has been raised so far and as a result
the Trust has under its protection 706 km (440 miles) of coastline in England
and Wales. Some 128 km (80 miles) of coast in Scotland are protected by
conservation agreements with the National Trust for Scotland. In Northern
Ireland 61 km (38 miles) of coast and coastal path have been acquired by the
National Trust.
In exceptional cases economic arguments override conservation; development
associated with North Sea oil and gas is occurring on remote and unspoiled
coastal areas in Scotland, for instance, but planning guidelines drawn up by the
Scottish Development Department aim to ensure that oil-related activities are
sited so as to make the best use of existing labour and infrastructure and to
174
Outdoor
Advertising
Countryside
Commissions
National Parks,
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
and National
Scenic Areas
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
minimise the effect on the coastline. Provision has also been made for funds to
be set aside for the restoration of sites once there is no further need for them.
The protection of the coastline against erosion is administered centrally by the
Department of the Environment, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Office. The
maritime local authorities, which have powers to carry out coastal protection
works, are presented with difficult engineering problems and heavy costs, but
substantial grants from central funds may be made available.
The display of outdoor advertisements is controlled by local planning author¬
ities. General consents have been issued for certain classes of advertisement but
these can be withdrawn in any particular case where there is a serious threat to
amenity or public safety. Consent for other advertisements must be sought from
the local planning authority. Rural areas and urban areas requiring special
protection for reasons of amenity can be designated as ‘areas of special control’
with stricter standards on most advertisements and a ban on posters.
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for
Scotland) are responsible for encouraging and promoting measures to conserve
and enhance the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside and for
encouraging the development of facilities for open-air recreation in the
countryside. These include the provision by local authorities (sometimes in
association with other bodies) and private individuals of country parks and
picnic sites often within easy reach of towns; the provision or improvement of
recreational paths; the encouragement of amenity tree-planting schemes; and
the increased use of reservoirs, canals and other waterways for bathing, sailing
and other activities. Some 183 country parks and 232 picnic sites have been
recognised in England and Wales by the Countryside Commission. In Scotland
28 country parks are recognised and a large number of local authority and
private sector schemes for the provision of a variety of countryside facilities have
been approved for grant aid. The Commissions undertake research projects and
experimental schemes, working in consultation with local authorities and such
bodies as the Nature Conservancy Council (see p 175) and the Sports Councils.
The Commissions give financial assistance to public, private and voluntary
bodies and individuals carrying out countryside recreation and amenity
projects.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) is empowered to
designate, for confirmation by the appropriate minister, national parks and
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’; to define heritage coasts in conjunction
with local authorities (see p 173); and to make proposals for the creation of
long-distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been estab¬
lished covering 13,600 sq km (5,250 sq miles), or 9 per cent of the area of
England and Wales. Some 35 areas of outstanding natural beauty have been
designated and confirmed, covering 14,500 sq km (5,600 sq miles).
The land in these designated areas generally remains privately owned, but
agreements or orders to secure additional public access may be made by local
authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance the landscape’s natural
beauty by high standards of development control, and by positive measures, for
which grants are available, such as tree planting and the removal of eyesores. In
the national parks other measures for the benefit of the public include the
provision of car parks, camping and caravan areas, and information centres. All
national parks and some other designated areas have warden services. Most
local authority expenditure on national parks is met by government grants.
In Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Committee advises the Depart¬
ment of the Environment on the preservation of amenities and the designation
THE ENVIRONMENT
175
Local Footpaths
and Open
Country
Nature
Conservation
of areas of outstanding natural beauty. Eight areas of outstanding natural
beauty have been designated, covering 259,500 hectares (641,000 acres) and
seven areas are being managed as country parks and one as a regional park.
In Scotland there are no national parks as such, but there are 40 ‘national
scenic areas , covering more than 1 million hectares (2-5 million acres), or 13 per
cent of the country, where certain kinds of development are subject to
consultation with the Countryside Commission for Scotland, and the Secretary
of State for Scotland, in the event of a disagreement. More than 98 per cent of
the land in Scotland is designated countryside within which the Commission
may provide grants for a wide range of countryside projects.
There are seven forest parks in Great Britain, covering some 243,000 hectares
(600,000 acres) and administered by the Forestry Commission, and nine in
Northern Ireland administered by the Forest Service of the Department of
Agriculture. Camping and other recreational facilities are provided.
Many voluntary organisations are concerned to preserve the amenities of the
countryside; they include the Councils for the Protection of Rural England and
of Rural Wales, the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland and the
Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside.
County councils in England and Wales are required to prepare and keep under
review definitive maps showing public rights of way; they are also responsible for
keeping rights of way free from obstruction, and signposted. If a path is not
shown on the map, a private citizen may claim that it is a public right of way if it
has been used and regarded as such without hindrance for at least 20 years.
Public footpaths are maintained by local authorities which also supervise
landowners’ duties to repair stiles and gates. Local authorities in Great Britain
can create paths, close existing paths no longer needed for public use and divert
paths to meet the needs of either the public or landowners. Local planning
authorities can also convert minor roads into footpaths or bridleways to improve
the amenities of their area. There are 13 approved long-distance footpaths and
bridleways in England and Wales covering some 2,580 km (1,600 miles) and
three approved long-distance routes in Scotland covering some 530 km
(330 miles). Voluntary organisations concerned with footpaths include the
Open Spaces Society, the Scottish Rights of Way Society and the Ramblers
Association.
There is no automatic right of public access to open country, although many
landowners permit more or less free access. Local planning authorities can
secure access by means of agreements with landowners; if agreements cannot be
obtained, authorities may acquire land or make orders for public access. Similar
powers cover Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Common land, a large proportion of which is open to the public, totals an
estimated 600,000 hectares (1-5 million acres) in England and Wales. (There is
no common land in Scotland or Northern Ireland.) This land is usually privately
owned, but people other than the owner may have various rights on or over it, for
example, of pasture for farm animals. Commons are protected by law and cannot
be built on or enclosed without the consent of the Secretaries of State for the
Environment or Wales.
The official body responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain is the
Nature Conservancy Council which has the functions of establishing, maintain¬
ing and managing nature reserves, advising the Government, providing general
information and advice, and commissioning or supporting research. There are
195 national nature reserves covering 150,000 hectares (371,000 acres). Some
4,000 sites of special scientific interest have been scheduled for their flora,
fauna or geological or physiographical features.
176
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Land
Reclamation
and Use
About 46,000 hectares (114,000 acres) of Forestry Commission land are
managed as areas in which nature conservation is the main object. Local
authorities have declared about 95 local nature reserves. Voluntary nature
conservation trusts and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds play an
important part in protecting wildlife, having established between them some
1,500 reserves. The trusts are affiliated to a parent organisation, the Royal
Society for Nature Conservation. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds,
with over 350,000 members, is the largest voluntary wildlife conservation body
in Europe.
In Northern Ireland the Nature Reserves Committee advises the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland on the designation of national nature
reserves and areas of scientific interest; there are 42 and 47 respectively.
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 extended the list of protected species,
restricted the introduction into the countryside of animals or plants not
normally found in the wild and afforded greater protection for areas of special
scientific interest and other important habitats. The Act also contained a
number of measures designed to enhance and promote the national parks and
amended the law relating to public rights of way. In Northern Ireland a nature
conservation order and a wildlife protection order are expected to be operative in
1985, bringing legislation into line with the rest of Britain on species and
habitat protection.
Derelict land, often concentrated in places associated with nineteenth-century
industrial development, presents special problems to planners. It includes
mineral waste tips, old mineral workings, obsolete industrial buildings and
disused railways and docks. In England most derelict land reclamation is
undertaken, with the help of central government grant, by local authorities,
which have the power to acquire derelict land and bring it back into use or
improve its appearance. Grants are also available to people and public bodies
other than local authorities.
The expenditure provision for the derelict land programme in 1984-85 is £74
million. Priority is given to joint schemes by local authorities and private
developers aimed at bringing land reclaimed by public expenditure into private
development for industrial, commercial, housing and recreational use. Between
April 1974 and March 1982 some 17,000 hectares (41,900 acres) of derelict land
were restored to beneficial use.
In Scotland and Wales responsibility for derelict land reclamation rests with
the respective development agencies, which may acquire and reclaim land,
employ local authorities as their agents (in Scotland) or make grants to local
authorities for the purpose (in Wales). In Northern Ireland grants may be paid to
landowners who restore or improve derelict sites.
To prevent new dereliction, planning controls require that when permission is
given for mineral working various measures must be taken to minimise the
disturbance caused by the work and to secure whatever restoration is
practicable, either progressively or when working ceases. The use of land for
disposal of waste materials is also subject to conditions restricting the height of
waste tips or requiring treatment of waste on completion of workings.
The amount of agricultural land taken for development has been steadily
reduced from about 18,000 hectares (45,000 acres) a year between 1965 and
1970 to about 9,000 hectares (23,000 acres) a year between 1975 and 1980.
Land Registers In England the Government has instituted, and made available for inspection,
registers of under-used land held by local authorities, nationalised industries
and other public bodies; some 45,300 hectares (112,000 acres) have been
THE ENVIRONMENT
177
Administration
The Land
identified. There is power to direct a public body to dispose of registered land.
Registers have also been published for certain areas of Wales.
Control of Pollution
Government measures to control environmental pollution, in which industry
and voluntary organisations co-operate, are long established, and are com¬
plementary to the planning system and the various measures to conserve
amenities and the country’s heritage.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974, which applies to England, Scotland and
Wales, sets out a wide range of powers and duties for local and water authorities,
including control over wastes, air and water pollution and noise, and contains
important provisions on the release of information to the public on environmen¬
tal conditions. In particular, it introduced a new system for the comprehensive
planning of waste disposal operations so as to ensure that disposal is carried out
to satisfactory standards and that where practicable waste materials are
recovered and recycled. The Act also increased the penalties for a large number
of pollution offences. The provisions relating to noise and air pollution are fully
in force, as are a substantial number of those relating to waste on land; most of
the part dealing with water pollution will be fully implemented by 1986. Similar
legislation applies in Northern Ireland.
Executive responsibility for pollution control rests in general with local and
water authorities; certain industrial processes are controlled by the Industrial
Air Pollution Inspectorate (of the Health and Safety Commission). Local
authorities are responsible for matters such as collection and disposal of
domestic wastes; control of air pollution from domestic and certain industrial
premises; and noise abatement measures. Sewerage and sewage treatment and
disposal are the responsibilities of regional water authorities in England and
Wales, of local authorities in Scotland and of the Department of the Environ¬
ment in Northern Ireland. The regional water authorities in England, the Welsh
Water Authority, the river purification boards and islands councils in Scotland
and the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland are responsible for
control of water pollution.
An independent standing Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution
advises the Government on national and international matters concerning the
pollution of the environment, on the adequacy of research and on the future
possibilities of danger to the environment. It has so far produced ten reports
covering a wide range of topics.
Central government departments are principally concerned with exercising
general budgetary control, promoting the necessary legislation, and advising
pollution control authorities on its implementation. In England and Wales the
Secretary of State for the Environment has a co-ordinating role concerning
pollution matters as a whole, exercised in England through a Central Directo¬
rate of Environmental Protection within the department and in Wales through
the Water and Environmental Protection Division of the Welsh Office on behalf of
the Secretary of State for Wales. In Scotland and Northern Ireland a similar role
is exercised by the Secretaries of State through the Scottish Development
Department and the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
The main risks of land pollution lie in the indiscriminate dumping of waste
materials on land, careless disposal of pesticides and chemicals and the
deposition of materials from the atmosphere and from flood-water. The use of
sewage sludge on farms, too, involves risks as well as benefits to the land.
The Control of Pollution Act places a duty on waste disposal authorities
(county councils and the Greater London Council in England, for example) to
178
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Recycling and
Materials
Reclamation
Water Pollution
Marine
Pollution
ensure that there are adequate arrangements to dispose of controlled wastes. It
requires them to draw up and revise periodically a waste disposal plan and
establishes a licensing system for all waste disposal sites, treatment plants and
storage facilities receiving, controlled wastes. In addition, it provides for a more
intensive control system for certain specially hazardous or difficult wastes.
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any public place in the open air or to
dump rubbish except in designated places.
The Government encourages the reclamation and recycling of waste materials
wherever this is practicable and economic in order to reduce imports and waste
disposal costs and to help to conserve natural resources. Industry already makes
considerable use of reclaimed waste material such as metals, paper and textiles.
Local authorities collect about 200,000 tonnes of waste paper and about
100,000 tonnes of ferrous scrap annually. In an increasing number of areas
there are ‘bottle banks’ where the public can deposit used glass containers.
Waste disposal authorities are required under the Control of Pollution Act to
take full account of opportunities for waste reclamation in drawing up their
waste disposal plans. The Department of the Environment has provided
financial and technical help to South Yorkshire and Tyne and Wear County
Councils for two full-scale prototype plants for the mechanical sorting of
household refuse at Doncaster and Byker. Voluntary organisations also arrange
collections of waste material.
There has been a steady and significant improvement in water quality: the level
of pollution in the tidal Thames, for example, has been reduced to a quarter of
the 1950s' level and over 100 different kinds of fish have been identified there
since 1964. Discharges of polluting matter into rivers, lakes, estuaries and some
coastal waters are already controlled by law. Powers will be extended to lakes and
to underground and all coastal waters when the Control of Pollution Act is fully
implemented. More than 95 per cent of the population is provided with main
drainage, and public authority sewage treatment works serve over four-fifths of
the population—a very high proportion by international standards.
Control of marine pollution from ships is based largely on international
conventions drawn up under the auspices of the International Maritime
Organisation, a United Nations agency with headquarters in London, and
implemented for British ships by domestic legislation. The Merchant Shipping
(Prevention of Oil Pollution) Regulations 1983 make it an offence for ships of any
nationality to discharge oil or oily mixtures into British territorial waters and for
British registered ships to make similar discharges anywhere into the sea,
except in accordance with the regulations.
To deal with spillages of oil or chemicals at sea, which may cause coastal
pollution or threaten wildlife, the Department of Transport has a Marine
Pollution Control Unit and can also call upon the resources of the Marine Survey
and Coastguard services. The main treatment method is to spray dispersant
from aircraft or surface vessels, and emergency cargo transfer equipment is
available to remove oil from a damaged tanker. Local authorities have a primary
role in dealing with oil and chemical pollution of beaches and inshore waters,
and receive government advice and support.
The development of the offshore oil industry has brought an increased risk of
oil pollution in the North Sea. Offshore operators must ensure that oil does not
escape into the sea and are required to have contingency plans for dealing with
oil spilled accidentally. Discharges containing oil are controlled under the
Prevention of Oil Pollution Act 1971. Exemption from the Act, subject to strict
controls laid down by the Department of Energy, is normally granted to the
THE ENVIRONMENT
179
Clean Air
operators of offshore installations to permit the discharge into the sea of water
separated from crude oil, since it is not possible to remove all traces of oil.
Similar controls are to be applied to discharges from drilling operations which
contain oil. Discharges of chemicals are controlled and monitored by a
non-statutory Chemical Notification Scheme, which is administered by the
Department of Energy in close consultation with fisheries departments.
Offshore installations are required to regulate discharges associated with
platform drainage in accordance with the Merchant Shipping (Prevention of Oil
Pollution) Regulations 1983.
Under the Dumping at Sea Act 1974 a licence has to be obtained for the
permanent deposit of any substance or article into tidal waters and the sea.
Dumping at sea is permitted on the basis of the scientific criteria set out in the
annexes to the Oslo Convention (International Convention for the Prevention of
Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft 1972) and the London
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and
Other Matter 1972.
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily with local authorities. Under the
provisions of the Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968 they may declare ‘smoke control
areas within which the emission of smoke from chimneys constitutes an
offence. About two-thirds of the premises in conurbations are now covered by
smoke control orders. Emissions from most industrial premises are also subject
to the control of local authorities under the Clean Air Acts. The emission of dark
smoke from any trade or industrial premises or from the chimney of any
building is in general prohibited, and new furnaces must be capable as far as
practicable of smokeless operation. The height of the chimney serving a new
furnace must generally be approved by the local authority, and approved grit and
dust arrestment plant has to be installed. Regulations prescribe specific limits
to the quantities of grit and dust which may be emitted from certain furnaces.
Industrial premises that give rise to particularly offensive or dangerous
emissions are, in England and Wales, under the control of the Industrial Air
Pollution Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive. In Scotland this
function is discharged by the Industrial Pollution Inspectorate. The Inspec¬
torates require the best practicable means to be used to prevent or abate
emissions. Similar legislation and controls apply in Northern Ireland. Controls
are also in force on emissions from motor vehicles, such as the maximum
permitted lead content of petrol which will be reduced to 015 grammes per litre
by 1985. The Government has accepted the recommendation of the Royal
Commission on Environmental Pollution that lead be removed entirely by the
end of the 1980s.
Considerable progress has been made towards the achievement of cleaner air
and a better environment, especially in the last 20 years or so. Total emissions
and average concentration of smoke in the air have fallen by 80 per cent since
1960. The domestic smoke control programme has been particularly important
in achieving this result. London no longer has the dense smoke-laden ‘smogs’ of
the 1950s and in central London winter sunshine has been increasing since the
1940s when average hours a day were about 40 per cent less than at Kew in
outer London; the levels are now virtually the same. Similar improvement has
been achieved in other cities including Glasgow and Sheffield. Since 1960
average concentrations of sulphur dioxide in towns have fallen by over 60 per
cent.
Britain has become increasingly involved in international air pollution issues
such as acid rain, and with the possible implications of growing concentrations
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Particular emphasis is placed on research
into the causes and effects of environmental acidification.
180
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Noise
Radioactivity
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (and similar legislation in Northern Ireland)
requires local authorities to inspect their areas for noise nuisance and gives
them the power to deal with it. It also enables them to designate ‘noise
abatement zones’ within which registered levels of noise from classified
premises may not be increased without their permission. The Act contains
specific provisions to control noise from construction and demolition sites.
Transport is one of the main offenders in noise pollution, and control
measures are aimed at reducing noise at source, through requirements limiting
the noise that aircraft and motor vehicles may make, and at protecting people
from its effects. The Motor Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1978 set
out the permissible noise levels for various classes of vehicles when new and
when in use; more stringent limits have applied for vehicles coming into use
since 1983 and further reductions in noise limits are under consideration.
Under the Land Compensation Act 1973 and similar legislation in Scotland,
compensation is payable for loss in property values caused by physical factors
including noise arising from the use of new or improved public works such as
roads and airports. Regulations made under the Acts also enable highway
authorities to carry out or make grants for insulation of homes subject to
specified levels of increased noise caused by new or improved roads. Noise
insulation may also be provided where construction work for new roads is likely
seriously to affect nearby homes.
Noise emission levels of most aircraft on the United Kingdom Register of Civil
Aircraft are regulated in accordance with standards agreed by the International
Civil Aviation Organisation. Subsonic jets acquired by British operators after
September 1978 must already meet the noise certification criteria and all those
on the United Kingdom Register will have to do so from 1 January 1986. Various
operational restrictions have been introduced to reduce noise disturbance
further, and people living in the worst affected areas round a number of airports
may be eligible for noise insulation grants.
Radiation resulting from industrial and other processes represents only a small
fraction of that to which the population is exposed from the natural environ¬
ment. Nevertheless, that fraction is subject to stringent control because of
possible effects on health or longer-term genetic effects. Under the Radioactive
Substances Act 1960 users of radioactive materials other than those subject to
licence under the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 must be registered by the
appropriate department, and authorisation is also required for the disposal of
radioactive waste. The Health and Safety Executive, through its Nuclear
Installations Inspectorate, is the authority concerned with the granting of
nuclear site licences for commercial nuclear installations. No installation maybe
constructed or operated without a licence granted by the Executive. The
National Radiological Protection Board established under the Radiological
Protection Act 1970 provides an authoritative point of reference on radiological
protection.
Radioactive wastes vary widely in nature and level of activity, and the practices
followed reflect this variation. Some wastes are dispersed safely in the
environment. The Nuclear Industry Radioactive Waste Executive is responsible
for developing and operating disposal facilities for solid wastes with a low or
intermediate level of activity. Research is being carried out, in collaboration with
other countries, into disposal of high-level wastes, but these will first be stored
in vitrified form for at least 50 years.
9 The Churches
Everyone in Britain has the right of religious freedom (in teaching, worship and
observance) without interference from the community or the State. Churches
and religious societies may own property, conduct schools, and propagate their
beliefs in speech and writing. There is no religious or denominational bar to the
holding of public office.
Clergy of the established churches of England and Scotland work in services
administered by the State, such as the armed forces, national hospitals and
prisons, and are paid a salary by the State. Clergy of other denominations are
also appointed. Voluntary schools provided by religious denominations may be
wholly or partly maintained from public funds.
There is no precise or uniform information about the number of church
adherents since no inquiries are normally made about religious beliefs in
censuses or other official returns, and each church adopts its own criteria in
counting its members. Membership figures in this chapter are therefore
approximate.
The Church of The established Church of England’s relationship with the State is one of
England mutual obligation—privileges accorded to the Church balanced by certain duties
which it must fulfil. The Sovereign must always be a member of the Church, and
promises to uphold it; Church of England archbishops, bishops and deans are
appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; all clergy take an
oath of allegiance to the Crown. The Church can regulate its own worship. The
two archbishops (of Canterbury and York), the bishops of London, Durham and
Winchester, and 21 other bishops (according to their seniority as diocesan
bishops) sit in the House of Lords. Clergy of the Church (together with those of
the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church)
are not allowed to sit in the House of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury, comprising 30 dioceses (includ¬
ing the Diocese of Europe), and York, 14 dioceses. The Archbishop of
Canterbury is ‘Primate of All England’, and the Archbishop of York ‘Primate of
England’. (The following information does not include the Diocese of Europe.)
The dioceses are divided into 13,500 parishes. In 1982 it was estimated that, in
the two provinces, some 241,000 people were baptised into the Church; of these
205,000 were under one year old (35 per cent of live births). In the same year
there were 84,500 confirmations. Attendances at services on a normal Sunday
are around 1-2 million. Many people who rarely, if ever, attend services,
nevertheless regard themselves as Church members (amounting perhaps to
some 60 per cent of the population).
The central governing body, the General Synod, has both spiritual authority
and legislative and administrative powers; and bishops, clergy and lay members
are involved in decisions. Certain important issues must be referred for the
approval of the dioceses before being decided by the Synod. Lay members are
associated with church government in the parishes through the ancient office of
churchwarden and the modern parochial church councils.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with such
matters as education, mission, inter-church relations, social questions, recruit¬
ment and training for the ministry, church work at home and overseas and the
182
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
The Free
Churches
care of church buildings, particularly those of historic and architectural
interest. It is also concerned with church schools and colleges of education,
theological colleges, and establishments for training women in pastoral work.
The Church has its own courts whose jurisdiction today extends only to
matters of purely ecclesiastical concern.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses, with
contributions to a central fund for the maintenance of central services,
including capital expenditure on training and theological colleges and grants for
training candidates for ordination. The State makes no direct financial
contribution to church expenses. The Church's endowment income is mainly
administered by the Church Commissioners, the body largely responsible for the
payment of clergy stipends and pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 28 autonomous provinces in Britain and
overseas and three regional councils overseas with a total membership of about
65 million. In the British Isles, there are four provinces: the Church of England
(established), the Church in Wales, the Scottish Episcopal Church in Scotland,
and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference meets for unofficial consultation
among all Anglican bishops (the last meeting was in 1978): presided over by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, it has no executive authority, but enjoys great
prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other commun¬
ions, and attitudes to political and social questions are widely studied. The
Anglican Consultative Council (an assembly of laymen and clergy as well as
bishops which meets every two or three years) is designed to provide
consultations within the Anglican Communion and to serve as an instrument of
common action. The Council last met in 1981.
The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian form of government. Its status as the
national church derives from the Treaty of Union 1707 and the Church of
Scotland Act 1921 which confirmed its complete freedom in all spiritual
matters. It appoints its own officers, and its decisions on questions of doctrine
and discipline are not subject to parliamentary discussion or modification.
All ministers have equal status, each of 1,780 churches being governed locally
by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and the elected elders of the
Church: above the Kirk Session is the Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of
the Synod, and finally the General Assembly, consisting of elected ministers and
elders, which meets annually under the presidency of an elected moderator who
serves for one year. The Sovereign is represented at the General Assembly by the
Lord High Commissioner. The adult communicant membership of the Church
of Scotland is estimated at 903,000.
The expression ‘Free Churches’ is commonly used to describe those Protestant
churches in England and Scotland which, unlike the Church of England and the
Church of Scotland, are not established. In the course of history they have
developed their own convictions in church order and worship.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with nearly 500,000
adult full members, originated in the eighteenth century following the evangeli¬
cal revival under John Wesley, and is based on a 1932 union of most of the
separate Methodist Churches. The Methodist Churches which did not join the
union include the Independent Methodists (4,500 members) and the Wesleyan
Reform Union (with some 5,000 members). The Methodist Church in Ireland
has nearly 19,000 members in Northern Ireland.
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of which
belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland (formed in 1813), with a
THE CHURCHES
183
The Roman
Catholic
Church
total membership of about 168,600; in addition, there are separate Baptist
Unions for Scotland, Wales and Ireland and other Baptist churches.
The United Reformed Church, with some 140,000 members, was formed in
1972 when the Congregational Church in England and Wales (the oldest
community of dissenters in Britain) and the Presbyterian Church of England
merged the first transdenominational union of churches in Britain since the
Reformation in the sixteenth century. In 1981 there was a further union with
the Reformed Association of the Churches of Christ.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland (with
some 132,000 regular communicants in Ireland); the Presbyterian (or Calvin-
istic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose from the revivalist movement led
in 1735 by Howell Harris; the Union of Welsh Independents; the Free Church of
Scotland; the United Free Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of
Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed
Presbyterian Church of Ireland; and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church
of Ireland.
Other Protestant denominations include: the Churches of Christ (known also
in the United States as Disciples of Christ), which have been an organised
community in Britain since early in the nineteenth century; the British Province
of the Moravian Church, which is an international missionary church; the Free
Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in 1844
as a direct result of the Oxford Movement: and the Congregational Federation,
formed from Congregational churches which did not enter the United Reformed
Church. There are also the Pentecostalists, who are increasing in numbers.
Their two main bodies operating in Britain are the Assemblies of God and the
Elim Pentecostal Church, many of whose members are of West Indian origin.
There are a number of small West Indian churches, whose membership together
amounts to well over 85,000 and various African churches with a membership of
over 20,000.
The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), with about 18,130 members in
Britain and 445 places of worship, came into being in the middle of the
seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox. Silent worship is
central to its life as a religious organisation and Friends work for peace and the
relief of suffering in many parts of the world.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 85 other
countries. Within Britain there are 63,000 active members operating from
nearly 1,000 centres of worship. The Salvation Army’s distinctive ministry of
Christian evangelism and practical care is also expressed through the work of
160 social service centres, ranging from hostels for the homeless to homes for
the elderly, for abused children and for teenagers on probation, and recreational
centres for Service personnel.
There are also a number of other religious organisations with churches or
assemblies in Britain, including the Unitarian and Free Christian Churches, the
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (the
Mormon Church); the Christian Scientists and the Spiritualists.
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became temporari¬
ly extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish
hierarchy became extinct in the early seventeeenth century and was restored in
1878. There are now seven Roman Catholic provinces in Great Britain, each
under an archbishop, 29 episcopal dioceses (21 in England and Wales, eight in
Scotland), and over 3,000 parishes. In Northern Ireland, there are six dioceses,
some with territory partly in the Irish Republic. It is estimated that there are
some 5-7 million adherents to the Roman Catholic faith in Britain. In 1982 Pope
John Paul II paid a pastoral visit to Britain, the first by a reigning pontiff.
184
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Jewry
Other
Religious
Communities
Co-operation
among the
Churches
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of its
children and requires its members to try to bring up their children in the
Catholic faith. Many schools for Catholic children are staffed by members of the
religious orders who also undertake other social work such as nursing, child
care, and the conduct of homes for old people.
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman Conquest, but the
community in Britain dates from 1656; consisting of some 400,000 people,
including both Sephardi (originally from Spain and Portugal) and Ashkenazi
(from Germany and Eastern Europe), it has become one of the largest groups of
Jews in Europe. The community is divided into two schools of thought: the
Orthodox, to which about 80 per cent of practising Jews belong; and the
Reform, which originated in 1840 and was followed in 1901 by the Liberal
Jewish movement. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest group (Ashkenazi)
within Orthodox Jewry; the Haham is the head of the Sephardi group. Jewish
congregations in Britain number about 350. Jewish denominational schools are
attended by about one in four Jewish children.
Christian communities of foreign origin, including the Orthodox, Lutheran and
Reformed Churches of various European countries, together with the Armenian
Church, have established their own centres of worship, particularly in London.
Immigration into Britain during the past 30 years has created substantial
non-Christian communities. There are now an estimated 1-25 million Muslims
in the country, and there are large Hindu and Sikh communities. The Islamic
Cultural Centre (and London Central Mosque) on the edge of Regent’s Park, is
the most important Muslim institution in the Western world, and there are
mosques in almost every town and city where Muslims have settled. The Hindus
and the Sikhs have several hundred temples in Britain, and arrangements have
been made in places of work to allow the members of non-Christian religions to
follow their religious observances. There are well over 100 Buddhist groups and
centres and at least three monasteries and a number of temples. All schools of
Buddhism are represented. The Buddhist Society, with its headquarters in
London, publicises the principles of Buddhism and encourages their study and
practice; it adheres to no one school of Buddhism.
The British Council of Churches, with representatives or observers from all the
main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates common action and
seeks to further Christian unity. It works through five divisions: Christian Aid
(which has a separate constitution); Conference for World Mission; Ecumenical
Affairs; Community Affairs; and International Affairs.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches of England and
Wales. It promotes unity and joint action among the Free Churches and is a
channel for communication with central and local government.
The permanent Anglican-Roman Catholic Commission explores points of
possible unity between the two communions.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches also participate in the World
Council of Churches (of which the British Council of Churches is an associated
national council) which links together some 300 churches in over 100 countries
for co-operation and the study of common problems. The Council of Christians
and Jews works for better understanding among members of the two religions
and deals with problems in the social field. The British Council of Churches has
also established a Committee for Relations with People of Other Faiths.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made by
two or more churches for the sharing of church buildings.
10 National
Economy
Britain has an open economy and, in consequence, international trade is a vital
part of economic performance. In 1983 exports of goods and services accounted
for almost one-third of its gross domestic product (GDP), one of the highest
shares in the major economies. The proportion has increased over the last two
decades from about 20 per cent in the early 1960s. Similar rises have occurred
in most other developed countries, reflecting the growing importance of
international trade in an increasingly interdependent world economy.
One of the world s largest exporters of visible goods, Britain accounts for about
5 per cent of the total. It is among the major exporters of aerospace products,
motor vehicles, electrical equipment, finished textiles and most types of
machinery. It is also one of the world's largest importers of agricultural
products, raw materials and semi-manufactures. In overall terms, Britain is
self-sufficient in oil.
The economy is primarily based on private enterprise, and government policy
is aimed at encouraging the private sector, which accounts for 71 per cent of
GDP and total employment. Within the public sector, local authorities account
for 12 per cent of total employment, central government for 10 per cent and
public corporations for 7 per cent.
The traditional economic strength of Britain, as a pioneer in the industrial
revolution, has been manufacturing. However, over the last 20 years the
industrial structure of the economy has undergone a marked change—a trend
common to most major developed economies, reflecting several fundamental
economic and social forces. Real personal disposable income in Britain has more
than doubled since 1945; as incomes rise people tend to spend more on
services—personal, financial and leisure services such as dry-cleaning and
hairdressing, hire-purchase and sports facilities. Also, rising real incomes in
other countries have contributed to an increased overseas demand for British
services such as air transport and construction.
Some 2-7 per cent of Britain’s employed labour force is engaged in
agriculture—a lower proportion than in any other major industrial country.
However, because of a high level of productivity, Britain is able to produce nearly
two-thirds of its own food.
Britain's energy position has been transformed in the last decade. With the
discovery and exploitation of oil and natural gas from the Continental Shelf
under the North Sea, the country has become self-sufficient in energy in net
terms. In 1983 some 5 per cent of gross national product1 was attributable to the
oil and gas sectors. Substantial revenues from oil and gas taxation have helped
to ease the pressure of government borrowing and other forms of taxation, thus
making an important contribution to reducing inflation; there have also been
considerable benefits to the balance of payments. Coal—traditionally the most
important source of energy—still accounts for some 36 per cent of Britain's
needs; the value of Britain’s coal reserves has been enhanced by the substantial
increase in world oil prices since 1973.
GDP (£257,000 million) plus net property income from abroad (£2.000 million).
186
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ECONOMIC
BACKGROUND
Post-war
Developments
Inflation and
Competitive¬
ness
Membership of the European Community from 1973 has had a major impact
on Britain's pattern of trade, increasing the proportion with other member
countries and reducing the share of Commonwealth trade. Between 1972 and
1983 the proportion of Britain's exports going to other member countries of the
Community rose from 30 to 44 per cent while that going to other Common¬
wealth countries fell from 19 to 11 per cent. Imports followed a similar trend.
Trade with the newly industrialising countries, including Singapore, South
Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia, has risen substantially.
The broad historical pattern of Britain's overseas trade has been a deficit on
visible trade offset by a surplus on invisible transactions (but there was a
surplus on visible trade in 1980—82); these include, for example, transactions
relating to international investment, travel, shipping and financial services. In
1983 earnings from invisibles comprised over 40 per cent of Britain’s earnings
on current account. In 1982 Britain accounted for nearly 8 per cent of world
invisible receipts (excluding government transactions). The significant con¬
tribution made by invisibles to the current account is largely a reflection of
Britain’s position as a major financial centre. The banks, insurance under¬
writers and brokers, and other financial institutions of the City of London
provide world-wide financial services, and the City contains perhaps the most
comprehensive and advanced capital market in the world.
In the period since the end of the second world war in 1945 there has been a
marked rise in living standards, the emergence of new industries and the
renewal and improvement of much of the country’s infrastructure. At the same
time, in spite of short periods of rapid economic expansion, the rate of growth
has been low in comparison with the rates in most other industrialised
countries, averaging 2-3 per cent annually up to 1973 but only about 1 per cent
after that until the early 1980s. By 1983, however, with the economy moving out
of recession, the rate of growth increased to 3 per cent. Although attention has
been paid throughout the period to achieving higher levels of exports (with
considerable success, the proportion of GDP exported rising from under 20 per
cent in 1950 to 30 per cent in 1983), the economy, during the years of fixed
exchange rates and before the growth of North Sea oil production, was
vulnerable to balance of payments problems, with a strong rise in imports at
times of expansion. The effects bore most heavily on the reserves of gold and
foreign currencies and led repeatedly to the imposition of restraints on home
demand, as part of a pattern which became known as ‘stop-go'.
After the late 1960s the rise in wage and price inflation had adverse effects on
competitiveness, profitability and business confidence. This was associated
with an increase in unemployment over the same period. At various times
governments attempted to control pay rises by means of voluntary or statutory
controls on incomes and also, periodically, on prices but such policies were
largely unsuccessful. Following the five-fold increase in world oil prices in
1973-74, which was accommodated by a rapid growth in money supply and
public spending, the annual inflation rate reached a peak of 24 per cent in 1975.
After falling into single figures in 1978 and early 1979, inflation again rose
rapidly, reaching 22 per cent in May 1980, partly as a result of the doubling of oil
prices in 1979. The growth in earnings also accelerated, particularly in the
1979-80 pay round when they rose by 22 per cent. Subsequently, firm monetary
and fiscal policies, assisted by the general weakness of world commodity prices
in the early 1980s, have resulted in a much reduced rate of inflation, to 4-5 per
cent in July 1984. Pay settlements have also moderated sharply; average
earnings rose by an underlying rate of about 8 per cent in the year to June 1984.
In the later 1970s British manufacturers experienced a sharp loss of
NATIONAL ECONOMY
187
Output,
Fixed
Investment
and
Employment
Overseas
Sector
international cost competitiveness due to the appreciation of sterling in
1978—80 and much more rapid increases in unit labour costs than in other
countries. Sterling then depreciated, partly as a result of the weakness in the
world oil market. This depreciation, together with greater moderation in pay
settlements and a substantial rise in manufacturing productivity since the end
of 1980, led to a considerable improvement in Britain’s cost competitiveness; by
the first quarter of 1984 output per head in manufacturing was 23 per cent
higher than in the fourth quarter of 1980.
The rate of growth of industrial output and, within this, of manufacturing
output, has declined in recent years (apart from North Sea oil, see p 188) relative
to the rest of the economy. Industrial output rose by some 3 per cent a year in the
decade or so to 1973 (much the same as for the economy as a whole) but has
since fallen. The relative decline partly reflects strong competition in overseas
markets from newly industrialising as well as from other developed countries.
Many industries have undergone considerable reorganisation to improve
competitiveness. A number of them, such as aerospace, chemicals, oil, gas and
electronics, have gained strength while textiles and some other traditional
industries, including steel and shipbuilding, have contracted, shifting empha¬
sis to more profitable or specialised products. Regional policies promoted by
successive governments have encouraged the development of newer manufac¬
turing and service employment in assisted areas. The policies are now directed
more selectively to benefit areas of greatest need and to reduce regional
imbalances in unemployment.
In the period 1979—81 the severe recession (induced partly by the stagnation
in the world economy and a second substantial increase in world oil prices) led to
a sharp fall in the rate of growth of money incomes. These pressures caused
firms to cut back on investment, stockbuilding and employment. Industrial
output fell by about 14 per cent between the second quarter of 1979 (the
previous cyclical peak) and the second quarter of 1981 (the trough of the
recession), the fall being most pronounced in the manufacturing and construc¬
tion industries. It improved gradually in the second half of 1981, during most of
1982 and in 1983 and early 1984 with all industrial sectors benefiting from the
increase in activity. By the first quarter of 1984 the average estimate of output
was nearly 3 per cent higher than a year earlier.
Total fixed investment grew at an average rate of about 4 per cent a year
throughout the 1960s and early 1970s but, since reaching a peak in 1973, the
level has altered little (apart from cyclical variations). Over the period 1973-83
there has been an increase in the private sector's share of total investment (from
61 to 73 per cent), mainly reflecting the sharp rise in service investment
(particularly banking, finance and insurance). Manufacturing’s share has fallen
(from 16 to 11 per cent) as has public sector investment which, however, still
accounts for 27 per cent of the total (compared with 39 per cent in 1973).
Although unemployment remains high—almost 13 per cent of all employees in
April 1984—other labour market indicators have improved. Overtime in
manufacturing has risen and short-time working has fallen. The number of
registered vacancies in July 1984 was 164,000 compared with 85,000 at the low
point in June 1981.
Britain’s overseas trade performance fluctuated during the 1970s. In general,
imports of food, energy, raw materials and manufactured goods were greater
than visible exports, which were largely manufactured goods. This deficit on
visible trade was wholly or partly offset by a surplus on invisibles, which cover
earnings from services, together with interest, profits and dividends, and
transfers. However, in the period 1980-82 there was a surplus on visible trade
188
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(largely due to a rapidly growing surplus on oil). Between 1982 and 1983 exports
rose slightly in volume but imports increased sharply, partly in order to meet the
need for higher stocks as the economy continued its recovery.
The strength of overseas invisible earnings has been maintained by the
continued adaptation to new conditions, particularly following the abolition of
exchange controls in 1979, and growth in world markets of insurance, banking,
tourism, construction, consultancy and other services.
The substantial surpluses on current account imply corresponding increases
in Britain's net external assets. Since the abolition of exchange controls in 1979
investment outflows, particularly portfolio investment, have increased sharply;
British banks' sterling lending abroad has also been at a high level since then.
Oil The beneficial effects of growing North Sea oil and gas production on the balance
of payments were apparent over the second half of the 1970s and the early
1980s, a deficit on trade in oil of nearly £4,000 million in 1976 having been
turned into a favourable balance of £7,000 million by 1983. In 1974 oil
accounted for some 4 per cent of Britain's visible exports and 19 per cent of
visible imports; by 1983 the proportions were 21 per cent and 9 per cent
respectively. Exports, mainly to other European Community countries, account
for more than half of domestic production. They are partly offset in balance of
payments terms by imports of other grades of crude oil from the Middle East and
elsewhere.
North Sea oil spared Britain the fall in real national income which other
industrial countries suffered following the oil price rises of the 1970s. It has
helped to ease the task of controlling public sector borrowing, contributing to
the Government's strategy of reducing interest rates and inflation. Without
North Sea oil, the benefits of which are expected to continue for some time,
non-oil taxes would have had to be higher or public expenditure lower.
Sterling During periods of high world demand for oil the pound has been strong in
foreign exchange markets, reflecting Britain's position as a net oil exporter and
the world’s sixth largest producer. During 1979 and 1980 sterling appreciated
markedly but has since fallen back. The world price of oil fell sharply in early
1983 since when it has changed little. It is government policy to seek to
moderate undue fluctuations in the level of sterling but to allow the rate to be
determined primarily by the balance of market forces. The effective exchange
rate index, which shows changes in the value of a currency as a weighted
average of changes in its exchange rate against other individual currencies, was
79-4 in June 1984 (1975 = 100).
ECONOMIC The Government’s medium-term economic objectives include: a continued
POLICY reduction in inflation; an increase in employment through the creation of
lasting jobs; a sustained growth in output; a reduction in direct taxation: the
promotion of a more effective framework for industrial relations; an easing of
monopoly power through privatisation and the introduction of competition: the
encouragement of small firms and new enterprises; support for modern
technologies; and the ending of restraints on economic initiative (controls on
pay, prices, dividends, outward capital movements and hire purchase have all
been abolished as have unnecessary planning constraints). The financial
framework within which policy is operated is set out in the Government's
medium-term financial strategy. Control of the money supply is an essential part
of it, though, in judging the rate of monetary growth needed to reduce inflation,
the Government takes account of structural influences on the different
monetary measures and the behaviour of other financial indicators including
the exchange rate. The target range for the growth of both broad and narrow
NATIONAL ECONOMY
189
ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT
NATIONAL
INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
Output
Use of
Resources
Personal
Income and
Expenditure
monetary totals in 1983-84 was successfully met. The ranges for 1984-85 are 6
to 10 per cent for broad money and 4 to 8 per cent for narrow money. Fiscal
policy is designed to be consistent with this monetary framework; over a period
of years, a reduction in public sector borrowing as a proportion of GDP is
important in order to leave room for lower interest rates.
The Treasury has prime responsibility for the formulation and conduct of
economic policy, which also involves the Departments of Trade and Industry,
Employment, Energy, the Environment and Transport and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Other bodies are concerned with specific
aspects of economic policy. These include the Bank of England (the central
bank), the National Economic Development Council, in which the Govern¬
ment meets representatives of industry under the chairmanship of the
Prime Minister, the Office of Fair Trading and the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission.
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy, and on
the economic problems it faces, the Government makes known its purposes and
keeps in touch with developments throughout the economy by means of
informal and continuous links with the chief industrial, financial, labour and
other interests. Final responsibility for the broad lines of economic policy rests
with the Cabinet.
In 1983 GDP at factor cost (the total value of goods and services produced at
home) is estimated to have been £257,000 million. After allowing for price
changes the increase in GDP since 1973 was 9 per cent. (Gross national product
amounted to £259,000 million.) Production in Britain is relatively heavily
orientated towards services, which in 1983 accounted for 61 per cent of GDP.
The diagram shows that in 1983 Britain consumed nearly 66 per cent of what it
produced and imported. Between 1973 and 1983 the proportion of final
expenditure devoted to exports rose from 19 per cent to 21 per cent.
Final Expenditure at Market Prices in 1983
Total: £378,000 million
%
Consumers'
expenditure
48 3% £182,000 in
Final
consumption
of general
government
17.4% £66,000 m
Gross domestic
fixed capital
formation-
private sector
9.6% £36,000 m
»
Gross domestic
fixed capital
formation -
public sector
6% £13,000 m
Exports of goods
and services
21.1% £80,000 m
Final expenditure at market prices is equal to gross
domestic product at market prices plus imports.
Personal incomes at current prices before tax rose rapidly and fairly steadily
from £64,000 million in 1973 to £258,000 million in 1983. In real terms (that is,
excluding the effects of inflation), personal disposable income was nearly 2 per
cent higher in 1983 than in 1982.
190
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sources of
Income
Consumers’
Expenditure
Table 10: Gross Domestic Product by Industry^5
1973
1983
£ million per cent £ million per cent
Agriculture, forestry and
fishing 2,006 3-0 5,535 2-l
Energy and water supply 3,018 4-6 29,645 11-4
Manufacturing 20,919 31-7 62,258 240
Construction 4,995 7-6 15,319 5-9
Distribution, hotels
and catering, repairs 8,982 13-6 35,002 13-5
Transport 3,248 4-9 11,543 4-4
Communication 1,608 2-4 7,092 2-7
Banking, finance, insurance,
business services and leasing 7,365 11-2 31,067 12 0
Ownership of dwellings 3,525 5-3 15,761 6 1
Public administration,
defence and social security 4,220 6-4 18,027 6-9
Education and health services 5,276 8 0 24,021 9-2
Other services 3,507 5-3 16,415 6-3
Total
Adjustment for financial
services
Gross domestic product at
factor cost (income based)
68,669 1040 271,685
-2,656 -40 -11,854
66,013
1000 259,831
104-6
-4-6
1000
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1984 Edition.
a Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
That part of personal pre-tax income which is not taken in taxes or National
Insurance is used for consumption or is saved. Consumers' expenditure
amounted to 71 per cent of pre-tax personal income in 1983 compared with 72
per cent in 1973; there was a fall in saving as a percentage of personal disposable
income from 11-9 per cent in 1973 to 10-9 per cent in 1983. (Movements in the
personal savings ratio may reflect people’s wish to compensate for the rise or fall
in the real value of assets fixed in money terms in response to changes in price
levels.)
The proportion of total personal income accounted for by income from
employment was 66 per cent in 1983; average gross weekly earnings in April
1983 in Great Britain were £163-80 for full-time adult male workers (21 and
over) and £106-90 for full-time adult female workers (18 and over). The three
other main sources of personal income were self-employment (9 per cent),
income from rent, dividends and interest (10 per cent) and current grants from
general government (15 per cent).
The diagram shows the pattern of consumers' expenditure in 1983. Food,
alcoholic drink, housing, fuel and power, and clothing and footwear together
accounted for 49 per cent of the total. Consumers’ expenditure increased by over
4 per cent in real terms between 1982 and 1983. The changes in the pattern
NATIONAL ECONOMY
191
Current
Government
Expenditure
Components of Consumers’ Expenditure in 1973 and
1983
1973
Food (household
expenditure)
Alcoholic
drink
Tobacco
Clothing and
footwear
Housing
Fuel and
power
Household
goods and
Transport
and
communications
Recreation,
entertainment
and education
Other goods
and services
Other items*
18%
7%
4o/o
8%
13%
4%
8%
14%
9%
12%
2%
1983
15%
7%
3o/o
70/o
15%
5%
70/0
17%
9%
13%
2%
Food (household
expenditure)
Alcoholic
drink
Tobacco
Clothing and
footwear
Housing
Fuel and
power
Household
goods and
services
Transport
and
communications
Recreation,
entertainment
and education
Other goods
and services
Other items*
"Household expenditure overseas plus final expenditure by private non-profit-making bodies minus expenditure
by foreign tourists in Britain.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
between 1973 and 1983 in Britain were paralleled in other industrialised
countries, with declining proportions spent on food, and on clothing and
footwear.
Current expenditure on goods and services by central government and local
authorities rose by 17 per cent in real terms over the period 1973-83, at the end
of which it amounted to 22 per cent of GDP. The main cause of this was the
192
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
growth over the period of the social services, especially education and the
National Health Service.
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of
National Insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest and
subsidies. Central government also makes grants to local authorities to finance
about one-half of their current expenditure.
11 Framework
of Industry
Among the most prominent trends in industrial activity in Britain during the
1970s and early 1980s have been the growth of the offshore oil and gas
industries together with related products and services: the rapid development of
electronic and microelectronic technologies and their application to a wide
range of other sectors; and a continuous rise in the service industries' share of
total employment. Following the increase in world oil prices in 1979, Britain,
along with most other countries with similarly advanced economies, experi¬
enced an industrial recession. By 1983 there had been a fall in oil prices to a level
which has since stabilised. This, together with the strong rise in productivity,
eased the process of economic recovery. In early 1984 total output was 6-8 per
cent higher than at the low point of the recession in early 1981.
In order to support re-expansion in the economy, the Government is
encouraging industry to become more competitive, strengthening the small
firms sector and reducing state involvement in industry. It continues to
contribute to the formulation of European Community industrial policies.
This chapter describes some of the general features of industrial activity in
Britain such as the forms of enterprise, trends in production and investment,
and factors affecting efficiency, including research and development, technolo¬
gical advance and management education. It also outlines the framework of
incentives for general industrial development provided by the Government, and
by Community institutions, together with the regulatory framework within
which industry operates.
INDUSTRIAL The forms of industrial organisation and the pattern of ownership and control
ORGANISATION are varied. Unincorporated, corporate (including co-operative) and public sector
AND enterprise all assume a number of different forms, and all are important in the
PRODUCTION economy. (For a definition of incorporation', see p 209.) The Government is
encouraging employees to take a financial interest in the profitability of their
companies. Employees in public sector concerns into which private capital is
being introduced (privatisation) are being given a preferential right to buy
shares in their new companies and employee share-ownership in general has
been facilitated by changes in legislation. Although not numerous, co-operative
schemes are becoming more common and since 1980 there has been a rise in
the number of buy-outs' in which the staff, or management, of a company raises
the finance to purchase it.
In some sectors a small number of large companies and their subsidiaries are
responsible for a great proportion of total production. However, it is rare for a
few shareholders to have a controlling interest since shares in these companies
are usually distributed among many holders or held by insurance companies or
pension funds representing a cross-section of the community.
The private sector accounts for about 70 per cent of gross domestic product in
Britain and for the greater part of activity in the agricultural, mining and
quarrying (apart from coal), manufacturing (except steel and shipbuilding),
construction, distributive, financial and miscellaneous service industries.
Industries in public sector ownership include most of the energy, transport and
communications industries.
194
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Industrial
Association
The private sector comprises at least 1 million unincorporated businesses
(sole traders and partnerships) and 600,000 to 650,000 companies. There are
about 16 major public corporations with an employed labour force of 1 -6 million.
Unincorporated businesses, corporate enterprises and public sector enterprises
contribute about 19, 52 and 11 per cent of gross domestic product respectively
(the remainder being accounted for by central and local government).
Most of Britain’s large firms in the private sector are classified, under
company law, as ‘public limited companies’, while the great majority of small
companies are private' (see p 209). At the end of 1983 there were 856,000
companies on the companies’ register of which about 5,300 were public limited
companies. It is estimated that only about three-quarters of the companies on
the register are trading.
The largest organisations are shown in Table 11 (figures are for the latest
accounting year). About 75 companies registered in Britain each had net assets
of over £500 million in 1983. In terms of annual sales three of the top six
industrial groups in Europe were British, with British Petroleum first and Shell
Transport and Trading third. Alongside these large organisations the many
hundreds of thousands of small firms play an essential part in the economy.
Voluntary associations representing private enterprises and covering, with
varying degrees of completeness, most of British industry, exist for a number of
Table 11: Largest Industrial Organisations
Ranked by capital
Ranked by turnover £ million employed £ million
Private sector
British Petroleum Company 37,960
Shell Transport and Trading 24,411
BAT Industries 11,652
Imperial Chemical Industries 8,256
Shell UK 7,807
Esso UK 7,565
Unilever 5,355
Rio-Tinto Zinc Corporation 4,811
General Electric Company 4,626
Grand Metropolitan 4,469
Imperial Group 4,382
Berisford (S&W) 4,325
Philbro-Salomon 4,036
Ford Motor Company 3,585
Public sector
Electricity Council and Boards 9,562
British National Oil
Corporation 7,910
British Telecom 6,876
British Gas Corporation 6,422
National Coal Board 4,660
British Steel Corporation 3,358
Private sector
British Petroleum Company 19,137
Shell Transport and Trading 15,213
Rio-Tinto Zinc Corporation 5,815
Imperial Chemical Industries 5,709
BAT Industries 4,893
Shell UK 3,727
General Electric Company 2,837
Grand Metropolitan 2,715
Esso UK 2,672
Unilever 2,516
Ford Motor Company 2,118
BOC Group 1,964
BTR 1,614
Pilkington Brothers 1,454
Source: Extel Statistical Services and annual reports of public corporations.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
195
Output
different purposes including the provision of common services, the exchange of
information and representation of their members’ point of view, and negotiation
with trade unions on wages and conditions of work. The majority are either
trade associations or employers' organisations. Trade associations, concerned
mainly with representation to the Government, the provision of common
services and the regulation of trading practices, are normally composed of
concerns manufacturing or retailing a particular product or group of products.
Employers organisations established on a national basis are usually concerned
with negotiation of wages and conditions of work; they normally consist of
concerns engaged in the same type of operation or manufacturing process. In an
industrial sector concerned wholly with an allied group of products, one
association may undertake the functions of both a trade association and an
employers’ organisation.
The central body representing British business and industry nationally is the
Confederation of British Industry (CBI), recognised by the Government as a
channel for consultation between government departments and representatives
of both private and public sector employers.
The CBI represents 250,000 companies directly and indirectly through parent
companies, subsidiaries, employers’ organisations and trade and commercial
associations, and the majority of the nationalised industries. For its members it
acts as an advisory and consultative body providing them with information and
statistics, ascertaining their collective views and representing them nationally
to the Government and the public and also internationally. CBI representatives
sit on bodies such as the National Economic Development Council, the
Manpower Services Commission and the Health and Safety Commission. The
Institute of Directors has a representative role for directors of all types of
company.
Chambers of commerce are open to producers and traders of all kinds; they
promote the interests of local, regional and national industry and commerce.
The chambers provide export facilities, including export documentation and the
sponsorship of outward trade missions and visits, as well as information
services and training courses. The Association of British Chambers of Com¬
merce is the co-ordinating body for 84 affiliated local chambers, whose member
companies represent a majority of Britain’s exporters and a significant number
of the largest companies. British chambers of commerce also operate in 22
overseas countries. In Scotland there is an additional central organisation, the
Association of Scottish Chambers of Commerce, in Wales the Federation of
Welsh Chambers of Commerce, and in Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, to which local chambers are affiliated. The
Scottish Council (Development and Industry)—a body which represents econo¬
mic, financial and social interests in Scotland and which is supported by
voluntary subscription—also acts as a sponsor of trade missions and a
campaigning body on economic issues. Other voluntary associations include
industrial development associations for particular areas or regions, sponsored
by local authorities, trade associations and individual firms.
Industrial output in Britain has twice been affected by recession since 1973,
partly as a result of fluctuations in oil prices. Output declined for two years after
1973, recovered steadily between 1975 and 1979, fell again in 1980 and the first
half of 1981, and has since risen gradually. Manufacturing was especially
affected in the more recent decline, together with construction, while the service
industries experienced a less marked downturn in activity. In contrast, mining
and quarrying output continued to rise (owing to the North Sea oil and gas
industries). In the recovery since mid-1981 the construction sector and mining
and quarrying have both performed strongly. Table 12 shows the trend of output
196
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Productivity
and Investment
Industrial
Financing
in 1982 and 1983 and the index of employment in 1983. revealing the shift away
from employment in production industries and towards services.
There was a fall in total employment between 1982 and 1983 but an increase
in employment in the service industries, especially the banking, finance and
insurance sector, and in local government service.
Table 12: Industrial Output and Employment (Indices: 1980 = 100)
Output
Employment
Per cent Index Index Per cent Index
1980 1982 1983 1983 1983
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Production industries
of which: Energy and water supply
Manufacturing
Construction
Services
of which: Distribution, hotels,
catering and repairs
Communications
Financial and
business services
Whole economy
2-2 111-9 107-2
36-1
9-5
26-6
6-3
59-5
12-8
2-6
98-1
110-0
93-7
91-7
102-2
100-2
105-1
101-2
116-0
95-9
95-3
105-3
104-0
109-8
11-6 113-0 121-0
100-0a 100-3 103-2
1-7
29-7
3- 1
26-9
4- 8
63-5
19-4
21
96-7
81-7
90-1
80-8
80-1
96- 5
93-8
97- 7
8-4 102-4
100-0 90-7
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1984 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
a Including adjustment for financial services.
Increases in productivity are recognised as being of prime importance for the
economy. Although output per head has generally been low in Britain by
international standards, it rose more sharply in 1982 and 1983. The rise for
manufacturing was greater than for the economy as a whole. The index for the
whole economy in 1983 was 108 (1980 = 100). Among the factors influencing
productivity are capital investment, innovations and improvements in products
and processes, and the performance of management and labour. The proportion
of gross domestic product invested in Britain is about the same as that in other
industrialised economies. Investment in major sectors of the economy in 1983
(at 1980 prices) is shown in Table 13. The figures for manufacturing industry do
not include expenditure on leased assets since these are attributed to the service
industries on the basis of ownership. Manufacturing industry is, however, the
major user of leased assets. The practice of leasing has grown rapidly since the
early 1970s.
Over half of companies' funds for further investment and other purposes are
internally generated, with banks providing the chief external source of linance.
The main forms of short-term finance available in the private sector are bank
overdrafts, trade credit, bill financing (essentially a more formal kind of trade
credit) and factoring (making cash available to a company in exchange for its
debts). Types of medium- and long-term finance include bank loans, the
mortgaging of property and the issue of securities and shares to the public
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
197
Technological
Advance
Table 13: Gross Fixed Capital Formation by Sector at 1980 Prices
(Indices: 1980 = 100)
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Oil and gas extraction
Other energy and water supply
Manufacturing
Construction
Distribution, hotels, catering and repairs
Transport and communications
Finance and business services
Leased assets
Other assets
Other services
Dwellings
Transfer costs of land and buildings
Total investment
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1984 Edition.
Investment
Per cent
1983
2-8
5-8
8-2
10-9
11
81
7-5
4-9
110
13-4
211
5.2
1000
Index
1983
113
102
108
71
96
107
82
97
129
112
106
132
102
through The Stock Exchange. The acquisition of equipment through leasing
may also be regarded as a form of finance. Other sources of finance for industry
include the Government (see p 200), the European Community and specialist
financial institutions, including the Investors in Industry Group.
The 1980s have been particularly notable for the growth of venture capital
schemes run by iinancial institutions in both the public and private sectors to
provide start-up' and investment finance for smaller firms.
Advanced applications of information technology (a major new sector in which
computing and telecommunications have been brought together through
advances in microelectronics) are having profound effects on the pace of
technological change. Extensive use of electronics and automated controls is to
be found across the whole range of industry, both in production and services.
Britain was a pioneer in computers and has one of the largest computer
industries outside the United States. It is ahead of most other countries in
micro- and minicomputers. There are many advanced applications of computer¬
ised control in operation in both the public and private sectors of industry (for
example, in steel mills, coal-mines, oil refineries and chemical plants) and
Britain is among the world s leading nations in the provision of software services
and systems (that is, the preparation of instructions for computer operations
and related services). In recognition of the very wide ranging implications of
information technology, which is providing the basis for many new products
and services, the Government has set up special schemes of support for the
fibre-optics and opto-electronics industries, computer-aided design and manu¬
facture, and industrial robots. It is also collaborating with industry and
academic institutions in a research programme on advanced information
technology.
198
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and
Development
Management
Education
Schemes operated by the Department of Trade and Industry encourage
manufacturing industry to adopt advanced manufacturing techniques
appropriate to their business. The use of robots is increasing rapidly, notably in
the motor industry. According to the British Robot Association, Britain was the
world's fifth largest user of robots at the end of 1983, with more than 1,750
programmable robots installed in manufacturing plants, an increase of 52 per
cent over the figure for 1982.
British industry has a record of success in biotechnology. The pharmaceuti¬
cals sector is among the world leaders in the production of antibiotics by
fermentation. The problems of maintaining sterility in large-scale continuous
fermentation have been solved in the production of single-cell protein for animal
feed. Microbiological processing of wastes is making rapid advances, and there
has been steady improvement of fermentation techniques in the production of
foods and beverages. Biotechnology has gained a new impetus from research
achievements in genetic engineering and cell fusion. The Department of Trade
and Industry and other government bodies are encouraging the exploitation of
new developments. A Biotechnology Unit at the Laboratory of the Government
Chemist is the focus for government co-operation with industry, and an
interdepartmental committee ensures the necessary co-ordination in an area
that cuts across established boundaries of responsibility.
Industrial research and development is carried out mainly by firms themselves.
Some 40 research associations, covering all areas of technology, conduct work
mainly for member companies. Work is also done by independent contract
research laboratories, universities and government research establishments,
especially those for which the Department of Trade and Industry is responsible
(see p 202).
Industrial expenditure on research and development in 1981 was £3,792
million. The major part, £3,320 million, was accounted for by private sector
companies. Public corporations spent a further £385 million and research
associations £88 million. The main industrial sectors incurring expenditure on
research and development were electronics (£1,221 million), aerospace (£763
million), chemicals and allied products (£617 million), mechanical engineering
(£234 million) and motor vehicles (£180 million).
The British Institute of Management, whose representative role for the
management and administrative professions is becoming more important,
provides a wide range of information services and has a particular interest in
management education and training. There are also a number of professional
bodies concerned with standards and training in specialised branches of
management.
A large proportion of management education is provided by polytechnics and
many of the colleges of further education throughout Britain; regional centres of
management education have been established in England and Wales through
the association of polytechnics and colleges which have high reputations for
management and business studies, and certain colleges in Scotland have
formed similar associations. Universities also make an important contribution,
especially with the full-time postgraduate programmes at the business schools
of London and Manchester universities and at the Scottish Business School,
based on a consortium of Scottish universities. Training courses for higher
management are offered by several independent colleges including the Manage¬
ment College, Henley-on-Thames, and Ashridge College of Management,
Berkhamsted.
Many firms provide general management courses for senior executives or
systems of informal training.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
199
Engineering
Council
Design
Standards
for Products
and
Processes
Measurement
Standards
The Engineering Council was set up under Royal Charter in 1981. Its objectives
are to advance education in, and to promote the science and practice of,
engineering (including relevant technology) for the public benefit and thereby
promote industry and commerce in Britain. The Council maintains a register of
professional engineers, technician engineers and engineering technicians and
is developing an organisational structure that will set standards for education,
training and experience to qualify people for registration. The Council is an
independent body although the Government is providing initial funding of up to
£1 million a year for the first three years, and during that period is responsible
for appointing the members of the Council.
Good design is seen as crucial for maintaining and improving the quality and
competitiveness of goods and services; the Department of Trade and Industry
gives priority to its campaign to encourage a greater awareness in industry and
commerce (among both producers and customers) of the value of good design
and to reinforce the importance of design education and training at all levels.
Advice and assistance on design matters are available from the government-
sponsored Design Council, while the Computer-Aided Design Centre also
provides assistance to individual firms. The Design Council has centres in
London, Cardiff and Glasgow, and its services include advice on design
problems; the organisation of product displays and overseas trade fairs,
conferences and seminars on design; help for design education; and the
production of a range of publications. The Council also provides annual awards
for consumer goods, engineering products and components, medical equipment
and motor vehicles and accessories. The Society of Industrial Artists and
Designers is the representative professional body in Great Britain of industrial
designers.
The British Standards Institution (BSI) prepares and publishes standards
which specify dimensions, performance and safety criteria, testing methods and
codes of practice for a large range of products and processes in most fields of
production. It is a voluntary non-profit-making body, funded by sales of
standards, subscriptions and government grant. Voluntary acceptance of the
standards by manufacturers, buyers and sellers reduces unnecessary variety
and simplifies the specification of requirements. The board of the BSI includes
representatives of the main organisations of employers and workers, profession¬
al institutions, consumers and the larger government departments. The BSI,
with government support, co-operates with other countries in achieving
international agreements on standards. The Government is working for
recognition of the importance of standards, believing that they can serve to
improve the quality and thereby the international competitiveness of products.
It uses standards in legislation and public purchasing wherever possible and
supports their development and practical application in national life. In 1983
the Government launched a National Quality Campaign, supported by a number
of non-government bodies including the BSI.
The National Physical Laboratory (NPL), a research establishment of the
Department of Trade and Industry, is responsible for providing the measure¬
ment standards and calibration facilities necessary to ensure that measure¬
ments in Britain are made on a common basis and to the required accuracy.
Measurement standards bear directly on quality control in manufacture,
efficiency in commerce and on health and safety. The NPL maintains links with
national standards laboratories all over the world to ensure international
compatibility in measurements essential for overseas trade and technological
co-operation. Much of the dissemination of measurement standards is provided
by the NPL's British Calibration Service (BCS), which comprises over 100
200
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GOVERNMENT
POLICIES FOR
INDUSTRY
independent approved laboratories located in industry, universities and govern¬
ment establishments. These offer authenticated calibrations of scientific
instruments and official certificates for electrical, mechanical, flow, optical,
pressure, thermal and time interval measurements. BCS measurements are
linked directly or indirectly, within known and approved uncertainties, to the
national measurement standards at the NPL. The National Testing Laboratory
Accreditation Scheme (NATLAS), also based at the NPL, grants official recogni¬
tion to laboratories shown by independent assessors to be competent to carry
out specific types of test to a required standard. Its purpose is to enhance the
standing of British testing laboratories and secure international acceptance of
test results from accredited laboratories.
The chief aim of the Government’s industrial policy is to encourage industrial
enterprise and initiative in a flexible and competitive market economy. The
extent of state ownership is being reduced, a review of industrial subsidies has
been carried out and industrial investment agencies in the public sector have
been encouraged to secure private sector participation in their projects.
Competition policy has been strengthened in order to create a climate in which
commerce can flourish. A further policy to promote efficiency and competitive¬
ness takes the form of a campaign to enhance the status of standards and
quality assurance. The Government is also encouraging the development of
small businesses by reducing their administrative burdens, adjusting taxation
and through other policies.
Successive governments have aimed to provide an environment favourable to
industrial expansion. For areas and industries with special needs and difficul¬
ties, there are schemes of financial and other aid, administered by a number of
bodies, chiefly the Department of Trade and Industry. Aid provided by the
Department in 1983—84 amounted to about £1,332 million (compared with
some £1,800 million in the previous year). The 1983—84 total included £667
million for regional and general industrial support, £324 million for scientific
and technological assistance, and £341 million for aerospace, shipbuilding,
steel, and vehicle manufacture. The largest component of regional and general
industrial support has been the regional development grant scheme (£415
million in 1983—84). Various other agencies in the public sector provide aid,
either for defined activities (such as tourism) or for specific geographical areas.
The latter include inner urban areas, for which the Government has schemes of
social and economic regeneration; enterprise zones—areas in which, as an
experiment, economic activity is relieved of certain tax burdens and administra¬
tive controls; and freeports (also experimental) in which traders are freed from
certain customs requirements. These national industrial aids are supplemented
by assistance from European Community funds (see p 205). Direct investment
from overseas is encouraged, especially by the Department of Trade and
Industry's Invest in Britain Bureau. Britain has for many years been the leading
country for United States manufacturing investment in Europe and is also the
recipient of more than half of all Japanese investment in the European
Community. Overseas firms are generally offered the same facilities and
incentives as British-based companies.
Recognition of outstanding industrial performance is conferred annually by
the Queen s Awards for Export and Technology, the Export Awards for Smaller
Manufacturers (for firms employing fewer than 200 people) and the MacRobert
Award, the major award for engineering in Britain (made by the Fellowship of
Engineering for successful technological innovation). The Queen’s Awards are
made to firms in all sectors of industry (including services) on the advice of a
committee composed of businessmen, trade union representatives and civil
servants.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
201
Nationalised
Industries
Privatisation
Direct state participation in industry is mainly effected through public
corporations known as nationalised industries. The major nationalised indus¬
tries are: the National Coal Board; British Gas; the electricity industry; the
British National Oil Corporation; the British Steel Corporation; British Ship¬
builders; the Post Office; British Telecom; British Rail; the National Bus
Company; British Airways; and the British Airports Authority. These industries
and services account for around one-tenth of gross domestic product and
employ about 6 per cent of all employees.
The managing boards and staffs of the nationalised industries are not
generally civil servants although they are responsible to ministers who appoint
(and may dismiss) the chairman and members of each board. Ministers are
responsible for agreeing with the industries their general strategies and have
the power to give general directions as to how the industry should be run, but do
not interfere in day-to-day management. The Government’s policy is to
encourage the nationalised industries to behave as far as possible as commercial
enterprises, and this is carried out through the financial framework, set by the
Government, within which the industries are expected to operate. This is
designed to integrate the industries medium-term commercial aims with the
requirements of government policy on the management of the economy. The
main elements of the framework are clear government objectives for the
industries, regular corporate plans and performance reviews, and systematic
monitoring, the principles governing investment appraisal and pricing, external
financing limits, financial targets and performance aims.
To ensure that nationalised industry investment earns an adequate economic
return, there is a required rate of return which investment programmes are
expected to achieve before they are approved by the Government. The current
rate of return is 5 per cent in real terms before tax. Financial targets are set for
individual nationalised industries to give them a framework similar to those of
private sector companies which need to earn profits. They are generally set for a
period of three to five years, the form of the target varying according to the
commercial character of the industry concerned. Financial targets are sup¬
ported by a series of performance aims, covering costs and standards of service,
which are considered particularly important for industries with some monopoly
power where linancial targets would not automatically impose pressures for
operating efficiency. External financing limits, which control the amount of
finance (grants and borrowing) a nationalised industry can raise from external
sources in any financial year, are an important short-term operating control.
They are set in the light of a nationalised industry's financial target and its
expected performance and investment requirements. Nationalised industries
are planning to finance a greater proportion of investment from internally
generated funds.
External scrutiny of nationalised industry efficiency is conducted by the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission, which carries out four to six investiga¬
tions each year at the instigation of ministers, and these investigations are
complemented on occasion by studies undertaken by management consultants.
Nationalised industry matters are also considered by parliamentary committees
such as the Treasury and Civil Service Committee and the Public Accounts
Committee.
The Government believes that reform of the nationalised industries is essential
to economic recovery, and that the best way to improve performance in the long
term is to expose the industries to market forces, through privatisation and the
reduction of monopoly; it has already sold all or part of its interest in a number
of concerns including British Aerospace, Cable and Wireless, the National
Freight Consortium, Amersham International, Britoil and Associated British
202
Fiscal
Investment
Incentives
Financial
Investment
Incentives
Research and
Development
Support
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ports. Other areas where privatisation is envisaged include telecommunica¬
tions, energy, steel, shipbuilding, civil aviation and some other parts of the
transport sector. To stimulate efficiency, the Government has relaxed the
statutory monopolies of a number of nationalised industries.
Incentives to encourage capital expenditure by industry on plant and machinery
were revised in the Budget of 1984. The first-year allowance on plant and
machinery (previously 100 per cent) was reduced to 75 per cent and will be
reduced further to 50 per cent from April 1985. These first-year allowances will
be abolished in April 1986 but all expenditure on plant and machinery will
qualify for annual allowances of 25 per cent. Initial allowances on industrial
buildings fell, as a result of the Budget, from 75 to 50 per cent and will be
reduced further to 25 per cent from April 1985. These allowances will then be
abolished from April 1986. Progressive reductions' in the main rate of
corporation tax were also brought into effect as a result of the 1984 Budget.
The Department of Trade and Industry provides selective financial assistance for
major investment projects in manufacturing industry which are judged to be in
the national interest and which would not proceed without assistance. The
Department also operates schemes of selective assistance to support the
introduction by private industry of new products and processes. Particular
importance is attached to encouraging industry to equip itself with aids to
design and manufacture based on microelectronics.
Guarantees are provided for the repayment of loans and interest incurred in
the purchase of new ships and mobile offshore installations built in Britain.
Expenditure on research and development supported by the Department of
Trade and Industry is aimed at the rapid exploitation of technology, emphasis
being placed on partnership with the private sector. A growing proportion of
expenditure is going towards work carried out in industry; other work is done at
research associations and in government research establishments. The Depart¬
ment’s research establishments are the National Physical Laboratory (respon¬
sible for measurement standards, and research and development in related
fields of national importance, including the properties of industrially important
materials, and information technology), the National Engineering Laboratory
(research and development in mechanical engineering, including manufactur¬
ing systems and robotics, materials applications, fluid power, pumps, fans and
heat exchangers, and structural analysis and testing), the Warren Spring
Laboratory (control engineering, materials handling, metal extraction, mineral
processing, waste materials processing and environmental technology), and the
Laboratory of the Government Chemist (analytical services mainly to central and
local government, public institutions and international organisations).
‘Support for Innovation' is the Department of Trade and Industry’s general
facility for providing financial assistance for various purposes to companies
(and research associations) in or closely associated with any sector of manufac¬
turing industry. The balance and direction of research and development support
is overseen by industrialists and other specialists in the Department's sectoral
requirements boards and their advice is closely integrated into the Department’s
industrial support programme.
The Advisory Council for Applied Research and Development, whose members
include representatives of industry, industrial research and the engineering
profession, is a source of independent advice to ministers collectively on applied
research and development in both the public and private sectors, on the linkage
between this research and scientific research supported by the Department of
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
203
British
Technology
Group
Regional
Development
Investment
Incentives
Education and Science, the development and application of technology, and on
the role of Britain in international collaboration in such activities. The Council
has published a number of reports on aspects of new technology. It is served by a
secretariat in the Cabinet Office.
The British Technology Group (BTG) was formed in 1981 by the merger of the
National Research Development Corporation and the National Enterprise Board.
Its primary function is to promote the development and commercialisation of
technology derived from public sector sources (universities, polytechnics,
research councils, and the research establishments of government departments
and other public bodies) where the Government is the ultimate owner of the
industrial property. The BTG takes responsibility for protecting and licensing
inventions from these sources, provides funds for development, seeks licensees
and negotiates licence agreements with industry. It has a portfolio of 1,600
British patents and patent applications, 600 licensees in Britain and overseas
and over 300 revenue-earning inventions. It is also funding 365 development
projects at universities and other research organisations.
The principle of the BTG's operations is collaboration with and support of
private initiative, bridging the gap between the emergence of a research idea and
its commercial exploitation. It maintains contact with research work, particu¬
larly in the universities; helps to evaluate the marketability of new ideas from
both public and private sources; assists with their development and protection
through patents; helps industry and sources of finance to identify research work
of potential interest; and provides support for start-up companies where other
means of exploitation cannot be found. The BTG is not a grant-giving body; it
seeks to make a return on its investments and undertakes transactions on a
commercial basis.
Economic imbalance between different parts of the country is due partly to the
steady decline over the years, in certain regions, of older industries, such as
coal, steel, shipbuilding and textiles, and partly to the tendency of many newer
and expanding industries to develop elsewhere. Thus the^traditional industrial
areas, mainly in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and some parts of England
(particularly in the North and on Merseyside), experienced, for many years,
higher unemployment rates than regions such as the South.East, and suffered
from net outward migration and industrial dereliction. In order to restore the
economies of the areas of greatest need the Government has provided incentives
to encourage industrial development in designated ‘assisted areas'. Following a
review of policy in Great Britain (Northern Ireland is treated separately), the
Government has reaffirmed its commitment to maintain an effective regional
industrial policy to ease the process of change in areas which have been
dependent on declining industries and to encourage new businesses there. A
new structure of regional industrial incentives, more directly linked to job
creation, and a revised designation of the assisted areas, is to be introduced in
the autumn of 1984.
Under the revised structure for regional industrial incentives regional develop¬
ment grants will be payable for job-creating projects in the assisted areas, either
as a proportion of capital expenditure limited by a cost-per-job ceiling or as an
amount for each new job created, whichever is the more advantageous to the
investor. Small firms will not, in general, be subject to a cost-per-job ceiling. All
manufacturing industries and some service industries will be eligible for
regional development grants. In addition, regional selective assistance will
continue to be payable to manufacturing and service sector projects that create
or safeguard employment in the assisted areas.
204
Other Assisted
Area Measures
Administrative
Arrangements
Northern
Ireland
Development
Agencies
Rural
Industries
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Government also provides factories and workshops where the private sector
is unwilling to invest in them. Special grants are available towards the
improvement of the infrastructure in the assisted areas and towards the
clearance of derelict land.
The Department of Trade and Industry takes the lead in the formulation of
regional industrial policy and administers the regional development grant
scheme throughout Great Britain. Regional selective assistance is administered
in England by the Department (with some powers delegated to its regional
offices) and by the Scottish and Welsh Offices. Factories in the assisted areas are
provided, often in association with the private sector, by English Estates, and by
the Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies.
The Industrial Development Board, formed in 1982 under the aegis of the
Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development, offers a range of
incentives similar to those available in the assisted areas, extended in 1983 (in
some cases at higher rates than in the assisted areas). Incentives automatically
available to manufacturing industry include grants of up to 30 per cent of the
cost of new fixed assets, training grants, grants for key workers moving to
Northern Ireland and exemption from local authority rates for industrial
premises. Manufacturing and service industry projects which create jobs may be
eligible for grants of up to 50 per cent of the cost of new fixed assets, interest
relief grants, favourable rental terms for factories, and grants to assist with
setting-up costs and research and development costs. The Board can also
provide equity and loan capital for new expanding businesses, assist the
development of new high-technology products and processes, and promote joint
ventures with overseas companies. Other incentives include corporation tax
relief of up to 80 per cent for certain new projects; 30 per cent grants for
approved energy conservation projects; grants to attract and retain good
management; and an advisory service on production methods.
Government regional policies have been aimed at encouraging new industries in
order to offset the decline in traditional activities. Accordingly the Scottish and
Welsh Development Agencies promote industrial development in their respective
countries. They encourage investment by overseas companies, provide equity
and loan capital for industrial projects (which they are expected to do with a
maximum of private sector participation), provide government factories, and
have powers to assist small firms and undertake land reclamation.
In the rural areas of England, assistance towards any scheme likely to benefit
the local economy can be provided by the Development Commission. Through its
agency, the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas (CoSIRA), the
Commission provides managerial and technical advice, training facilities and a
credit service to small manufacturing and service industries in rural areas.
Loans and advice are also provided by CoSIRA for small tourism enterprises in
the rural parts of the assisted areas and in areas designated by the Commission
as priority action areas. In addition, the Commission provides factory premises
and support for pioneering and experimental schemes bearing on the rural
economy and for voluntary bodies aiming to enrich social and cultural life in the
countryside.
In Scotland and Wales these services are provided generally through the
development agencies, but separate bodies cater for two particular rural areas.
In Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development Board provides loans and
grants for viable projects in manufacturing, agriculture, fisheries and services,
makes available training grants and advice, and builds factories. The Develop-
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
205
Tourism
Small Firms
European
Community
Regional Policy
and Aid
European
Regional
Development
Fund
ment Board for Rural Wales (usually referred to as ‘Mid-Wales Development )
provides factories, key worker housing and advice for small businesses. It has a
general responsibility to promote the economic and social well-being of
mid-Wales and a particular responsibility for the new town (Newtown, Powys).
Government support for the tourism industry is provided by four statutory
bodies. The British Tourist Authority is responsible for the overseas promotion
of tourism in Great Britain. The English, Scottish and Wales Tourist Boards,
which promote tourism in their respective countries within Britain, encourage
the development and improvement of tourist accommodation and amenities,
and administer grants or loans for projects to provide or improve tourist
amenities, and interest relief grants. The Scottish Tourist Board, unlike its
English and Welsh counterparts, is also empowered to carry out limited overseas
promotional activities independently of the British Tourist Authority.
The Northern Ireland Tourist Board has a promotional role similar to that of
the other boards.
The Department of Trade and Industry has a separate division which is the focal
point for the formation of policy towards the small business sector. The division,
together with the Small Business Division of the Scottish Development Agency
and the Welsh Office, administers the Small Firms Service, which provides
advice and guidance on a wide range of business problems affecting small firms
and those seeking to set up businesses. In Northern Ireland the Local Enterprise
Development Unit, established to promote the development of small industries,
provides grants, loans, help with obtaining premises and management advice to
new and expanding companies.
The Government has been particularly concerned since the late 1970s to
encourage small firms. It has introduced a framework of measures aimed at
reducing burdens and providing incentives for enterprise and risk-taking.
These have included a pilot loan guarantee scheme and a business expansion
scheme under which tax reliefs are available to private individuals investing in
small businesses. Other tax concessions have also been made for small firms
and the provision of premises for small firms has been encouraged. The
development of new sources of venture capital has been promoted and a number
of private sector initiatives have been made by the clearing banks and by groups
of large firms and financial institutions. An export award for smaller businesses
is made annually. Assistance for small firms is also provided by the development
agencies and by the agencies for rural industry. Priority is being given to the
provision of relevant and accessible training for those setting up or running
small businesses, together with appropriate advisory services.
European Community regional policy has two major aims: the reduction of
existing regional imbalances; and the prevention of new imbalances arising
from the adoption of Community policies. Although the principal responsibility
for helping depressed areas remains with the national authorities concerned,
the Community may complement schemes through aid from a number of
sources.
The European Regional Development Fund was set up to correct the major
regional imbalances in the European Community, particularly those resulting
from over-dependence on agriculture, industrial change and structural under¬
employment. Most of the Fund's resources are allocated to individual European
Community countries by agreed quotas. Britain has the second largest quota
and by December 1983 had been allocated £1,250 million towards the cost of
industrial and infrastructure projects in the assisted areas and in Northern
206
European
Investment
Bank
European Coal
and Steel
Community
Exchange Risk
Guarantee
Scheme
COMPETITION
POLICY AND
CONSUMER
PROTECTION
Competition
Policy
Monopolies and
Mergers
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ireland. The remaining part of the Fund is used to promote particular measures
decided upon by the European Community as a whole. During the period
1981—85 Britain is receiving about £32 million to help to improve the
environment and to encourage the development of job-creating activities in
certain steel and shipbuilding closure areas in the border regions of Northern
Ireland. Approval has also been given for aid of £89 million over the five-year
period 1984—88 for steel and shipbuilding closure areas and new aid for textile
closure areas.
The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a self-governing institution set up by
the Treaty of Rome with member states of the European Community subscrib¬
ing to its capital. The Bank's aims are to help to stimulate development in
less-favoured regions, to modernise or convert industries, to help to create new
activities and to offset structural difficulties affecting certain sectors. The EIB
also serves projects of common interest to several member states or the
Community as a whole. It has loaned over £3,200 million since 1973 for projects
in Britain, mostly for public works such as the Sullom Voe oil terminal, and
manufacturing projects in the assisted areas.
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) makes loans to companies in
the coal and steel industries, and for manufacturing projects which create new
employment opportunities for redundant coal and steel workers. Non-repayable
aid may be available for workers who have been made redundant. The ECSC can
lend up to 50 per cent of the fixed capital costs of a project.
Exchange risk cover may be provided by the Government on EIB and certain
ECSC loans for projects qualifying for regional selective assistance. The British
borrower takes on only a sterling liability.
A major feature of the Government's economic policy is the stimulation of
competition and the control of practices which are restrictive or anti¬
competitive. Linked to this policy is the encouragement of fair trading, with the
particular aim of helping consumers and safeguarding their rights. The
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Corporate and Consumer Affairs,
who is answerable to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, has special
responsibilities for competition policy and consumer affairs (although certain
matters, such as safety of foodstuffs and road vehicles, are the concern of other
departments).
The Office of Fair Trading, a small government department headed by the
Director General of Fair Trading, has various executive responsibilities relating
to competition policy and consumer protection.
Competition policy is supported by machinery for scrutinising and regulating
monopolies, mergers, anti-competitive practices and restrictive trade practices
and by powers to regulate any structural changes or anti-competitive practices
which operate against the public interest. The Director General of Fair Trading
administers the F'air Trading Act 1973, which deals with monopolies and
mergers, the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, which deals with restrictive
trading agreements, the Resale Prices Act 1976, which deals with minimum
resale price maintenance, and the Competition Act 1980, which deals with
anti-competitive practices.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Director General of Fair
Trading can refer monopolies for investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission. The legislation defines a monopoly as a situation where at least a
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
207
Anti¬
competitive
Practices
The Public
Sector
Restrictive
Trade
Practices
quarter of a particular kind of goods or service is supplied by or to a single
person, or by two or more people acting in a way which prevents, restricts, or
distorts competition. Local monopolies can also be referred to the Commission,
and the Secretary of State can refer public sector industries. If the Commission
finds that a monopoly operates against the public interest, the Secretary of State
for Trade and Industry has powers to take action to remedy or prevent the harm
which the Commission considers may exist. Alternatively the Director General
may be asked to negotiate undertakings to remedy the adverse effects identified
by the Commission.
Proposals for a merger (defined as occurring when two or more enterprises are
brought under common ownership or control) may be referred to the Commis¬
sion by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, taking account of advice
from the Director General, if the merger would result in or intensify a monopoly
or if the total value of gross assets to be taken over would exceed £30 million. If
the Commission finds that a merger or proposed merger may be expected to
operate against the public interest, the Secretary of State can prevent it from
taking place or obtain undertakings to remedy the adverse effects identified; or,
if it has already taken place, he can require it to be reversed. There are special
provisions for newspaper and certain other mergers.
Subject to limited exemptions, the Director General can investigate any
business practice (whether in the public or private sectors) which may restrict,
distort or prevent competition in the production, supply or acquisition of goods
or services in Britain. If the Director General concludes that a practice is
anti-competitive he may either accept an undertaking from the business
responsible for the practice or, in default of such an undertaking, refer the
matter to the Commission to establish whether it operates against the public
interest. On an adverse finding by the Commission, the Secretary of State has
powers to take remedial action.
The Government is working to increase competition in professional services.
It wishes to see an end to restrictive practices, a reduction in charges and a
greater degree of advertising. Proposals have been announced to improve
competition in property conveyancing and in the supply of spectacles. Other
professions likely to be the subject of government proposals include estate
agency, accountancy and veterinary practice.
The Competition Act also empowers the Secretary of State to refer to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission any questions on the efficiency and costs
of, the service provided by, or the possible abuse of a monopoly situation by,
various bodies in the public sector. It is the Government’s intention that at least
one major examination of each industry should take place every four years.
Under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976 restrictive trading agreements
have to be registered with the Director General of Fair Trading. Broadly, an
agreement is registrable if two or more parties to it, engaged in business in
Britain in the supply of goods or services, accept some limitation on their
freedom to make their own decisions about matters such as prices or conditions
of sale. Failure to register an agreement means that the restrictions are void and
the parties are liable to legal proceedings. Having placed an agreement on the
register, the Director General has the duty of referring it to the Restrictive
Practices Court and the Court must declare the restrictions in it contrary to the
public interest unless the parties can satisfy the Court by reference to criteria
laid down in the Act that this is not the case. Restrictions declared contrary to
the public interest are void and the Court can order the parties not to give effect
to them or make any similar agreement. In practice, however, many agreements
208
European
Community
Consumer
Protection
Consumer
Advice and
Information
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
do not need to be referred to the Court because, for example, the parties choose
to give up the restrictions rather than go to Court, or the Secretary of State
accepts the Director General's advice that the restrictions are not significant
enough to warrant reference to the Court.
The objective of the European Community's competition policy is to ensure that
there is free and fair competition in trade between member states and that the
government trade barriers dismantled by the Treaty of Rome are not replaced by
private barriers which fragment the common market. The competition rules are
set out in the Treaty of Rome. These are directly applicable in the law of member
states but their enforcement is the responsibility of the European Commission,
which has powers to investigate and terminate alleged infringements and to
impose fines.
The Treaty prohibits agreements or concerted practices which are likely to
affect trade between member states and have as their object, or effect, the
prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the common market;
and prohibits any abuse of a dominant position within the common market or a
substantial part of it, to the extent that it affects trade between member states.
The Fair Trading Act 1973 provides machinery (headed by the Director General
of Fair Trading) for the continuous review of consumer affairs, for action to deal
with trading practices which unfairly affect consumers' interests and with
persistent offenders under existing law. and for the negotiation of self-regulatory
codes of practice to raise trading standards. The Director General is also
responsible for the working of legislation which regulates consumer credit and
hire business and estate agency work.
The consumer’s interests with regard to the purity of foods, the description
and performance of goods and services and pricing information are safeguarded
by the Food and Drugs Acts 1955 to 1982, the Medicines Act 1968, the Trade
Descriptions Acts 1968 and 1972, the Prices Act 1974, the Unfair Contract
Terms Act 1977, the Sale of Goods Act 1979 and the Supply of Goods and
Services Act 1982. The marking and accuracy of quantities are regulated by the
Weights and Measures Acts 1963 and 1979, the latter introducing a system of
average weights for certain pre-packed goods. The Consumer Protection Acts
1961 and 1971 and the Consumer Safety Act 1978 empower the Government to
control the supply of most goods in the interests of safety. A White Paper
proposing major changes in the law to prevent unsafe products being marketed
was published in July 1984.
Provision of consumer advice and information is an important function of those
in local and central government concerned with consumer protection, and of
several independent organisations. The local outlets are the Citizens Advice
Bureaux and in some areas Consumer Advice Centres.
The independent, non-statutory National Consumer Council (and associated
councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), which receives government
finance, ensures that the consumers view is made known to those in
government and industry whose decisions affect the consumer's interest.
Consumer councils for the energy, rail and communications nationalised
industries investigate questions of concern to the consumer, while some trade
associations in industry and commerce have established codes of practice. In
addition, several private organisations work to further consumer interests. The
largest is the Consumers’ Association, funded by the subscriptions of its
membership of over 630.000. The Association conducts an extensive program¬
me of comparative testing of goods and investigation of services; its views and
test reports are published in its monthly magazine Which? and its other
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY
209
COMPANY
LAW
INDUSTRIAL
AND
INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY
publications. The Association also provides an advice service on subscription.
Local consumer groups, many belonging to a national federation, also promote
consumers’ interests and provide information and advice.
The European Community’s consumer programme covers a number of
important topics, such as health and safety, protection of the consumer’s
economic interests when purchasing goods and services, promotion of con¬
sumer education and strengthening the representation of consumers. The
views of British consumer organisations are represented by the Consumers
in the European Community Group (UK).
The formation and conduct of private sector corporations is regulated by the
Companies Acts. ‘Incorporation’ means registering an enterprise with an official
registrar of companies, with related obligations such as those concerning the
capital structure of a company, the rights and duties of its directors and
members, and the preparation of accounts. Nearly all corporate businesses are
limited liability’ companies, which means that each company is a legal entity
distinct from its members, who are not as such liable for its debts. The
members’ liability is limited to contributing an amount related to their
shareholding. In unincorporated businesses, such as sole proprietorships or
partnerships, by contrast, individuals are personally liable for any business
debts.
The European Community is pursuing a programme for the harmonisation of
company law among member states. In accordance with the programme, the
Companies Act 1980 provided for revised arrangements for the classification
and registration of companies and their capital structure and distribution of
profits and assets. The Act sets out criteria for public companies (that were
previously defined as those not meeting one or other of the tests for private
companies) and, by exclusion, defines private companies as those which are not
public. It continues to be the case that private companies may not offer shares to
the public. After registering under the Act a public company must put ‘Public
Limited Company or PLC after its name. The Act also lays down rules
concerning the conduct of company directors, and prohibits share dealings that
depend upon certain privileged kinds of information.
The Companies Act 1981 implements a European Community directive that
sets out the statutory framework for the disclosure of company accounts, while
allowing for less disclosure by small and medium-sized companies. It also makes
provision to enable companies to purchase their own shares (mainly in order to
assist small businesses); extends the law requiring disclosure of interest in a
company s shares; and alters the law controlling company names and business
names.
Proposals to reform the law on insolvency and to offer greater protection to
investors are under consideration by the Government. Work has already begun
to consolidate the legislation which makes up the various Companies Acts; it is
expected that consolidation will simplify the application and interpretation of
company law.
There is a substantial body of legislation designed to secure the rights of the
originators of inventions relating to manufacture, new industrial designs and
trade marks. These matters are administered respectively by the Patent Office,
the Design Registry and the Trade Marks Registry, while governmental
responsibility is exercised by the Department of Trade and Industry. Protection
is also available under the European Patent Convention and the Patent
Co-operation Treaty, and benefits may be claimed in other countries by virtue of
the International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property. The
Government is reviewing the law on copyright and related matters, with
210
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
particular attention to the problems raised by private tape recordings of sound
or video copyright works, the application of copyright to industrial designs, and
the use of photocopying. The penalties for trading in pirate sound and film
recordings (including video) were greatly increased in 1983.
The Government is concerned to encourage innovation by providing a more
adequate legal and administrative system for the protection of the ownership of
ideas by means of patents, registered designs, trade marks and copyright, and to
improve awareness of the value of these intellectual property rights and of their
accessibility and usage, particularly by individuals and small businesses.
12 Manufacturing
and Service
Industries
Manufacturing plays a vital role in the economy. It accounts for 24 per cent of
gross domestic product; about 26 per cent of the employed labour force is
engaged in manufacturing; and around 66 per cent of visible exports consists of
manufactured or semi-manufactured goods. Developments of particular note in
manufacturing in the last decade have been fluctuations in output generally in
line with international trends, and rises both in export performance and import
penetration in a number of sectors. Growth in output and exports was strongest
in chemicals and electrical, electronic and instrument engineering, while the
food industries as a whole reduced the extent of import penetration. Utilisation
of advanced technologies in industry, especially microelectronics, is steadily
increasing.
The proportion of gross domestic product contributed by service industries
continues to increase. Among traded services, financial and business services,
tourism, and earnings on construction work overseas show the greatest growth.
The manufacturing industries are described here by sector or group of
sectors, together with construction and services.
The statistics in the following sections, relating to the main sectors of
manufacturing industry, are supplied by the Statistical Division of the
Department of Trade and Industry. Unless otherwise stated, export and sales
figures include parts. Figures in the text are for 1983.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturing is carried out by private enterprise. Though the greater
parts of the iron and steel and shipbuilding industries are in public ownership,
the Government is reducing the extent of state ownership of industry. Table 14
shows the size distribution of manufacturing establishments. About 55 per cent
Table 14: Manufacturing: Size Distribution of Establishments
Number of Number of % of total % of total
employees establishments establishments employment
Under 20 80,930
20 to 499 25,465
500 to 1,499 1,445
1,500 or more 436
74-7 100
23-5 40-1
U3 20-3
0-4 29-6
Source: Report on the Census of Production 1981.
212
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Output and
Investment
of the largest establishments were in engineering and metals and vehicle
manufacturing. Within the private sector, the 100 largest companies accounted
for 34 per cent of manufacturing employment in 1981. (A company may consist
of one or more establishments.) In each of the following sectors over 90 per cent
of net output was attributable to the five largest companies: tobacco, man-made
fibres, wines, cider and perry, motor vehicles and their engines, railway and
tramway vehicles and asbestos goods; and over 80 per cent in ordnance small
arms and ammunition, insulated wires and cables, shipbuilding and repairing,
cement, lime and plaster, iron and steel and the extraction and preparation of
metalliferous ores.
The largest manufacturing companies (by £ million turnover in the latest
financial year) are BAT Industries (11,652), Imperial Chemical Industries
(8,256), Unilever (5,355), General Electric Company (4,626), Imperial
Group (4,382), Ford Motor Company (3,585), BL (3,421), Rothmans
International (3,412), George Weston Holdings (3,376) and Associated British
Foods (3,366).
The figures in Table 15 show the relative size of the sectors of manufacturing
and their growth rates. Manufacturing output as a whole fell after 1973,
following the rise in international oil prices, but grew again gradually between
1975 and 1979, most evidently in chemicals; paper, printing and publish¬
ing; other manufacturing (timber, rubber, plastics); food and drink manufac¬
turing; metals; clothing, footwear and leather; and electrical and instrument
engineering.
Between 1979 and 1981 output declined sharply, following further rises in
energy costs, which produced a recession in manufacturing affecting nearly all
Table 15: Manufacturing—Gross Value Added and Index of Production
Index of production
Gross value (1980 = 100)
added (£ million)  
1982 1982 1983
Metal manufacturing
Other minerals and mineral
products
Chemicals and man-made fibres
Mechanical engineering
Other metal goods
Electrical and instrument
engineering
Motor vehicles and parts
Other transport equipment
Food, drink and tobacco
Textiles
Clothing, footwear and leather
Paper, printing and publishing
All other manufacturing
1,879 103-8 104-2
3,161 94-9 94-3
5,358 99-5 105-8
7,895 89-0 85-7
3,411 94-3 97-0
7,917 97-4 106-7
3,160 79-8 84-0
3,426 100-5 97-1
8,424 98-9 100-4
1,758 87-7 89-5
1,960 89-0 91-2
5,550 91-4 91-7
4,383 88-1 91-9
Total 58,282 93-7 95-9
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1984 Edition.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
213
MINERAL
PRODUCTS
Metals
Iron and Steel
Products
the industrialised market economies. Additional factors depressing output in
Britain were high domestic interest rates and, for exporters, a rise in the
exchange value of sterling which raised the prices of British goods in overseas
markets. Output remained low in 1982, but rose by 1-3 per cent in 1983.
A major stimulus has been provided by the various needs of the offshore oil
and gas industries. In long-established industries (for example, shipbuilding
and marine engineering) extensive reorganisation, re-equipment and mod¬
ernisation are being undertaken to meet changing economic conditions.
Since manufacturing industry lies mainly in the private sector, investment in
manufacturing tends to be determined by market considerations and to reflect
expectations of profitability. There are discernible cycles in the level of
investment: 1983 saw the beginning of an upturn in the latest trough. Total
direct investment in 1983 was £5,299 million, comprising £4,194 million on
plant and machinery, £617 million on new building and £488 million on
vehicles. In addition, assets worth an estimated £948 million were purchased by
iinaneial companies to lease to manufacturers on full payment agreements. By
branch ol industry, the main direct investments were in chemicals and
man-made fibres (£805 million), mechanical engineering (£657 million), food
(£655 million) and vehicles (£652 million).
Labour^ Sales5 Exports Imports
1983 (’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Metal manufacturing 224
of which: iron and steel products 157
non-ferrous metals 67
Non-metallic mineral products 201
of which: building materials and
abrasives 99
glass and glassware 50
refractory and ceramic goods 52
3 Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
b Sales of principal products.
The manufacture of metals is an important activity in Britain, covering both
iron and steel and non-ferrous metals such as aluminium.
8,083 3,374 4,046
4,995 1,486 1,207
3,088 1,887 2,839
6,600 738 671
4,634 192 179
1,089 239 341
877 309 151
Most of the early developments in iron and steel production originated in
Britain, still one of the world’s major steel-producing nations. Britain takes part,
as a member ol the European Coal and Steel Community, in joint efforts with
other member countries to rationalise the structure of the industry and improve
the profitability of operations.
The British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed as a public corporation in 1967,
has accounted in recent years lor 82 to 85 per cent of Britain’s crude steel
production by volume.
BSC invested heavily in modernising its production capacity in the 1960s and
1970s. The traditional open-hearth steelmaking process disappeared in Britain
in 1980; production is now concentrated on basic oxygen steelmaking (for bulk
production) and the electric arc process (for more specialised tasks). Because of
a marked fall in demand for steel, BSC has had to accelerate the closure of its
older steelworks and reduce capacity at some of the more modern works. Further
restructuring of the industry has included the transfer of assets and businesses
between BSC and the private sector and the closure, both in the public and
214
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Non-ferrous
Metals
Building
Materials
private sectors, of plants that cannot be made profitable. The private sector
accounts for about 25 per cent of deliveries to the domestic market and is
particularly strong in the manufacture of alloy and stainless steels and of
finished products for the engineering industry. The main steel producing areas
are Wales (33 per cent of crude steel output in 1983), Yorkshire and Humberside
(32), the Northern region (18) and Scotland (12).
About 72 per cent of British steel producers’ deliveries of finished steel
products is used by home industry and the remainder is for direct export to all
parts of the world. A large part of the steel used by industry in Britain is also
subsequently exported as part of other finished products.
Britain's non-ferrous metals processing and fabricating industry is one of the
largest in Europe. Its major products are aluminium (both virgin and secondary
metal), secondary refined copper and lead, and primary zinc. Tin mining in
Cornwall supplied about 40 per cent of Britain’s tin requirements in 1983 but
otherwise British metal smelting and refining industries are based on imported
ores and concentrates except for substantial secondary production from scrap
metal. Britain is also a major producer of specialised alloys for high technology
requirements in the aerospace, electronic, petrochemical, and nuclear and other
fuel industries. Titanium and titanium alloys are also produced and used in
aircraft production, power generation and North Sea oil production, where their
lightness, resistance to stress, flexibility and resistance to oxidisation are
especially valued. Nearly half the industry is situated in the Midlands. Other
centres include Wales, where Europe’s largest nickel refinery and only titanium
sponge plant are situated, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth, where there is a
zinc smelter of some 100,000 tonnes capacity. Two large-scale aluminium
smelters provide 75 per cent of Britain’s requirements for primary aluminium.
The large non-ferrous metals fabricating industry uses large quantities of
imported refined metals such as copper, lead, zinc and aluminium. A wide range
of semi-manufactures is produced in these metals and their alloys, and,
particularly in aluminium, firms are engaged in smelting, casting and fabrica¬
tion by rolling, extrusion and drawing; advanced techniques of powder
metallurgy and pressure die-castings are also employed, which help to conserve
energy and materials. In recent years considerable progress has been made in
the development of‘superplastic’ alloys, which are more ductile and elastic than
conventional alloys.
The main products exported, including alloys and semi-finished products, are
copper, nickel, aluminium, lead, tin and zinc. Exports of aluminium and
aluminium alloys reached £312 million in 1983 while exports in the same year of
copper, brass and other copper alloys reached £272 million. Exports of silver,
platinum and other metals of the platinum group totalled over £961 million in
1983. The major export markets for the whole industry are the United States
and the rest of the European Community.
Firms in the industry manufacture such items as bricks, roofing tiles, chimney
pots, and concrete, plaster, slate and stonework products. Most manufacture is
now based on highly mechanised systems. London Brick PLC supplies about 40
per cent of total brick deliveries.
The cement industry is chiefly concerned with the manufacture of Portland
cement for the home market. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented in 1824,
this material and the methods of its production have been the subject of
continuous technical improvement and intensive research. Three firms domin¬
ate the industry, the largest being Blue Circle Industries.
Glass-reinforced cement composites, a new variation, were invented in Britain
in the mid-1970s and are manufactured under licence in over 40 other
countries.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
215
Ceramic and
Refractory
Goods
Glass
CHEMICALS AND
MAN-MADE
FIBRES
Chemicals
The pottery industry, centred largely in Staffordshire, supplies almost all home
needs lor domestic and industrial pottery. It uses largely indigenous clay from
Cornwall and Devon. There has been considerable re-equipment in the industry;
kilns fired by gas or electricity have replaced all the coal-fired kilns, and new
decorating techniques and automatic and semi-automatic machinery, such as
automatic glazing machines, have been introduced. Domestic pottery, including
china, earthenware and stoneware, accounts for 55 per cent of the industry’s
output; the other main divisions are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical
ware, and such specialised industrial products as acid-proof stoneware, porous
ceramics and laboratory porcelain. Research is being conducted into ceramics
for use in housebuilding and diesel and jet engines. Important industrial
ceramics invented in Britain include silicon carbides developed by the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority and sialons developed at the University of
Newcastle upon Tyne. Production of tableware is concentrated in two major
groups. Britain is the world’s principal manufacturer of fine bone china, much
of which is exported; famous makes include Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester,
Royal Doulton, Minton, Aynsley, Coalport and Royal Crown Derby. Refractory
goods include heat-resisting materials such as magnesite, silica and high-
alumina bricks, crucibles, kiln linings and radiants for gas and electric fires.
Britain s glass industry is one of the biggest in the world. Glass containers form
the largest part of the industry; another major section is devoted to the
manufacture of flat glass in its various forms, chiefly ‘float’ glass, by a process
developed in Britain by Pilkington Brothers and licensed to glassmakers
throughout the world. Pilkingtons have also developed an energy-saving window
glass which reflects room heat without impairing visibility. The use of glass for
internal decoration and as a finish for internal and external walls has greatly
increased in recent years. Large quantities of safety glass are produced for the
motor and other industries. Other products include tubular glass, mirrors, lamp
and bulb glass, scientific and medical glassware, glass fibres, and all types of
glass containers (mostly made automatically). Craft products include handmade
lead crystal glassware of very high quality and works by individual artists
working from studios.
1983
LabourJ Sales5 Exports Imports
(’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Chemicals 325
of which: basic industrial chemicals 121
paints, varnishes and
printing inks 31
pharmaceuticals 80
soap and toilet
preparations 36
Man-made fibres 15
16,883
7,607
1,243
2,922
1,745
739
6,918
3,480
222
1,116
365
375
5,340
3,195
102
524
174
322
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
b Sales of principal products.
The chemicals industry is one of the most successful industries in Britain as
well as being its fifth largest industrial sector, accounting for about 10 per cent
of manufacturing net output. The industry is also the third largest in Europe
and its exports of £6,918 million in 1983 (accounting for 16 per cent of British
216
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Basic Industrial
Chemicals
Paint
Specialised
Industrial and
Agricultural
Chemicals
manufacturing exports) placed Britain among the top five chemicals exporting
nations. The largest British chemicals group. Imperial Chemical Industries, is
the fifth largest chemicals company in the world, accounting for 28 per cent of
production in Britain. The industry is represented by the Chemical Industries
Association. Western Europe is the major export market.
Basic industrial chemicals comprise inorganic chemicals, basic organic chemi¬
cals (except specialised pharmaceuticals), fertilisers, synthetic resins and
plasties, synthetic rubber, and dyestuffs and pigments.
A high proportion of inorganic chemicals production consists of relatively
simple bulk chemicals, such as sulphuric acid and metallic and non-metallic
oxides, serving as basic materials for industry. Substantial quantities of
inorganic chemicals are used in the manufacture of fertilisers, detergents,
paint, glass and metals. Radioisotopes are produced by Amersham International
(formerly the Radiochemical Centre), the world's largest manufacturers and
exporters of radioactive products; over 80 per cent of production is for export.
Organic chemicals include the heavy organics produced in bulk and the
speciality intermediate products. Oil and natural gas are the source of some 90
per cent of world organic chemicals production. The most important products
(by weight) are ethylene, propylene and benzene. The main uses of organic
chemicals are in solvents, plastics and synthetic resins, synthetic rubber,
man-made fibres and detergents, and as intermediate chemicals in the
manufacture of other chemicals, pharmaceuticals, dyestuffs, paints, adhesives,
plastics and textiles.
Many of the basic discoveries in plastics, including polyethylene, were made in
Britain. Over 30 per cent of production is exported. Expansion in recent years
has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of which the most important are
polyethylene (used in coverings and packaging—notably for foodstuffs), poly¬
vinyl chloride (known as PVC and used for a wide range of industrial purposes
and consumer goods), polystyrene (a material used for toys, light mouldings and
many consumer goods) and polypropylene (which can be fabricated as mould¬
ings, films and fibres). A new group of plastics materials reinforced with carbon
fibres is also in commercial production: they have up to three times the strength
but are only 20 per cent of the weight of steel, and are being increasingly used in,
for example, vehicle manufacture. Styrene-butadiene and polybutadiene rub¬
bers used for tyres, high-styrene rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and nitrile
rubbers for use where oil resistance is required are also in large-scale
production, together with neoprene rubber.
The development of chemical fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of
British scientists. Manufacture of fertilisers, in particular ammonium nitrate, is
dominated by a few large firms producing almost entirely for the home market. A
number of smaller companies also formulate and market compound fertilisers.
The industry produces not only decorative and industrial paints, but also
varnishes and allied products. In recent years many improved techniques have
been introduced into the paint and varnish industry, including new ranges of
synthetic resins and pigments, powder coatings, non-drip, quick-drying paints
and paints needing only one top coat.
Specialised chemical products include dyestuffs, formulated adhesives and
sealants, chemically treated oils and fats, essential oils and flavouring materials,
explosives, industrial gases, products for the treatment of leather and textiles,
adhesive film, cloth and foil, surfactants (surface-active agents) for many
purposes and formulated pesticides. A substantial proportion of world research
and development in agrochemicals is conducted in Britain.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
217
Pharmaceu¬
ticals
Soap and Toilet
Preparations
Man-made
Fibres
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING
AND METAL
GOODS
British scientists have discovered and developed many essential drugs and
medicinal products, and the industry produces a wide range of pharmaceutical
preparations. These include antibiotics and other drugs for the treatment of
infective (including tropical) diseases; drugs used for the treatment of gastro¬
intestinal, respiratory, circulatory, rheumatic and psychiatric conditions;
antihistamines, anaesthetics, synthetic steroids and other hormones; and
vaccines, sera and drugs obtained from natural sources. Some firms are among
the world s leading producers and exporters of preparations for the treatment of
human and animal diseases. (Britain is foremost among the world’s developers
of molecular graphics, a computer-aided technique for studying the structure of
complicated organic molecules on a visual display unit, eliminating the need for
many physical tests of drugs.)
These industries include washing powders and other synthetic detergents,
soap, detergents, toilet preparations, cosmetics and perfumes. Some of the large
companies in the detergents and toiletries industry are owned or financed by
United States companies but there are a number of long-established British
cosmetics, toiletries and soap manufacturers. Both sectors are significant
exporters.
Britain played a major role in the early development of man-made fibres and
continues to be an important producer of these fibres, mainly through a small
number of large companies. The main types of fibre are still those first
developed—regenerated cellulosic fibres such as viscose rayon, and the major
synthetic fibres such as nylon polyamide, polyester (a British invention) and
acrylics. Extensive research continues to produce a wide variety of innovative
products with characteristics designed to meet market needs, such as anti¬
static and flame-retardant fibres. Polyolefins (polypropylene and polyethylene)
now find significant use in carpets, carpet backing and other household textiles.
More specialist products include the aramids (with very high thermal stability
and strength), elastanes (giving very high stretch and recovery), melded fabrics
(produced without the need for knitting or weaving) and carbon fibres (originally
developed for the aerospace industry but now finding numerous wider
applications).
1983
Labour3 Sales6 Exports Imports
COOOs) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Mechanical engineering
of which: industrial plant and
steelwork
agricultural machinery
and tractors
machine tools
textile machinery
process machinery
mining, construction and
mechanical handling
equipment
Other metal goods
768
72
38
75
11
41
86
365
15,882
2,739
1,203
1,096
232
890
2,637
7,680
6,693
579
729
451
175
656
1,164
959
4,729
386
560
411
117
504
732
1,029
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
b Sales of principal products.
218
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mechanical
Engineering
Industrial Plant
and Steelwork
Agricultural
Machinery and
Tractors
Machine Tools
Textile
Machinery
The mechanical engineering industry comprises a group of industries manufac¬
turing all types of non-electrical machinery, machine tools, industrial engines,
mechanical handling equipment, construction equipment and industrial plant.
Over half the industry's production is for the home market. The major
customers for the heavy equipment sectors are the nationalised fuel industries,
the chemicals industry and the British Steel Corporation. A wide range of
equipment is supplied to the building and construction industry. Demand for
other types of equipment comes from all the production industries in Britain.
Other companies in the mechanical engineering industry manufacture parts
and components and do general sub-contracting, fabricating and repair work.
The industry manufactures almost every type of industrial (including process)
plant and steelwork. Of particular importance are fabricated products such as
pressure vessels, heat exchangers and storage tanks for chemical and oil¬
refining (process) plant, steam-raising boilers (including those of high capacity
for power stations), nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment plant and
fabricated steelwork for bridges, buildings and industrial installations. The
industrial plant industry comprises both equipment manufacturers and
contractors responsible for the design, engineering, construction and commis¬
sioning of complete plants for process industries.
A wide range of agricultural equipment is produced for general and special use,
including many special purpose machines such as fruit and vegetable harvesters
and improved root harvesters and agricultural tractors, which account for the
bulk of wheeled tractors produced. Mechanised equipment is extensively used in
the arable farming and dairy farming sectors. Much of the new machinery is
designed for use in a variety of conditions to meet the needs of overseas farmers.
The industry’s products are shown at the Royal Smithfield Show and Agricul¬
tural Machinery Exhibition, a large-scale annual exhibition held in London in
December. The annual Royal International Agricultural Show is held in July at
the National Agricultural Centre, which also provides regular demonstrations of
technical developments in agriculture.
Britain was the birthplace of the machine tools industry and provides a very
wide range of machine tools. Almost all of those produced are purchased by
engineering, vehicles and metal goods industries. As these sectors are among
those most affected by the recession in world manufacturing, production of
machine tools has also contracted.
The most important types of metal-cutting machine tools are milling, grinding
and turning machines. Computerised numerically controlled machine tools,
which are programmed to carry out, electronically, operations previously
undertaken by a human operator, are produced on a large scale. The United
States was again the largest export market for the industry in 1983 (£38-5
million). The next were the Federal Republic of Germany (£17-2 million). South
Africa (£15-7 million) and France (£15-7 million). The Machine Tool Trades
Association represents most of the industry and is responsible for the inter¬
national machine tools exhibition held in Britain every four years, the next
in 1988.
Textile machinery produced in Britain includes machines and accessories for
the manufacture and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types of natural
and man-made fibres. British inventions have remained the foundation of many
textile processes in use internationally and progress has been made in applying
automated techniques (including the use of microelectronics) in the industry. In
1983, some 75 per cent of the industry's total sales were to export markets.
Process
Machinery
Construction,
Mining and
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Other
Machinery
Metal Products
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES 219
Another important sector comprises machinery for food, chemicals and related
industries. This includes plant and machinery for industrial food and drink
processing; machinery for bottling, canning, packeting, labelling and bottle¬
washing; tobacco-processing and cigar- and cigarette-making machinery;
chemical centrifuges, drying machines, and filtration and mixing equipment;
furnaces, ovens and kilns for the manufacture of metals, cement and glass; and
gas, water and waste treatment plant.
Almost the whole range of plant required by the construction industry is
produced, including excavating, earth-moving and road-making equipment,
pile-drivers, and quarry crushing and screening plant. Overseas sales of
construction equipment and mining machinery and equipment, including coal
cutting and coal-face loading machinery, are substantial. Mechanical handling
equipment is used not only for construction and related activities but
throughout industry generally. It extends from individual units and accessories
to complete operating systems, the main products being cranes and transpor¬
ters, lifts, escalators, conveyors, elevators, hoists and powered industrial trucks.
Electronically controlled and completely automatic handling systems are also
produced.
Britain is an important manufacturer of industrial engines, including those
derived from aero-engines. Industrial pumps, valves and compressors are vital
components in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil and
electric power industries. The fluid power industry makes oil, hydraulic and
pneumatic equipment for operating machinery and construction and other
equipment. There are many new areas where these powerful and flexible systems
may be used. The other major products of the mechanical engineering industry
include bearings; chains and gears; printing, bookbinding and paper goods
machinery; refrigerating, space heating, ventilating and air-conditioning equip¬
ment; engineers small tools (excluding gauges); garden tools; portable power
tools; and miscellaneous non-electrical machinery, such as boot- and shoe¬
making machinery, laundry equipment, automatic vending machines, plastics
working machinery and other types of specialised equipment.
The castings industry plays an important role in meeting the needs of
manufacturers for essential components for products sold both in Britain and
abroad. Its main customers are the vehicle, mechanical engineering, and
building and construction industries. The larger mechanised foundries are
dominant, but many smaller craft foundries meet needs for specialised and
low-volume castings. Output (by volume) has been falling and the industry has
been progressively changing. While some foundries have been closing, many
others have been investing in new melting equipment, moulding equipment and
processes, and process and quality control equipment, both to meet demands
for castings of higher quality and strength and to improve working and
environmental conditions.
A range of metal products is produced by a group of industries made up of a
very large number of firms. One of the main groups, in which small firms
predominate, manufactures engineers’ small tools and gauges, which include
jigs and fixtures, press tools and moulds, hard metal tipped tools and other
metal cutting tools. Another group manufactures cutlery, tableware, safety
razors and blades.
A wide variety of domestic utensils, such as saucepans, buckets and dustbins,
made mainly from aluminium and wrought steel, are produced by the
hollow-ware industry, together with industrial hollow-ware, such as kegs,
drums and barrels. Five major firms which dominate the can and metal box
220
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industry use recycled material in can manufacture. The manufacture of hand
tools, including files, saws, hammers, axes and spades, is a long-established
industry. About half of its total production is for export. Other main groups of
metal goods are bolts, nuts and screws, metal furniture, metal windows, metallic
closures, metal small-ware (such as needles and pins), safes, locks and keys,
domestic gas appliances and drop forgings.
OFFICE
MACHINERY,
DATA-
PROCESSING
EQUIPMENT AND
ELECTRICAL,
ELECTRONIC
AND
INSTRUMENT
ENGINEERING
1983
Labour3
COOOs)
Sales'5 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Office machinery
Electronic data-
processing equipment
Electrical and electronic
engineering
of which: basic electrical equipment
telecommunications
equipment
radio and electronic
capital goods
electronic components
electronic consumer
goods, records and pre¬
recorded tapes
domestic electric
appliances
Instrument engineering
72
619
114
315
42
104
115
1,464
13,062
2,124
1,434
2,127
1,701
861
1,055
1,877
174
1,647
5,013
1,125
157
975
899
167
158
996
250
2,519
5,988
592
200
658
1,317
1,203
601
1,179
“ Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
b Sales of principal products.
Office
Machinery
and Data-
processing
Equipment
Computers
The industry covers a wide range of products including duplicators, photo¬
copiers, typewriters, word processors, microfilm, dictation and mailroom
equipment, and cash registers. A large proportion of the industry is owned by
multinational companies, and is likely to continue to be so, as the rapidly
advancing technologies involved require a heavy commitment to research and
development. In particular, the incorporation of microelectronics into office
products is rapidly increasing. The industry is strong in microfilm readers/
printers, duplicators, and office offset litho and rapid high-volume photo¬
copiers.
The computer sector produces an extensive range of computer systems, central
processors and peripheral equipment, from large computers for large-scale data
processing and scientific work to mini- and microcomputers for use in control
and automation systems and for home and office use. Britain’s home computer
manufacturers are particularly competitive in export markets, and Sinclair
Research is recognised internationally as a pioneer of home computing.
Essential to the sector is the software industry, which provides programs and
associated services and complements the hardware industry, enabling the
systems manufacturers to provide complete solutions to meet the requirements
of users.
Electrical and
Electronic
Engineering
The electrical and electronic engineering industry is engaged in the manufac¬
ture and installation of a wide variety of equipment, including all types of power
generation, transmission and distribution equipment, motors, telecommunica-
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
221
Electrical
Engineering
Electronic
Equipment
tions and broadcasting equipment, capital electronic equipment and systems,
industrial controls, electronic components, consumer electronics and domestic
electrical appliances. Electronics, which makes a vital contribution to the
efficiency of many branches of the country's economy, is one of the most
important sectors of British industry.
The main product categories are power equipment (generators, turbines,
motors, converters, transformers and rectifiers) and switchgear, starting and
control gear.
The industry produces cables and wires for the distribution of electric power,
for telecommunications networks and other purposes; its products include
submarine cables and cables insulated by a great variety of materials. Optical
fibres (hair-thin strands of glass) for use in telecommunications were invented
in Britain in 1964; they have a much higher capacity and better durability and
efficiency than copper cables.
A few large firms dominate the market for other electrical goods, including
domestic appliances such as heating and cooking equipment, washing
machines and dryers, refrigeration appliances, vacuum cleaners, irons and
electric kettles. Other major sectors are electrical equipment for motor vehicles
and aircraft, electric lamps and light fittings, and batteries and accumulators.
The British electronics industry is one of the largest and most comprehensive in
the world, responsible for many fundamental developments such as optical fibre
transmission systems. Because the applications of electronics technology are
continuing to multiply rapidly, definition of the industry must be arbitrary, but
the sectors included are radar and navigational aids, telecommunications
equipment, security systems, components, consumer goods, computers and
communications and other capital equipment, as well as electronic process
control and industrial instrumentation.
The dependence of the telecommunications industry on electronic techniques
is increasing as new switching systems are introduced. The main products are
switching and transmission equipment for telephone, telex and telegraph
systems and subscribers’ apparatus such as telephones, private automatic
branch exchanges, teleprinters and facsimile systems. British Telecom is the
main customer in the home market, and carries out research and development
work in co-operation with companies. Hitherto, British Telecom has largely been
supplied by four big companies (GEC, Plessey, Standard Telephones and Cables,
and Pye TMC). but active competition from other companies is being encouraged
and the range of new products widened. Innovative work is being particularly
stimulated by plans for direct broadcasting by satellite and a rapid expansion of
cable television.
The components sector manufactures a wide range of both active and passive
electronic components. The comprehensive indigenous industry is sup¬
plemented by subsidiaries of a number of large overseas companies. The sector
meets domestic requirements and is also very active in international trade. The
manufacture of integrated circuits (in which many components are fabricated
within a tiny chip of semi-conductor material) is an area of particularly rapid
change. Britain is improving its position in the manufacture of advanced
components.
The major consumer goods produced are radio and television sets, music
centres and high-fidelity audio and video equipment. In the audio field, British
manufacturers have a reputation for high-quality goods but are less strong in
the mass market. Equipment is also manufactured for reception of Britain's
Prestel' and teletext’ services.
222
Instrument
Engineering
MOTOR
VEHICLES
AND OTHER
TRANSPORT
EQUIPMENT
Motor Vehicles
and Cycles
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Another expanding sector of the industry is that which covers the manufac¬
ture of radio communications equipment, radar and radio navigational aids for
ships and aircraft, alarms and signalling equipment, public broadcasting
equipment and other capital goods. British equipment is used extensively
overseas, for defence, aviation, shipping, health and educational purposes.
An important advance in medical diagnosis was the development in Britain, in
the 1960s and early 1970s, of the tomographic X-ray scanner. This made a
world-wide impact by providing images of sections of brain or whole body on
living subjects. The more recent nuclear magnetic resonance machines linked,
like X-ray scanners, with computers to display digitised images on a television
screen, have enabled further advances in medical diagnosis to be made, while
eliminating the use of X-rays.
Instrument engineering is a particularly important sector of the engineering
industry. Electronic techniques are widely used, particularly in the industrial
instrument sector, which comprises integrated control systems and equipment,
optical instruments, electronic measurement and test equipment, analytical
instruments and a diverse group of others. The chemicals, petrochemicals,
power, petroleum, and iron and steel industries account for the great majority of
process control applications, the largest sector of the industry and one which is
expanding. Major advances have been made in automatic testing equipment and
analytical instruments for non-destructive testing, medical diagnosis and
pollution control. Other sectors of the instrument industry include photo¬
graphic, cinematographic and reprographic equipment; watches, clocks and
time recorders; and surgical instruments and appliances.
Labour3 Sales'3 Exports Imports
1983 (’000s) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Motor vehicles (including
trailers, caravans and
engines)
Motor vehicle parts (including
bodies)
Other transport equipment
of which: shipbuilding and
repairing
railway equipment
aerospace equipment
167 5,202
140 3,429
325 6,317
115 1,031
36 284
164 4,826
1,633 4,414
1,572 1,338
3,284 2,141
210 43
118 21
2,886 1,897
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
h Sales of principal products.
The motor vehicle industry comprises the manufacture of cars and commercial
vehicles, caravans and trailers, and parts and components. Output of cars and
commercial vehicles is dominated by four large groups which account for 99 per
cent of car production and some 98 per cent of commercial vehicle output: BL, in
which there is a majority public shareholding. Ford, Vauxhall and Talbot
(formerly Chrysler UK); the remainder is in the hands of smaller, specialist
producers of cars, heavy commercial vehicles, buses and coaches. The BL board
of management is working in agreement with the Government for the return of
all or part of the company to the private sector. In recent years the home market
has been increasingly supplied by imports, mainly from other European
countries and Japan, but British manufacturers are responding strongly to the
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
223
Railway
Equipment
Aerospace
competition, and the industry remains one of the major export sectors. The
principal trade associations for the industry are the Society of Motor Manufac¬
turers and Traders and, on the retail side, the Motor Agents Association. Motor
industry shows are held in alternate years at the National Exhibition Centre,
Birmingham, and in London.
The motor-cycle industry has contracted over the last two decades and the
domestic market is largely supplied by imports. On the other hand, the market
for pedal cycles has increased significantly and is mainly supplied by British
firms, the largest of which is TI Raleigh.
British Rail builds most of its locomotives and rolling stock in its own
workshops using components from the private sector; it also supplies equip¬
ment and provides consultancy services to many overseas countries. The large
private sector supplies a full range of equipment, including components,
traction and control gear, signalling, heating and ventilating systems, and track
equipment to British Rail; it also builds trains for London Regional Transport
and rapid transit networks. All this equipment is also supplied to overseas
railway and rapid transit authorities. In addition, the private sector undertakes
electrification and other major works overseas and also provides overseas
consultancy services.
Britain s aerospace industry is one of the largest and most comprehensive in
Western Europe and the Western world. The products of the industry include
civil and military aircraft, helicopters, aero-engines, guided weapons, hovercraft
and space vehicles, supported by a comprehensive range of aircraft and airfield
equipment and systems.
The main British airframe manufacturer is British Aerospace (BAe). National¬
ised in 1979, it was transformed into a public limited company in 1981, when
the Government sold just over half of its shareholding in BAe to private
investors; special arrangements were made for employee shareholdings. The
Government does not use its rights as a shareholder of a maximum of 48-43 per
cent of shares to intervene in BAe’s commercial decisions.
The major publicly owned companies are Rolls-Royce and Short Brothers.
Rolls-Royce is responsible for almost the entire output of aero-engines in
Britain; it is one of the world s three leading aero-engine manufacturers and
over 10,000 of the world's civil and military aircraft are powered by Rolls-Royce
engines.
The remainder of the industry is in private ownership and comprises a
number of aircraft companies, including Westland PLC and its subsidiary,
Westland Helicopters (which specialises in helicopter design and manufacture
and, in addition, performs a wide range of aviation equipment work), and all of
the aviation equipment sector. The development and manufacture of an EH 101
helicopter in commercial and military versions is being undertaken by EH
Industries, a company formed jointly by Westland Helicopters and the Italian
company Giovanni Agusta.
Production of BAe includes such civil aircraft as the HS748 feederliner and the
HS125 business jet, while the new BAe 146 feederjet and Jetstream 31 transport
aircraft came into service in 1983. BAe is a full partner in the European
consortium Airbus Industrie; it manufactures the wings for the A300 Airbus
and designs and manufactures the wings for the A310 derivative. Military
aircraft include the unique Harrier vertical/short take-off and landing aircraft
(which has achieved substantial sales to the United States), the Hawk advanced
trainer, the Anglo-French Jaguar tactical fighter/operational trainer and the
Tornado multi-role combat aircraft, which is a collaborative venture by Britain,
the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy.
224
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BAe is also a major producer of guided weapons including a number which
have been sold overseas, in particular the Rapier ground-to-air missile.
Collaborative guided weapon projects between Britain and its NATO partners are
becoming increasingly important.
Short Brothers, which is based in Belfast, produces the Skyvan, the SD330
and 360 commuter airliners, airframe components and missiles. Westland
Helicopters manufactures the successful Sea King and is the British partner in
the Anglo-French collaborative programmes on the Puma, Gazelle and Lynx
helicopters, which are being produced for the armed forces of a number of
countries besides Britain and France. In 1983 Westland also introduced the W30
Lynx derivative intended mainly for the civil market.
Rolls-Royce aero-engines in production include the collaboratively produced
RBI99 for the Tornado, the RB211 civil engine and its more powerful derivative
the RB211-524, the Pegasus vectored-thrust engine for the Harrier and the Gem
helicopter engine. More advanced versions of the RB211-524 have been
developed, as has another RB211 derivative, the RB211-535E4, which enables
the Boeing 757 to carry a full load of passengers nearly 6,500 km (3,800 miles).
Rolls-Royce and General Electric, of the United States, have an agreement on
mutual participation in the high technology developments of their respective
commercial engines. Industrial versions of aero-engines such as the RB211 and
the Olympus (developed for Concorde) are being produced for use in oil and gas
transmission and as stand-by power generators. Versions for marine use, in
particular of the Olympus and the Tyne, are being used to power a new
generation of warships for the Royal Navy and many overseas navies.
The aviation equipment manufacturers provide a wide range of systems
essential to engines and aircraft, including engine and flight controls, electrical
generation, mechanical and hydraulic power systems, cabin furnishings, flight
decks and information displays including head up’ displays (which project
electronically into the pilot’s line of sight the information needed to fly and
navigate the aircraft, making it unnecessary to look down at the instruments);
all are sold both in domestic and overseas markets. They also supply radar and
air traffic control equipment, ground power supplies and flight simulators, to
airports and airlines throughout the world.
The space sector manufactures satellite systems and space hardware for the
programmes of the European Space Agency (ESA); it also meets Britain’s own
requirements and contributes as manufacturers of sub-systems in, for example,
the satellite system of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisa¬
tion (INTELSAT). The Dynamics Group of BAe has acted as prime contractor for
all the ESA's telecommunications satellite projects, which include the Orbital
Test Satellite (OTS), launched in 1978 and still in operation, the European
Communications Satellites (ECS), procured for EUTELSAT (the European
telecommunications satellite authority), and the maritime series of communica¬
tions satellites (MARECS), leased to the International Maritime Satellite
Organisation (INMARSAT), the first of which was launched in 1981. BAe is also
the prime contractor for the ESA’s L-SAT large telecommunications satellite to
be launched in 1986. Marconi Space and Defence Systems (MSDS) concentrates
on satellite communications payloads and launcher guidance systems, MSDS is
payload contractor for the MARECS satellites and for L-SAT. Both BAe and
MSDS are involved in the development of the Ministry of Defence's Skynet IV
satellite series and the world-wide supply of satellite sub-systems, and. with
British Telecom, have formed a consortium to build satellites for direct
television broadcasting, initially for the BBC. The British space industry
continues to contribute to ESA's scientific satellites, through BAe's prime
contractorship for the GEOS satellites and principal contractorship for the
development of the Giotto satellite, which will investigate Halley’s comet in 1986.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
225
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
British firms also built the later scientific satellites in the Ariel series and
manufacture all types of ground stations (including those on the INTELSAT
network) both to meet the requirements of British Telecom and for business and
data communications and television transmission.
The industry is thus extensively involved in the manufacture of space systems
and in scientific research in other European collaborative programmes. It
carries out an extensive programme of research and development on airframes,
aero-engines and equipment, including avionics, while considerable research is
also undertaken by universities and government research establishments.
Aerospace production and exports, which are fairly evenly divided between
aircraft, engines and equipment (including avionics), have made considerable
progress over the past few years and now stand at record levels. The principal
destinations for exports are the United States and countries with which Britain
is involved in collaborative ventures such as France and the Federal Republic of
Germany. However, markets in the developing world may become increasingly
important for sales of satellite equipment.
The main trade association for the industry is the Society of British Aerospace
Companies which organises a major international air show at Farnborough,
Hampshire, every two years (the next in 1986).
Britain has a long-established tradition of shipbuilding and remains one of the
leading countries in the world for the construction, conversion and repair of
merchant vessels, warships and offshore structures. Most of the major British
shipyards have been reorganised in recent years, with the construction, in
several cases, of covered-berth ship ‘factories’ which are among the most modern
and efficient in the world. These yards, in both the public and private sectors,
build a wide variety of ships ranging from series designs of cargo ships to
nuclear submarines, and from specialist tugs and offshore supply vessels to
supertankers.
The public sector, which comprises British Shipbuilders and the Belfast
company of Harland and Wolff, accounts for 97 per cent of output in merchant
shipbuilding and for all slow-speed marine diesel engines. In addition, British
Shipbuilders has a substantial warship building capacity. The public sector also
includes a number of companies engaged in general engineering work con¬
nected with the marine industries. It is the Government’s policy that the
building of warships and other activities outside general merchant shipbuilding
should be transferred from the public to the private sector.
The continuing recession and over-capacity in shipbuilding throughout the
world has led to the closure of a number of shipyards and a reduction in the
industry s workforce. Orders for Royal Navy vessels, however, are expected to
remain strong. About 45 per cent of merchant ship output in 1983 was for
overseas registration.
The private sector plays an important role in the construction and repair of
smaller vessels. Numerous yards specialise in the construction and repair of
tugs, purpose-built coasting and short-sea cargo vessels, smaller product
tankers, fishing boats, and other small craft required to meet the needs of the
armed forces, harbour and pilotage authorities and the leisure market.
The private sector also provides the offshore oil and gas industry with
consultancy services (including advice on exploiting hydrocarbons under
difficult conditions) and has modern and well-equipped construction facilities
able to build all types of fixed platforms and semi-submersible units for drilling,
production and emergency/maintenance support, drillships, jack-up rigs,
modules and offshore loading systems. The world's first manned submersible
made largely of glass-reinforced plastics was built by a British company, and a
wide range of submersible and other operational equipment is marketed.
226
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
FOOD, DRINK
AND TOBACCO
Bacon Curing,
Meat and Fish
Products
Dairy Products
Conventional yards within British Shipbuilders can also supply both traditional
and specialised support vessels.
1983
Labour2 Sales'3 Exports Imports
COOOs) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Food manufacturing
of which: organic oils and fats
meat and fish products
milk and milk products
fruit and vegetable
processing
production of bread,
biscuits and flour
confectionery
sugar, ice-cream, and
cocoa, chocolate and
sugar confectionery
animal feedstuffs and other
foods
Drinks
of which: brewing and malting
distilling and
compounding
Tobacco
611
101
42
34
131
71
88
104
59
21
27
24,769
1,073
4,384
4,600
961
2,906
3,002
7,844
7,412
4,355
1,921
5,113
1,902
57
668
310
80
144
293
350
1,151
142
970
427
5,106
585
1,886
641
545
173
633
643
778
485
121
65
1 Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
’ Sales of principal products in 1982.
Britain has one of the world’s largest and most sophisticated food processing
industries, and processed foods have accounted for a growing proportion of total
domestic demand for food in recent decades, though the rate of growth has
slowed since the early 1970s. Convenience foods, particularly certain frozen
foods, yoghurts and instant snacks, have formed the fastest-growing sector. The
market is also growing in foods for consumers concerned about the effects of
their diet on their health or weight. A high rate of innovation applies to
processed foods, largely owing to the need to increase sales in a food market
which is not growing in size, given a nearly static population. While Britain is a
net importer of foodstuffs, the level of imports declined between 1970 and 1980,
though it has since risen somewhat. The most marked reductions in imports
have been in dairy, meat, fish, fruit and vegetable products, and oils and fats.
Exports, mainly within the European Community, have grown steadily. Basic
research is being conducted into yeasts and new sources of protein.
The industry uses about one-third of Britain’s pigmeat in the production of
cured bacon and ham and another third is processed into sausages, pies,
canned hams, pates and similar products. Other meat products include canned
and preserved meat, meat extracts and pastes and meat used to prepare other
foodstuffs. A wide range of fish, including shellfish, is processed by freezing,
canning, smoking or coating in batter or breadcrumbs. Products include fish
portions, complete fish meals, smoked fish and spreads.
Production of milk was some 16,549 million litres in 1983, of which just under
half was for sale as liquid milk. Nine out of ten households in Britain receive
pasteurised milk in bottles through a unique daily door-step delivery system
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
227
Fruit,
Vegetable
and Other
Products
Bakery
Products
Confectionery
Beverages
employing about 40,000 roundsmen (not included in the employment figure in
the table) driving electric vehicles. There are about 186 dairy companies and
co-operatives buying, processing and distributing milk and some 8,500 small
distributors. Domestic milk consumption per head (110 litres in 1983) is among
the highest in the world.
The main milk products are butter (241,000 tonnes in 1983), cheese (243,000
tonnes), cream (73,000 tonnes), full-cream condensed milk (203,000 tonnes),
full-cream milk powder (32,000 tonnes) and skim milk powder (354,000
tonnes). 1 he dairy industry accounted for 66 per cent of new butter supplies to
the British market in 1983, 70 per cent of new cheese supplies, and nearly all of
other milk products. Production and exports of butter and cheese have
increased significant!)- in recent years: butter exports in 1983 were 60,000
tonnes and cheese exports 26,000 tonnes, compared with 16,000 tonnes and
10,700 tonnes respectively in 1976. The other main exports are skim milk
powder (115,000 tonnes in 1983) and condensed milk (43,000 tonnes). The
industry’s interests are represented by the Dairy Trade Federation.
Fruit and vegetable products include canned, frozen, crystallised and dried fruit
and vegetables, prepared nuts, pectin, jam, marmalade, pickles and sauces.
Other products of the food processing industry include sugar, sugar prepara¬
tions and honey, egg-based products, oils and fats, coffee, cocoa, tea and spices,
and cereal preparations. The oils and fats industry comprises a small number of
seed-crushing companies (producing about 390,000 tonnes of crude oil a year)
and several refiners, with a combined output of some 930,000 tonnes of refined
oils and fats. These products are used for a number of purposes including food
manufacturing, animal feeding stuffs, soap and paints.
About 60 per cent of the bread in Britain is manufactured in large mechanised
bakeries, most of which use a process (the ‘Chorleywood’ process) developed by
the industry’s principal research organisation, the Flour Milling and Baking
Research Association, and now widely used in other countries. Two groups are
predominant: Associated British Foods and Ranks Hovis McDougall. There is a
growing consumer interest, however, in locally baked varieties, production of
which is usually allied to the production of cakes and other flour confectionery.
Biscuits and related products are a major sector of the industry and have gained
a world-wide reputation. Another sector is grain milling and the production of
various specialised flours and meal.
The cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery industry is composed of a small
number of very large manufacturers and many medium-sized and small
companies. The three main manufacturers are Rowntree Mackintosh, Cadbury
Schweppes and Mars. Britain has a large share of world trade in chocolate and
sugar confectionery.
Of prime importance among the alcoholic beverages produced in Britain, and in
the food and drink industry as a whole, is whisky. Scotch whisky accounts for
almost all whisky production in Britain. There are about 110 distilleries in
Scotland and the well-known brands of blended Scotch whisky are made from
the products of a number of different distilleries. The Distillers Company
accounts for about a half of Scotch whisky output. Over 80 per cent of all Scotch
whisky produced is exported. The principal overseas markets are the United
States (which takes nearly a third of whisky exports from Britain), the rest of the
European Community and Japan. Production of gin in Britain rose steadily
from the early 1950s until 1980 and some of the larger manufacturers also own
distilleries overseas. Production of vodka in Britain also increased in the 1970s.
228
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tobacco
TEXTILES,
FOOTWEAR,
CLOTHING,
LEATHER AND
FUR GOODS
In the brewing and malting industry there are about seven major brewery
groups whose products are sold nationally, and about 70 smaller enterprises
who mainly supply locally, or regionally. In addition there are a number of small
independent brewers. Firms have introduced new production methods, includ¬
ing continuous brewing processes, and automated batch production plants are
well established. The main raw materials used are malt, hops and some sugar.
British malt, which is made almost entirely from home-grown barley, is used by
brewers throughout the world. Lager has increased steadily in popularity since
the late 1960s and accounts for a third of beer sales.
Cider, perry and wine producers form the smallest sector of the drinks
industry and are located mostly in southern and south-western England. Cider
consumption has risen sharply since 1980. Made-wine is produced from
imported grape-juices.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade. There are
some very large companies among about 20 producing brands which are
marketed on a national scale, while other companies supply regional markets.
There is some specialisation among firms in the production of various types,
such as carbonated drinks, cola-based drinks, squashes and cordials, ‘mixers’,
fruit juices and health drinks.
The British tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and tobacco
goods sold in Britain. Over 90 per cent of production is provided by four major
manufacturers (the Imperial Group, Gallaher, Carreras Rothmans and British
American Tobacco). The industry specialises in the production of high-quality
cigarettes made from flue-cured tobacco and achieves significant exports,
mainly of cigarettes—countries in Europe, the Middle East and Africa are
important markets. Britain's most important source of raw tobacco is the
United States followed by Brazil, Zimbabwe, India and Canada. By voluntary
agreement with the Government, cigarette manufacturers restrict their adver¬
tising, print health warnings on packets and have reduced the tar yield of
cigarettes.
1983
Labour3 Salesb Exports Imports
(’OOOs) (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Textile industiy 252 5,343 1,379 2,439
of which: woollen and worsted
industry 46 1,273 416 307
cotton and silk industry 40 439 314 1,133
hosiery and other
knitwear 88 1,246 335 487
carpets, rugs and matting 18 735 130 227
Footwear 53 926 126 550
Clothing, hats and gloves 210c 3,140 574 1,135
Made-up textiles 27 153 85 144
Fur goods —d 109 104 80
Leather and leather goods * 26 615 175 272
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
b Sales of principal products.
r Includes fur goods.
d Included with clothing, hats and gloves.
Despite its contraction over a number of years, this is still a large group of
related industries, employing 500,000 people and making substantial exports.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
229
Wool
Cotton
Linen
Hosiery and
Knitwear
Carpets
Jute
Its main products are yarn, woven and knitted fabrics, apparel, household
textiles and carpets based mainly on wool, cotton and man-made fibres. The
textiles industry is made up of a few large companies, which are multi-process,
and a large number of small and medium-sized firms. The industry makes
extensive use of technological advances.
The textiles and clothing industries in Britain, as in other developed
countries, have been affected by low-cost imports from developing countries.
Trade in textiles and clothing is regulated by the Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA)
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The MFA allows a measure of
restraint on imports of textiles and clothing from low-cost countries into
industrialised countries.
In 1983 exports of tops, yarns and fabrics of wool textiles exceeded imports by
about 50 per cent. The industry is one of the largest in the world and includes
the world's biggest wool textile company, Illingworth, Morris. There are two
main branches, woollen and worsted. An increasing amount of man-made fibre
is now blended with wool. West Yorkshire is the main producing area but
Scotland and the west of England are also famous as specialised producers of
high-quality yarn and cloth. Large quantities of raw wool are scoured and
cleaned in Britain in preparation for spinning. British mills also process the
bulk of rare fibres, such as cashmere and mohair, entering world trade. The
largest markets for woollen and worsted fabrics are the rest of the European
Community, Japan and the United States.
During the nineteenth century cotton was Britain’s chief consumer goods
industry and cotton piece goods its largest export. Low-cost competition has cut
progressively into British markets and made necessary reorganisation, mod¬
ernisation and the introduction of new techniques. Production includes yarns
and fabrics of cotton, spun man-made fibres and mixtures of these.
The linen industry is centred in Northern Ireland, where the lighter types of
fabrics for apparel, furnishings and household textiles are produced. The
heavyweight canvas for sailcloth, tents, awnings and tarpaulins is mainly
produced in Scotland.
The hosiery and knitwear industry comprises about 960 companies situated
mainly in the East Midlands and Scotland, of which most are small to medium
in size. The industry produces fabrics, outerwear, underwear, tights, socks,
stockings, gloves and accessories.
Some 60 per cent of the value of carpet and rug output (80 per cent in volume
terms) is made up of tufted carpets, in the production of which the pile, usually
with a high man-made fibre content, is inserted into a pre-woven backing.
Woven carpets, mainly Axminster, account for most of the remainder of sales.
There is a higher wool content in woven types, although in these, too, more use
is being made of man-made fibres. The high quality and variety of design make
Britain one of the world's leading producers of woven carpets. The volume of
carpet sales has contracted since 1978.
Jute products are manufactured in the Dundee area. Jute yarn and man-made
polypropylene yarn are used in the manufacturing of carpets, cordage and ropes
and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the packaging,
upholstery, building and motor-car industries. New uses for jute, for example as
a plastics reinforcement and for decorative wall coverings, have also been
developed.
230
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Clothing
Footwear and
Leather
OTHER
MANUFAC¬
TURING
Furniture,
Brushes and
Timber
Paper and Board
Manufacture
and Conversion
The British clothing industry is one of the largest in Europe; it is highly labour
intensive with about 7,000 companies (predominantly small ones), accounting
for 4 per cent of Britain’s total employment in manufacturing. It supplies about
two-thirds of domestic demand, while exports have risen since the mid-1970s. A
wide range of clothing is imported from European and Asian countries.
The footwear manufacturing industry is made up predominantly of small
companies. Though necessarily largely labour intensive, the industry has made
use of technological advances and it includes some of the most up-to-date
factories in the world. It supplies nearly half the shoes sold in Britain. Imports
have, however, risen in recent years. Leather tanning and the manufacture of
leather goods are also long-established industries; all types of leather (particular¬
ly for footwear, clothing and gloves) and leather goods are produced, and about
one-third of leather production is exported.
1983
Labour3
(’000s)
Salesb Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Timber and wooden furniture 206 5,687 311 1,981
Paper and paper products 142 5,386 592 2,288
Printing and publishing 332 6,174 590 394
Processing of rubber and
plastics 177 5,562 1,253 1,414
Toys and sports goods 27 480 187 353
Other manufacturing0 53 491 842 1,114
a Employees in employment (Great Britain) at June 1983.
b Sales of principal products.
‘ Excluding photographic laboratory processing.
The furniture industry comprises about 4,500 companies, mostly small to
medium-sized with only a few of any significant size. A wide range of products is
manufactured, the greater part of production being accounted for by domestic
furniture and the remainder by office, contract, school and other furniture. The
industry makes wooden, metal and plastics furniture, upholstery, beds and
mattresses.
The brush industry is located throughout Britain and includes highly
mechanised establishments as well as small craft units.
Domestic production of softwood timber has been steadily increasing but the
timber-using industries are mainly dependent on imported supplies. A large
proportion of timber sales goes to the construction industry.
There were about 100 paper and board mills in 1983, the largest five accounting
for 25 per cent of total British production, which was 3-2 million tonnes. The
largest British groups are Wiggins Teape, the Dickinson Robinson Group, Reed
International and the Bowater Corporation. Overseas paper and board groups
with manufacturing investments in Britain include Georgia Pacific, Kimberly
Clark, and Consolidated Bathurst. The main types of paper and board produced
are printing and writing papers and board, corrugated case materials, packag¬
ing paper and board, and tissue. There has been a significant trend towards
waste-based packaging grades, in order to reduce the industry’s reliance on
imported woodpulp supplies. The use of recycled waste paper is increasing and
research is helping to extend it. Waste paper provides over half of the industry’s
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
231
Printing and
Publishing
Rubber
Plastics
Production
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
Other Products
iibre needs. Domestically produced wood pulp represents only a small percen¬
tage of raw material supplies.
The packaging and converting industries manufacture a variety of products,
including cardboard boxes, cartons, fibreboard packaging and business station¬
ery products.
The printing and publishing industries produce a wide range of products,
including national and provincial newspapers, periodicals, books, business
stationery and greetings cards. Mergers have led to the formation of large groups
in the newspaper, magazine and book publishing sectors, but general printing,
engraving, bookbinding and a large part of publishing remain essentially
industries of small firms. The book publishing industry is a major exporter.
Production processes include high-speed printing, electronic engraving, ad¬
vanced processes of photographic reproduction and computer typesetting.
Security printers (of, for example, banknotes and postage stamps) have a high
reputation and are important exporters, the two major companies being De La
Rue and Bradbury Wilkinson. The most important overseas markets for printed
matter are the United States, the Irish Republic and Australia.
Tyres and tubes represent around 45 per cent of sales of rubber manufactures,
the most important other goods being vehicle components and accessories,
conveyor belting, cables, industrial, hydraulic and marine hoses, latex foam
products and rubber footwear, gloves and clothing. Rubber is also used for
inflatable life-rafts, containers for fuel and other industrial liquids, and seals for
storage tanks and other products where there are problems of air exclusion and
vapour suppression. Tyre manufacturers include several subsidiaries of United
States and other overseas companies. The industry’s consumption of rubber
includes natural, synthetic and recycled rubber.
In addition to the plastics components and accessories supplied to many
different industries, the plastics processing industry manufactures a wide range
of building materials, such as pipes, sheeting for roofs, sanitary ware, tanks and
other products. It also supplies flexible foams, used in the vehicle, furniture and
other industries; rigid foams; packaging products, including bottles, containers
and bags; domestic and industrial hollow-ware; many kinds of household goods;
vinyl and other floorcoverings; and artificial leathercloth. Extensive research is
being conducted into the use of plastics in engineering products, particularly
those associated with transport.
There are about 480 manufacturers of a wide range of toys and games, but few of
significant size. About a third of total production is exported, the major markets
being France, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States. British
diecast toys and plastic toys (including model construction kits) are well
established in overseas markets. The greatest expansion in recent years has
been in electronic toys and games.
There are about 350 manufacturers of sports equipment, many of which are
small companies with a high reputation for craftsmanship. British fishing
tackle and golf and tennis equipment have a world-wide reputation. The main
export markets are the United States and the rest of the European Community.
Jewellery, gold and silverware and the refining of precious metals is an industry
in which British craftsmen are world famous. The Royal Mint makes coins for
some 70 overseas countries. Other miscellaneous manufacturing includes
musical instruments, film processing and small stationery goods.
232
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
Construction
The construction industry accounts for about 6 per cent of gross domestic
product. The total value of output in Great Britain in 1983 was £24,343 million,
of which new work accounted for £13,396 million (55 per cent) and repairs and
maintenance the remainder. In housing, new work was valued at £4,849 million
and repairs and maintenance at £5,622 million. About 11 million people are
employed in the industry (including some 70,000 apprentices), accounting for
nearly 5 per cent of total employment. There are also about 400,000 self-
employed.
The industry includes firms engaged on the construction, alteration, repair,
and maintenance of buildings, highways, bridges, tunnels, airfields, drainage
and sewerage systems, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence works, offshore
structures, electrical wiring, heating and other installation work, and structural
work connected with power stations and telecommunications. Efficiency and
productivity within the industry are benefiting from new computerised techni¬
ques such as the use of electronic load safety measures for cranes, distance
measuring equipment, computerised stock ordering and job costing, and
computer-aided design.
Government sponsorship of the construction industry is the responsibility of
the Department of the Environment. Building regulations prescribe minimum
standards of construction in England and Wales. Made by the Secretary of State
for the Environment and administered and enforced by local authorities, the
regulations apply to new building, the installation or replacement of fittings,
and alterations and extensions to existing buildings. There are broadly similar
controls under separate legislation in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Inner
London. As an alternative to local authority building control and in order to
simplify procedures, an optional system of private certification of compliance
with building regulations is provided for in the Housing and Building Control
Bill before Parliament. The British Board of Agrement, sponsored by the
Department, assesses and issues reports and certificates relating to products
and systems for use in the construction industry.
Construction work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. In 1983 about 88 per cent of the
work was done by private firms. Although there were about 96,000 firms
employing two or more people, 97 per cent of them employed fewer than 25.
Some large firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops,
mechanised plant and standard builders' equipment; some undertake responsi¬
bility for projects from initial design to finished building. All but the smallest
projects are generally carried out under professional direction, either by
architects or, in the case of the more complicated civil engineering projects, by
consulting engineers. The latter, acting on behalf of a client, may advise on the
feasibility of projects, draw up plans and supervise the construction work.
The Property Services Agency (PSA), which is an integral part of the
Department of the Environment, is responsible for the construction program¬
mes undertaken directly by the Government, including work for the armed
forces both in Britain and overseas.
A large proportion of public authority employees are engaged on repair and
maintenance work for local authorities.
During 1983 a total of 213,500 dwellings were started in Great Britain, the first
increase for four years. Starts in the public sector were 46,300 and those for
private owners 167,200. Some 187,000 dwellings were completed, of which
49,500 were in the public sector and 137,500 in the private sector. Industrial-
Housing
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
233
Civil
Engineering
Projects
Research and
Advisory
Services
Overseas
Construction
ised building methods employing prefabricated components are used in some of
the work in both sectors. A timber-frame construction technique is employed in
a growing proportion of new houses.
Among important construction projects in hand or completed in Britain in 1983
were the Heysham and Torness nuclear power stations, the Dinorwig pumped-
storage electricity station, the Thames Barrier, which forms part of London’s
flood defences, new air terminals at Heathrow and Gatwick, the new Lloyd’s
insurance building and the International Conference Centre in London and the
M25 motorway; as well as roads, tunnels, bridges, hospitals and large-scale
housing developments.
Within the Department of the Environment, the Building Research Establish¬
ment is concerned with all aspects of construction research and also provides an
advisory service.
In addition to research carried out within the major construction and building
materials firms, work is also undertaken by research associations, universities
and colleges of technology. The Hydraulics Research Station at Wallingford
(Oxfordshire) carries out research in water supply, drainage, flood control, sea
protection and offshore engineering.
The Association of Building Centres represents 12 building centres through¬
out Britain, most of which provide exhibition and information services on
materials, products, techniques and building services.
Total overseas earnings of all sectors of the construction industry in 1982-83
were estimated at about £3,820 million. British contractors earned £490 million
from overseas customers and a further £65 million from overseas branches and
subsidiaries. The related professions (consulting engineers, architects and
surveyors) had earnings of £680 million while process plant engineering
contractors contributed some £315 million and exports of building materials,
plant and machinery accounted for some £2,270 million.
In 1982-83 British construction firms carried out work overseas valued at
£2,275 million. New contracts worth £2,732 million were won overseas. Recent
major projects have included the Dubai Dry Dock, the largest in the world, and
the Hong Kong Metro. Other major contracts obtained have been those for a
power station project and an international bank headquarters building in Hong
Kong, the Mahaweli dam and power project in Sri Lanka, a share in the second
phase of the Trans-Gabon railway, water supply systems in Nigeria, an alumina
plant in the Irish Republic and a young offenders centre in Spain.
The International Building Service, within the Building Centre in London,
helps overseas clients to procure British building products and services.
Service Industries
Growth has been faster in the service sector in Britain than in the rest of the
economy in recent decades. In 1983 services contributed about 61 per cent of
gross domestic product compared with 45 per cent in 1960 and accounted for 63
per cent of employees in employment compared with 48 per cent in 1960.
Overseas trade in services, particularly financial services, has also grown, and in
1983 overseas earnings from services amounted to around half the value of
exports of manufactures.
In the decade to mid-1983 total service employment rose by 1-3 million,
compared with a fall in employment in all other sectors. Much of this, however,
was accounted for by growth in part-time (principally female) employment. Since
the late 1970s employment has grown more rapidly in the private sector than in
234
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DISTRIBUTION
WHOLESALE
TRADES
the public sector, a reversal of the pattern of the 1960s and the early 1970s. It is
the Government’s policy to restrict employment in public sector services.
The fastest-growing sectors within services in the 1970s, measured by
employment, were financial and business services, professional and scientific
services (mainly health and education) and miscellaneous services (mainly
leisure and personal services). In the 1980s the financial services have
continued to grow strongly. Among trends in the miscellaneous sector is a
growth in franchising, an operation in which a company owning the rights to a
particular form of trading sells them to franchisees, usually by means of an
initial payment with continuing royalties. Hotel, catering and cleaning
businesses are the main services in which franchising has developed.
Among the reasons for the growth in services is the fact that real personal
disposable income has more than doubled since 1945. As real incomes rise
people tend to spend a greater proportion of income on personal, financial and
leisure services. While, to some extent, consumers have exchanged services
(such as public transport, laundries and cinemas) for goods (motor cars,
washing-machines and television sets), this has generated demand for fresh
services in the distribution, maintenance and repair of these goods. Increased
consumer expenditure on the running costs of motor cars is a significant factor
in the rise in consumer expenditure on services. Demand for British air travel,
hotel and catering services has resulted from the increase in real incomes in
other countries.
Other factors include a greater readiness to use banking services and the
spread of home ownership, which has increased demand for legal and estate
agency services. Demographic changes, such as the increase in the elderly as a
component of the population, help to explain the growth of medical services.
Shorter working hours tend to raise the demand for leisure services.
Changes in technology have also played a part in the growth of services.
Examples range from the computer services industry to the provision of cash
and credit by means of cards and the growth of information systems such as
viewdata and teletext. It is thought that there are now about 1 million people
employed in a ‘tradeable information sector’, which encompasses activities such
as the supply of financial and business information, printing and publishing,
on-line computerised technical services, consultancy, and aspects of education
and training services and of the entertainment industry.
There were about 4 million people engaged in the distributive and allied trades
in Great Britain in mid-1983, together with a large number of owners of
businesses. There were 845,000 people in wholesaling, just under 2 million in
retailing, 923,000 in hotels and catering, and 195,000 in the repair of vehicles
and consumer goods. The distributive and allied trades accounted for about 13
per cent of national income in 1983.
In 1982 there were some 101,000 businesses engaged in wholesaling and
dealing, with a turnover (including sales to other wholesalers and dealers) of
some £124,400 million. The main areas in which wholesalers are dominant are
groceries and provisions, petroleum products, and ores and metals. A number of
large retailers carry out the functions of the wholesaler by having their own
warehouses, and buying and distributive organisations.
The wholesale grocery trade is divided between ‘cash and carry’ and the
traditional delivered trade in a ratio of 2 to 1. The cash and carry sector, with
some 560 depots, grew in importance during the 1960s and 1970s by offering
discounts to customers who purchase in bulk and limiting expenditure on
premises, credit and delivery facilities. Grocery wholesaling has greatly dimi-
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
235
RETAIL
TRADES
nished in recent years: over two-thirds of groceries are now delivered direct from
manufacturers to the large multiple food retailers, by-passing the traditional
wholesalers.
Three large groups, Booker McConnell, Nurdin and Peacock, and the Dee
Corporation predominate in the wholesale grocery trade. London's wholesale
markets play a significant part in the distribution of foodstuffs. New Covent
Garden is the main market for fruit and vegetables, Smithfield for meat and
Billingsgate for fish.
The co-operative movement in Britain has its own wholesale organisation, the
Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS), to serve the needs of retail societies: its
turnover was £2,139 million in 1983. Retail societies are encouraged to buy
from the CWS, which supplies about two-thirds of their requirements.
In the grocery trade there are a number of voluntary groups which have been
formed by wholesalers with small independent retailers, whereby the retailers
are encouraged by discounts and other incentives to buy as much as possible
from the wholesaler. This has helped to preserve many smaller retail outlets for
the wholesaler, including the traditional ‘corner shops' and village stores, of
value to local communities, and has given small retailers the advantages of bulk
buying and co-ordinated distribution.
Turnover of the retail trades has been growing slowly in real terms in recent
years, despite the recession. In 1983 retail sales were 28 per cent higher than in
1980, representing, however, only an 8 per cent increase in volume. In 1982
there were an estimated 233,000 businesses in the retail trade in Great Britain
each with a turnover of more than £17,000. Their turnover was about £70,000
million and they invested £1,830 million. As the large multiple retailers (those
with ten or more outlets) have grown in size and diversified their product
ranges, there has been a decline in the number of retail businesses and outlets.
The decline has been particularly evident among small independent businesses
and retail co-operative societies. Shops selling durable household goods have
experienced the fastest growth in turnover in recent years, while those selling
clothing and footwear have recorded the slowest growth.
The largest multiple retailers in the packaged grocery market are the retail
co-operatives, Sainsbury, Tesco, Asda, Allied Suppliers, Kwik Save, Fine Fare
and International Stores. Retail co-operative societies are voluntary organisa¬
tions controlled by their members, membership being open to anyone paying a
small deposit on a minimum share; at the end of 1983 the 130 retail societies
had 8-7 million members and 6,430 retail outlets. Turnover in 1982 amounted
to £4,024 million, 6 per cent of total retail trade. Retail co-operatives and the
Co-operative Wholesale Society (see above) are members of the Co-operative
Union as are a number of other co-operative bodies such as the Co-operative
Bank. In 1983—84 Sainsbury had about 243 stores and sales were valued at
£2,688 million. Tesco had some 400 outlets and the company’s sales amounted
to £2,595 million.
The leading mixed retail businesses are Marks and Spencer (with sales of
£2,855 million in 1983-84), Boots, FW Woolworth, the John Lewis Part¬
nership, House of Fraser, W H Smith & Son, Debenhams and British Home
Stores.
There are a number of discount stores operating on the principle of selling
most or all of their goods at a reduced price. Electrical goods, furniture, carpets
and do-it-yourself supplies are some of the main items sold by discount stores.
About 18 million people regularly shop by ppst. In 1982 sales by general mail
order firms totalled some £2,421 million, representing 3-5 per cent of retail sales
and 5-7 per cent of retail sales excluding food shops. The volume of mail order
sales increased rapidly in the 1970s but fell off somewhat after 1980. Leading
236
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trends
Supermarkets,
Superstores and
Hypermarke ts
items sold by mail order are clothing, footwear, furniture, household textiles and
radio, television and electrical goods. The two main mail order firms are Great
Universal Stores and Littlewoods.
Table 16: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1982*
Number of Number of
businesses outlets
Number of
people
engaged Turnoverb
(’000s) (£ million)
Single-outlet retailers 203,157
Small multiple retailers 28,657
Large multiple retailers (ten
or more retail outlets) 1,135
of which: Co-operative societies 148
203,157
76,346
70,153
6,945
828
355
1,081
116
21,093
9,609
39,082
4,061
Food retailers 82,625 114,774 818 27,211
Drink, confectionery and
tobacco retailers 40,862 57,195 264 7,641
Clothing, footwear and
leather goods retailers 28,923 55,649 269 5,911
Household goods retailers 39,112 58,230 269 9,358
Other non-food retailers 33,759 46,363 216 5,788
Mixed retail businesses 5,205 10,963 383 12,770
Hire and repair businesses 2,462 6,484 43 1,105
Total retail trade
232,948 349,659
2,264 69,784
Source: British business.
a Figures cover businesses above the threshold of value added tax (£17,000 at that time).
b Includes value added tax.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
One of the most significant trends in retailing in recent years has been the
increase in the proportion of turnover accounted for by large multiple retailers:
they have 56 per cent of retail turnover. Other important trends have been the
increase in very large self-service stores selling a wide variety of products,
diversification by food multiples into selling a wider range of goods, the
development of specially designed shopping precincts, the growth of shops
selling computers, software and video-cassettes and an increasing emphasis on
price competition.
There are supermarkets in most towns and cities in Britain. The main multiple
grocery companies have been steadily increasing the size of their main
supermarkets. The trend to greater size has led to a growing number of
superstores and hypermarkets, single-level, self-service stores offering a wider
range of food and non-food merchandise and which have at least 2,500 sq m
(26,900 sq ft) and 5,000 sq m (53,800 sq ft) respectively of selling space. They
are designed primarily for shoppers with cars, and substantial free car-parking
space is usually provided. In Britain the first such store was opened in the
mid-1960s and by January 1984 there were some 240 superstores and 39
hypermarkets, while planning permission for a further 43 superstores and 5
hypermarkets had been granted. It is government policy that these stores should
be located within urban areas, preferably within shopping centres, where they
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
237
Shopping
Centres
Diversifica tion
Promotions
Use of
Technology
Vehicle and
Petrol Retailing
are accessible to all shoppers including those without cars. Since 1980 there has
been an increase in mini-superstores’ in the range 1,000 to 2,500 sq m (10,760
to 26,900 sq ft).
Britain has a variety of new purpose-built shopping centres. The largest are the
Manchester Arndale and the centre in Milton Keynes, which, both covering more
than 93,000 sq m (1 million sq ft), are among the largest in Europe. Other large
centres are at Brent Cross in London, the Luton Arndale and the Eldon Square
Development in Newcastle upon Tyne.
Many of the large multiple groups have diversified over the last few years to offer
a much bigger range of goods than previously. This has been especially
noticeable for the large food retailers, which often sell non-food products, such
as beer, wines and spirits, clothing and household appliances, as well as
packaged groceries. Another trend is that many superstores and large super¬
markets offer fresh as well as packaged food, often with special counters or areas
for fresh meat, fish, vegetables and bread baked on the premises.
Retailers are placing greater emphasis on price competition as a means of
promoting sales, while trading stamps, which were an important method of
sales promotion in the late 1960s and early 1970s, have become much less
significant. With the growth of payments by credit card, certain of the large
retailers have issued their own credit cards for regular customers in an attempt
to increase sales, particularly of high-value goods.
Laser-scanning electronic check-outs are expected to have a major impact on
retailing in the next few years. A low-power laser beam at the point of sale scans
a bar code on the package of each item and the price is automatically retrieved
from a central computer. The customer is given a receipt showing the price and
identity of each item purchased, while the store’s stock records are altered
automatically. Substantial savings are expected from improved stock control
and a reduction of individual price marking in stores. Key Markets introduced
the first operational laser-scanning electronic check-out in Britain at Spalding
(Lincolnshire) in 1979. At four centres in Gateshead. Tyne and Wear, a
computerised shopping service enables elderly and disabled people to order
goods from a supermarket by passing a light-pen over items on a list of goods.
Some large multiple retailers are experimenting with sales information on
Prestel; others are using electronic order and invoice systems in dealing with
their suppliers, following a legal change permitting tax invoices in forms other
than paper. Small independent retailers, also, are using electronic ordering,
pricing and delivery systems. High-speed labelling techniques, including the use
of electronic printers which can overprint labels, the use of pressure-sensitive
glues and printing in foil instead of ink, are being adopted in order to save time
and labour costs.
In June 1983 some 262,000 people were employed in Great Britain in the retail
distribution of motor vehicles and parts and in petrol stations. In spite of the
continuing increase in the number of road vehicles, the number of petrol
stations is declining and at the end of 1983 there were some 23,100 (4-2 per cent
fewer than in 1982), of which 32 per cent were owned by oil companies. There
were about 8,720 outlets selling diesel fuel. Self-service stations are becoming
increasingly important and in 1983 they accounted for 33 per cent of petrol
stations. There were some 27,500 retail businesses wholly or mainly engaged in
motor vehicle distribution in 1982, and 27,200 motor repair businesses.
238
Hotels and
Catering
BUSINESS
SERVICES
Advertising
Computer
Services
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The hotel and catering trades employed 923,000 people in Great Britain in
mid-1983: 277,000 in hotels and other residential establishments; 177,000 in
restaurants, cafes and snack bars; 224,000 in public houses and bars: 136,000
in clubs; and 109,000 by catering contractors. A large number of self-employed
people are also engaged in hotels and catering. There were 13,400 hotel
businesses in Great Britain in 1982, with a turnover of £2,880 million. Many
licensed hotels as well as most of the numerous guest houses are small, with
fewer than 20 rooms. Of the major hotel business groups the biggest is
Trusthouse Forte Ltd, which runs 800 hotels including 200 in Britain, and has
catering and leisure interests. The total turnover of holiday camps and camping
and caravan sites was about £390 million in 1982. Among the largest firms
running holiday centres (including holiday camps with full board, self-catering
centres and caravan parks) are Butlins, Pontins, Ladbroke Holidays, Warners
and Haven Leisure. There were over 38,000 businesses in Great Britain in 1982
with a total turnover of more than £3,100 million, which were engaged in the
sale of food for consumption both on and off the premises. These include
restaurants, snack bars, cafes, fish and chip shops and other establishments
selling ‘take-away' food. Britain has a very wide range of restaurants of which a
substantial number specialise in the dishes of other countries such as Chinese,
Italian, Indian and Greek foods. ‘Fast-food’ catering, in which establishments
sell hot food such as hamburgers or chicken to be eaten either on the premises
or elsewhere, is becoming increasingly significant. There are about 41,500
‘pubs' (public houses, which mainly sell beer, wines and spirits for consumption
on the premises) in Great Britain, with a total turnover of £6,000 million in
1982.
Business services include advertising, market research, management consul¬
tancy, exhibition and conference facilities, computer services and auction
houses. Most of these sectors have grown rapidly in recent years.
Advertising expenditure rose by 14 per cent in 1983 to £3,579 million,
according to the Advertising Association. Advertising in the press accounted for
63 per cent of the total, television for 31 per cent, posters for 4 per cent and
commercial radio for 2 per cent. Advertising has been growing fastest in
television, freesheets and directories. Advertising campaigns are planned
mainly by advertising agencies, of which there are several hundred in Britain; in
some cases they also provide marketing, consumer research and other services.
There were some 37,200 people employed in advertising in Great Britain in
mid-1983.
Britain is acknowledged as a world leader in the provision of software and
computer services, and software developed in Britain has contributed to
developments in the applications of computers in numerous countries. The
industry comprises software houses, which provide professional services such
as consultancy and the writing of programs to meet the computing needs of
their clients, and computer bureaux, where the main emphasis is on processing
customers’ data. The revenue of the industry was £695 million in 1982, about
£83 million more than in the previous year. The industry has recorded an
annual average growth at constant (1975) prices of 13 per cent since 1971. Some
25,140 people were employed full-time in computing services in 1982. About
230 computer service companies are members of the Computing Services
Association, the leading trade association. Many of the companies are sub¬
sidiaries of firms engaged in activities such as banking, insurance, manufactur¬
ing and distribution.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
239
Management
Consultancy
Market
Research
Exhibition and
Conference
Centres
Auction
Houses
Other Business
Services
MISCEL¬
LANEOUS
SERVICES
Film and
Television
There are thought to be some 5,000 management consultants in Britain, of
whom 2,800 are practising members of the Institute of Management Consul¬
tants. Among the largest management consultancy companies are the 26
members of the Management Consultants Association, whose turnover
amounted to £95 million in 1983. Revenue earned within Britain comprised
£71 million, an increase of 22 per cent on the previous year, while overseas
revenue amounted to £24 million. The Association reports a growing demand
for services supporting the application of computer technology, particularly
micro-processing, to all aspects of business.
The 27 members of the Association of Market Survey Organisations (AMSO)
accounted for about three-quarters of total turnover by market research
companies in 1983. The turnover of AMSO members increased to £96 million in
1983 from £80 million in 1982. The largest company, the AGB group, had a
turnover of £22 million. Research on behalf of food companies accounted for 15
per cent.
With the steady increase in new and renovated facilities, some 55 to 60 towns
and cities are well equipped to hold conferences and exhibitions. Among the
most modern buildings are the National Exhibition Centre at Birmingham, the
Wembley Conference Centre and the Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences
in London, the Brighton Centre in Sussex, the Harrogate Centre in North
Yorkshire, the Bournemouth International Centre in Dorset, St David’s Hall in
Cardiff and the Royal Centre in Nottingham. Other large facilities are the Earls
Court, Olympia and Wembley Arena sites in London. The major conference
towns are Blackpool (Lancashire) and Brighton. Britain is one of the world's
three leading countries for international conferences (the others being the
United States and France); the Union of International Associations, based in
Brussels, estimated that about 10 per cent of the world's main international
conferences were held in Britain in 1983. British firms are very active overseas
in the market for exhibition organising services.
Britain s chief auction houses are active in the international auction markets for
works of art, trading on the acknowledged expertise of British valuers and
dealers. The two largest houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are established
world-wide and had turnover of £401 million and £351 million in 1983-84
respectively.
Other business services include land and estate companies, estate agents, and
typewriting, duplicating, document copying, translating and employment
agencies.
Some 94,000 people were employed in film, theatre, literary, musical, broadcast¬
ing and related services in Great Britain in mid-1983, 287,000 in sanitary
services, 115,000 in research and development services and 242,000 in services
connected with sport, recreation, gambling and betting. Other services provided
include hairdressing and beauty parlours (86,000 employees), laundries, dyers
and dry cleaners (60,000), photographic studios, religious organisations,
tourist offices, learned societies, employers’ and trade union organisations, and
funeral services.
Among major changes in the film and television industry in recent years, main
trends have been the growth of the specialised film and television services
sector, the decline of the cinema sector, partly as a result of the growth of public
television services, and the extension of cable television services. Technical
developments, such as the use of magnetic video tape instead of film, and the
240
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TRAVEL
AND
TOURISM
exploitation of computer-generated graphics, have been responsible for changes
both in the production and exhibition of film and television material. They have
also played a part in the growth of the specialised sector, in which relatively
small studios, mostly based in London, provide a wide range of film and
television services, including the making of advertising films, ‘special effects’
sequences for feature and other films, documentary and educational program¬
mes, and cartoon films. In addition, new audio-visual technology is being
adopted in industrial, commercial, medical and scientific contexts for informa¬
tion, observation and training purposes.
The Department of Trade and Industry conducts an annual inquiry into the
value of overseas transactions relating to the production and exhibition of
cinema and television material. For many years the inquiry has shown a surplus
of receipts over expenditure. In 1982 receipts by film and television companies
were £163 million, while expenditure was £85 million, a surplus of £78 million.
Film companies' receipts totalled £130 million and television companies’
receipts £33 million, the North American market accounting for 60 per cent of
revenue in both cases. Some 191 film companies, the 18 Independent
Broadcasting Authority programme contractors and the British Broadcasting
Corporation were covered in the 1982 inquiry.
The travel business is another growth sector and some 2,436 travel agencies,
with about 5,450 offices (over 90 per cent of the total), belong to the Association
of British Travel Agents (ABTA). In general travel agents are small businesses
but many ABTA members have more than one office. There are a few large firms
(of which the biggest is Thomas Cook) with over 150 branches. Computerised
information and booking systems are being introduced in travel agencies. There
are also some 600 tour operator members of ABTA; some 230 companies are
both retail agents and tour operators. The leading tour operators are British
Airways (through its subsidiaries. Sovereign and Enterprise), Cosmos, Horizon,
Intasun, Rank Travel and Thomson. It is estimated that about 70 per cent of the
air package holiday market is accounted for by the 18 largest air travel
organisers. ABTA operates financial protection schemes to safeguard its
members' customers, maintains codes of conduct drawn up with the Office of
Fair Trading, and offers a free conciliation service to help to resolve complaints
against members and an independent arbitration scheme for tour operators’
customers.
Overseas earnings from foreign travel increased greatly in the 1970s and
Britain had a surplus on its travel account from 1968 to 1980. It is estimated
that in 1983 some 12-5 million overseas visitors to Britain (some 860,000 more
than in the previous year) spent £3,655 million, about £487 million more than
in 1982. British residents made 21 million trips abroad and spent £4,054
million, giving a deficit on the travel account of £399 million. About half of
overseas visitors to Britain came from the other European Community
countries, 23 per cent from North America and about 12 per cent from elsewhere
in Western Europe. There was an increase of 0-4 million visits abroad by British
residents in 1983: the main destinations were the European Community (just
over half of all visits) and elsewhere in Western Europe (33 per cent). Official
support for the promotion of tourism within Britain is provided by the British
Tourist Authority and the tourist boards for England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland. Voluntary registration schemes exist for tourist accommoda¬
tion throughout Britain and facilities offered by registered establishments are
listed in the boards' accommodation guides. Information on tourist facilities
and accommodation is available from official information centres throughout
Britain and on the Prestel information service. Booking facilities are also to be
introduced on Prestel in 1984.
13 Energy
and Natural
Resources
Energy and non-fuel minerals make an important contribution to the British
economy. The approximate value of minerals produced in 1982 was £22,766
million, of which crude oil accounted for 68 per cent, coal 21 per cent and
natural gas 5 per cent.
All minerals in Great Britain are privately owned, with the exception of gold,
silver, oil and natural gas (which are owned by the Crown), and coal and some
minerals associated with coal. On the United Kingdom Continental Shelf the
right to exploit all minerals except coal is vested in the Crown. The exclusive
right to extract coal, or license others to do so, both on land and under the sea, is
vested in the National Coal Board. Normally, ownership of minerals belongs to
the owner of the land surface but in some areas, particularly where mining has
taken place, these rights have become separated. Mining and quarrying, apart
from coal, are usually carried out by privately owned companies.
Water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial require¬
ments; supplies are obtained from surface sources such as mountain lakes and
from underground sources by such means as wells and boreholes.
Energy
Britain has the largest energy resources of any country in the European
Community, and is a major world producer of oil, natural gas and coal. The
other main primary sources are nuclear power and some water power; secondary
sources are electricity, coke and very small quantities of town gas. Since 1980
Britain has been self-sufficient in energy in net terms as a result of the
continued growth in offshore oil production, and this position should be
maintained for a number of years. Coal is the country’s richest natural resource
and estimated operating reserves are 7,000 million tonnes, equivalent to output
at present rates of extraction ior nearly 60 years; total coal resources are many
times higher. A major capital investment programme in the coal industry is in
progress. Nuclear power provided about 18 per cent of electricity generated by
the public supply system in 1983 and the proportion will grow as recently built
nuclear power stations reach full capacity and as those under construction are
brought into service.
Privately owned companies predominate in offshore oil and gas production
and oil refining, while publicly owned bodies are responsible for most coal
production, gas distribution, and electricity generation and distribution. The
publicly owned fuel and power industries in Britain employ in total about
500,000 people (some 2-4 per cent of all employees); their annual turnover is
about £30,000 million and capital investment £3,600 million. In Great Britain
the Secretary of State for Energy is responsible for these industries, except for
electricity in Scotland which is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for
Scotland.
242
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Energy Policy
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
The Government’s energy strategy involves ensuring the security and availability
of energy supplies within the framework of general government policy and
Britain's international obligations. Oil and gas resources are continuing to be
developed, and competitive coal production and nuclear power are being
encouraged. The Government is supporting research into renewable sources of
energy and encouraging cost-effective energy conservation measures. Pricing
that reflects the true long-term costs of energy supplies is also central to the
Government’s approach, both to discourage the wasteful use of energy and to
stimulate new methods of utilising and saving it.
Britain is actively engaged in international collaboration on energy questions,
notably through its membership of the European Community and of the
International Energy Agency (IEA, a body with 21 member countries attached to
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). Since its
establishment in 1974, the IEA has agreed a wide range of co-operative
measures to reduce member nations’ dependence on imported oil. The
Government attaches considerable importance to a common understanding
between energy producers and energy consumers.
Inland primary energy consumption amounted to 312-9 million tonnes of coal
equivalent in 1983 (see Table 17), slightly higher than in 1982 but below the
Primary Energy Consumption
1973
Coal 37.6 °/o
C
I
Oil 46.4%
I
^ Natural gas 12.5%
Nuclear energy 2.9%
Hydro-electric power 0.6%
1983
  Nuclear energy 5.8%
IB Hydro-electric power 0.8%
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
243
ENERGY
EFFICIENCY
Energy
Efficiency Office
Energy
Efficiency
Campaign
level ol the 1970s. reflecting energy conservation and lower levels of production
during the recession. The changing pattern of consumption is illustrated in the
diagram on p 242. the most noticeable feature being the growing contributions
of natural gas and nuclear power. Energy consumption by final users in 1983
amounted to 54,1/9 million therms1 on a heat supplied' basis, of which
industrial users consumed about 31 per cent, domestic users 29 per cent,
transport 26 per cent and public services 6 per cent.
Table 17: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)
million tonnes coal equivalent
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear energy
Hydro-electric power
Total
1973
164-2
1330
44-2
10-1
2-0
1978
1981
1982 1983
139-3
119-9
65-1
13-4
2-1
110-9
118-2
72-1
13-7
2-3
111-1
110-7
71-7
16-0
2-4
Source: Department of Energy.
106-1
111-5
74-8
18-1
2-4
353-5 339-8 317-2 311-9 312-9
The aim of obtaining the best value for money from energy consumed is an
integral part of the Government s strategy to increase the efficiency with which
energy is supplied and used throughout the economy.
In 1983 the Government set up an Energy Efficiency Office within the
Department of Energy to co-ordinate government action and to provide
information, advice and assistance. Its objective is to make Britain the most
energy-efficient country in the Western world.
Ministers are conducting a series of meetings around Britain with leaders of
industry, commerce and local authorities to encourage greater efficiency in the
supply and use of energy. The campaign also includes an Energy Saver Show
aimed at domestic consumers, which is visiting shopping centres and home
exhibitions throughout Britain; the campaign is supported by extensive
advertising.
Schemes for industry and commerce provide assistance towards the cost of
energy efficiency surveys, demonstration projects, monitoring, and research
and development including feasibility studies on combined heat and power or
district heating. Regional energy efficiency officers provide help to companies
and support for firms’ energy managers, of whom there are some 7,000.
Grants are available to householders for loft and water-tank insulation. The
Energy Efficiency Office gives grants towards the establishment of community
insulation projects and is helping to develop home energy audits—assessments
of the degree of efficiency in a household's use of energy.
The Government sets certain compulsory standards including minimum
insulation levels for new buildings and a maximum temperature of 19°C (66°F)
for non-domestic buildings.
Motor vehicle manufacturers have achieved a 15 per cent improvement in the
fuel consumption of new cars sold in Britain since 1978.
1 therm = 105,506 kilojoules.
244
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
OFFSHORE
OIL AND GAS
Offshore
Supplies
OIL
North Sea
Fields
Structure of the
Oil Industry
Britain's energy position has been transformed by the discovery of substantial
oil and gas reserves offshore in the United Kingdom Continental Shelf (UKCS).
Seismic prospecting began in the early 1960s and full-scale exploration
activities in 1964. The total area covered by production licences is some 94,300
sq km (36,400 sq miles) out of a total designated area of about 651,650 sq km
(251,600 sq miles), over which Britain has exercised its rights to explore and
exploit the seabed and subsoil. Expenditure on offshore and onshore explora¬
tion and development amounts to more than £41,000 million (at 1983 prices) so
far. Expenditure in 1983 was estimated at about £2,800 million. By the end of
1983 over 2,200 wells had been or were being drilled on the UKCS (more than
1,000 production wells and nearly 1,200 exploration or appraisal wells).
The Offshore Supplies Office of the Department of Energy has three main
functions: to ensure that the market in goods and services for UKCS
developments is open, with British suppliers fully considered by the multi¬
national operators: to foster the growth of British-controlled offshore tech-
nology; and to promote exports of offshore products and services. In 1983 goods
and services valued at £2,616 million were ordered for UKCS developments, the
British share of orders received being £1,883 million (72 per cent).
Before the 1970s Britain was almost wholly dependent for its oil supplies on
imports, the only indigenous supplies coming from a small number of
land-based oilfields. However, the first discovery of oil in the UKCS was made in
1969 and the first oil was brought ashore in 1975. Output of crude oil from the
UKCS in mid-1984 was about 2-4 million barrels (320,000 tonnes) a day,
making Britain the world's sixth largest producer.
There were 25 offshore fields producing crude oil in mid-1984: Brent and
Forties, two of the largest offshore oilfields in the world; Argyll; Auk; Beatrice;
Beryl A; Buchan; Claymore; Duncan; Dunlin; Fulmar; Heather; Magnus;
Maureen; Montrose; Murchison (UK); Ninian; North Cormorant; North West
Hutton; Piper; South Brae; South Cormorant; Statfjord (UK); Tartan; and
Thistle. Six more fields are under development, while another 19 significant
finds may prove to have commercial potential after further appraisal. Production
from most large fields is controlled from production platforms of either steel or
concrete which have been built to withstand severe weather including gusts of
wind of up to 260 km/h (160 mph) and waves of 30 m (100 ft).
Britain’s primary oil production, including condensates and petroleum gases,
amounted to about 115 million tonnes in 1983 (see Table 18), 11 per cent more
than in 1982. Output should be at its highest levels in the mid-1980s, although
Britain should be a significant producer on a smaller scale until well into the
twenty-first century. The Government’s oil policy is intended to encourage
exploration and development with the objective of maximising economic oil
production for the foreseeable future. Remaining proven reserves of oil in the
UKCS amount to about 1,000 million tonnes while the total remaining reserves
of the UKCS could be as high as 5,280 million tonnes.
There are several large oil companies operating in Britain or engaged in work on
the UKCS. In total there are about 300 companies with interests in the North
Sea. The two leading British oil companies are British Petroleum (BP) and Shell
Transport and Trading, which are the two largest industrial companies in
Britain in terms of turnover. Sales by BP (in which the Government has a 32 per
cent stake) averaged 31 million barrels (0-41 million tonnes) a day of crude oil
and petroleum products in 1983, and its gross income was £37,960 million. It
has about 131,600 employees, of whom 33,150 are employed in Britain.
Oil
50
 I 
100
“T"
50
150 km
 i
 1
100 miles
Norway
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Other named offshore oil finds
Onshore oil finds
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
Crude oil pipelines
Magnus—.
Eider—
N Cormorant—\ ^
Tern—
S Cormorant-
N W Hutton-
Clair a
Sulfom Voe
Shetland
Islands
Orkney i fjo
Islands ^-Fiotta
0-
Heather
•Deveron
Don
Thistle
Murchison
Statfjord
Dunlin
Brent
Hutton
—N Alwyn
^Ninian
Beryl B,
Beryl A*
Piper N Brae
Crawford
IS Brae
Tiffany
Toni/Thelma
Balmoral
Maureen
246
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Land-based
Fields
Refineries
The British National Oil Corporation (BNOC) is a public corporation set up
under the Petroleum and Submarine Pipe-lines Act 1975 and a major oil trader.
Its role is to secure and dispose of UKCS oil in a way which contributes to
national security of supply and, through effective trading and marketing, to
ensure that the national economy receives the maximum benefit from the
Corporation’s access to the oil. BNOC is the largest single trader in oil from the
UKCS by virtue of its rights through agreements with other oil companies to
acquire at market prices up to 51 per cent of oil currently produced, and as agent
for the Government in marketing oil received as royalty payments-in-kind. In
1983 BNOC’s sales averaged 1-3 million barrels (017 million tonnes) a day of
crude oil—some 56 per cent of UKCS production.
Under the Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982, BNOC’s oil-producing business
(covering substantial exploration, development and production activities on the
UKCS) was transferred to Britoil, a new independent private sector company in
which the Government retains a 49 per cent stake. Enterprise Oil was set up in
1983 to take over the offshore oil interests of the British Gas Corporation, and
its shares were sold to the public in June 1984.
Onshore production of crude oil in Britain is much less significant than offshore
production. In 1983 it amounted to over 300,000 tonnes, including 215,000
tonnes produced from Britain’s largest onshore field at Wytch Farm (Dorset),
which started production in 1979. Eleven other onshore fields are in operation,
notably Bothamsall and Egmanton in Nottinghamshire, Gainsborough in
Lincolnshire and Kimmeridge in Dorset.
At the beginning of 1984 the distillation capacity of Britain’s 17 oil refineries
stood at 100-7 million tonnes a year, 12-9 million tonnes less than a year earlier.
Excess capacity is being eliminated, while existing refineries are being adapted
to the changing pattern of demand by the construction of new upgrading
facilities (‘catalytic crackers’) which are leading to a higher output of motor
spirit and naphtha at the expense of fuel oil.
Table 18: Oil Statistics
million tonnes
1973 1978 1981 1982 1983
Oil production3
land 01 0-1
offshore — 53-9
Refinery output 106-0 89-2
Deliveries of petroleum products
for inland consumption 99-8 84-1
Exports (including re-exports):
crude petroleum 2-8 23-1
refined petroleum products
and process oils 17-1 14-3
Imports:
crude petroleum 113-3 65-5
refined petroleum products
and process oils 22-6 14-7
0-2 0-3 0-3
89-2 103-0 114-6
70-7
72-0
66-3
52-5
14-2
33-0
14-4
67-2
60-3
14-5
28-3
17-2
70-9
64-5
68-4
15-9
22-8
17-4
Sources: Department of Energy and HM Customs and Excise.
a Crude oil plus condensates and petroleum gases derived at onshore treatment plants.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
247
Consumption
International
Trade
Oil Pipelines
Research
GAS
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding refinery
consumption) in 1983 totalled 64-5 million tonnes including 19-6 million
tonnes of motor spirit, 16-7 million tonnes of gas and diesel oil (including derv
fuel used in road vehicles), 12-5 million tonnes of fuel oil and 6-2 million tonnes
of kerosene. Deliveries were 4 per cent less than in 1982, with a particularly
large fall in consumption of fuel oil (which is half the amount consumed in
1979), reflecting a substantial decline in the use of oil for electricity generation,
although deliveries of motor spirit continued to increase and were at a record
level in 1983.
Exports of crude oil have grown rapidly and in 1983 amounted to 68-4 million
tonnes (equivalent to over half of UKCS output), three times the level of crude oil
imports. (Heavy crude oil continues to be imported for particular uses as not all
the petroleum products required in Britain can be made from the high-quality
oil produced in the UKCS.) Virtually all exports went to the markets of Britain’s
partners in the European Community and the International Energy Agency the
largest markets being the United States, the Netherlands and France. Some 16
million tonnes of petroleum products were also exported. The volume of imports
of crude oil has fallen considerably to about 20 per cent of the level of the peak
year of 1973. The main sources of imports in 1983 were Norway (which supplied
about 30 per cent by value), Saudi Arabia (19 per cent) and Nigeria (8 per cent).
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 83 per cent of offshore oil in 1983. Some
1,540 km (960 miles) of major submarine pipeline have been built to bring
ashore oil from a number of North Sea oilfields (see map, p 245). Major crude oil
onshore pipelines in operation from harbours, land terminals or offshore
moorings to refineries include those connecting Finnart to Grangemouth, Angle
Bay to Llandarcy, Tranmere to Stanlow, Amlwch to Stanlow, and Cruden Bay to
Grangemouth. Onshore pipelines also carry refined products to major market¬
ing areas; for example, a 423-km (263-mile) pipeline runs from Milford Haven to
the Midlands and Manchester.
Research into petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the leading oil
companies, which have extensive research and development programmes in
support of oil exploration and production and on new and improved fuels. All
aspects of production are covered, including the design of production facilities
and enhanced oil recovery techniques. Research centres are at Sunbury-on-
Thames (BP), Ellesmere Port in Cheshire and Sittingbourne in Kent (Shell), and
Abingdon in Oxfordshire (Esso). The main government research and develop¬
ment effort in offshore technology is undertaken by the Department of Energy
with the advice of the Offshore Energy Technology Board. In 1984-85 the
Department expects to spend some £22 million in support of offshore
technology.
Public supply of manufactured gas in Britain began in the early nineteenth
century in Westminster in central London. For many years gas was produced
from coal but during the 1960s, when growing supplies of oil were being
imported, there was a switch to producing town gas from oil-based feedstocks.
However, a more significant change began in the late 1960s following the first
commercial natural gas discovery in the UKCS in 1965 and the start of offshore
gas production in 1967. Supplies of offshore natural gas grew rapidly and
natural gas has now replaced town gas in the public supply system in Great
Britain. Originally used almost exclusively for lighting, gas is now used for
domestic cooking and heating and for industrial and commercial purposes.
Gas
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
249
Structure
Production
Transmission
and Storage
The Gas Act 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain under public ownership
and control in 1949. As a result of the change to natural gas necessitating more
centralised control of production and transmission, the British Gas Corporation
was set up in 1973 under the Gas Act 1972 to replace the Gas Council and area
gas boards. The Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982 gives power to permit the
disposal of assets held by the Corporation, and limits the Corporation's
statutory monopoly in the supply of gas for fuel purposes so as to permit private
companies to compete in this supply.
In 1983-84 the turnover of the Corporation and its subsidiaiy companies
amounted to £6,422 million, of which sales of gas accounted for £5,866 million.
Its current cost profit after taxation was £417 million. Recently the Corporation
has been wholly self-financing and has repaid all its long-term debt to the
Government. The Corporation has a large investment programme, amounting to
£3,000 million (at 1983 prices) in the five years from 1983-84, a large part of
which is accounted for by investment in the Rough and Morecambe fields (see
below). The Corporation has some 97,200 employees.
In 1983 indigenous natural gas accounted for about 75 per cent of total natural
gas supplies, the remainder coming from Norway. Output of natural gas
amounted to 39,539 million cubic metres (mem), of which 2,487 mem were used
for drilling, production and pumping operations offshore, 297 mem supplied
direct to the petrochemicals industry and 8 mem supplied direct for other
industry, leaving 36,747 mem available for the public supply gas industry.
Production comes mainly from six major gasfields: Leman Bank Frigg (UK)
Indefatigable, Hewett. Viking and West Sole. In addition, a growing amount of
gas produced in association with oil in oilfields is being brought ashore,
particularly from the Brent and Piper fields and from the fields connected to the
Far-North Liquid and Associated Gas System (FLAGS) pipeline. The British Gas
Corporation is undertaking a major investment programme to develop the
Morecambe field in the Irish Sea, and the first supplies should be brought
ashore in the winter of 1984—85.
Indigenous offshore natural gas supplies and imports from Norway are
expected to be sufficient to meet the major part of British requirements into the
twenty-first century. Total proven gas reserves remaining in known discoveries
in the UKCS at the end of 1983 amounted to 712,000 mem and remaining
recoverable reserves, including potential future discoveries, were estimated to be
in the range of l-365 million to 2-725 million mem.
The national high-pressure pipeline system of some 5,000 km (3,100 miles)
provides for the distribution of natural gas. It is supplied by feeder mains from
four North Sea shore terminals, while a new terminal near Barrow-in-Furness is
under construction. Four pipelines have been built to carry gas from St Fergus
(Grampian) to central Scotland and northern England and pipelines linking the
Morecambe gasfield to the Barrow terminal and the national transmission
system have been completed. In the northern North Sea two 362-km (225-mile)
pipelines have been laid between the Frigg field and St Fergus, while the longest
offshore pipeline in the UKCS, part of the FLAGS network, has been laid for
452 km (281 miles) between the Brent field and St Fergus. Gas is also being
brought ashore from a number of fields through the Brent pipeline system and
is separated into natural gas suitable for distribution through the national
pipeline system and other gases such as ethane, propane and butane which
provide feedstock for the petrochemicals industry. The whole of the high-
pressure transmission system is regularly inspected; the Corporation has
developed the world's most advanced computerised inspection vehicle for
high-pressure pipelines that detects flaws as it travels through them.
250
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consumption
Research
COAL
The National
Coal Board
Production and
Productivity
Various methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions are
used including salt cavities and storage facilities for liquefied natural gas. The
British Gas Corporation has acquired the partially depleted Rough gasfield and
intends to use it to store natural gas, the first time an offshore gasfield will be
used for this purpose.
Sales of gas by the public supply industry in Britain totalled 16,844 million
therms in 1983. About half of all gas sold by the British Gas Corporation to its
16-2 million consumers is for industrial and commercial purposes, most of the
remainder being for household use. Gas is used extensively in industries
requiring the control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy such as the
pottery industry and certain processes for making iron and steel products. In
1983, 5,637 million therms of gas were sold to industry in Britain, 77 million
therms to public supply and transport power stations and 2,260 million therms
to commercial users. The domestic load includes gas for cookers, space heaters,
water heaters and refrigerators, but an increasingly large part of domestic
demand is for gas for central heating. In 1983, 8,871 million therms were sold to
domestic users.
The British Gas Corporation conducts research at five research stations into all
aspects of gas supply and use. Its total expenditure on research and development
and on technical service and testing amounted to about £52 million in 1983—84.
Work on processes for the manufacture of substitute natural gas (SNG) from
either oil or coal is one of the Corporation’s main research projects. A
demonstration coal gasification plant (‘slagging gasifier’) has been built at the
Westfield Development Centre in Fife and a prototype plant to make SNG from oil
at Killingholme (Humberside) began operating in 1982. Other research is
concerned with the design, efficient operation and maintenance of the
transmission and distribution systems and with the efficient use of gas in the
various industrial and domestic applications.
Coalmining in Britain can be traced back to the thirteenth century. It played a
crucial part in the industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries and in its peak year, 1913, the industry produced 292 million tonnes
of coal, exported 74-2 million tonnes and employed over a million workers. In
1947 the coal mines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal Industry
Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board (NCB) as a
statutory corporation to manage the industry.
The NCB has, with limited exceptions, exclusive rights over the extraction of
coal in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private operators to work
small mines and opencast sites. It also has powers to work other minerals, where
discoveries are made in the course of searching for, or working, coal: and to
engage in certain petrochemicals activities beneficial to the future of the coal
industry. Retail sales remain largely in private hands, although the NCB makes
bulk sales to large industrial consumers.
In 1983—84 the total turnover of the NCB and its subsidiaries was £4,660
million: its deficit grant of £875 million, together with grants towards the social
costs of mine closures and other grants, was met by the Government.
At the end of March 1984 there were 170 NCB collieries in operation grouped
into 12 areas. The main coal-bearing areas are shown on the map on p 251 and
the main trends in the coal industry are shown in Table 19. In 1983—84 output
of 107-7 million tonnes comprised 90-8 million tonnes of deep-mined coal, 14-4
million tonnes from opencast mines and 2-4 million tonnes from other sources
(including recovered slurry).
Coal
£? ® (sr v
»Glasgow Edinburgh / v.
% & Newcastle ,
^ upon Tyne #
•Carlisle
Durham
Workington
Liverpool'
■SSZ-S, l • Doncaster
y Sheffield j ^
Manchester \ Nottingham
Vale of Belvoir
Birmingham^
London
Cardiff/
Bristol
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
80 miles
I I Coalfields
Potential coalfields
Swansea
Dover
252
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Consumption
Britain's coal industry remains the largest in Western Europe and is one of the
world s most technologically advanced. Substantial progress has been made in
techniques for mining coal. Developments are concentrated on the increasing
use of heavy-duty equipment, such as powered roof supports, power loaders and
armoured flexible conveyors, capable of sustained high performance with
minimum maintenance, and on the introduction of computerised automatic
monitoring and remote control of machines. Productivity in terms of output per
manshift was 2-43 tonnes in 1983-84, the most productive NCB areas being
North Nottinghamshire and North Yorkshire (over 3 tonnes).
The NCB has a substantial capital investment programme, amounting to £698
million in 1983—84. In 1983 production started at its new mining complex at
Selby in North Yorkshire (one of the world's most advanced deep mines) and
should build up to 10 million tonnes a year by the late 1980s. Investment of
£400 million is planned to develop a new mine at Asfordby in the Vale of Belvoir
(Leicestershire).
Although many good seams of coal have now been worked out because of the
early development of the industry, total coal resources in Britain are estimated
at 190,000 million tonnes, of which about 45,000 million tonnes (sufficient for
at least 300 years at present rates of consumption) are considered to be
recoverable using established technology.
The first coal to be discovered on a significant scale in Northern Ireland is a
substantial deposit of lignite (brown coal) on the eastern shore of Lough Neagh
with 100 million tonnes of recoverable reserves proven so far. Exploration is
continuing and the development of this deposit by opencast mining could make
a significant contribution to Northern Ireland's energy supplies.
In 1983—84 inland consumption of coal was 112 million tonnes of which 74 per
cent was by power stations, 9 per cent by coke ovens and 7 per cent by domestic
users. With a substantial proportion of coal being used by power stations for
electricity generation, NCB sales of coal to them totalled 77 million tonnes in
1983-84.
Exports of coal in 1983—84 were 6-9 million tonnes, most of which went to
Western European countries, while imports amounted to 5 million tonnes.
Table 19: Coal Statistics
year ended March
1974a 1979 1982 1983 1984£
Output (million tonnes)
of which:
opencast (million tonnes)
Output per manshift (tonnes)5:
underground
overall
Inland consumption (million tonnes)
Average labour force (thousands)5
Collieries in operation5
110-2 121-5 126-6 124-3 107-7
9-6
2-77
2-15
121-2
252-0
259
13-8 14-8 15-2
2-86
2-24
122-5
234-9
223
302c
2-40<
117-0
218-5
200
3-06
2-44
110-4
207-6
191
14-4
3-03
2-43
111-8
191-5
170
Sources: Department of Energy and NCB.
a Affected by industrial disputes.
b NCB mines only.
‘’Figures for this and the following years are not directly comparable with those for earlier years.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
253
Research
ELECTRICITY
Structure
Consumption
In 1983 84 the NCB spent £55 million on research. It has two main research
establishments: the Coal Research Establishment (CRE) at Stoke Orchard (near
Cheltenham), concerned with the combustion and utilisation of coal: and the
Mining Research and Development Establishment at Stanhope Bretby (Stafford¬
shire), for work on mining methods and equipment, particularly improving the
performance and reliability of equipment and developing systems for remote and
automatic control. A major research and development programme on fluidised
bed combustion for industrial steam-raising and heating has led to successful
commercial exploitation, and development work continues. Agreements to
exchange technical information have been signed by the NCB with several
countries. Britain is responsible through an NCB subsidiary for the manage¬
ment of a service which provides information on and analyses of coal topics
under the auspices of the International Energy Agency.
The first public supply of electricity in the world was in 1881, at Godaiming
(Surrey). In 1948 all municipal and private undertakings in Great Britain were
acquired under the Electricity Act 1947 and vested in the British Electricity
Authority and 14 regional boards, except in the north of Scotland where they
became the responsibility of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
(NSHEB), which had been set up in 1943. Two subsequent Acts (1954 and 1957)
effected a measure of decentralisation and established the present structure of
public corporations. Electricity from the public supply system is available to all
premises in Britain except for very remote rural households. The public supply
industry employed about 159,000 people and invested some £1,850 million in
1983-84. The main transmission system (national grid) in England and Wales
is one of the largest fully interconnected power networks under unified control
in the Western world.
The Energy Act 1983 allows private generation to compete with the public
supply industry. It entitles private generators of electricity to sell their electricity
to the boards on terms reflecting costs fairly incurred by the boards, and allows
them to use the public transmission and distribution system.
The Electricity Council is the central co-ordinating body of the supply industry
in England and Wales. It has a general responsibility for promoting the
development and maintenance of an efficient, co-ordinated and economical
system of electricity supply. Electricity is generated and transmitted by the
Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB), which is responsible for the
operation and maintenance of power stations and the national grid. Twelve area
electricity boards are responsible for distribution and for the retail sale of
electricity. In 1983—84 the income of the electricity supply industry in England
and Wales was £9,562 million and its operating profit was £901 million.
In Scotland two boards, the NSHEB and the South of Scotland Electricity
Board (SSEB), generate, distribute and sell electricity. The boundary separating
their areas runs from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth
of Tay (see map, p 255). In 1983-84 the income of the SSEB and the NSHEB was
£782 million and £227 million respectively and their net surpluses were £16-1
million and £12-1 million.
In Northern Ireland generation, transmission and distribution are carried out
by the publicly owned Northern Ireland Electricity Service.
Sales of electricity in 1983 amounted to 224,907 gigawatt hours (GWh)
Domestic users took 36-9 per cent of the total, industry 36-2 per cent and
commercial and other users the remainder. About one-fifth of domestic sales is
for space heating, one-quarter for water heating and one-tenth for cooking.
Electricity is used in industry mainly for motive power, melting, heating and
254
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Generation
lighting. It is supplied to 23-7 million consumers of whom 21 million are in
England and Wales, 1-6 million are supplied by the SSEB, 563,000 by the
NSHEB and 544,000 are in Northern Ireland.
Generation by the public supply electricity industry in Britain amounted to
260,436 GWh in 1983. Conventional steam power stations provided 80-1 per
cent of the total, nuclear stations 17-6 per cent and gas turbine, hydro-electric
and diesel plant 2-3 per cent. Public supply power stations consumed 108
million tonnes of coal equivalent in 1983 of which coal accounted for 75 per cent
and oil 7 per cent. The output capacity of the 181 generating stations of the
electricity boards at the end of 1983 totalled 62,374 megawatts (MW) including
50,727 MW run by the CEGB, 6,188 MW by the SSEB, 3,129 MW by the NSHEB
and 2,290 MW by the Northern Ireland Electricity Service. An analysis of
electricity generation by and output capacity of the public supply system is given
in Table 20.
Table 20: Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply Power Stations
Electricity generated (GWh) Output
  — Per cent capacity3
1973 1978 1983 1983 (MW)
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped-storage plant
Other hydro-electric plant
23,658 33,339 45,776
229,892 228,193 208,514
1,347
668
3,235
688 356
1,183 1,897
3,388 3,892
17-6
80-1
01
0-7
1-5
5,825
50,681
3,258
1,325
1,284
Total
258,800 266,791 260,436 1000 62,374b
Electricity supplied (net)c 240,373 248,003 241,305
Source: Department of Energy.
aAt 31 December 1983.
b Including 1 MW of wind-powered plant.
c Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (including electricity used for pumping at
pumped-storage stations).
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
(15,714 GWh in 1983). The major sources outside the fuel industries are the
chemicals, engineering, paper, and iron and steel industries and the nuclear
power plants of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) and
British Nuclear Fuels pic. In 1983 these nuclear plants supplied 3,567 GWh of
electricity to the public supply system.
The most recent large-scale power stations are based on units of 500 MW and
660 MW. Station capacities have increased and there are 11 stations each with a
capacity of 2,000 MW including Kingsnorth (Kent), Europe’s largest mixed-fuel
station burning either coal or oil, while Britain’s biggest power station is at
Longannet (Fife), a 2,400-MW station. A 2,000-MW coal-fired extension to the
Drax station (North Yorkshire) is under construction; when completed, Drax will
be the largest coal-fired power station in Europe. The larger units have a higher
thermal efficiency (the ratio of the net electrical energy output to the heat energy
input) than earlier units and their introduction, coupled with the closure of less
efficient plant, has resulted in a gradual rise in overall thermal efficiency,
Electricity
256
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear Power
Nuclear Power
Programme
British Nuclear
Fuels
leading to substantial savings in fuel consumption. Average thermal efficiency of
conventional steam stations in England and Wales rose from 20-91 per cent in
1947—48 to 34-30 per cent in 1983—84.
The pumped-storage station at Dinorwig (Gwynedd), the largest of its type in
Europe, began operating in 1983 and has an average generated output of 1,680
MW. (In pumped-storage schemes electricity generated in off-peak periods is
used to pump water to high-level reservoirs from which it descends to drive
turbines, rapidly providing a large supply of electricity at peak periods or to meet
sudden increases in demand.)
The Government is keen to encourage combined heat and power (CHP)
schemes. As part of a programme to study the potential for CHP and district
heating in particular locations in Britain, the Government announced in April
1984 that it was ready to encourage the formation of local consortia to
undertake studies on CHP provided that there was substantial private sector
participation. The Government would give three towns grants of up to £250,000
each towards these studies.
Britain has been developing nuclear power for several decades and in 1956 the
world's first large-scale nuclear power station, at Calder Hall (Cumbria), began to
supply electricity to the national grid. The Government believes that nuclear
power has a vital role in helping to meet Britain’s long-term energy require¬
ments. There are 11 nuclear power stations in operation controlled by the
electricity authorities, while four other stations also feed electricity to the
national grid: the two original Magnox stations (both with a net capacity of
about 200 MW) operated by British Nuclear Fuels pic at Calder Hall and
Chapelcross (Dumfries and Galloway): and two experimental or prototype
stations run by the UKAEA, at Winfrith (Dorset) and Dounreay (the site of the
Prototype Fast Reactor).
Under the first commercial programme, nine Magnox stations with a total gross
capacity of about 4,000 MW were commissioned between 1962 and 1971, the
largest being Wylfa (Gwynedd), which has a capacity of 840 MW. The second
main programme was based on the Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor (AGR). Hinkley
Point B (Somerset) and Hunterston B (Strathclyde) began operating in 1976,
while three more AGRs are due to be commissioned later in 1984: Dungeness B
(Kent), Hartlepool (Cleveland) and Heysham (Lancashire). All the AGRs are
1,320-MW units except Dungeness B (1,200 MW). Construction has started on
two further AGRs, a second 1,320-MW station at Heysham and a 1,320-MW
station at Torness (Lothian). The CEGB has also applied for the consent of the
Secretary of State for Energy to build a 1,200-MW pressurised water reactor at
Sizewell (Suffolk). This application is subject to the results of a public inquiry
and to the necessary consents and safety clearances being obtained.
British Nuclear Fuels pic provides nuclear fuel services covering the whole fuel
cycle: uranium conversion, uranium enrichment, fuel element fabrication,
transport and reprocessing of spent fuel, and the manufacture of specialised fuel
element components. All of its shares are held by the Government. The company
is organised into four divisions, covering uranium enrichment, based at
Capenhurst (Cheshire); fuel manufacture at Springfields (Lancashire); reproces¬
sing (operations) at Sellafield (Cumbria) where valuable unused uranium and
plutonium are recovered from the spent fuel; and reprocessing (engineering) at
the headquarters at Risley (Cheshire). There is a large-scale investment
programme costing some £3,500 million (at 1983 prices) over the next ten years.
The major part of this expenditure relates to the Sellafield site and comprises the
refurbishment of facilities for treating spent fuel from Magnox power stations.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
257
Nuclear
Research
Research on
Electricity
the construction of a thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP) which will take
spent fuel from Britain’s AGRs and overseas reactors, and the construction of
facilities to process and package radioactive waste. The remainder of the
programme involves the construction of further centrifuge enrichment plant at
Capenhurst, and refurbishment and construction of new plant at Springfields.
The UKAEA carries out the research and development necessary to ensure that
nuclear power is economic, safe and environmentally acceptable. Its work is
undertaken at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell (Oxford¬
shire), the Culham Laboratory in Oxfordshire, the Atomic Energy Establish¬
ment at Winfnth (Dorset), the Risley (Cheshire) and Dounreay Nuclear Power
Development Establishments, and a number of other UKAEA establishments.
Work connected with the development of the fast reactor at Dounreay and its fuel
cycle (including the on-site reprocessing of spent fuel) represents the largest
single programme of the UKAEA.
Co-operation in nuclear energy between Britain and other countries takes
place within a framework of inter-governmental agreements and membership of
bodies such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, and through direct
links on research between the UKAEA and equivalent organisations overseas. In
January 1984 Britain signed a memorandum of understanding with Belgium,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy on collaboration on the
development of fast reactors. Britain takes part in the co-operative research
programmes of the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) including
one on establishing the feasibility of achieving controlled thermonuclear fusion.
major component of this programme is the Joint European Torus (JET)
project at Culham which became operational in 1983.
The Electricity Council draws up a general programme of research, some of it
direct research carried out by the Council and electricity boards and some of it
in co-operation with selected industrial research associations and through
research contracts placed with universities and other organisations. Some of
the work is done in collaboration with the SSEB, the NSHEB and the Northern
Ireland Electricity Service which contribute towards its cost (£112 million in
1983-84). Collaboration on research between the supply industry and the plant
manufacturers is co-ordinated by the Power Engineering Research Steering
Committee. The research establishments run by the CEGB comprise the Central
Electricity Research Laboratories at Leatherhead (Surrey), the Berkeley Nuclear
Laboratories in Gloucestershire and the Marchwood Engineering Laboratories
on Southampton Water. Research on distribution technology and electricity
utilisation is undertaken at the Electricity Council Research Centre at
Capenhurst (Cheshire) and by the area boards.
RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF
ENERGY
Research is in progress on assessing the potential contribution of alternative
sources of energy and the ways in which they may be harnessed. These include
wind energy, geothermal energy (from hot dry rocks), and tidal and sea-wave
energy for electricity generation; solar and geothermal (from deep aquifers)
energy for low-grade heat; and the conversion of biomass (plant tissue or animal
waste) to fuels. Development is at an early stage and alternative sources are not
expected to make a major contribution to energy supplies this century, although
they may have a greater role in the long term. The Department of Energy is
estimated to have spent some £11-3 million in 1983-84 in support of its
renewable energy programme; it is giving priority to supporting the development
of wind power and geothermal energy.
Wind power constitutes a resource of considerable national significance. The
Department's work is concentrated on two major projects: a proposed 60 m
258
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Exploration
Production
(200 ft) diameter horizontal axis wind turbine generator of 3 MW on Orkney and
a new medium-scale vertical axis machine of 160 kW at Carmarthen Bay (Dyfed).
Three other medium-size horizontal axis machines have recently been brought
into operation: two on Orkney (both built by private sector companies) and one
at Carmarthen Bay (built by the Central Electricity Generating Board). The
Board is also conducting experiments on wind speed and other conditions at
three additional sites with a view to erecting a larger generator which could be
the forerunner of a cluster of ten or 12 machines.
Under its geothermal hot dry rock programme, the Department is investigat¬
ing the economic possibilities of extracting heat from rocks at great depth.
Research is mainly carried out by the Camborne School of Mines in Cornwall
where a project is being conducted to establish the technology for creating a
suitable deep underground heat exchange zone from which the heat could be
withdrawn. There are indications in several parts of Britain of rock strata at
intermediate depths containing warm water. The Department’s geothermal
aquifer programme is intended to locate and test these aquifers. Three test
boreholes have been drilled and a fourth project is under way in south
Humberside.
The Department and an industrial consortium are jointly funding a study of
the technical and financial viability of a tidal energy barrage in the Severn
estuary, which would be financed, built and operated by the private sector.
Wave energy is considered less attractive than other electricity-producing
renewable energy technologies but, nevertheless, the Department is supporting
a limited programme on basic concepts.
The Department’s work on passive solar design has shown that this could
meet a significant proportion of the demand for space heating in buildings, and
the adoption of effective passive design features is being encouraged.
Biofuels offer possibly the largest contribution from the renewable energy
resources in the medium term. The main work of the Department’s programme
is on the demonstration of the various technologies involved.
Non-fuel Minerals
Although much of Britain’s requirements of industrial raw materials is met by
imports, non-fuel minerals produced in Britain make an important contribution
to the economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in 1982 totalled 286 million
tonnes, valued at £1,137 million. The total number of employees in the
extraction industry was 37,000 in 1982. The geographical locations of some of
the more important minerals produced in Britain are shown on the maps on
p 259.
Exploring for and exploiting indigenous mineral resources to meet the needs of
industry are being encouraged by the Government to enhance security of
supplies. The British Geological Survey is carrying out a programme for the
Department of Trade and Industry aimed at identifying areas with the potential
for economic extraction of minerals.
The tonnage extracted of some of the main non-fuel minerals produced in
Britain is given in Table 21. In terms of value, production of common sand and
gravel was estimated at £342 million in 1982, limestone and dolomite £302
million, clays £164 million, igneous rock £91 million, salt £56 million,
sandstone £39 million, potash £25 million, tin £25 million, fluorspar £21
million, gypsum and anhydrite £14 million and chalk £10 million. Britain is a
major world producer of several important industrial minerals including china
clay, ball clay, fuller’s earth, celestite and gypsum, and also produces significant
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
#
f
c*-
N
I
rJ.
The maps above are based on county or regional boundaries and not those for geological outcrops.
260
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
amounts of limestone, dolomite, chalk, fluorspar, potash, salt, industrial sands,
fireclay, common clay and shale, barytes and talc, mostly for home consump¬
tion. Small amounts of diatomite, slate, calcspar, chert and flint, anhydrite and
china stone are also produced. In 1982 the production of metal from non-ferrous
ores totalled 19,000 tonnes, mainly lead mostly from northern England, and
zinc and tin from Cornwall—the Cornish mines satisfying about half of Britain’s
demand for primary tin. Small amounts of copper and silver are produced in
association with tin and zinc. Planning permission has been sought to develop a
large opencast tungsten mine at Hemerdon (near Plymouth).
Table 21: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1972
1977
1982
Common sand and gravel
Special sands
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk
Sandstone
Gypsum
Salt including salt in brine
Common clay and shale
China clay, ball clay and
potters' clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
Potash
Fluorspar
123-6
5-5
40-6
94-2
20-0
12-4
3-5
8-6b
33-5
3-7
2-1
9-0
0-2
106-9
6-3
35-6
86-4
16-3
12-2
3- 2
8-2
23-5
4- 4
1-5
3-7
0-1
0-2
97-8
4-1
36-1
85-5
11 -6‘
13-3
2- 7
7-6
20-3‘
3- 4
0-9£
0-5
0-4
0-2
Source: United Kingdom Mineral Statistics 1983.
a Great Britain only.
b Estimated production.
Production of sand, gravel and crushed rock (from limestone, igneous rock
and sandstone) as aggregates for use in construction constitutes over half, by
value, of Britain's output of non-fuel minerals. Britain is the world’s second
largest producer of marine-dredged sand and gravel (14-8 million tonnes in
1982).
Water
Britain’s water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as
mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river
intakes (one-third comes from rivers), and partly from underground sources by
means of wells, adits and boreholes. Water consumption in Britain amounted to
about 18,500 megalitres (Ml) a day in 1982 and average daily consumption per
head was nearly 340 litres. About 99 per cent of the population in Great Britain
and over 96 per cent in Northern Ireland are connected to the public water
supply system.
In general, householders pay for their domestic water supply, sewerage and
sewage disposal services through charges based on the rateable value of their
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
261
England and
Wales
Water
Authorities
Statutory Water
Companies
Supplies
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
property, whereas industrial users are charged for their water supply according
to actual metered consumption. Since 1983 optional metering for domestic
users has been available throughout England and Wales.
In England and Wales the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for Wales
are jointly responsible for policy in relation to the conservation, augmentation,
distribution and proper use of water resources and provision of water supplies;
the provision of sewerage and sewage disposal services; the restoration and
maintenance of the wholesomeness of rivers and other inland waters; and the
use of inland waters for navigation and recreation. The Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Wales are responsible for policy
relating to land drainage, and the protection and development of fisheries.
Nine regional water authorities in England and the Welsh Water Authority in
Wales are responsible for the management of water services; the development of
water resources; water distribution and supply; the prevention of pollution;
sewerage and sewage treatment; river management; land drainage; sea de¬
fences; recreation; and freshwater fisheries. District councils usually act as
agents of water authorities for the design, construction, operation and
maintenance of public sewers in their areas.
There are 29 statutory water supply companies, accounting for about
one-quarter of total supplies, operating under the Water Act 1973.
Special arrangements govern the relationship of these companies to the water
authorities.
Some 32,900 Ml a day were abstracted in England and Wales in 1982, of which
public water supplies accounted for 16,300 Ml a day. The Central Electricity
Generating Board took 11,600 Ml a day primarily for cooling in connection with
electricity generation, other industry 4,700 Ml a day and the remainder was
used in agriculture. Water authorities’ estimated revenue for 1984-85 is some
£2,200 million.
Water authorities have powers to restrict consumption when there are severe
water shortages. Under the Drought Act 1976, passed in the driest period of
weather since records began in 1727, they can limit or prohibit the use of water
and, if necessary, restrict domestic water supplies.
In Scotland responsibility for public water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal
rests with the nine regional and three islands councils. In addition, the Central
Scotland Water Development Board is primarily responsible for developing large
water sources and supplying water in bulk to its five constituent member
authorities, the regional councils in central Scotland.
Scotland has a relative abundance of unpolluted water from upland sources.
About 890 million cubic metres of water were abstracted in Scotland in 1982 for
public water supplies. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for the
promotion of the conservation of water resources and the provision by water
authorities of adequate water supplies, and also has a duty to promote the
cleanliness of rivers and other inland waters and the tidal waters of Scotland.
The Water Service of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is
responsible for water supply and sewerage throughout Northern Ireland. The
Department is also responsible for the conservation, cleanliness and planned
development of Northern Ireland’s water resources. Northern Ireland has
abundant potential supplies of water for both domestic and industrial use. An
average of 691 Ml of water a day was supplied in 1983.
262
Development
Projects
Research
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Investment is taking place to ensure that there is an adequate water supply to
meet future demand. Recent projects have included the Kielder Reservoir in
Northumberland, officially opened in 1982, one of the largest man-made
reservoirs in Europe. In 1983-84 capital expenditure on water supply, sewerage
and sewage disposal amounted to some £725 million in England and Wales, £95
million in Scotland and £28 million in Northern Ireland.
The central research organisation for the water industry in Britain is the Water
Research Centre. Its membership includes water undertakings, consulting
engineers, manufacturers and overseas organisations. It has three laboratories:
at Stevenage (Hertfordshire), which deals with water and waste water treatment:
at Medmenham (Buckinghamshire), which is concerned with environmental
protection (including water quality and pollution); and at Swindon (Wiltshire),
which is concerned with instrumentation, water mains and sewers. Other
organisations conducting research include Hydraulics Research Limited, uni¬
versities, the Meteorological Office and the Natural Environment Research
Council (which has a number of laboratories including the Institute of
Hydrology and the British Geological Survey).
14
Land Use
Farming
Agriculture,
Fisheries
and Forestry
Agriculture
British agriculture is noted for its high level of efficiency and productivity.
Employing less than 3 per cent of the working population, the industry produces
nearly two-thirds of Britain’s food requirements compared with just under a half
in 1960, and about three-quarters of that which can be grown in a temperate
climate compared with nearly two-thirds in 1960. The food share of Britain’s
total imports has fallen from 40 per cent in the 1960s to around 12 per cent in
1983. The industry’s gross output in 1983 was £11,000 million, about 2-5 per
cent of gross domestic product. As befits its long tradition of innovation and
efficient farming, Britain has an important programme of modern research
which has increased crop and other yields. It is also a major exporter of
agricultural produce and machinery, fertilisers and food products.
Just over three-quarters of the land area is used for agriculture, the rest being
mountain, forest or put to urban and other uses. Although the area for farming
is declining by about 10,000 hectares (25,000 acres) a year to meet the needs of
housing, industry and transport, the land in urban use is less than a tenth of
the agricultural land. There are 12 million hectares (30 million acres) under
crops and grass. In hill country, where the area of cultivated land is often small,
some 61 million hectares (over 15 million acres) are also used for rough grazing.
Soils vary from the thin poor ones of highland Britain to the rich fertile soils of
low-lying areas like the fenlands of eastern England. The cool temperate climate
and the even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season; streams
rarely dry up and grassland is green throughout the year.
The average area of a full-time holding (including rough grazing) is some 119
hectares (294 acres). About half of the 243,300 holdings are able to provide
full-time employment for at least one person and account for 91 per cent of total
output. Some 31,000 large farms capable of providing full-time employment for
at least four people account for about half of total output. In Wales and Northern
Ireland the output from small-scale holdings is more significant than in the rest
of Britain.
In England, Scotland and Wales, some two-thirds of holdings are wholly or
mainly owner-occupied. Nearly all the farms in Northern Ireland are owner-
occupied.
The number ol people engaged in agriculture was nearly 700,000 in 1983. The
labour force continues to decline slightly, and the level of mechanisation to
increase, labour productivity rising by over 150 per cent between 1963 and
1983. Investment has increased the level of capital per person employed in the
264
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PRODUCTION
Livestock
Cattle and
Sheep
industry which is now about the same as in manufacturing industry compared
with 80 per cent in 1960. Total farming income in 1983 was an estimated
£1,536 million.
There are over half a million tractors and some 57,000 combine harvesters in
use. A wide variety of other machines for harvesting and preservation of grass
are also employed. Horticultural crops such as blackcurrants and brussels
sprouts are frequently harvested by machine and milking machines are used on
the vast majority of dairy farms. Over 90 per cent of farms have a direct
electricity supply, the remainder having their own generators. Computers and
Prestel viewdata services are increasingly used in farm management.
Home production of the principal foods is shown as a percentage by weight of
total supplies (that is, output plus imports minus exports) in Table 22.
Table 22: British Production as a Percentage of Total Supplies
Food product
1972-74
average
1983
Meat
Eggs
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese
Butter
Sugar (as refined)
Wheat
Potatoes for human consumption
78
98
100
60
18
32
59
95
89
100
100
70
66
54
101
87
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
About three-fifths of full-time farms are devoted mainly to dairying or beef cattle
and sheep. The majority of sheep and cattle are reared in the hill and moorland
areas of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and northern and south-western
England. Beef fattening occurs partly in better grassland areas, as does
dairying, and partly in yards on arable farms. British livestock breeders have
developed many of the cattle, sheep and pig breeds with world-wide reputations,
for example, the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus beef breeds, the Jersey, Guernsey
and Ayrshire dairy breeds. Large White pigs and a number of sheep breeds.
Because of developments in artificial insemination and embryo transfer, Britain
is able to export semen and embryos from high-quality donor animals.
Table 23 shows the number of livestock and output of livestock products.
Most dairy cattle in England and Wales and a significant proportion in Scotland
and Northern Ireland are bred by artificial insemination. The average size of
dairy herds in Britain was 58 in 1983 while the average yield of milk per dairy
cow has increased from 3,331 litres (733 gallons) in 1963 to 4,965 litres (1,092
gallons) in 1983, a rise of 49 per cent. Average household consumption of milk
per head in 1983 was 21 litres (3-7 pints) per week.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the national dairy
herd, in which the Friesian breed is predominant. While pure-bred Friesians
make a substantial contribution to Britain’s beef supplies, many other dairy
cows are crossed with beef bulls for beef production.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production with more than 40 breeds and
many crosses between them. Research has provided vaccine and serum
ELECTRONIC SUMMIT
A range of electronic equipment enabled some 3,500 newspaper and
broadcasting staff from all over the world to report on the London economic
summit in June 1984. Besides closed-circuit television, it included two-
way videotex terminals providing information and a message-sending
service; mobile radio telephones; and telephone ‘mail-boxes’ which
bleeped their owners on a radiopager when a message was left.
The main reporters’ room at the press
centre, showing the closed-circuit
television screen.
Videotex terminals used at the
press centre.
TENSION LEG PLATFORM
The world’s first tension leg oil production platform, designed and
built in Scotland for the Hutton field in the North Sea, paves the way
for the economic exploitation of oilfields at depths of up to 914 m
(3,000 ft), well beyond the range of conventional fixed steel or
concrete platforms. In severe weather, the platform has a pendulum¬
like motion; its stability is achieved by the tension maintained in the
tubular steel mooring lines (or Tegs’), connected to the sea-bed, by the
upward force of its own buoyancy.
SOLAR POWER & THE SOLAR SYSTEM
This solar-powered refrigerator for storing Health Organisation to help in the fight
vaccines will provide a vital link in the ‘Cold against diseases such as poliomyelitis
Chain’ of vaccine stores set up by the World and rinderpest (an animal disease).
Giotto, Europe’s first
space explorer, is to be
launched on an Ariane 1
rocket in 1985 to
intercept and investigate
Halley’s Comet, which is
due to reappear in 1986
after its 76-year-long orbit
round the sun. Built by a
ten-nation European
Space Agency team with
British Aerospace as
prime contractor, Giotto is
expected to send back
data about the comet
which may provide
evidence about the
formation of the solar
system. Edmond Halley
was the English
Astronomer Royal
who first identified the
comet and calculated its
orbit in 1682.
PLASTICS AND GLASS TECHNOLOGY
This exact working replica of a 75-year-old
twin-cylinder steam engine is one of a
range of working models made entirely in
transparent acrylic. It enables engineers
and research workers to observe the flow of
gases and liquids in machinery under
active conditions. The company which
made it has developed methods of casting,
laminating and refining acrylic to meet the
demands of atomic energy authorities, oil
companies and laboratory scientists.
A new abrasive jet cutting machine can cut
glass and glass laminates up to 40 mm (I* 6
inches) thick, as well as a wide range of
other materials, into curved and complex
shapes, a process that is usually time-
consuming, costly and often impossible to
carry out with conventional methods.
Other advantages are the absence of heat,
distortion or dust.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
265
protection against nearly all the epidemic diseases. Although lamb production is
the main source of income for sheep farmers, wool is also important^
Grass supplies 60 to 80 per cent of the feed for cattle and sheep; grass
production has been enhanced by the increased use of fertilisers, irrigation and
methods of grazing control, and improved herbage conservation for winter feed.
Rough grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep and cattle, producing
young animals for fattening elsewhere.
Table 23: Livestock and Livestock Products
Average
1972-74 1981 1982 1983
Cattle and calves ( 000 head)
Sheep and lambs ('000 head)
Pigs (’000 head)
Poultry ( 000 head)
Milk (million litres)
Eggs (million dozen)
Beef and veal (’000 tonnes)
Mutton and lamb (’000 tonnes)
Pork (’000 tonnes)
Bacon and ham (’000 tonnes)
Poultry meat (’000 tonnes)
14,419
27,854
8,732
141,885
13,489
1,187
973
238
679
257
659
13,138
32,097
7,828
132,286
15,237
1,069
1,039
269
711
200
745
13,244
33,067
8,023
135,363
16,094
1,074
980
276
745
197
807
13,290
34,069
8,174
128,260
16,442a
1,037
1,044
297
776
212
796
Provisional figure.
Pigs and
Poultry
Crops
Cereals
Pig production is carried on in most areas but is particularly important in
eastern and southern England, and Northern Ireland. There is an increasing
concentration into specialist units and larger herds. Artificial insemination is
available in England, Wales and Scotland.
Output of poultry meat and eggs has continued to benefit from better
husbandry and genetic improvements. Since 1971 poultry meat production has
increased by a third and reached an estimated 796,000 tonnes in 1983.
Production of broilers from holdings of over 100,000 birds accounts for just over
a half of total production. In 1983, egg production was an estimated 1,037
million dozen. About 64 per cent of laying birds are in flocks of 20,000 or more.
Britain remains broadly self-sufficient in poultry meat and eggs.
The farms devoted priniarily to arable crops are found mainly in eastern and
central southern England and eastern Scotland. Large-scale potato and
vegetable production is undertaken in the fens (in south Lincolnshire and
Cambridgeshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers Thames and Humber and
the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Early potatoes are an important crop in
south-west Wales, Kent and south-west England. High-grade seed potatoes are
grown in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Table 24 gives figures on the area, harvest and yield of the main crops.
About a third of the wheat crop is normally used for flour milling, and about half
for animal feed. Between 15 and 25 per cent of the barley crop is used for malting
and distilling and 50 per cent for animal feed. Exports of wheat and barley are
increasing substantially and account for about a quarter of total production.
There has been a rapid increase in the oilseed rape crop; the seed is crushed to
obtain vegetable oil and the solid matter left is used for animal feed.
266
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fodder Crops
Sugar
Horticulture
Table 24: Main Crops
Average
1972-74 1981 1982 1983
Wheat
Area (’000 hectares) 1,170
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 5,304
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 4-52
Barley
Area ( 000 hectares) 2,260
Harvest ('000 tonnes) 9,128
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 4 04
Oats
Area (’000 hectares) 283
Harvest ('000 tonnes) 1,095
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 3-86
Potatoes
Area ( 000 hectares) 225
Harvest ('000 tonnes) 6,721
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 29-87
Oilseed
Area (’000 hectares) 15
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 33
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 2-20
Sugar Beet
Area ('000 hectares) 193
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 6,077
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 33-10
1,491 1,663 1,695
8,710 10,320 10,798
5-84 6-20 6-40
2,329 2,222 2,144
10,230 10,960 9,993
4-39 4-93 4-66
144 130 108
620 575 463
4-30 4-42 4-28
191 193 196
6,190 6,930 5,857a
32-32 35-83 29-87a
125 174 222
325 581 565a
2-60 3-33 2-53a
213 204 206
7,395 10,007 7,494
35-72 49-81 38-3
Provisional figure.
The universal use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation of
drying and storage facilities, many of which are used on a co-operative basis.
The area of traditional fodder crops (field beans, maize, turnips, swedes and
kale) has declined since 1960, farmers having provided winter feed more
economically by increased grass production and improved conservation.
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet provides about 50 per cent of requirements,
most of the remainder being refined from raw sugar imported from developing
countries under the Lome Convention.
In 1983 the land utilised for horticulture was 224,000 hectares (553,516 acres).
Fruit (including dessert apples, pears, cherries, plums, strawberries, blackcur¬
rants, raspberries and gooseberries) accounted for 58,000 hectares (143,321
acres), vegetables grown in the open, excluding potatoes, for 152,000 hectares
(375,600 acres), flowers, bulbs and nursery stock for 12,000 hectares (29,650
acres) and protected crops (mushrooms and crops grown under glass or plastic)
for 2,000 hectares (4,942 acres).
Field vegetables account for some 42 per cent of the value of horticultural
output and are widely grown throughout the country. Most horticultural
enterprises are increasing output per unit area with the help of improved
planting material, new techniques and the widespread use of machinery.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
267
EXPORTS
MARKETING
Co-operatives
Most glasshouses (used for growing tomatoes, cucumbers, lettuce, flowers,
pot plants and nursery stock) have been re-equipped since the mid-1960s.
Widespread use is made of automatic control of heating and ventilation and
semi-automatic control of watering. Efforts are being made to promote
energy-efficient glasshouses through the use of thermal screens and other
methods. Low-cost plastic tunnels extend the season for certain crops previously
grown only out of doors.
Under the European Community's Common Agricultural Policy (see p 268), a
wide range of horticultural produce is subject to common quality standards.
The Government is keen to encourage the growth of exports related to
agriculture; these amounted to £4,755 million in 1983, of which exports of food
and drink accounted for £3,932 million. In 1983 it set up Food from Britain, a
national marketing organisation responsible for improving the marketing of
British produce in home and overseas markets. The British Food Export Council
represents the export arm of Food from Britain for fresh and processed food and
drinks, and identifies suppliers for customers, organises programmes of visits
and meetings for overseas customers, and with the British Overseas Trade
Board co-ordinates British pavilions at the world’s major agricultural exhibi¬
tions. The British Agricultural Export Council provides a similar service for
agricultural and horticultural supply industries; products and services offered
by its members include all types of machinery, seeds, fertilisers, chemicals,
feedmgstuffs, livestock and semen, veterinary preparations and equipment, and
consultancy.
One of the world’s largest agricultural events, the annual Royal International
Agricultural Show, held at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire, provides an opportunity
for overseas visitors to see what British agriculture has to offer. A typical
attendance for the four open days is 200,000 including 11,000 from overseas.
Virtually every British agricultural machinery manufacturer is represented at
the show which is also the most important pedigree livestock event in the
country. The shows specialised sections cover livestock improvement, farm
mechanisation including working demonstrations of agricultural equipment,
electronics, arable cropping, horticulture, forestry, new technology and re¬
search, tropical agricultural applications and a food hall. Other major agricultu¬
ral displays include the annual Royal Smithfield Show, held in London, which
exhibits agricultural machinery, livestock and carcasses, and the annual Royal
Highland Show held in June at Ingliston near Edinburgh.
Agricultural products are marketed by private traders, producers’ co-operatives
and marketing boards, the latter being producers’ organisations (each including
a minority of independent members appointed by agriculture ministers) with
certain statutory powers to regulate the marketing of milk, wool and potatoes.
Most boards buy from producers or control contracts between first buyers; the
Potato Marketing Board, however, maintains only a broad control over
marketing conditions leaving producers free to deal individually with buyers.
For home-grown cereals, meat and livestock, apples and pears, and eggs, there
are marketing organisations representing producer, distributor and indepen¬
dent interests.
Food from Britain is responsible for improving the marketing of food and
agricultural products.
Agricultural co-operatives may be concerned with production, storage, market¬
ing, services and the supply of farmers’ requirements. There are, in addition,
machinery syndicates. Food from Britain has responsibility for agricultural
co-operative development.
268
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Common
Agricultural
Policy
Price Guaran¬
tees, Grants
and Subsidies
Four government departments are responsible for agricultural policy—the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries for Scotland, the Welsh Office Agriculture Department and the
Northern Ireland Department of Agriculture.
The main aims of the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy,
which accounts for two-thirds of the Community’s budget, are to increase
agricultural productivity and thereby to ensure that farmers have a fair standard
of living, to stabilise the agricultural market, to guarantee regular supplies of
food and to provide these supplies at a reasonable price.
Decisions on the level of price support are taken annually by the Council of
Ministers on the basis of proposals presented by the European Commission.
These measures generally consist of a minimum price at which the intervention
agencies of the member states are willing to purchase excess production which
cannot be marketed at that price. Minimum import prices are also fixed, and
levies made on imports, to protect the Community market. Schemes may be
introduced for subsidised disposal of stocks to consumer^ within the Commun¬
ity where this can be done without disrupting internal markets. The export of
surpluses is subsidised through export refunds to enable Community exporters
to sell on world markets when world prices are below Community price levels.
There is also provision for certain direct payments, including beef and
sheepmeat premiums, to producers. The support price levels, as well as rates of
levy and subsidy, are set in European Currency Units and are converted into the
currencies of the member states at fixed rates of exchange (commonly called
‘green rates’) which do not vary automatically in line with changes in market
exchange rates. The green rates can thus be out of line with the market rate of
exchange between each currency and the European Currency Unit giving rise to
different real support price levels in the different member states. Monetary
compensatory amounts, based on the percentage difference between the green
and market rates of each currency, are applied to prevent distortions in trade.
They operate as import subsidies and export levies for countries whose
currencies’ market rates are below the green rates, and as import levies and
export subsidies in the opposite case.
The British Government continues to seek significant improvements in the
operation of the Common Agricultural Policy. In particular it would like to see
strict guidelines imposed on the growth of agricultural expenditure and regards
the Community’s agricultural price settlement for 1984—85 as a first step
towards controlling surpluses and containing the costs of the Policy.
The Community’s agricultural expenditure is channelled through the Euro¬
pean Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund. The Fund’s guarantee section
finances market support arrangements, while the guidance section provides
funds for structural reform, for example, farm modernisation and investment,
and payments to assist certain farmers to change to alternative enterprises.
Expenditures in Britain in 1983—84 on price guarantees, grants and subsidies
and on Common Agricultural Policy market regulation were estimated to be
£332 million and £1,357 million respectively. About £1,082 million was
reimbursed from the Community budget.
Potatoes and wool are not covered by the Common Agricultural Policy; price
guarantees for potatoes are operated through the Potato Marketing Board and
the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland and a price stabilisation
fund for wool is administered by the British Wool Marketing Board.
Producers also receive support through certain capital and production grants,
some based on Community decisions. Grants are available to assist farmers and
horticulturists with their development plans and capital investment, and there
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
269
Smallholdings
and Crofts
Tenancy
Legislation
Safety at Work
Advisory
Services
Animal Welfare
is special financial help for hill farmers in the form of headage payments on
cattle and sheep (known as compensatory allowances). Community assistance
may also be made to help to improve facilities for the marketing and processing
of agricultural products and to provide a premium payment to specialised beef
producers, while launching aid is available to production and marketing groups
in the horticultural sector.
Local authorities provide some 6,959 smallholdings in England and 965 in
Wales. They make loans of up to 75 per cent of required working capital to their
tenants. Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the
Government, which, while now seeking to dispose of holdings to sitting tenants,
still owns and maintains about 126,000 hectares (311,450 acres) of land
settlement estates, comprising some 1,750 crofts and holdings.
Within the crofting areas of Scotland (in Strathclyde, Highland, Western Isles,
Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands) much of the land is held by crofters,
tenants whose holdings are generally either rented at a cost of not more than
£100 a year or have an area not exceeding 30 hectares (75 acres). Crofting is
administered by the Crofters Commission, and benefits from government grants
for land improvements and some other agricultural work.
The agricultural holdings legislation protects the interests and rights of
landlords and tenants. Rent is a matter for negotiation between landlord and
tenant and may be varied by agreement or, failing agreement, by arbitration
Most agricultural tenants have the right to contest a notice to quit, which is
then ineffective unless the landlord obtains consent to its operation from an
independent body (in England and Wales the Agricultural Land Tribunal and in
Scotland the Scottish Land Court). On termination of tenancy, the tenant is
entitled to compensation in accordance with a special code. There are provisions
for succession of a close relative on the death of a tenant but this will not apply in
England and Wales to new tenancies coming into effect on or after 12 July 1984
when the Agricultural Holdings Act 1984 was passed.
Practically all farms in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied, but, under a
system known as ‘conacre’, farmers not wishing to farm all their land let it
annually to others. About one-fifth of agricultural land is so let, and is used
mainly for grazing.
The Agricultural Inspectorate of the Health and Safety Executive is responsible
for enforcing regulations relating to the health and safety of workers in
agriculture. These cover such matters as the guarding of field and stationary
machinery, workplaces, the fitting of safety cabs to tractors, and the use of
chemicals.
A wide range of professional, scientific and technical services are given to
agriculture and its ancillary industries in England and Wales by the Govern¬
ment s Agricultural Development and Advisory Service, in Scotland by three
regional agricultural colleges and in Northern Ireland by the Department of
Agriculture’s advisory service and specialist divisions, together with agricultural
colleges and research divisions. The purpose of the advisory services is to exploit
and develop new technology, to identify problems requiring investigation and
research, to contribute to possible solutions and to disseminate information
gained to the farming community.
It is an offence to cause unnecessary pain or distress to livestock on commercial
farms. Regulations control such operations as castration and tail docking, and
require owners of intensive units to arrange for the daily inspection of their
270
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Plants
Pesticides
stock and the equipment on which it depends. There are advisory codes and
recommendations for the welfare of all major species of farm animals and
compliance with them is monitored by the State Veterinary Service. The welfare
of farm animals is also protected by regulations.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, keeps under review the welfare of farm animals on agricultural
land, at markets, in transit and at the place of slaughter.
England, Scotland and Wales are free from many serious animal diseases. If they
were to occur, diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease and swine vesicular
disease would be combated by a slaughter policy applied to all infected animals
and those exposed to infection, and by control over animal movements during
the outbreaks. Rigorous measures are taken to eradicate sheep scab and warble
fly. The incidence of bovine tuberculosis is very low; cattle (except for certain
categories) are tested at regular intervals, and reactors to the test are
slaughtered, compensation being paid to the owners. Because of compulsoiy
measures to eradicate brucellosis, begun on an area basis in 1972, England and
Wales were declared free of the disease for all practical purposes in 1981,
following a similar declaration for Scotland in 1980. In September 1984
vaccination will replace slaughter as a means of controlling Newcastle disease in
poultry.
Strict controls are exercised on the import of animals, meat and meat
products, live poultry and other captive birds, and poultry meat, so as to prevent
the introduction of animal or poultry diseases. Special measures apply to
prevent the introduction of rabies, and most animals are subject to import
licence and six months’ quarantine; exceptions to this rule include such farm
animals as pigs, cattle, sheep and goats. There are severe penalties for breaking
the law. There has been no case of rabies in Britain since 1970.
Northern Ireland has been kept free from the major animal diseases, including
rabies, foot-and-mouth disease and swine vesicular disease, and in 1971 was
declared brucellosis-free.
Professional advice and action on the control of animal disease and the welfare
of farm livestock is the responsibility of the State Veterinary Service which in
England and Wales has extensive laboratory facilities and investigation centres
performing specialist work and advising private practitioners. In Scotland the
equivalent duties and services are undertaken and provided partly by the State
Veterinary Service, on a statutory basis, and partly by the three regional
agricultural colleges on an advisory basis. In Northern Ireland the Department of
Agriculture has its own veterinary service, supplemented by a central veterinary
laboratory.
The agricultural departments are responsible for limiting the spread of plant
pests and diseases and for preventing the introduction of new ones. They also
issue the health certificates required by other countries to accompany plant
material exported from Britain. Certification schemes are operated to encourage
the development of healthy, vigorous and true-to-type planting stocks.
Control of pesticide safety is exercised through the Pesticides Safety Precautions
Scheme which is a non-statutory agreement between the Government and
industrial associations and which will be replaced by statutory arrangements.
Under the scheme the Government, advised by the independent and expert
Advisory Committee on Pesticides, gives safety clearance for marketing only if it
is satisfied that when recommended precautions are followed the product can be
used without risk to people, livestock and domestic animals and with minimal
risk to wildlife and the environment generally. In addition, cleared products may
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
271
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
EDUCATION
AND
TRAINING
AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
be officially approved for efficacy under the voluntary Agricultural Chemicals
Approval Scheme.
The manufacture, sale and supply of veterinary medicinal products is prohibited
except under licence. Licences are issued by the agriculture ministers, who are
advised on safety, quality and efficacy by the Veterinary Products Committee
comprising independent experts.
University and other degree and postgraduate courses provide training in the
scientific and technological aspects of agriculture and horticulture, the emph¬
asis being on science and economics. There are also degree and postgraduate
courses in veterinary medicine. Science-based sandwich courses, leading to a
Business and Technician Education Council (BTEC) Higher National Diploma
and available at agricultural colleges, are designed for students wishing to enter
farming or horticulture with a good knowledge of the managerial and
technological aspects of the industry. The three-year BTEC National Diploma,
also organised on a sandwich basis, is a general course in agriculture with some
colleges offering special subjects such as arable farming, livestock production,
dairy farming and farm mechanisation. Both diploma courses, validated by the
BTEC, normally require 12 months' previous practical experience. In addition,
there are one-year full-time National Certificate courses providing a basic
education in agriculture or horticulture, and a one- or two-year part-time
practical course in the basic principles of agriculture, horticulture or forestry
followed by more specialised study. In Scotland new and restructured courses
have replaced the Higher and Ordinary National Diplomas.
In Great Britain the Agricultural Training Board runs an apprenticeship and
craft training scheme for young people entering agriculture and horticulture,
which includes release to attend part-time courses. Shorter courses in craft
skills training are available for others working in agriculture and horticulture.
In Northern Ireland agricultural training courses are the responsibility of the
Department of Agriculture.
Hundreds ol research projects are being carried out, many of international
importance.
The Agricultural and Food Research Council, the Government and private
industry are responsible for the research effort. An autonomous body, the
Council conducts its own research and supports projects in universities and
elsewhere. It has eight institutes dealing with research in animal breeding, food,
weeds, soil science, animal physiology, animal diseases, meat and poultry, and
has four units associated with universities. In addition, the Council is
responsible for 15 independent state-aided research institutes concerned with
such topics as plant breeding, glasshouse crops, grassland, animal viruses, fruit
and vegetable growing, dairying, poultry, soils and agricultural engineering. In
Scotland the Council advises on the research programmes of seven institutes
financed by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries; four of these are
concerned primarily with animal-related research, one with plant breeding and
crop research, one with soil research, and the last with agricultural engineering.
Research in Northern Ireland is carried out by the Department of Agriculture in
association with the Queen’s University of Belfast. Three teaching agricultural
colleges also cover applied research in agricultural science and food technology.
Among research achievements of international importance are the high-
yielding wheats developed at the Plant Breeding Institute and in wide use in
Europe, and the foot-and-mouth disease vaccines developed by the Animal Virus
Research Institute and used throughout the world. The National Vegetable
Research Station, in association with Oxfam, maintains a gene bank designed
272
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
FOOD
RESEARCH
Fish Caught
The Fishing
Fleet
to preserve seed varieties so that plants with better growth and disease resistant
characteristics can be kept to meet agricultural needs in different areas of the
world in the long term. The National Institute of Agricultural Engineering has
developed machinery more suitable for use in countries with labour-intensive
agriculture.
The Ministry of Agriculture's Chief Scientists’ Group commissions half of the
work of the Agricultural and Food Research Council and other research at
universities.
The State Veterinary Service’s central laboratory carries out research and
development on the control of diseases of farm animals. The four central
laboratories of the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service’s Agricultural
Science Service undertake research on pests and diseases affecting growing
crops and stored products and on harmful mammals and birds. Work is also
undertaken on the detection of pesticide residues and on plant health.
Food research is funded by the Ministry of Agriculture’s Food Science Division
and Chief Scientists Group, the Agricultural and Food Research Council and
food firms. Research is undertaken at some of the Council’s institutes, by four
research associations and in government and private industry laboratories.
Fisheries
Britain is one of Europe’s most important fishing nations. The fishing industry
provides about 66 per cent of British fish supplies, and is an important source of
employment and income in a number of ports. In 1983 there were 16,000
fishermen in regular employment and about 6,500 occasionally employed. The
maintenance of fishing opportunities through conservation of stocks and the
preservation of British fishermen’s access to traditional grounds are prime
government concerns.
In 1983 demersal fish caught on or near the bottom of the sea accounted for
about 57 per cent by weight of total British landings, pelagic fish caught near
the surface for 33 per cent and shellfish for 10 per cent. Landings of all types of
fish (excluding salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels totalled 746,000
tonnes. Cod accounted for 32 per cent of the total value of demersal and pelagic
fish landed while haddock (25 per cent), mackerel (8 per cent) and plaice (6 per
cent) were the other most important sources of earnings to the industry.
The British fish farming industry is a substantial and expanding business
mainly concerned with the production of salmon and trout although shellfish
and eel farming are growing. Estimated production in 1983 was 11,000 tonnes
of trout and 3,000 tonnes of salmon.
Imports of fresh, frozen, cured and canned fish and shellfish in 1983 totalled
342,700 tonnes, those of fish meal 162,250 tonnes and those of fish oils
197,300 tonnes. Exports and re-exports of fish and fish products amounted to
351,000 tonnes. Following a British initiative, member states of the European
Community banned from January 1982 the import of primary whale products in
order to help to conserve whale populations.
Some 70 per cent of the British catch is taken by the 6,800 vessels of the inshore
fleet employing a variety of catching methods. The deep-sea fleet, comprising
230 larger vessels, has been reduced in number as fishing opportunities and the
profitability of operations in distant waters have declined. Recently the mackerel
and herring stock off the west coast have provided alternative fisheries for the
larger vessels.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
273
Administration
Fishery Limits
Common
Fisheries Policy
Fisheries
Research
Freshwater
Fisheries
The fisheries departments are responsible for the administration of legislation
concerning the fishing industry and for fisheries research. The safety and
welfare of crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to shipping
generally are provided for under legislation administered by the Department of
Transport.
The Sea Fish Industry Authority provides financial aid for the purchase of new
fishing vessels, vessel improvements, the provision and improvement of
processing plants, cold stores and ice plants and towards the formation of
fishermen s co-operatives. Other functions include research and development,
training, dissemination of information, publicity and promotion.
Community countries, and certain non-Community countries having fishery
agreements with the Community, may fish up to Britain’s 12-mile limit.
Designated Community countries may also fish in specified areas of Britain’s
6-to-12-mile zone. The only non-Community country which may fish in this
zone is Norway, which has very restricted rights in some areas off the Scottish
coast. No foreign vessels may fish within Britain’s 6-mile limit.
Fishery relations between the European Community and other countries are
governed by long-term framework agreements. In 1983 reciprocal agreements
were in force with Norway, the Faroe Islands, Sweden, Spain and Finland.
Non-reciprocal agreements were in force with Canada, the United States,
Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Equatorial Guinea, Sao Tome and Principe,
and the Seychelles. Quotas were also established in international waters in the
north-west Atlantic.
With the extension of fishery limits to 200 miles, new arrangements became
necessary to control Community fishing in the greatly extended area. Britain
has a particularly strong interest in such control, since a sizeable proportion of
the total catch within the 200-mile limits of member states is taken in British
waters, while the loss of fishing opportunities in distant waters (such as Iceland)
has reduced the British industiy’s total catch more than that of other
Community states.
In January 1983 member states reached an agreement on a common fisheries
policy providing for new arrangements on access to coastal waters applicable for
a period of at least 20 years. Its other features include a revised marketing
regime, regulations covering technical conservation measures such as mesh
sizes for nets, the allocation of catch quotas among member states within each
year’s total allowable catch, effective enforcement of the rules and financial aid to
promote the adaptation and development of the Community fishing fleet and the
fish farming industry.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has a research directorate
comprising laboratories dealing with marine and freshwater fisheries, shellfish,
marine pollution, fish farming and diseases. Work on the utilisation of fish is
undertaken by a research station at Tony, Aberdeen. There are also two
seagoing research vessels. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries maintains laboratories on marine and freshwater fisheries research as
well as three seagoing vessels. The two research programmes are co-ordinated.
Department of Agriculture laboratories in Northern Ireland monitor marine and
freshwater fisheries.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout. Sea fishing for
salmon is prohibited in waters outside a limit of six miles from the coasts of the
British Isles. Within six miles, drift netting and certain other methods are
274
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Forestry
Commission and
Forestry Policy
Private
Forestry
Forestry
Education and
Research
prohibited off the coast of Scotland but are permitted under licence off England,
Wales and Northern Ireland. In Scotland, salmon fishing is a private right. In
England and Wales, water authority licences are required for coastal and estuary
netting.
Forestry
Woodland covers an estimated 21 million hectares (5-2 million acres): about 7
per cent of England, 13 per cent of Scotland and 12 per cent of Wales. The
Government supports the continued expansion of forestry in order to reduce
dependence on imports of timber and to provide employment in forestry and
related industries.
The area of productive forest in Great Britain is 1,993,000 hectares
(4,925,000 acres), just under half of which is managed by the Forestry
Commission and the rest by private owners. The rate of new planting in 1983
was 9,000 hectares (22,000 acres) by the Commission and some 12,500
hectares (30,000 acres) by private woodland owners mainly in Scotland. Most
planting is of conifers in upland areas though the planting of broadleaved trees
is encouraged on suitable sites. An increasing proportion of new planting is
being done by private owners.
Total employment in state and private forests in Great Britain was estimated
at about 28,000 in 1983.
British woodlands meet only 9 per cent of the nation’s consumption of wood
and wood products, as only just over half of the Commission’s woodlands are in
production. Home timber production, however, will double over the next 20
years.
The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority in Great Britain. The
Commissioners give advice on forestry matters and are responsible to the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for
Scotland and Wales. In pursuing timber production, forestry policy also takes
into account amenity, environmental and employment criteria, and the
Commission’s activities include wildlife conservation, the landscaping of
plantations and the provision of facilities for recreation. The Commission has
also encouraged the setting up of new timber-using industries.
The Government has asked the Commission to sell some of its land and
plantations to reduce its call on public funds. The Commission is financed
partly by the Government and partly by receipts from sales of timber and other
produce and rents.
A substantial number of private woods are in ownerships of under 100 hectares
(250 acres) in extent. The Government encourages private forestry through
appropriate tax reliefs. There is also a forestry grant scheme under which the
Commission aids planting by private owners.
Degree courses in forestry and associated studies are provided at three
universities and there are supervisory, craft and managerial level courses. The
Forestry Training Council, set up by the Forestry Commission, assists the
development of systematic training and the co-ordination of training in the state
and private sectors. The Furniture and Timber Industry Training Board is
concerned with training for private sector employees in the home timber trade.
Forestry research is carried out by the Commission at two research stations.
Aid is also given for research work in universities and other institutions,
including the Commonwealth Forestry Institute in Oxford.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
275
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
The Department of Agriculture may acquire land for afforestation and give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. Financial provision is
made annually by Parliament.
The state forest area has grown steadily since 1945. By 1983, 73,000 hectares
(180,000 acres) of plantable land had been acquired, of which 55,000 hectares
(135,900 acres) were planted. There were about 13,000 hectares (32,000 acres)
of privately owned forest. Some 480 people work in state forests.
15 Transport and
Communications
Major improvements in the movement of passengers and freight have resulted
from the construction of a network of motorways, the extension of fast inter-city
rail services (such as those operated by high-speed trains), the modernisation of
many ports, the increased use of containers and other modern methods in
shipping, the use by airlines of larger or speedier aircraft (including the
Concorde supersonic aircraft) and expansion schemes at many airports.
Communications are benefiting from developments in microelectronics, compu¬
ter and satellite technology, and advances in materials, for example, the
application of optical fibres in telecommunications.
While major sectors of transport and communications operations are publicly
owned, the Government is arranging for the introduction of private capital into
a number of them as part of its policy of reducing state involvement as much as
possible.
Inland Transport
Passenger and freight traffic is carried mainly by road. At the end of 1983 there
were 20-2 million vehicles licensed for use on the roads of Great Britain, of
which 17-2 million were private cars and light goods vehicles, 06 million heavy
goods vehicles, 1-3 million motor cycles, scooters and mopeds, and 113,000
public road passenger vehicles (including taxis). Private ownership of cars has
been growing rapidly for many years and the car is the most popular form of
transport. Buses and coaches account for about 8 per cent of passenger mileage
within Great Britain, rail for 6 per cent and air 0-5 per cent. Road haulage has a
dominant position in the movement of inland freight, accounting for about 83
per cent of tonnage carried and for some three-fifths of tonne-km. Railways,
inland waterways, coastal shipping and pipelines are important in carrying
certain types of freight, particularly bulk goods. Road haulage is in the hands of
private enterprise, whereas the railways and most of the bus industry are
publicly owned.
Transport policy rests on the fundamental aims of promoting economic
growth and higher national prosperity, and ensuring a reasonable level of
personal mobility, while improving safety, particularly on the roads, minimising
damage to the environment and using energy economically. Britain is taking an
active part in the development of a common transport policy by the European
Community.
ROADS Motor vehicle traffic in Great Britain amounted in 1983 to some 271,200 million
vehicle-km, of which cars and taxis accounted for 81 per cent. Improvements are
continually being made in the network of trunk roads (which form a basic
network linking major centres of population, industrial areas and ports) to
accommodate the growth in traffic. A number of motorways (roads specially
designed for high-speed traffic) have been built, while other improvements, such
as the construction of by-passes, have helped to make travelling easier and
faster, particularly over long distances and between cities, and have relieved
many towns and villages of heavy through traffic. Although motorways account
for less than 1 per cent of road mileage, they carry nearly 12 per cent of traffic
including 27 per cent of heavy goods vehicle traffic. Motorways have attracted a
278
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
greater volume of traffic (particularly heavy lorries) than originally expected,
necessitating the structural renewal of a number of the older sections.
In 1983 the road network totalled some 368,670 km (229,081 miles), of which
some 2,822 km (1,754 miles) were motorways (see Table 25).
Table 25: Road Length (as at April 1983)
km
Trunk roads
Public (including
roads motorways)
Trunk
motorways3
England
Scotland
Wades
Northern Ireland
262,293
50,303
32,382
23,692
10,039
3,121
1,767
658
2,274
212
120
113
Britain
368,670
15,585
2,719
Sources: Department of Transport, Northern Ireland Department of the Environment, Scottish Development
Department and Welsh Office.
a In addition, there were 79 km (49 miles) of local authority motorway in England and 24 km (15 miles) in
Scotland. In April 1984 some 119 km (74 miles) of trunk motorway were under construction in England and 8 km
(5 miles) in Scotland.
The main aims of the Government’s programme to improve trunk roads are to
meet the needs of industry and to keep heavy lorry traffic away from towns and
villages. In England the main priorities are the final stages of the M25 London
orbital route (which should be completed by 1986) and routes to serve industry
and the major ports. In Wales the priorities are to reconstruct the coast road in
north Wales and improve roads which are important for industrial redevelop¬
ment. Although most of the motorway and dual carriageway network in central
Scotland has been completed, an extension to the southern end of the M74 is
under construction. Other priorities are the improvement of strategic routes
such as those to the north and north-east (which are important for North Sea
oil-related activities), some of the west-coast routes, and the construction of
more by-passes. In Northern Ireland the emphasis is on building new links to
the motorway network, constructing more by-passes, and improving roads in
the Belfast area and other urban areas. Priority for new roads in urban areas of
Great Britain is being given to those designed to meet the needs of industry and
commerce, serve new industrial or housing estates, provide links to the national
trunk road network or to complement traffic management schemes.
Responsibility for trunk road motorways and other trunk roads in Great Britain
rests in England with the Secretary of State for Transport, in Scotland with the
Secretary of State for Scotland and in Wales with the Secretary of State for Wales.
The costs of construction, improvement and maintenance are paid for by central
government. The highway authority for non-trunk roads in England and Wales
is, in general, the county council in whose area the roads lie, and in Scotland the
regional or islands council. In Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Depart¬
ment of the Environment is responsible for public roads and their maintenance
and construction.
Research into all aspects of road construction, traffic engineering and safety,
and into problems associated with transport is carried out by the Transport and
Road Research Laboratory, the research arm of the Department of Transport.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
279
Road Safety
Great Britain’s accident record is considerably better than that of most other
countries even though it has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the
world. In 1983, 5,400 people were killed on the roads, about 71,000 seriously
injured and 231,400 slightly injured. A comprehensive framework of legislation
embodied in recent Road Traffic and Transport Acts and summarised in the
Highway Code (which sets out the standard of conduct for road users) has
contributed to the decline in casualty rates. Other factors have been better road
design and construction, segregating vehicles from pedestrians, and campaigns
conducted nationally by government departments and the Royal Society for the
Prevention of Accidents and locally by local authorities to persuade people to
take greater care on the roads.
Comprehensive regulations govern the design of vehicles, their use on the
roads, and the maintenance and testing of their mechanical condition. Under a
national ‘type approval' scheme in Great Britain, all new cars must be of a type
that has been certified as meeting the required standards. Private cars and light
vans which are three or more years old must be tested annually at private
garages authorised as test stations. (In Northern Ireland private cars seven or
more years old are tested at official vehicle inspection centres.) A compulsory
type approval scheme applies to virtually all goods vehicles in Great Britain
manufactured from 1 October 1982 and first used on or after 1 April 1983.
Heavy goods vehicles are subject to annual tests carried out at special testing
stations.
Minimum ages are laid down for driving: 16 for riders of mopeds and disabled
drivers of specially adapted vehicles; 17 for driving cars and other passenger
vehicles with nine or fewer seats (including that of the driver), motor cycles and
goods vehicles not over 3-5 tonnes gross laden weight; 18 for goods vehicles over
3-5 but not over 7-5 tonnes; and 21 for passenger vehicles with over nine seats
and goods vehicles over 7-5 tonnes. All drivers of motor vehicles, except new
residents holding certain non-British licences, are required to pass the driving
test before being granted a full licence to drive. Learners must display L’ plates
on their vehicle and be accompanied while driving (with certain exceptions) by a
qualified driver. There are national speed limits of 60 mph (97 km/h) on single
carriageway roads and 70 mph (113 km/h) on dual carriageway roads (including
motorways), unless a lower limit is indicated. In built-up areas there is a general
limit of 30 mph (48 km/h).
Other measures directed primarily towards road safety include legislation and
publicity to discourage drinking and driving, computer-controlled warning
signals on most busy motorways to inform motorists of advisory speed limits in
adverse conditions and of lane closures, and regulations governing the carriage
of dangerous goods by road. Several provisions designed to improve road safety
have been implemented under the Transport Act 1981. Breath testing has
become the main means of determining a driver’s alcohol level; the statutory
limit of breath alcohol concentration for drivers is 35 microgrammes of alcohol
in 100 millilitres of breath. Provisions to improve the safety of motor cyclists
include the restriction of learner drivers to the less powerful machines, a new
two-part motor-cycle driving test and a limit on the duration of the motor-cycle
provisional licence. Regulations governing the compulsory wearing of seat belts
in the front seats of cars and light vans took effect on 31 January 1983. In the
first 11 months of operation there was a decline of some 25 per cent in deaths
and serious injuries among front-seat occupants of these vehicles. The
totting-up procedure of licence endorsements for driving offences was replaced
in 1982 by a more discriminating system whereby drivers are given penalty
points, varying in number according to the severity of the offence, and are liable
to disqualification from driving for a period if they incur a set number of points
within three years.
280
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Traffic in
Towns
ROAD
HAULAGE
Structure of the
Industry
Licensing and
Other Controls
Traffic management schemes are being operated in many city and town centres
to minimise congestion and its environmental effects, and to improve road
safety. They may include one-way systems, streets reserved for pedestrians, bus
priority measures, parking controls and limited road construction. In most town
centres parking is restricted and waiting limits apply. Major city centres often
have controlled parking zones, where payment is required for on-street parking.
Many towns have shopping precincts, some of them enclosed, which are
specially designed for pedestrians and from which motor vehicles are excluded.
Urban traffic control systems, with traffic signals controlled by a central
computer, are in operation in 35 cities in Britain. Systems developed by the
Department of Transport and British firms have achieved international repute
and are the most commonly used in the world. The most modern of these
systems, which continuously measures and responds to the flow of traffic, is in
operation in Coventry, Maidstone, Southampton and Cambridge, and is about
to be installed in Worcester and Wolverhampton. It is also in operation in central
London in the first stage of converting the present control system covering 1,200
sets of traffic signals.
Road haulage traffic amounted to 90,735 million tonne-km in 1983. There has
been a move towards larger and more efficient vehicles carrying heavier
loads—about 70 per cent of the traffic, in terms of tonne-km, is carried in
vehicles of over 28 tonnes gross laden weight. Much of the traffic is moved over
short distances, with about three-quarters of the tonnage being carried on hauls
of 100 km (62 miles) or less. Public haulage (private road hauliers carrying other
firms’ goods) accounts for 64 per cent of freight carried in Great Britain in terms
of tonne-km. The growth in road haulage has been concentrated on long¬
distance traffic, particularly international road haulage.
The environmental problems caused by lorries have become a matter of public
concern. The Government has introduced a number of measures to bring
economic benefits and increased protection to the environment and the public.
In 1983 the maximum permitted weight of articulated lorries was increased
from 32-5 to 38 tonnes, subject to the lorries having five axles. Safeguards on
the design of lorries include restrictions on their dimensions, while a number of
measures have been taken to improve the enforcement of lorry weights and
safety. More by-passes are being built to keep lorries away from residential areas.
In 1983 the maximum noise limit for the heaviest new lorries was reduced, while
there is a programme of research and development, involving vehicle and engine
manufacturers, to reduce the noise from heavy lorries to less than half the 1981
level and produce a quiet heavy vehicle for the 1990s. To encourage the use of
railways and inland waterways for the carriage of freight, grants of up to 60 per
cent are available towards the cost of construction or modernisation of privately
owned facilities where there are significant environmental benefits by the
removal of heavy goods vehicle traffic from the roads.
Road haulage is predominantly an industry of small, privately owned
businesses. Many of the 127,700 holders of an operator’s licence in 1983 had
only one vehicle and the average size of a vehicle fleet is only about four. The
biggest operator in Great Britain is the National Freight Consortium set up by a
consortium of managers and employees to acquire the National Freight
Company from the Government. The acquisition, completed in 1982, was the
largest staff/management ‘buy-out’ ever undertaken in Britain and the first for a
nationalised industry.
Those operating goods vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight (with certain
special exemptions) require an operator’s licence, obtained on showing good
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
281
PASSENGER
SERVICES
Public
Transport
Operators
Bus and Coach
Services
repute and ability to maintain vehicles properly and control loading and drivers’
hours. Licences are divided into restricted licences for firms carrying their own
goods and standard licences, sub-divided into ‘national only’ and ‘international’,
for hauliers operating for hire or reward. (In Northern Ireland operators carrying
their own goods do not require a licence.) Proof of professional competence is
required to obtain a standard licence. Regulations lay down limits on the hours
worked by drivers of goods vehicles, and there are also minimum rest periods.
Tachographs (which automatically record speed and distance covered, driving
time and stopping periods) must be fitted and used in most goods vehicles over
3-5 tonnes gross weight in Great Britain. International road haulage is governed
mainly by bilateral agreements which are in force with 26 other countries.
Local bus and urban railway services in Britain are provided mainly by publicly
owned operators, coach services partly by publicly owned bodies, and taxis and
hire cars almost entirely by privately owned businesses.
The largest single public sector bus and coach operator in Britain is the National
Bus Company, which operates in England and Wales through more than 40
locally based subsidiaries and has a network of long-distance coach services; it
has a fleet of some 14,600 vehicles. The Scottish Transport Group operates the
main bus services in Scotland outside the major cities and also runs ferries to
the islands off the west coast of Scotland; it has 3,100 vehicles. In Northern
Ireland almost all road passenger services are provided by subsidiaries of the
Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. Citybus Ltd operates services
in the city of Belfast and Ulsterbus Ltd operates most of the services in the
rest of Northern Ireland. These companies have some 290 and 930 vehicles
respectively.
Under the London Regional Transport Act 1984 control of the London
Transport Executive was transferred from the Greater London Council to the
Secretary of State for Transport and the Executive was reconstituted in June
1984 as London Regional Transport (LRT) with its members appointed by the
Secretary of State. LRT has two main subsidiaries responsible for London’s bus
and underground railway services; it operates some 5,600 buses. Its aims
include the improvement of transport services in London, a reduction in costs,
greater efficiency and the involvement of the private sector in the provision of
services. Closer co-operation is planned with British Rail to avoid unnecessary
duplication of services. Seven passenger transport executives are responsible for
the day-to-day management and operations of local transport in Strathclyde and
the metropolitan counties of Greater Manchester, Merseyside, West Midlands,
Tyne and Wear, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire. The Government intends
to introduce legislation which would abolish the metropolitan county councils,
with most of their powers being transferred to district councils; the executives
would continue to operate but would report to joint boards appointed by the
districts. The executives operate 9,600 vehicles, while some 5,300 vehicles are
operated by other local authority undertakings.
There are some 5,800 privately owned undertakings (of which the majority
have fewer than five vehicles) comprising about 31,800 vehicles; only a small
proportion of these operators provide scheduled local bus services.
Double-deck buses are the main type of vehicle used for urban road passenger
transport in Britain and there are some 25,400 in operation. In addition, there
are 44,700 single-deck buses and coaches, and some 79 trams (at Blackpool and
Llandudno which have Britain’s only remaining tramway systems).
There has been a long-term decline in the use of local bus services, mainly
because of the growth in ownership of private cars, and in 1983 buses or
282
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Taxis
Urban
Railways
coaches covered some 3,231 million vehicle-km in Great Britain, 6 per cent fewer
than in 1973. Bus operators have taken action to contain costs and to improve
productivity by increasing the proportion of bus services operated by one man
and reducing or rationalising services, particularly in rural areas. As an
alternative to uneconomic bus services, encouragement has been given to the
promotion of unconventional services in rural areas, such as community buses
operated by voluntary drivers, postbuses (Post Office vehicles carrying mail and
passengers), and social car-sharing schemes.
Great Britain is divided into nine traffic areas, each with a body of traffic
commissioners responsible for licensing operators of buses and coaches to
ensure their suitability for carrying the public safely. Local bus services cannot
be provided except under road service licences. The commissioners are required
to grant applications for licences unless satisfied that to do so would be against
the public interest.
Local authorities subsidise some uneconomic local bus services where they
consider them to be necessary on social grounds. They also fund concessionary
fare schemes for elderly, blind and physically disabled people. Grants and
subsidies to the bus industry totalled £1,003 million in 1983.
In July 1984 the Government issued a White Paper proposing major changes
to the control and organisation of the bus industry including the' abolition
(except in London) of road service licences for local bus services, the transfer of
the operations of the National Bus Company to the private sector and the
reorganisation of the passenger transport executives into smaller units, which
would become independent companies. Local authorities would be required to
seek competitive tenders where they wished to subsidise uneconomic services. A
special innovation grant is proposed to encourage transport schemes for
communities in rural areas. The aim of the proposals is the encouragement of a
competitive market which would be more responsive to passenger needs and
which would bring pressure on operators to reduce costs and increase their
efficiency. These proposals follow the reforms enacted in the Transport Act 1980
which removed regulatory restrictions on operating long-distance express coach
services and excursions and tours, allowing free competition between operators.
This had a noticeable effect on long-distance express coach services, bringing
about reductions in fares, the provision of more services and an increase in the
number of passengers carried.
There are about 35,000 licensed taxis and 70,000 licensed taxi drivers in Great
Britain, mainly in urban areas; London has some 13,100 and 18,200
respectively. In London and a number of other cities taxis must be purpose-built
to conform to very strict requirements and drivers must have passed a test of
their knowledge of the area. Hire cars with drivers may be booked only through
the operator and not hired on the street; in most areas outside London hire cars
are licensed.
There are underground railway services in three British cities: London, Glasgow
and Liverpool. London Regional Transport has 3,900 railway cars and serves
267 stations, while its trains operate over 402 km (250 miles) of railway, of
which about 164 km (102 miles) are underground. A new light rapid transit
system, 55 km (34 miles) long with over 40 stations, is in operation on Tyneside.
The project, the largest provincial urban transport scheme in Britain in the
twentieth century, involved the electrification of two suburban railway lines,
linked by new tunnels under Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead, and a new
bridge over the Tyne. A 12-km (7-5-mile) light railway is being built in London’s
Docklands and should be completed by 1987.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
283
RAILWAYS
Operations
Passenger
Services
Railways were pioneered in Britain, and the Stockton and Darlington Railway,
opened in 1825, was the first passenger public railway in the world to be worked
by steam power. Under the Transport Act 1947 the four large railway companies
in Great Britain were brought under public ownership and in 1962 the British
Railways Board was set up to manage railway affairs and subsidiary activities. In
Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd, a subsidiary of
the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company, operates the railway service
on some 320 km (200 miles) of track.
British Rails operating statistics are shown in Table 26. In 1983 the Board’s
turnover, including financial support and income from other activities but
excluding internal transactions, was £3,189 million and there was a net surplus
of £11-7 million. Financial support for British Rail includes compensation for
the financial burden of operating as a public service those parts of the rail
passenger system which would not otherwise cover their costs, research grants
and grants for level crossings. In 1983 the British Railways Board received £933
million from the Government and the passenger transport executives in respect
of the public service obligation. At the end of 1983 the Board employed some
200,800 people. Following a report, published in 1983, which reviewed the
finances of British Rail and identified a number of opportunities for improved
efficiency and reductions in costs, the Government has set the Board new
objectives including a reduction in its public service obligation grant from the
Government to £635 million (at 1983 prices) in 1986.
Table 26: Railway Statistics
1978
1981
1982
1983
Passenger journeys (million) 734
Passenger-km (million) 30,700
Freight train traffic (million
tonnes) 171
Freight train traffic (million net
tonne-km) 19,982
Assets (at end of year):
Locomotives 3,580
HST power cars and passenger
carriages 530
Other coaching vehicles 21,039
Freight vehicles3 150,371
Stations 2,837
Route open for traffic (km) 17,901
719
30,700
154
17,505
3,131
845
18,304
88,327
2,742
17,431
630
27,400
142
15,880
3,016
906
16,925
71,452
2,711
17,229
695
30,100
145
17,144
2,850
906
16,260
54,510
2,619
16,964
Source: British Railways Board.
pin ono ' 3 nUm^r °f Pri',ately owned wagons are operated on the railway network for customers of British
Rail. 15.902 were authorised for working on the network at the end of 1983.
The passenger network (see map, p 284) comprises a fast inter-city network,
linking the main centres of Great Britain; local stopping services; and commuter
services in and around the large conurbations, especially London and south-east
England. British Rail runs about 1,400 inter-city expresses each weekday,
serving about 150 business and leisure centres. Journey times on inter-city
routes have been reduced substantially as more track has been made suitable for
high-speed operations and as a result of faster trains, notably the InterCity
Main Railway Passenger Routes
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
285
Freight
Other
Activities
Private
Railways
125s, operated by High Speed Trains (HSTs), travelling at maximum sustained
speeds of 125 mph (201 km/h). Intercity 125 services (which represent nearly
half of inter-city train mileage) operate on the London-Bristol-south Wales route,
the London-Edinburgh-Aberdeen route, the London-Plymouth-Penzance route,
the London-Sheffield route and the route linking Edinburgh, Newcastle upon
Tyne, Birmingham and south-west England or south Wales.
Electrification is continuing. In 1983 electrified services were introduced
between London and Bedford, and a number of other schemes are in progress
including the electrification of services from Glasgow to Ayr and Ardrossan, a
£25 million scheme to extend electrified services from London to Ipswich,
Norwich and Harwich, and a £10 million project to electrify the line between
Bishops Stortlord and Cambridge. In July 1984 approval was given by the
Government for a £306 million scheme to electrify the east-coast main line
between London and Edinburgh.
British Rail has developed ways of reducing costs on its local passenger
services including the installation of additional automatic level crossings and
radio signalling. It has begun to replace the fleet of diesel multiple-unit trains by
two new types of vehicle with greater reliability and low maintenance costs: a
lightweight railbus (with a bus-type body) and a medium-weight diesel
multiple-unit.
The most important freight commodities handled in 1983 were coal and coke
(87-9 million tonnes), iron and steel (161 million tonnes), building materials
(15-7 million tonnes), and petroleum (10-8 million tonnes). Over 90 per cent of
rail-freight revenue is obtained from traffic in bulk commodities, most of it in
trainloads.
Greater efficiency is being obtained with the introduction of new types of
wagon with larger capacities and capable of higher speeds, and of new, more
powerful locomotives, the latest of which can haul loads of 1,000 tonnes at
speeds of up to 130 km/h (81 mph). A network of some 138 scheduled
Speedlink high-speed freight services has been established between the major
industrial centres. Other developments, such as the concentration of freight
traffic at fewer but better-equipped terminals and a computer-based total
operations processing system, which monitors all consignments and freight
train and wagon movements in Great Britain, have contributed to a significant
increase in productivity.
British Rail has a group of other subsidiary companies, of which British Rail
Engineering Ltd (BREL) has the largest number of employees, about 27,700 at
the end of 1983. BREL constructs locomotives and rolling stock as well as
undertaking heavy maintenance and overhauls for British Rail; it also manufac¬
tures rolling stock for railway administrations overseas. The Railway Technical
Centre at Derby is the largest of its type in the world. Transmark provides
consultancy services overseas on railway and associated operations. Travellers-
Fare is responsible for catering facilities at 165 stations and on 840 trains each
weekday.
Under the Transport Act 1981 the British Railways Board was given powers to
dispose of its interests in its non-railway businesses and has already privatised
its hotels, shipping and hovercraft businesses and disposed of considerable
amounts of property. The Board may decide to keep a minority interest in a few
cases, but the intention is that the businesses should be transferred to the
private sector, with their future investment financed by private capital.
There are over 40 small privately owned passenger-carrying railways in Great
Britain, mostly operated on a voluntary basis and providing limited services for
286
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INLAND
WATERWAYS
Port Traffic
tourists and railway enthusiasts. The main aim of most of these railways, such
as the Bluebell Railway in East Sussex, is the preservation of steam traction.
The inland waterways of Great Britain are popular for recreation, make a
valuable contribution to the environment and play an important part in land
drainage and water supply. They are also used to a limited extent for
freight-carrying. The first official survey of inland waterway freight traffic
reported that in 1980, 63 million tonnes of freight were carried on inland
waterways and estuaries, covering some 2,300 million tonne-km (1-5 per cent of
freight traffic by tonne-km in Great Britain). Nearly 60 per cent of internal
freight (in tonne-km) was carried in the South East, mainly on the River
Thames. Of the 3,200 km (2,000 miles) of canal and river navigations controlled
by the publicly owned British Waterways Board, some 550 km (340 miles) are
maintained as commercial waterways. In 1983 some 4-9 million tonnes were
carried on the Board’s waterways, a total of 65 million tonne-km. The Board also
operates docks, warehouses and inland freight terminals, and has two barge
fleets, although most of the traffic on its waterways is conveyed by independent
carriers. In 1983 the Board’s turnover amounted to £18-5 million and it received
government grants of £38-8 million to maintain its waterways to statutory
standards. The Board’s £16 million project to improve the Sheffield and South
Yorkshire Navigation between Doncaster and Rotherham was officially opened
in 1983. Suitably designed craft of up to 700-tonne payloads can now navigate
between Rotherham and the Humber ports.
Ports
There are over 300 ports in Great Britain, but a substantial number are small
harbours of only local significance and many do not handle cargo regularly. Most
port authorities operate with statutory powers and responsibilities under
private Acts of Parliament. They are of three broad types: trusts, local authorities
and statutory companies.
Major ports controlled by trusts include London, Milford Haven, Tees and
Hartlepool, Medway, Forth, Clyde and Belfast. Local authorities control a
considerable number of small ports but also the much larger ports of Bristol,
Portsmouth and the new oil ports in Orkney and Shetland.
The Transport Act 1981 provided for the introduction of private capital into
Britain’s main nationalised port undertaking, the British Transport Docks
Board, which has become a private sector company. Associated British Ports. It
owns and operates 19 ports including Southampton, Immingham, Hull,
Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. Other port undertakings owned by statutory
companies include Felixstowe, Manchester and Liverpool. The Act also provided
powers for the British Railways Board to introduce private capital into its ports
(which include Folkestone, Newhaven and Parkeston Quay at Harwich) and in
July 1984 its harbour installations were sold, together with the rest of the
Sealink business (see p 288).
In 1983 traffic through the ports of Great Britain amounted to 427 million
tonnes comprising 136 million tonnes of exports, 122 million tonnes of imports
and 168 million tonnes of domestic traffic (including ‘one-port’ traffic which
comprised offshore traffic, landings of sea-dredged aggregates and material
shipped for dumping at sea). About 63 per cent of the traffic was in fuels, mainly
petroleum and petroleum products. Some 75 per cent of the 12-7 million tonnes
of traffic (10-2 million tonnes of imports and 2-5 million tonnes of exports)
which entered or left Northern Ireland by sea in 1983 represented traffic with the
rest of Britain.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
287
Development
Britain s main ports, in terms of total tonnage handled, are given in Table 27.
Offshore oil developments have had a substantial effect on port traffic by greatly
increasing the flow through certain North Sea ports, such as Tees and
Hartlepool and the Forth ports, creating new oil ports at Flotta in Orkney and
Sullom Voe in Shetland, and reducing oil traffic at many traditional oil¬
importing terminals. There has also been a decline in the volume of conventional
cargo handled by traditional major ports, such as London, Liverpool and
Manchester, and a growth in traffic through other ports including Dover
(Britain’s leading seaport in terms of the value of trade handled), Felixstowe and
Harwich, due to containerisation and the use of roll-on/roll-off facilities, and to
the increasing proportion of Britain’s trade with the rest of Europe. While
non-fuel traffic has been growing only slowly, container and roll-on traffic has
more than doubled since 1972 to 51 million tonnes in 1983 and now accounts
for about 38 per cent of non-fuel foreign and coastal traffic. The leading ports for
container traffic are Felixstowe, London and Southampton and for roll-on traffic
are Dover, Felixstowe, Harwich, Grimsby and Immingham, and Hull.
Table 27: Traffic through the Principal Ports of Great Britain'
Shetland
London
Tees and Hartlepool
Milford Haven
Grimsby and Immingham
Forth
Southampton
Orkney
Manchester
Liverpool
Clyde
1973
na
51-3
260
53-4
24-4
10-3
29-1
01
15-9
27-3
19-6
1978
1981
1-9
530
34-1
41-2
25-9
28-8
240
15- 6
14-6
16- 5
10-8
400
49-0
35-6
32-5
26-5
26-6
210
15-6
11-6
11-4
7-9
million tonnes
1982
47-3
46-9
35-7
35-6
27-6
27-5
210
15-9
120
9-8
90
1983
55-2
46-9
33-8
30-7
290
28-8
25-3
160
11-4
11-3
9-6
Source: Department of Transport,
na = not available.
respeeuvelyinngsa3'" ^ main P°rtS ^ NOrthem Ire'and ^ handled 6 milll°n t0nnes and 3 million ton"«
Modernisation of Britain’s ports has been carried out primarily to accommodate
the growth in container and roll-on traffic, to speed the handling of bulk
commodities, and as a result of the changing nature and direction of Britain’s
trade. Many ports have modernised facilities and improved productivity by
changing port layout, introducing new handling equipment and reducing
manning levels. Recent major developments include a £32 million scheme to
provide two deep-water container berths at Felixstowe, a £7 million project for a
freight ferry terminal at Poole, an £8 million project for improved customs and
immigration facilities at Dover, and an £11 million coal-handling terminal at the
port of Tyne.
Purpose-built terminals for oil from the British sector of the North Sea have
been built at Hound Point on the Forth, on the Tees, at Flotta and at Sullom Voe
(one of the largest oil terminals in the world). Three of the four jetties at Sullom
Voe can handle oil tankers of up to 350,000 deadweight tons, and the fourth
jetty handles the export of liquefied petroleum gases and can accommodate
vessels with a capacity of up to 75,000 cubic metres. A natural gas liquids
288
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE
MERCHANT
FLEET
Ownership
SERVICES
Cargo Services
terminal is being built at Braefoot Bay in the Firth of Forth. Supply bases for
offshore vessels have been built at a number of ports, mostly on the east coast,
including Great Yarmouth, Lowestoft, Leith, Dundee, Montrose, Aberdeen,
Peterhead Bay, Invergorden and Lerwick in Shetland.
Shipping
Britain remains a leading maritime nation, and its merchant fleet has much
modern tonnage and continues to be highly efficient. However, in common with
the fleets of other developed countries, the British fleet has been adversely
affected by the world recession in shipping and increasing international
competition, and has declined substantially since its peak of 33-2 million gross
tons1 in 1975 to 19-1 million gross tons (29-9 million deadweight tons) in
mid-1983. A large tonnage of ships, particularly of tankers, has been scrapped
or sold.
In July 1983, 24-4 million deadweight tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons
and over were both owned and registered in Britain: 15-2 million tons usually
employed as tankers, 6-3 million tons as tramps and 3 0 million tons as cargo or
passenger liners or cellular container ships. The merchant fleet figure of 29-9
million deadweight tons also includes non-trading vessels, such as fishing
vessels, tugs and dredgers, and shipping registered in Britain but owned in
other Commonwealth countries.
Virtually all of the British merchant fleet is privately owned following the sale of
Sealink UK Ltd by the British Railways Board to Sea Containers in July 1984.
Nearly two-thirds of the tanker fleet belongs to the oil companies, although there
are a few independent tanker operators. British cargo liner tonnage is
dominated by a relatively small number of large groups and container consortia.
Some shipowners have delegated the management of their fleets to specialist
ship management companies. Several companies are participating in consortia,
particularly where heavy investment is required, as with container vessels.
Chartering of ships of all nationalities takes place on the Baltic Exchange,
the largest market of its type in the world. The representative body for ship¬
owners (excluding owners of fishing vessels) is the General Council of British
Shipping.
About 95 per cent of Britain's overseas trade by weight, about three-quarters by
value, is carried by sea, while the proportion of passengers travelling to or from
Britain by sea is more than one-third, compared with about one-half in the early
1960s.
In 1983 British seaborne trade amounted to 247 million tonnes (valued at
£99,400 million) or 1 million million tonne-km (551,000 million tonne-miles).
Ships registered in Britain carried 24 per cent by weight, 22 per cent in terms of
tonne-mile and 35 per cent by value. Tanker cargoes accounted for nearly half
this trade by weight, but only 18 per cent by value, and foodstuffs and
manufactured goods accounted for three-quarters by value.
Container and roll-on/roll-off vessels are responsible for a growing proportion
of general cargo trade. Many of the deep-sea liner services from Britain are
operated by container ships. Roll-on services, accommodating passengers and
their cars and, in some cases, commercial vehicles, are increasing in number,
1 One gross ton =100 cubic feet (2-83 cubic metres). One deadweight ton = 1 tonne (1,000 kg or 2,205 lb). Gross
tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed space on a ship. Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum
load which a vessel can carry before submerging the load-line.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
289
Passenger
Services
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
particularly between Britain and the continent of Europe. Several freight-only
roll-on services operate to the Irish Republic, the continent of Europe, and to
more distant countries.
British shipping companies operating liner services have associated with each
other and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in
a series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of
rates, and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential
principle of a conference is a common tariff of freight rates and other conditions
of service to be applied by each member line. There are about 100 conferences
dealing with trade to and from Britain.
Almost all of the 26-8 million passengers who arrived at or departed from British
ports in 1983 travelled to or from the continent of Europe or the Irish Republic,
services on other routes having been withdrawn as a result of the growth of air
services. Remaining long-distance passenger ships are used for cruising and in
1983 some 65,000 passengers embarked on pleasure cruises from British ports.
Traffic from the south and east of England accounts for a substantial
proportion of traffic to the continent of Europe. Sealink UK Ltd and its
continental partners (Societe Nationale des Chemins de Per Frangais, Regie des
Transports Maritimes Beiges and Stoomvaart Maatschappij Zeeland of the
Netherlands) operate about 30 ships on continental routes. Sealink UK Ltd and
the other major British operators, including Townsend Thoresen and P & O
Ferries, have invested heavily in new ships in recent years, resulting in a
substantial increase in cross-Channel ferry capacity. Competition between the
operators has led to reductions in fares on many routes.
Cross-Channel hovercraft services are provided by Hoverspeed Ltd, with
routes between Dover and Boulogne, and Dover and Calais. A hovercraft
crossing takes about one-third of the time taken by ships, and hovercraft carry
over one-quarter of the traffic on the short-sea crossings to the continent of
Europe. Hoverspeed operates seven hovercraft including two British Hovercraft
Corporation SR.N Super 4s which have been structurally enlarged so that each
accommodates 418 passengers and 55 cars, making them the largest hovercraft
in the world.
Passenger and freight ferry services are also operated to many of the offshore
islands, such as the Isle of Wight, Orkney, Shetland and a number of other
Scottish islands.
The Department of Transport is the government department responsible for
most matters connected with merchant shipping, including general policy
towards the industry and Britain’s relations with other governments and
international organisations on shipping matters. The general policy is one of
minimum intervention by the Government and the encouragement of free and
fair competition. Under the Merchant Shipping Acts the Department does,
however, administer many regulations for marine safety and welfare, and for
preventing and cleaning up pollution from ships. For instance, it certifies the
load-line (or Plimsoll line) that shows that a ship is not overloaded; ensures that
standards of safety are observed in ship construction; ensures the provision of
adequate life-saving, fire-fighting and radio equipment; and deals with the
discipline, professional standards, health and accommodation of seamen. The
Acts also contain certain reserve powers for protecting shipping and trading
interests from measures adopted or proposed by overseas governments.
Outside London the Department’s responsibilities for the enforcement of
marine safety are carried out from marine offices located at various ports. In the
offices of the Registrar General of Shipping and Seamen, at Cardiff, a record is
kept of all ships registered in Britain and its dependencies.
290
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SAFETY AT
SEA
Role of the
Government
Britain's merchant fleet is one of the safest in the world with a lower record of
ship losses than the world average.
The Coastguard Service, administered by the Department of Transport, is
responsible for initiating and co-ordinating civil marine search and rescue
action in the United Kingdom Search and Rescue Region (SRR). This is divided
into six coastguard SRRs, each controlled by a maritime rescue co-ordination
centre (MRCC) supported by sub-centres, all of which maintain continuous
telecommunications watch on marine distress frequencies. In addition, at times
of casualty risk a watch is kept at some 250 other stations around the coast. The
Coastguard Service is able to call upon the lifeboats of the Royal National
Lifeboat Institution (a voluntary body which operates 257 lifeboats), Ministry of
Defence aircraft (including helicopters from 11 airfields around the coast), a
long-range civilian helicopter based at Sumburgh (Shetland), and any other
ships or aircraft available to assist in search or rescue action. In 1983 the
Coastguard Service took action in 4,950 incidents (including cliff rescues) in
which over 8,000 people were assisted.
The lighthouse authorities (for England and Wales the Corporation of Trinity
House, for Scotland the Northern Lighthouse Board and for Ireland the
Commissioners of Irish Lights) control about 370 lighthouses, many minor
lights and buoys, and a number of lightships, some of which are being replaced
by unattended sea marks or by light towers. In Britain there are 47 pilotage
authorities for the 93 pilotage districts and about 1,260 licensed pilots. Trinity
House is the largest pilotage authority, licensing some 590 pilots in 40 districts
in England and Wales. In some cases the harbour authority or local council is
the pilotage authority.
Compliance with traffic separation schemes around the shores of Britain is
mandatory for all vessels of countries party to the 1972 International Collision
Regulations. The most important scheme affecting British waters is in the Dover
Strait, the world’s busiest seaway. It consists of traffic lanes for shipping
passing through the strait and inshore traffic zones for use by local shipping.
The number of collisions in the strait has fallen considerably since the scheme
was introduced. Britain and France operate radar surveillance of the strait to
keep watch on ships not conforming to the scheme and, through the Channel
Navigation Information Service, broadcast navigational information to ships in
the Dover Strait. The MRCC at Dover has a data-processing system for detecting
and tracking vessels automatically, making it one of the most advanced centres
in the world.
Civil Aviation
Britain’s substantial civil air transport industry is continuing to develop to meet
the generally increasing demand for air travel, particularly international travel.
Airline services are operated by British Airways and by a number of independent
airlines. The airlines are re-equipping their fleets with the most modern aircraft,
while many airports are being substantially modernised and extended.
The Secretary of State for Transport is responsible for international matters
(including negotiation of air service agreements with more than 100 other
countries, the licensing and control of public transport operations into Britain
by overseas operators and British participation in the activities of international
aviation bodies), airports policy, amenity matters (such as aircraft noise),
aviation security policy and investigation of accidents. Government policy is
directed towards creating the right conditions for the development of British
civil aviation. It has liberalised airline services within Britain and is encourag¬
ing measures to liberalise operations within the European Community.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
291
Civil Aviation
Authority
Air Traffic
British Airways
Airline
Operations
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent statutory body, responsi¬
ble for the economic, technical and operational regulation of the industry. It is
also responsible for the aerodrome navigation services at certain British airports
and, jointly with the Ministry of Defence, for the provision by the National Air
Traffic Services of air navigation services. Members of the CAA are appointed by
the Secretary of State for Transport.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1982 its primary objectives are to ensure that
British airlines provide air services to satisfy all major categories of public
demand at the .lowest charges consistent with a high standard of safety and an
economic return for efficient operators, and to further the reasonable interests
of air transport users. Other duties are to ensure that British airlines compete
effectively on international routes, to secure the most efficient use of airports in
Britain and to have regard to the need to minimise the adverse effects of civil
aviation on the environment. The Government is considering the CAA’s review,
issued in July 1984, of airline competition policy; the review was asked for by
the Government in the light of major changes in civil aviation and its plans to
privatise British Airways.
In 1983 a total of some 46-3 million passengers travelled by air (international
terminal passengers) to or from Britain, 4-8 per cent more than in 1982. Total
capacity offered on all services by British airlines amounted to 12,011 million
available-tonne-km in 1983: 8,991 million tonne-km on scheduled services and
3,020 million tonne-km on non-scheduled services. British Airways accounts for
some 73 per cent of scheduled services flown by British airlines, whereas the
charter market is dominated by the independent companies.
In 1983 the value of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air was some £21,640
million and the proportions carried by air amounted to approximately 17 per
cent of the value of exports and the same proportion of imports. Air freight is
important for the carriage of goods with a high value-to-weight ratio, especially
where speed of movement is essential. Precious stones, live animals, medicinal
and pharmaceutical products, clothing, leather and skins, and scientific
instruments are major categories where a relatively high proportion of exports is
sent by air.
British Airways is one of the world’s leading airlines, and in terms of
international passengers carried and of international passenger-km flown it is
the largest in the world. During 1983—84 British Airways’ turnover was £2,514
million (including £2,217 million from airline operations) and it recorded a net
profit of £214 million. British Airways ceased to be a statutory body on 1 April
1984 when it was re-established under the Civil Aviation Act 1980 as British
Airways PLC, a public limited company under government ownership. At the
appropriate time the Government intends to sell its shareholding in the
company to private investors.
British Airways’ route network, covering some 516,200 km (320,800 miles) of
unduplicated route, is among the largest in the world. The airline serves 120
destinations in 60 countries and in 1983-84 carried 14-2 million passengers on
scheduled services. International scheduled services are operated to the rest of
Europe, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasia, East and South Africa, and
North America. Within Britain it runs 1,050 services a week to 16 towns and
cities. Scheduled Concorde supersonic services are operated from London
(Heathrow) to New York and to Miami via Washington, crossing the North
Atlantic in about half the time taken by subsonic aircraft. Other activities
carried out include helicopter services, engine overhaul work and investments
in a number ol hotel companies and air companies in other countries.
292
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Airways operated 150 aircraft and 33 helicopters in March 1984 (see
diagram below). A large investment programme is under way to replace the older
aircraft, and orders for new aircraft include a further five Boeing 757s, 16
Boeing 737s and three HS 748s.
Independent
Airlines
The independent airlines carry 6-2 million passengers a year on scheduled
services and 13-5 million on charter flights. The main independent scheduled
airline is British Caledonian Airways, which operates a fleet of 25 aircraft and
carried 2-1 million scheduled service passengers in 1983. Its scheduled services
are primarily to the continent of Europe: North, West and Central Africa; South
America; the United States; and the Middle East and Hong Kong. Other
operators of scheduled passenger services include British Midland Airways, Air
UK and Dan-Air Services. Britannia Airways, Dan-Air Services, Monarch
Airlines and Air Europe are the leading independent airlines operating charter
passenger services.
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work, but are mainly employed on the
large-scale operations connected with the development of Britain’s offshore oil
and gas resources. Bristow Helicopters, which operates a fleet of more than 60
helicopters in Britain, is the world’s largest helicopter contracting business.
There are several scheduled helicopter passenger services in Britain, including a
link between Heathrow and Gatwick airports, and a route between Penzance and
the Isles of Scilly. Light aircraft and helicopters are also involved in other
activities, such as charter operations, search and rescue services, crop¬
spraying, and aerial survey and photography.
Aircraft and Helicopters Operated by British Airways in
March 1984
26 BAG One-Elevens
0-
28 Boeing 737s
28 Boeing 747s
6 Concordes
7 Trident Twos
17 Sikorsky 61 Ns
Other aircraft Other helicopters
5 HS748s 2 Aerospatiale 332Ls
6 Boeing V234s
1 Jet Ranger V206
4 Sikorsky S76s
3 Westland 30s
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
293
Safety
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Airports
Ownership and
Control
The CAA is responsible for air safety, both airworthiness and operational safety.
Its Operations Division deals with the preparation and application of safety
requirements concerning airline and private aviation operations, flight crew
licensing and training, aerodromes, and fire and rescue services. The Airworthi¬
ness Division is responsible for the airworthiness standards of aircraft
registered in Britain, the licensing of aircraft maintenance engineers and the
approval of work schedules to which British transport aircraft are maintained.
The CAA is advised in its airworthiness duties by the Airworthiness Require¬
ments Board.
Every company operating aircraft used for public transport must possess an
Air Operator s Certificate which is granted by the CAA when it is satisfied that
the operator is competent to secure the safe operation of its aircraft. The CAA's
flight operations inspectors (who are experienced airline pilots) check that
satisfactory operating standards are maintained.
Each member of the flight crew of a British registered aircraft must hold the
appropriate official licence issued by the CAA. Except for pilots with acceptable
military or other qualifying experience, all applicants for a first professional
pilot s licence must have undertaken a full-time course of ground and flying
instruction at a training body approved by the CAA.
Responsibility for civil and military air traffic control over Britain and the
surrounding seas rests with the National Air Traffic Services (NATS). The
Controller of the NATS reports to both the CAA and the Ministry of Defence. The
function of the NATS is to secure the safe, orderly and expeditious flow of air
traffic within British airspace. It also provides air traffic services for aircraft
flying over the north-eastern quarter of the North Atlantic. At some 19 civil
aerodromes, including most of the major British airports, the NATS provides the
navigation services necessary for the operation of aircraft taking off and landing,
and integrates them into the flow of traffic within British airspace. To provide
its services, the NATS uses radar, some 100 navigational beacons, landing aids,
air/ground communications and an extensive telecommunications network.
Of the 128 licensed civil aerodromes in Britain, about one-fifth each handles
more than 100,000 passengers a year. In 1983 Britain’s civil airports handled a
total of 62-3 million passengers (61 1 million terminal passengers and 1-2
million in transit), and 725,900 tonnes of freight. London's Heathrow airport is
the world's busiest airport for international travel, and is Britain’s most
important airport for passengers and air freight, handling 27-1 million
passengers and 465,400 tonnes of freight in 1983. Gatwick, the second
major airport in the London area, and the world's fifth busiest international
airport, handled 12-6 million passengers in 1983. Other leading airports are
Manchester, Glasgow, Luton, Aberdeen, Birmingham, Belfast (Aldergrove),
Newcastle upon Tyne and Edinburgh.
The British Airports Authority (BAA), a statutory body, owns and manages seven
airports—Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted in south-east England, and
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Prestwick and Aberdeen in Scotland—which handle
about 75 per cent of air passengers and 86 per cent of air cargo traffic in
Britain. In 1983-84 the BAA’s income was £316 million and it recorded a pre¬
tax operating profit of £49-5 million. The Government is considering various
ways of introducing private capital into the BAA.
Belfast’s airport is managed by Northern Ireland Airports Ltd, a subsidiary of
the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. Sumburgh airport and seven
aerodromes in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland are controlled by the CAA.
294
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Most of the other public airports are controlled by local authorities. Except for
those controlled by the CAA, all airports used for public transport and training
flights must be licensed by the CAA. Stringent requirements, such as the
provision of adequate fire-fighting, medical and rescue services, suitable
physical characteristics and visual aids, must be satisfied before a licence is
granted. Strict aviation security measures are in force.
The Government’s policy is that the growing demand for air transport facilities
in south-east England should be met by the provision of additional capacity at
existing airports, especially at Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted. It is also
encouraging the maximum use of regional airports.
A fourth major terminal nearing completion at Heathrow will raise the
airport’s capacity from 30 million to 38 million passengers a year and is due to
open in late 1985. At Gatwick a £100 million redevelopment programme has
been completed, increasing the airport’s annual capacity to some 16 million
passengers. A second passenger terminal, which will ultimately increase
Gatwick’s capacity to about 25 million passengers a year, should be in operation
by 1987. The BAA is proposing to build a new terminal and associated facilities
at Stansted which would increase the airport’s capacity to 15 million passengers
a year. Its planning application has been examined at a public inquiry.
Work is in progress to develop facilities at several of Britain’s other airports. A
new £55 million terminal complex at Birmingham airport able to handle up to 3
million passengers a year was officially opened in May 1984. Other schemes
include major expansion of existing terminals at Luton, Belfast (Aldergrove) and
Leeds-Bradford airports (where a runway extension scheme is also in progress).
Communications
Telecommunications is one of the most rapidly growing sectors of the economy.
The Government has introduced two major Acts to establish a new framework
for telecommunications in Britain.
The British Telecommunications Act 1981 separated the Post Office into two
corporations, one for postal and banking services and the other for telecom¬
munications (British Telecom). It also promoted the introduction of competition
into the market for the supply of telecommunications equipment, the provision
of certain telecommunications services and the running of telecommunications
networks. Under the Act, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has
licensed Mercury Communications Ltd to run a second national network in
competition with that run by British Telecom, and two further companies, Racal
Vodafone Ltd and Telecom Securicor Cellular Radio Ltd, to provide competing
national cellular radio networks. He has issued a general licence to permit
private sector firms to pro /ide value added services over British Telecom’s public
network. Some 83 service providers have been licensed to offer over 330 services.
In addition, private sector firms are able to supply, install and maintain
equipment attached to British Telecom’s network.
The Telecommunications Act 1984 strengthened the measures taken to
promote competition. It removes British Telecom’s statutory monopoly to
provide telecommunications services and establishes arrangements for the
licensing of all telecommunications systems including that of British Telecom.
These licences are being issued by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry
or, subject to his authority, by the Director General of Telecommunications
(head of a new Office of Telecommunications). The Director General is required,
among other things, to ensure that licensees comply with the conditions of their
licences; to promote the interests of telecommunications users, including the
investigation of complaints; and to monitor telecommunications activities in
Britain. In British Telecom’s case the conditions of its licence contain certain
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
295
BRITISH
TELECOM
Telephone
Services
Exchanges
Transmission
obligations such as the provision of services throughout Britain including
services to rural areas, the provision of public call boxes, a free-of-charge
emergency service, and the provision of certain services and apparatus for the
disabled.
Under the Telecommunications Act 1984 British Telecom was reconstituted
as a public limited company in August 1984. The Government plans to sell 51
per cent of the ordinary voting shares of the new company on the market in
autumn 1984.
Britain has the world’s sixth largest public telecommunications business. There
are some 29 million telephones, 20 million exchange connections, 95,300 telex
connections and 101,900 data transmission terminals (more than in any
country except the United States). British Telecom (formally known as British
Telecommunications), established under the British Telecommunications Act
1981 to operate telecommunications and data-processing services, employs
241,100 people, has assets of £9,200 million, and runs eight factories. In
1983-84 its turnover totalled £6,876 million and profits, after interest
payments, amounted to £990 million.
In 1983-84 some 22,681 million internal telephone calls were made in Britain
(18,750 million local calls and 3,931 million trunk calls); some 369 million
international calls were also handled by British Telecom. Customers dial
virtually all local and trunk telephone calls, and about 98 per cent of
international calls. Britain’s telephone customers can dial direct to 158
countries.
Several specialised services are available by telephone, including the ‘999’
emergency dialling service enabling customers to be connected rapidly and free
of charge to the police, ambulance or fire services. British Telecom provides a
number of‘Guidelines’ services, the most popular being ‘Timeline’ (the Speaking
Clock). A radiopaging service, providing direct dialling access over the public
telephone network to small lightweight portable receivers, has been extended to
the whole of Britain to form one of the largest networks of its kind in the world.
Bureaufax’, an international facsimile service, provides high-speed links from a
number of cities to 61 other countries.
Nearly 1,900 electronic exchanges are in use and some 250 more have been
ordered. They are more reliable than conventional electro-mechanical ex¬
changes, they have very few moving parts and so require less maintenance. Most
electronic exchanges are of the TXE2 type, with a capacity of up to 7,000 lines,
or of the TXE4 type, with a capacity of up to 40,000 lines. A series of new
switching and associated systems for telephone exchanges, known as System X,
using microelectronics technology, integrated digital transmission and switch¬
ing, stored program (software) control and common channel signalling, has
been developed. British Telecom plans to install some 1,200 System X local
exchanges and 30 trunk exchanges by the end of 1987. A smaller electronic
exchange, the UXD5B, will bring the advantages of digital switching to smaller
rural communities; 400 are on order.
Digital transmission, in which telephone speech signals flow as a stream of
on/off electrical impulses, is being increasingly used instead of traditional
analogue transmission because of its many advantages, such as improved
speech quality, reliability and the ability to combine voice and data transmission
over the same links. British Telecom is extending digital transmission through
Britain’s cable and microwave transmission links and already has one of the
world s most extensive digital transmission networks. There are more than
296
Overseas
Services
Prestel
Data
Communi¬
cations
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
8,000 digital systems in the junction network interconnecting local exchanges,
amounting in length to some 214,000 km (133,000 miles).
Optical fibres (very thin strands of glass capable of carrying large numbers of
telephone calls simultaneously) are helping to improve transmission; they are
smaller than conventional cables and require less amplifying equipment to boost
long-distance calls. By mid-1984 some 70,000 km (43,500 miles) of fibre had
been ordered, to be made up into over 6,650 km (4,130 miles) of cable. Over
377 km (234 miles) of cable have been brought into service, including one of the
world's longest optical fibre links, stretching 205 km (127 miles) from London to
Birmingham.
The demand for international calls is doubling every four or five years and
British Telecom International (responsible for British Telecom’s international
links) has increased substantially the amount of equipment in its international
exchanges. In March 1984 there were some 27,300 cable and satellite circuits
linking Britain with other countries compared with nearly 3,000 in 1970. A
substantial proportion of the intercontinental telephone traffic to or from
Britain is carried by satellite. Britain has the second largest interest in the
International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (INTELSAT) and is the
third largest shareholder in the International Maritime Satellite Organisation
(INMARSAT). Satellite earth stations at Goonhilly in Cornwall and Madley near
Hereford provide access to the geostationary satellites which form the basis for
both systems. Between them the earth stations operate about 7,750 circuits via
five satellite paths to over 80 countries. British Telecom International is also the
joint largest shareholder in Eutelsat, a European organisation with over 20
members established to manage the European Communications Satellite
project. The system is planned to be fully operational later in 1984.
There are 30 submarine cables from Britain to the continent of Europe, the
Irish Republic and the Faroe Islands, and three cables from Britain to North
America.
British Telecom's ‘Prestel’, the world’s first public viewdata service, was
inaugurated in 1979. It enables information and messages to be transmitted
through the telephone network from a computer for display on a suitably
equipped television set in words, figures and simple graphics. Some 321,000
pages' of information are available from over 1,200 sources on a wide range of
subjects. Prestel has more than 43,000 sets attached to its network and is the
largest information service of its kind in the world. Its ‘Gateway’ facility connects
private computer databases to the Prestel database and allows a wide range of
services (such as booking holidays and travel tickets or placing an immediate
order with a mail order company). ‘Homelink’, a joint venture between Prestel,
the Nottingham Building Society and the Bank of Scotland for an electronic
home banking service, was inaugurated in 1983. Other Prestel services include
‘Skytrack’, an airline reservation system for travel agents, and ‘Micronet 800’, a
telesoftware service whereby microcomputer users can obtain access to a library
of software programs held on Prestel.
Prestel software has been sold to telecommunications authorities in a number
of countries. In 1981 British Telecom opened Prestel to overseas access as the
first international public viewdata service. Direct access is available from
anywhere in the world and the service is being used in 24 countries.
British Telecom’s ‘Datel’ services provide for transmission of information for
computers and other automatic processors at speeds from 200 up to 9,600 bits a
second over the public telephone network and up to 48,000 bits a second on
private networks. Datel services are available internationally at speeds up to
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
297
Telex
Telegrams
PRIVATE
TELECOMMUNI¬
CATIONS
SERVICES
THE POST
OFFICE
2,400 bits a second. The services consist of a suitable telegraph or telephone line
and, when necessary, a modem (which converts digital signals into voice
frequencies for transmission). In 1982 British Telecom inaugurated a new range
of digital transmission services known as ‘X-Stream’ to meet business needs.
Packet SwitchStream’, its commercial packet switching service for computer
data, covers all the main centres of Britain and an international service is also
available with a number of other countries including Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Japan and the United States. Other X-Stream services
include ‘MegaStrearn (a private circuit service for wideband voice and data
communications), KiloStream’ (a private circuit service with additional facili¬
ties), and ‘SatStream’, a service offering private digital communications using
small-dish earth terminals located on or near customers' premises to provide
satellite access.
The telex service is fully automatic. Customers can dial direct to 183 countries
and over 99 per cent of all international calls are dialled direct. Britain’s first
computer-controlled telex exchange handling international automatic calls was
installed in London in 1978 and a second was brought into operation in 1982.
Teletex , a very fast form of telex capable of transmitting messages at up to 3,500
words a minute (as against 80 for telex), will be introduced during 1984.
International telegrams are transmitted through a computer-controlled Tele¬
gram Retransmission Centre in London. It is one of the largest in the world, and
has direct access via satellite, cable and radio circuits to 92 terminals in 81
countries.
Cable and Wireless PLC provides or manages a wide range of telecommunica¬
tions activities, mostly overseas in over 60 countries. The company used to be in
the public sector, but the Government has reduced its shareholding to 23 per
cent. Mercury Communications Ltd, owned by a consortium of British
Petroleum and Cable and Wireless,1 operates under licence as the second
telecommunications carrier in Britain. Initially it is concentrating on domestic
business communications and its optical fibre and satellite trunk system should
be completed in 1985. It is developing satellite links, using earth stations in
London’s Docklands and at Tackley (Oxfordshire).
The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered postal services and was the first to
issue adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance payment for mail. The Royal
Mail provides deliveries to 23 million addresses and handles 40 million letters
and parcels each working day (10,000 million items a year). Mail is collected
from over 100,000 posting boxes, as well as from post offices and large postal
users. The Post Office has a monopoly on the conveyance of letters, but under
the British Telecommunications Act 1981 the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry has the power to suspend the monopoly in certain areas or for certain
categories of mail and to license others to provide competing services. The
Secretary of State has relaxed the monopoly on letters subject to a minimum fee
of £1, and has issued general licences enabling mail to be transferred between
document exchanges and allowing charitable organisations to carry Christmas
and New Year cards.
Mechanisation of mail handling is in progress and 64 of the 80 offices planned
to take over the work of hundreds of sorting offices handling letters manually are
in operation. All addresses in Britain have a postcode and the British system is
the most sophisticated in the world, allowing mechanised sorting down to part
Cable and Wireless is to purchase British Petroleum's 50 per cent interest in Mercury Communications.
298
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Specialist
Services
of a street on a postman’s round and, in some cases, to an individual address.
Some 35 large parcel centres, each serving a group of counties, have taken over
the work of 1,200 offices which handled parcels manually.
As well as postal and National Girobank services, post offices handle a wide
range of transactions. In much of its counter service the Post Office acts as agent
for government departments and local authorities. In February 1984 the Post
Office announced a scheme for introducing new technology into its counter
services. The modernised network will reduce costs and raise productivity, while
providing an improved range of services to customers. There are 22,500 post
offices, of which 1,600 are operated directly by the Post Office and the remainder
on an agency basis by sub-postmasters.
The Post Office provides a range of specialist services. ‘Datapost’, a door-to-door
delivery service, has overnight links throughout Britain and international
services to 45 countries including most of Europe and North America. An
‘Expresspost’ messenger service provides a rapid delivery within or between
some 80 main cities and towns in Britain. ‘Intelpost’, the world’s first
international public facsimile transmission service sending letters and other
documents by satellite, provides high-speed electronic mail links between 100
towns and cities in Britain as well as to and from the United States and a
number of other countries. The Philatelic Bureau in Edinburgh handles about
one-third of the Post Office’s philatelic business, much of it involving sales to
overseas collectors or dealers. The British Postal Consultancy Service offers
advice and assistance on all aspects of postal business to overseas postal
administrations, and over 35 countries have used its services since 1965.
16 Employment
TRENDS IN
EMPLOYMENT
UNEMPLOY¬
MENT
As a major industrial country, Britain has a labour force with high levels of
technical and commercial skill, but it is acknowledged that the increasing pace
of technological change calls for even greater flexibility in the workforce and
improvements in training, if the opportunities arising from new technologies
are to be fully exploited. Britain, in common with other industrialised countries,
has suffered in recent years from high levels of unemployment (in July 1984, 3 1
million or 12-9 per cent of the working population were unemployed). The
long-term solution to this lies in economic growth, which in turn depends upon
low inflation, financial stability and efficient, competitive industries. However,
the Government also has an important role to play in helping to improve the
flexibility of the labour market by encouraging the modernisation of training
provisions and making training more relevant to industry’s needs, promoting
enterprise and geographical mobility, maintaining an effective regional aid
policy, encouraging greater wage flexibility, and improving the framework of
industrial relations. In addition, it has introduced an extensive range of special
employment and training measures to help, in particular, young people and the
long-term unemployed.
The total workforce in September 1983 was 26-5 million (60 per cent of the total
population aged 16 and over) of whom 20-8 million (11-8 million men and 9
million women) were classed as employees in employment (see Table 28). The
percentage of women in employment (particularly those working part-time)
continues to rise, although at a reduced rate compared with previous years. The
great majority of the working population work for a wage or salary, but over 2
million are self-employed. Despite the increase in the population of working age,
the labour force has not grown in the early 1980s.
The distribution of employees by industry in 1973 and 1983 is shown in Table
29. There has been a substantial change in the pattern of employment during
the last two decades. Employment in manufacturing has been falling from a
peak reached in 1966 and employment in services has risen sharply, by some
1 -25 million between 1973 and 1983. Higher living standards and technological
developments have stimulated the growth of a number of service industries
while automation has increased efficiency and reduced the demand for labour in
manufacturing.
With some fluctuations unemployment rose sharply during the 1970s and by
1983 had reached the highest level since the 1930s, although the rate of
increase slowed during 1983. While remaining relatively low in parts of the
south of England, it has been consistently higher in areas with the greatest
dependence on traditional industries and, latterly, in areas like the West
Midlands with a high concentration of manufacturing industry. Government
measures to assist the unemployed have been expanded and are expected to cost
some £2,000 million in 1984-85.
Special emphasis has been placed on schemes for unemployed young people
and especially school-leavers, whose numbers have grown partly because of the
birth-rate bulge of the 1960s but mainly due to the general increase in
unemployment. Intended primarily as a measure to improve vocational educa¬
tion and training, the Youth Training Scheme, introduced in 1983, guarantees
300
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 28: Manpower in Britain 1973—83
Thousands
Year
(Sept)
Employees
in
employ¬
ment3
Self-
employed
Unem¬
ployed b
Total
Armed working
forces population
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
22,753
22,935
22,720
22,601
22,692
22,903
23,246
22,749
21,799
21,151
20,843
2,023
1,996
1,983
1,938
1,904
1,903
1,930
2,037
2,118‘
2,118(
2,118'
531
622
1,093
1,388
1,514
1,418
1,292
1,891
2,749
3,066
3,167
358
347
340
338
328
320
319
332
335
323
325
25,665
25,900
26,136
26,265
26,438
26,544
26,787
27,009
27,001
26,658
26,453
Source: Department of Employment.
a Part-time workers are counted as full units.
b Excluding adult students.
“'September 1981 estimate.
a full year's vocational training to 16- and 17-year-old school-leavers in Great
Britain who cannot find a job. Some 350,000 young people joined the scheme in
its first year and in 1984—85, when the scheme is expected to cost up to £900
million, there will be a period of consolidation, with an emphasis on improving
the quality of training. In Northern Ireland a broadly comparable Youth Training
Programme is in operation, providing some 15,000 places in 1984—85.
One of the aims of the new training initiative (see p 303), of which the Youth
Training Scheme is part, is to reach the position where all young people under
18 have the opportunity of continuing in full-time education or entering a period
of planned work experience combined with work-related training and education.
A Young Workers’ Scheme encourages employers to take on more young people
at wage rates which reflect their lack of training and relative inexperience.
Employers who satisfy the criteria of the scheme can claim £15 a week for each
young employee earning £50 or less a week, for up to one year. Under the
Community Industry Scheme, unemployed young people who suffer additional
personal or social disadvantages undertake projects of benefit to the commun¬
ity: the scheme is mainly financed through a grant to the National Association of
Youth Clubs, which employs both the adult staff and young people.
While it recognises that special measures cannot achieve as much for the adult
unemployed as for the young, the Government wants to ease the transition as far
as possible to a situation where new jobs can be founded on sound economic
development. The emphasis in adult schemes is placed on work of environmen¬
tal improvement, with encouragement for projects arranged by voluntary
agencies. The Community Programme for the longer-term unemployed is based
upon projects for community work put forward by sponsors such as local
authorities, voluntary organisations and the churches. Other measures for the
adult unemployed include: a scheme to encourage employers to use short-time
working as an alternative to redundancies: a job release' scheme to encourage
older workers to take early retirement and release jobs for unemployed people: a
job introduction’ scheme for disabled people: a scheme to encourage job
‘splitting' or sharing: and support for training places in industry. Following an
EMPLOYMENT
301
experimental period in five areas, the Enterprise Allowance Scheme, to
encourage the growth of new businesses, has been extended to the whole of
Britain. Under the scheme longer-term unemployed people can claim an
allowance of £40 a week while they start a new business. Various other
government measures to stimulate economic activity by assistance and en¬
couragement to small firms and the establishment of enterprise zones may
assist job creation.
Table 29: Analysis of Civil Employment in Britain 1973 and 1983
June 1973 June 1983a
Industry or service Thousands Percent Thousands Percent
Employees in employment
Primary sector
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Energy and water supply
Manufacturing industries
Non-fuel minerals and ores
extraction, metal manufacturing
and non-metallic mineral
products
Chemicals and man-made fibres
Mechanical engineering
Office machinery, data-
processing equipment, electrical
and electronic engineering
Motor vehicles and transport
equipment
Food, drink and tobacco
Textiles, leather and clothing
Other manufactures
Construction
Services
Distributive trades
Hotels and catering
Transport and communications
Banking and finance
Public administration
Education
Health
Other services
421 1-9
721 3-3
789 3-6
426 1-9
1,040 4-7
1,000 4-5
916 41
759 3-4
981 4-4
1,781 80
1,279 5-8
3,084 13-9
795 3-6
1,484 6-7
1,422 6-4
1,839 8-3
1,387 6-3
1,003 4-5
1,054 4-8
339 1-6
653 3-1
465 2-2
346 1-7
789 3-8
824 4-0
628 30
623 3 0
540 2-6
1,325 6-4
991 4-8
3,172 15-3
962 4-6
1,313 6-3
1,811 8-7
1,834 8-8
1,543 7-4
1,292 6-2
1,294 6-2
Total employees
Self-employed
22,183
1,969
100
20,744
2,260
100
Total in civil employment
24,152
23,004
Source: Department of Employment.
a Provisional estimates.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
302
FINDING
EMPLOYMENT
Employment
Services
Services for
Disabled People
Geographical
Mobility
Schemes
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Great Britain the Department of Employment is generally responsible for
employment policy and for the payment of unemployment benefit, while the
Manpower Services Commission (MSC) advises the Government on manpower
policy issues.
The MSC, on which employers, trade unions, local authorities and education¬
al interests are represented, is separate from the Government but accountable to
the Secretaries of State for Employment, Scotland and Wales. Scottish and
Welsh committees of the MSC consider special Scottish and Welsh aspects of
manpower issues. Most of the MSC’s activities are financed from public funds. It
is advised by a network of area manpower boards on which employers,
employees and other local interests are represented.
The MSC’s main duty is to help people to select, train for, obtain and retain
jobs, and to assist employers to obtain employees. The services in Northern
Ireland are run on similar lines by the Department of Economic Development.
The main public employment services (other than the careers service) are
provided in Great Britain by the MSC’s Employment Division which offers a
comprehensive service for employers needing staff and for people, whether or
not already in employment, seeking jobs. It operates through a network of about
1,000 local ‘jobcentres’ (often with self-service facilities for job-seekers) which
handle all occupations except professional, scientific, technical and managerial,
for which the MSC’s Professional and Executive Recruitment is responsible.
Registration for employment is voluntary for all unemployed people, whether
or not they wish to claim benefits. In the year to March 1984, 2 million vacancies
were notified and 1-65 million people were placed in employment (including
job-seekers who were placed in a job more than once during the year).
The public employment service has long provided a resettlement service to
disabled people. Specially trained Disablement Resettlement Officers advise on
rehabilitation and training courses and on the comprehensive range of special
schemes and facilities available. They can also advise employers about em¬
ploying disabled people, and the grants available for adaptation to premises and
equipment so that they can employ or retrain a disabled person. In 1983—84 the
MSC found jobs for some 72,000 disabled people. The Disabled Persons
(Employment) Act 1944 requires employers who employ 20 or more people to
include 3 per cent registered disabled people within their workforce. As part of
its ‘Fit for Work’ campaign to improve the employment prospects of disabled
people, the MSC runs a scheme of annual awards to give public recognition to
firms which excel in carrying out constructive policies on the employment of
disabled people.
The MSC’s Employment Division runs a network of 27 Employment Rehabi¬
litation Centres, which provide facilities for those who have been ill or injured or
are handicapped to return to working fitness (some 15,000 a year). The Division
also supports a number of agency centres run by local authorities and voluntary
bodies specialising in the employment rehabilitation of the blind, the mentally ill
and people with cerebral palsy.
Sheltered employment is provided for the severely disabled in Great Britain by
Remploy Ltd, a non-profit-making company, and in Northern Ireland by Ulster
Sheltered Employment Ltd, a company constituted similarly to Remploy, and by
local authorities and voluntary organisations. Sheltered Employment Procure¬
ment and Consultancy Services (a unit of the MSC) offers consultancy, and other
services, to sheltered workshops.
In order to help to fill vacancies which cannot be filled locally, the MSC can
provide grants, allowances and other financial help under the Job Search and
Employment Transfer Schemes to assist people who are unemployed, or under
EMPLOYMENT
303
Professional
and
Executive
Recruitment
Careers Service
TRAINING
SERVICES
threat of redundancy, to look for and move to jobs in other areas. The help
available includes the cost of attending interviews, visiting new areas to look for
work, and living away from home and moving home to the new area. The
National Mobility Scheme makes movement easier for public sector housing
tenants in England and Wales. Similar aims in Scotland are promoted by
provisions in the Tenants’ Rights (Scotland) Act 1980.
Professional and Executive Recruitment (PER) is a specialist branch of the MSC
which helps employers looking for professional, managerial, scientific or
technical staff and assists people seeking employment at this level. PER operates
nationally, through a network of offices, and offers a comprehensive recruitment
service based on a weekly jobs newspaper which is issued to all enrolled
job-seekers, for whom the service is free.
Local education authorities must under the Employment and Training Act 1973
provide a careers service to include vocational guidance for people attending all
educational institutions (except universities, which have their own careers
service) and an employment service for those leaving them. Authorities may also
provide an employment service for other people, mainly young people in their
early post-school years. The employment service provided by the MSC’s
Employment Division is also available to young people.
The careers services in Wales and Scotland are the responsibility of the
appropriate Secretary of State. In Northern Ireland it is an integral part of the
Department of Economic Development.
The MSC Careers and Occupational Information Centre publishes a wide
range of material to help people looking for jobs to make an informed choice, and
distributes careers literature to some 15,000 schools, careers offices and other
centres.
The main responsibility for carrying out industrial and commercial training lies
with individual employers, but in recent years the MSC, with government
support, has evolved a comprehensive strategy to help to improve the supply of
trained manpower needed by the economy, to provide opportunities for people to
acquire new skills, and to improve the effectiveness of training generally. The
MSC s Training Division is responsible for putting those programmes into
effect. In 1981 the Government announced a new initiative on training, spelling
out three important objectives for the 1980s and beyond: better arrangements
for skilled training to agreed standards; improving the vocational education and
training of all young people; and opening up more opportunities for adults to
train. The new Youth Training Scheme is seen as an important step towards
improving vocational education and training for young people; in addition, a
target date of 1985 has been set for achieving general acceptance of recognised
standards for all the main craft, technical and professional skills to replace
time-serving and age-restricted apprenticeships. There is also an Open Tech
Programme to make training at a technical and supervisory level accessible to all
adults who can benefit from it. The programme has features such as flexibility
over timing and location of study, and the use of a wide range of learning
materials including printed texts, audio-visual components and direct personal
tuition.
Proposals for further reform of training arrangements were published in 1984
under which the MSC would be given responsibility for part of the spending on
work-related further education, and the adult training programme would be
restructured by offering training more closely directed towards the skills needed
by employers and more training at the basic level for unemployed people who
need it to help them to find work.
304
Technical and
Vocational
Education
Initiative
Training
Opportunities
Scheme
Training
Services to
Employers
CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are a number of statutory training boards, which raise funds by a levy
on employers within the industry, and other industrial training organisations
concerned with the promotion of training within their respective industries.
Under a new Technical and Vocational Education Initiative a number of pilot
projects were established in England and Wales in September 1983 to last at
least five years, providing full-time integrated courses of general technical and
vocational education to 14- to 18-year-olds, and leading to recognised technical
qualifications. Entry to the projects, which are run by the MSC in co-operation
with local education authorities and make use of existing schools and colleges,
is voluntary. The scheme was extended to Scotland in 1984.
The Training Opportunities Scheme (TOPS) complements the training given in
industry and commerce by providing people aged 19 and over with the
opportunity to acquire new skills. Training is carried out in a nationwide
network of ‘skillcentres- under the control of the MSC’s Skillcentre Training
Agency and at many colleges and employers’ establishments. Skillcentre courses
concentrate mainly on engineering and electrical and electronic trades and
those elsewhere on clerical and commercial, management, technician and other
skills. Special priority has been given to expanding and developing technician
training and, in particular, electronics engineering courses with microprocessor
applications. About 500 different courses are available in a wide range of
occupations. Trainees are paid allowances which vary with domestic responsibi¬
lities and which may include travelling expenses and lodging and meals
allowances. Some 80,000 adults entered training under TOPS in 1983—84.
Through its training services to employers the MSC provides training in a wide
range of trades designed to equip selected employees with new or improved skills
of direct and immediate benefit to their companies. This training, specially
tailored to the employer’s needs, is carried out either at the local skillcentre or in
the company’s own workshop. The MSC also provides regular courses in
instructional techniques for skilled craftsmen and programmes of training in
supervisory skills in the broad areas of leadership and safety. Training services
at skillcentres and courses at instructor training colleges are also available to
trainees from overseas.
Britain has been a pioneer in the introduction of protective legislation for the
safety, health and welfare of employees. The determination by statute of
minimum wages, holidays and holiday pay is limited to certain trades and
industries where the organisation of employers or workers, or both, is
inadequate to negotiate collective agreements and to ensure their observance.
The Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 provides considerable
safeguards for employees. For example, most employees are entitled to receive
from their employers written information on their terms and conditions of
employment, disciplinary rules and the procedure available to employees
wishing to raise complaints; minimum periods of notice when employment is to
be terminated are also laid down for both employers and employees. Employees
with a minimum period of service of two years are entitled to lump-sum
redundancy payments if their jobs cease to exist (for example, because of
technological improvements or a fall in demand) and their employers cannot
offer suitable alternative work, the cost being partly met from a fund subscribed
to by both sides of industry. Protection against unfair dismissal is provided by
machinery under which an employee who has been in continuous employment
for one year or more (two years or more if working for a company employing 20 or
fewer people) may complain against an employer of unfair dismissal, and, if
EMPLOYMENT
305
Immigrant
Workers
Discrimination
Employment of
Women and
Children
successful, obtain reinstatement, re-engagement or compensation. Legal sup¬
port is given to the right to trade union organisation (with certain exceptions) by
making it unfair to dismiss a person because of membership or participation in
the activities of an independent trade union; rights of employees are also
protected in regard to penalisation short of dismissal because of trade union
membership or activities. Other rights include limited payment when work is
not available for reasons other than as a result of a strike, lock-out or other
industrial action, and maternity rights for female employees, including protec¬
tion from dismissal because of pregnancy, time off for antenatal care, maternity
pay for the first six weeks of absence, and the right, within certain limits, to
return to work after confinement.
In general, people coming to Britain for employment need a work permit issued
by the Department of Employment. People admitted as holders of work permits
may change their jobs only with the approval of the Department of Employment,
but the Home Office will consider an application to remove the conditions
attached to their stay after four years in approved employment, and, if granted, a
worker may change employment without restriction. Among other conditions,
work permits are issued only for work requiring a recognised professional
qualification, or a high degree of skill or experience, where the Department of
Employment is satisfied that the worker is necessary and there is no suitable
worker in Britain or in other European Community countries to fill the post,
and where the wages and conditions are not less favourable than for similar
work. In general, the age limits for permits in most categories are 23-54 years.
People coming for certain kinds of specialist employment (for example, doctors
or dentists taking up professional appointments; ministers of religion; repre¬
sentatives of overseas newspapers, news agencies or broadcasting organisa¬
tions; the self-employed) do not require work permits but may require entry
clearances issued by a British Consulate or High Commission.
Permits are also issued under the Training and Work Experience Scheme for
nationals of countries outside the European Community who are undertaking
limited periods of training or work experience leading to the acquisition of a
particular occupational skill or qualification and to young people from outside
the European Community to undertake short periods of employment to broaden
their industrial or commercial experience and, if appropriate, to improve their
knowledge of English.
European Community workers entering another member state have the same
rights as nationals of that state as regards facilities of the national employment
services, pay and working conditions, trade union rights, vocational training
and retraining facilities, access to housing and property, and social security and
industrial injury benefits.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes it unlawful to discriminate on grounds of
colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin, in
employment, training and related matters. The Department of Employment
operates a Race Relations Employment Advisory Service with advisers based in
the main areas where ethnic minorities have settled. Its general aim is to
promote equal opportunity in employment and its advisers offer help and
guidance to employers and unions on a wide range of issues which arise in the
employment of a multiracial workforce. A government code of practice,
introduced in 1984, makes employers responsible for the introduction of
systematic good practice in the employment of ethnic minority groups.
Legislation forbids any employment of children under 14 years of age, and
employment in any industrial undertaking of children who have not reached the
statutory minimum school-leaving age (16); of women and young people
306
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Earnings
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay
underground in mines and in certain other dangerous occupations (for
example, certain processes connected with lead manufacture); and of women in
factories and workshops within four weeks after childbirth. It also limits and
defines the permissible hours of employment for women and young people.
The employment provisions of the Sex Discrimination Act make it unlawful to
discriminate on the grounds of sex or marital status in employment, training
and related matters. The Equal Pay Act 1970 requires that a woman doing the
same or broadly similar work as a man, or work that has been given equal value
by job evaluation, should receive equal pay and conditions of employment.
Pay rates for manual occupations, and increasingly for non-manual occupa¬
tions, are normally set by collective bargaining (see p 311). In a few industries
and trades legally enforceable minimum rates are set by wages councils.
Basic rates of pay vary widely, and in private industry rates paid locally often
exceed the rates specified in national agreements. Higher rates are usually paid
for overtime and shift work, and weekly earnings may be further increased by
incentive bonus schemes.
According to the latest available information from the Department of
Employment’s New Earnings Survey, the average weekly earnings in April 1983
of full-time male workers aged 21 and over were, including overtime, £167-50,
while for full-time female workers aged 18 and over they were £108-80. Women’s
earnings are thus markedly lower than those of men, partly because on average
they work shorter hours, with less overtime paid at premium rates, and partly
because they tend to be concentrated in the less well-paid jobs.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally
by annual salary paid monthly, often on a scale carrying annual increments.
Starting salaries may be in the range of £3,500 to £4,000 (lower for 16- to
18-year-old trainees and higher for some graduates). Most of the senior posts in
business, the professions and the Civil Service command salaries in the range of
£15,000 to £30,000 a year gross before tax. The posts with salaries in the range
of £30,000 to £75,000 a year include those of Cabinet ministers, top-ranking
judicial appointments, the highest positions in government departments and
the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers, leading members
of professions and the higher managerial posts in industry, commerce and
banking. Salaries of chairmen of major companies often exceed £75,000 a year,
and other people such as star entertainers often receive more through fees or
fixed contracts.
The basic working week in Great Britain is in the range 37-5 to 40 hours for
manual work and 35 to 38 for non-manual work; a five-day week is usually
worked. Actual hours worked differ from basic hours; in 1983 they were 41-5 for
men compared with 37-2 for women. Men and women in non-manual
occupations generally work less overtime than manual workers.
National legislation limits and defines permissible hours of work for women
and young people in industrial work—the maximum, with limited exceptions,
being 48 hours a week and 10 hours a day (9 hours a day for 6-day-week
workers) in premises covered by the Factories Act for adult women over 18 and
young people between 16 and 18. The employment of women and young people
at night is in principle prohibited in industrial undertakings, except for young
men over 16 working in some continuous-process industries (subject to certain
conditions). The Health and Safety Executive can make exemptions from these
restrictions to maintain or increase efficiency. In general, the hours of work of
adult men, or of people not working in factories, are not restricted by statute.
Apart from industries where conditions are controlled by wages councils (see
p 313), there are no general statutory entitlements to holidays, and holiday
EMPLOYMENT
307
Additional
Benefits
Employers ’
Health Service
Other
Amenities
Human
Relations in
Industry
TRADE UNIONS
entitlements are normally determined by collective agreements. These generally
provide for at least lour weeks paid holiday a year, and over 60 per cent of
manual workers covered by agreements have entitlements of more than four
weeks. Non-manual workers tend to have longer holidays than manual workers.
Additional holidays, dependent upon length of service, are also quite common.
Additional benefits exist in varying degrees. About half of employees in
employment are covered by pension schemes provided by their employers. Many
employees are also covered by occupational sick pay schemes which are
additional or complementary to the state schemes, and by schemes to provide
private medical treatment. A smaller number are covered by schemes for
redundancy payments above the statutory minimum. Such benefits are more
usual among clerical and professional employees receiving a standard salary
than among manual workers. Employees may have use of a company car and
some firms provide profit-sharing and share-saving schemes. In accord with its
view that share ownership and profit-sharing can help in developing employees’
understanding of, and commitment to, business and industry, the Government
has extended fiscal measures designed to encourage profit-sharing. Share
option schemes, to enable employees to buy shares in the firms in which they
work, have increased from about 20 in 1979 to nearly 700 in 1984, and involve
about 1-5 million workers.
Many employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their employees over
and above the statutory requirements. Large employers have taken the lead but
a number of smaller firms also provide medical services and in a few cases have
joined together in group medical services.
An increasing number of firms pay part or all of the cost of recreational facilities.
Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes. The
provision of low-priced meals at the place of employment has become usual in
large undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. Many offices and shops
which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their staff have adopted
luncheon voucher schemes.
Research has been sponsored or conducted by the Economic and Social
Research Council and the Medical Research Council into the factors affecting
human relationships and efficiency in industry. A number of independent
bodies also research and advise on matters such as management and job
satisfaction. The Department of Employment’s Work Research Unit, advised by a
steering group chaired by a minister on which the Confederation of British
Industry (for industry) and the Trades Union Congress (for trade unions) are
represented, advises employers and trade unions on improving the quality of
working life.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers (and in some industries
nearly all workers) are organised into trade unions. These have grown up
gradually and independently over many years and, consequently, their form and
organisation vary considerably, as do their traditions. During the 1970s trade
unionism increased particularly among clerical, supervisory, technical and
administrative workers, but rising unemployment has led to a decline in union
membership, especially in unions representing manual workers. Trade unions
may be organised either by occupation (for example, they may recruit clerks or
fitters wherever employed) or by industry. Some are based on a combination of
both principles. In some companies membership of the relevant trade union is
required by agreement between the employer and union (‘closed shops’). At the
end of 1982 the total membership of British trade unions was 11-7 million.
308
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trades Union
Congress
There were 462 unions, but nearly 80 per cent of all trade unionists were in the
25 largest unions.
Among the largest unions are the Transport and General Workers Union (1-6
million members), the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers (1 million)
and the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union (940,000); of
the non-manual workers’ unions, the largest is the National and Local
Government Officers’Association (726,000 members).
The Certification Officer appointed under the Employment Protection Act
1975 is required to maintain a list of trade unions. To be eligible for entry on the
list a trade union must show that it consists wholly or mainly of workers and
that its principal purposes include the regulation of relations between workers
and employers, or between workers and employers’ associations. Certain rights
and privileges are reserved for independent trade unions.
The central organisation of most large unions consists of a national executive
council, usually elected by and responsible to the annual conference of delegates
from local branches. Between conferences, councils are the highest authority of
unions, and carry out policy decisions made by the conference delegates. Most
unions also have regional and district organisations. At the level of the
individual member there are local branches, covering one or more workplaces.
Members may attend branch meetings, make suggestions about terms and
conditions of employment, discuss the work of the union, and take part in the
election of the union’s officers. The branch takes action on certain matters
considered to be entirely, or mainly, of local interest and forwards its views on
wider issues for action by the union’s national or regional bodies.
The organising of members in individual places of work, and the negotiation
of local pay agreements with managements at the factory or plant, may be done
by full-time district officials of the union, or, in many cases, by ‘shop stewards’,
who are chosen by their fellow members in the place of work to represent them.
Trade unions vary in the degree to which shop stewards are integrated into their
organisation. Where two or more unions have members in the same workplace,
shop stewards’ committees may be formed to discuss matters of common
concern.
Many unions provide ‘strike pay’ for members involved in official industrial
action which may vary from an amount equal to full net pay to a largely nominal
sum. They also provide legal advice for members who suffer injury or contract
diseases at work, or have been unfairly dismissed, and may pay members’ legal
costs where a case for compensation goes to court. Some unions pay benefits in
case of illness, accident, death and retirement (additional to those payable under
the National Insurance scheme) financed out of membership contributions.
Many trade unions are affiliated to the Labour Party. Any trade union wishing
to use money for political purposes must set up a separate fund, subject to
special rules, one of which must allow any member who objects to contributing
to the fund to opt out. Following consultation about the working of this system
of ‘contracting out’, the Government reached an agreement with the Trades
Union Congress in 1984 that trade union members should be kept fully
informed of their right to contract out of the political levy and be able to exercise
that right effectively.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades Union
Congress (TUC), which was founded in 1868. The TUC’s objects are to promote
the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and
social conditions of working people. Its affiliated membership comprises 102
trade unions which together represent 10-5 million people, or 90 per cent of all
trade unionists in Britain, and it exercises power through influence rather than
through sanctions. The TUC deals with all general questions which concern
EMPLOYMENT
309
trade unions both nationally and internationally and gives assistance on
questions relating to particular trades or industries. It is consulted by the
Secretary of State for Employment before he appoints employee representatives
on the Manpower Services Commission, the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitra¬
tion Service and certain other official bodies with an interest in employment
matters. There are eight TUC regional councils for England, and a Wales Trades
Union Council.
The annual Congress convenes in September to discuss matters of concern to
trade unionists and to employees generally. It elects a General Council which
represents it between Congresses and is responsible for carrying out Congress
decisions, watching economic and social developments, providing educational
and advisory services to unions, and presenting to the Government the trade
union viewpoint on economic, social and industrial issues. The council is also
empowered to mediate in inter-union disputes in certain circumstances, and
uses its authority to deal with unauthorised and unconstitutional stoppages of
work, as well as official disputes.
The TUC, as well as many individual unions, conducts extensive educational
services for members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects, trade union¬
ism and the principles and practice of industrial relations.
The TUC plays an active part in international trade union activity, through its
affiliation to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
European Trade Union Confederation. It also nominates the British workers’
delegation to the annual International Labour Conference.
Scotland and
Northern
Ireland
Legal
Framework
Trade unions in Scotland also have their own national central body, the Scottish
Trades Union Congress, which in many respects is similar in constitution and
function to the TUC. Trade unions in Northern Ireland are represented by the
Northern Ireland Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU),
though the majority of trade unionists in Northern Ireland belong to unions
based in Great Britain. About 85 per cent of Northern Ireland trade unionists are
members of organisations affiliated to the ICTU, while the majority belong to
unions which are also affiliated to the TUC. The Northern Ireland Committee of
the ICTU has no political affiliations and enjoys a high degree of autonomy.
The beginnings of the present law on industrial relations were established a
century ago, when trade union members were freed from charges of criminal
conspiracy; at the same time trade unions were granted certain immunities,
including immunity from liability to damages for the economic effects of strike
action. Peaceful picketing during strikes was also made legal. At the beginning
of the present century unions were given a wide degree of immunity from legal
action under the civil law, and the immunities of those organising industrial
action were also strengthened.
The Employment Protection Act 1975 placed the Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service on a statutory basis, provided for the appointment of a
Certification Officer and for the setting up of the Central Arbitration Committee.
It also established an Employment Appeal Tribunal to hear appeals concerning
decisions of the Certification Officer and of industrial tribunals. (Industrial
tribunals are independent judicial bodies which deal, in general, with com¬
plaints from employees on infringements of individual rights under a number of
Acts concerning, for example, redundancy payments, contracts of employment,
equal pay, unfair dismissals and sex discrimination.)
The Employment Acts 1980 and 1982 were designed to obtain a better balance
between rights and responsibilities in industrial relations. The 1980 Act
enabled the Government to make funds available to encourage the wider use of
secret union ballots and to produce codes of practice to promote good industrial
310
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EMPLOYERS’
ORGANI¬
SATIONS
relations. It limited lawful picketing to the picket’s own place of work and
restricted the scope for secondary action such as blacking and sympathetic
strikes. It provided greater protection for the individual in relation to the closed
shop and removed legal protection from any new closed shop which had not been
approved in a secret ballot by 80 per cent of the employees affected. As provided
for in the Act, the Government has published codes of practice on the conduct of
picketing and the closed shop. Illegal activities such as violence on picket lines
are subject to the criminal law, which is enforced by the police, but unlawful
picketing is a matter for employers to restrain by means of civil law.
The 1982 Act was designed to carry the process further. It increased the
compensation for employees unfairly dismissed for non-membership or mem¬
bership of a union and introduced compensation (from government funds) for
certain employees dismissed because of non-membership of a union in a closed
shop between 1974 and 1980, when they had no protection. The Act also
removed legal protection from all closed shops (not only from new ones, as in the
1980 Act) where within two years of the legislation taking effect the closed shop
had not been supported in a secret ballot held in the previous five years by 80 per
cent of the employees affected or by 85 per cent of those voting in the ballot.
Where legal protection is removed, any dismissal for non-membership of a union
is unfair. Terms in commercial contracts specifying the use of union labour only
were made unenforceable and discrimination on the basis of union membership
in the awarding of contracts was made unlawful. Industrial action which seeks
to persuade employers to discriminate in this way or to interfere with the supply
of goods or services on grounds of union membership is unlawful. The Act also
ended the position which gave trade unions almost complete immunity from all
civil actions by bringing their position into line with that of their individual
officials and members. This means that trade unions now have immunity only
for action taken in furtherance or contemplation of a lawful trade dispute. There
were also changes to the definition of a trade dispute upon which immunity for
civil actions depends. Disputes between employer and employees (that is, most
industrial action) continue to qualify as lawful trade disputes. Disputes which
have become unlawful are those where there is no disagreement between an
employer and his or her employees, or those which have little to do with the
normal subject of a trade dispute (such as terms and conditions of work) or
concern matters wholly outside Britain, and other such disputes which do not
involve employers.
The Trade Union Act 1984 is designed to increase democracy in trade unions.
It requires that all voting members of the principal executive committee of
unions should be elected by a secret ballot of the members (normally a postal
ballot) at least once every five years, and requires unions to compile and
maintain a register of members’ names and addresses. It also removes legal
immunity from trade unions which call a strike or take other industrial action
without first holding a secret ballot of members concerned and securing a
majority vote for this action. In addition, the Act requires trade unions with
political funds to ballot their members at regular intervals to decide whether the
funds should be retained.
Northern Ireland has a broadly similar but separate system of industrial
relations legislation.
Many employers in Britain are members of employers’ organisations, some of
which are wholly concerned with labour matters although others are also
concerned with commercial matters or trade associations. The primary aims of
such organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of
employment, including a sound wage structure and proper standards of safety,
health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the efficient
EMPLOYMENT
311
Confederation
of British
Industry
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
Collective
Bargaining
and Joint
Consultation
use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which may
arise. Combined employers organisations and trade associations may also
represent members points of view as manufacturers or traders to the
Government on commercial matters.
Employers organisations are usually organised on an industry basis rather
than a product basis, for example, the Engineering Employers’ Federation. A few
are purely local in character or deal with a section of an industry or, for example,
with small businesses; most are national and are concerned with the whole of an
industry. In some of the main industries there are local or regional organisa¬
tions combined into national federations, while in others, within which
different firms are engaged in making different principal products, there is a
complex structure with national and regional federations for parts of an
industry as well as for the industry as a whole. Altogether there are 375
employers’ associations known to the Certification Officer. Those which are
national organisations negotiate the national collective agreements for their
industry with the trade unions concerned; most of these national organisations
belong to the Confederation of British Industry.
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is the largest central employers’
organisation in Britain, representing directly or indirectly some 300,000
companies which together employ about half the working population. It exists
primarily to ensure that Government, national and international institutions
and the public understand the needs, intentions and problems of businessmen.
Membership ranges from the smallest to the largest companies, private and
nationalised, and covers a broad spectrum which includes manufacturing,
agriculture, construction, distribution, mining, finance, retailing and insur¬
ance. Most national employers’ organisations, trade associations and some
chambers of commerce are members. Policy is determined by a council of 400
members, and there is a permanent staff of 350 including regional offices and an
office in Brussels. The CBI is the British member of the Union of Industries of
the European Community. The CBI nominates the employers’ representatives
on a number of bodies including the Manpower Services Commission, the
Health and Safety Commission and the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service.
The structure of industrial relations in Britain has been established mainly on a
voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly on the organisation of employees
and employers into trade unions and employers’ associations, and on freely
conducted negotiations at all levels. The government-funded, but independent.
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS), provides its services
where the usual methods of resolving disagreements have failed. The number of
working days lost through stoppages of work due to industrial disputes has been
declining in recent years, and in 1983 was estimated at 3-8 million, compared
with 5-3 million in 1982 and an annual average of nearly 13 million in the
decade 1971-80. Because of the publicity they receive, strikes are commonly
thought to occur much more frequently in Britain than in other countries.
International comparisons show, however, that Britain’s record on industrial
disputes is better than those of a number of other major industrial countries,
ranking about half-way in a list of 20 countries drawn up by the International
Labour Office.
In most industries terms and conditions of employment and procedures for the
conduct of industrial relations are settled by negotiation and agreement between
employers or employers’ associations and trade unions. Agreements may be
industry-wide, often supplemented by local agreements in companies or
312
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Advisory,
Conciliation
and
Arbitration
Service
Office of
Manpower
Economics
factories (plant bargaining). In the public sector, agreements are generally
reached at industry level. In some industries, companies and factories,
negotiations are conducted by meetings held when necessary, while in others,
joint negotiating councils or committees have been established on a permanent
basis. The scope of the various bodies (from national joint industrial councils for
whole industries to works councils and committees in individual workplaces)
varies widely, and can cover such additional matters as production plans,
absenteeism, training, education, welfare and safety. Normally these arrange¬
ments for collective bargaining suffice to settle all questions which are raised,
but there is often provision for matters not so settled to be referred for
settlement to independent conciliation or arbitration. The Employment Protec¬
tion Act 1975 as amended by the Employment Act 1980 makes provision for
information needed for collective bargaining purposes to be disclosed by
employers to trade unions, subject to certain safeguards.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service has the general duty of
promoting the improvement of industrial relations, and in particular of
encouraging collective bargaining and the development and (where necessary)
reform of collective bargaining machinery. ACAS is under the control of a
council consisting of an independent chairman and nine other members
experienced in industrial relations, of whom three are nominated after
consultation with the CBI, three after consultation with the TUC, and three are
independent. The Service conciliates in industrial disputes in both the public
and private sectors of industry on a voluntary basis. ACAS assistance is sought
in some 2,000 disputes each year. In addition there are some 200 further
requests a year for ACAS to provide arbitration, which it may do either by
appointing single arbitrators or boards of arbitration or by referring cases to the
Central Arbitration Committee (see below). Although ACAS has prime responsi¬
bility for helping to resolve disputes, and has also set up major committees of
inquiry, the Secretary of State for Employment retains powers to appoint a court
of inquiry or committee of investigation into a dispute, but these are rarely used.
The Service gives advice on all aspects of industrial relations and employment
policies to employers, managers, trade unions, employee representatives and
individuals, and it handles nearly 280,000 inquiries a year. Specialist staff make
some 11,000 advisory visits a year, and the involvement of both employers and
employees in diagnosing problems and finding remedies is encouraged. It
carries particular responsibility for attempting conciliation on complaints of
infringement of individual employee rights (such as individual complaints of
unfair dismissal, complaints under the Equal Pay Act 1970 and complaints on
employment matters under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and the Race
Relations Act 1976). There are over 42,000 such cases each year.
The Central Arbitration Committee is an independent standing arbitration
body. It provides boards of arbitration for the settlement of trade disputes
referred to it with the consent of the parties concerned and adjudicates on
claims, including those made under the disclosure of information provisions of
the Employment Protection Act and under the Equal Pay Act.
The Office of Manpower Economics is an independent non-statutory organisa¬
tion responsible for servicing independent review bodies which advise on the
pay of various public-sector groups. These are the Top Salaries Review Body, the
Armed Forces’ Pay Review Body, the Doctors' and Dentists’ Review Body, and the
Review Body for Nurses and other National Health Service professions. The
Office also provides services for the Pharmacists’ Review Panel, the Police
Negotiating Board and the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal. It is responsible
for research into pay and associated matters as requested by the Government.
EMPLOYMENT
313
Statutory
Negotiating
Machinery
In a small number of industries and trades where the organisation of employers
or employees or both is not strong enough to provide a basis for successful
voluntary arrangements, there are statutory wage-regulating bodies, known as
wages councils. These are composed of equal numbers of representatives of
employers and employees in the respective sectors of industry, with three
independent members. Wages councils publish proposals for minimum pay,
holidays, holiday pay and other terms and conditions of employment. After
considering any representations the councils make orders giving the proposals
statutory force. The Department of Employment's Wages Inspectorate enforces
the provision of these wages orders. About 2-7 million workers are covered by
such arrangements. Agricultural wages boards (one for England and Wales and
one each for Scotland and Northern Ireland) perform similar functions in
relation to employment in agriculture.
HEALTH AND
SAFETY AT
WORK
Employers have a duty at civil and criminal law to take reasonable care of their
employees, and others affected by their work activities, and to provide a safe
system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards each other and
also to take care of their own safety. The principal legislation is the Health and
Safety at Work Act 1974. Its purpose is to secure the health, safety and welfare of
people at work and to provide for the protection of the public whose health and
safety might be affected by work activities. The Act places general duties on
everyone concerned with work activities, including employers, the self-
employed, employees; manufacturers, designers, suppliers, importers of articles
and substances for use at work; and those in control of premises.
The 1974 Act is superimposed on earlier health and safety legislation, such as
the Mines and Quarries Act 1954, the Factories Act 1961 and the Offices, Shops
and Railway Premises Act 1963 and the various regulations made under them.
The earlier legislation imposes specific obligations and standards on, for
example, occupiers of particular types of premises or employers engaged in
particular activities and covers such matters as the fencing of machinery,
precautions against the exposure of people to toxic dusts and gases, precautions
against fire, dangerous substances and special risks, the safe condition of
premises, and cleanliness, lighting, temperature and ventilation.
Some of the earlier legislation was replaced immediately by the 1974 Act, but
the remainder continues in force pending its progressive replacement by
regulations and codes of practice approved by the Health and Safety Commis¬
sion. Replacement regulations require the notification of accidents and
dangerous occurrences, the establishment of first-aid facilities and to control
work with lead, each set being supported by either an approved code of practice
or other guidance material, and there are others in the course of development.
The Health and
Safety
Commission
The Health and Safety Commission, established by the Health and Safety at
Work Act and accountable to Parliament through the Secretary of State for
Employment, has responsibility for developing policies, including guidance,
codes of practice, or proposals for regulations to further the implementation of
the Act. In the case of proposals for changes in legislation, the Commission
consults the people who will be affected by them and makes recommendations to
the Secretary of State concerned. The Commission has an independent
chairman, three members appointed after consultation with the CBI, three after
consultation with the TUC, and two after consultation with local authority
associations. The Commission has six subject advisory committees (on toxic
substances, on dangerous substances, on dangerous pathogens, on genetic
manipulation, and on the safety of nuclear installations, and the Medical
Advisory Committee), and 11 industry advisory committees, for agriculture.
314
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Health and
Safety
Executive
Northern Ireland
ceramics, construction, education, foundries, health services, oil, paper and
board, printing, railways and rubber.
The 1974 Act also set up the Health and Safety Executive, which includes
government inspectorates covering a range of work activities: the Factory
Inspectorate (which also deals with a large number of activities outside factories
such as hospitals and educational establishments) and inspectorates for mines
and quarries, agriculture, major sources of industrial air pollution, nuclear
installations, and explosives. It also includes the Medical Division and the
Research and Laboratory Services Division. The inspectors, who have powers of
entry and enforcement, seek compliance with health and safety legislation in
individual workplaces and give advice. The Medical Division provides a
nationwide service of advice on the medical aspects of employment problems to
employers, employees, trade unions, doctors and others. It carries out medical
examination of workers in hazardous occupations and surveys of employment
hazards, advises the staff of the Manpower Services Commission on medical
aspects of job placement, rehabilitation and industrial training, and co-operates
with school medical officers and careers officers in helping to solve the
employment problems of handicapped school-leavers.
The Research and Laboratory Services Division provides scientific and
medical support and testing services, and carries out research both in its own
laboratories and through universities and other institutions on a contract basis,
often jointly funded by industry. Areas of study include explosion risks, fires,
protective equipment, methods for monitoring airborne contaminants, occupa¬
tional medicine and hygiene, and the safety of engineering systems.
In some premises, mostly offices, shops, warehouses, restaurants and hotels,
health and safety legislation is enforced by inspectors appointed by local
authorities, working under guidance from the Health and Safety Commission.
Some other official bodies work under agency agreement with the Health and
Safety Commission, for example, the Railway Inspectorate (concerned with
worker safety on railways), the Industrial Pollution Inspectorate for Scotland
(concerned with the control of emissions to the atmosphere) and the Depart¬
ment of Energy (concerned with health and safety in the oil and gas industries).
A basic principle underlying the Health and Safety at Work Act is that
employers, in consultation with their employees, should have the responsibility
of working out health and safety arrangements, within the broad obligations of
the law, to suit their own workplaces. Employers with five or more employees
must draw up a written policy for safety and health, including arrangements for
implementing it and keeping it up to date, and bringing it to the notice of all
their employees. In workplaces where negotiations take place with a trade
union, the union may appoint safety representatives to be the employees’ official
channel for representation and consultation over safety matters. Two safety
representatives may make a written request to the employer to establish a safety
committee, which must then be set up within three months.
In Northern Ireland, the Health and Safety Agency, roughly corresponding to the
Health and Safety Commission, and an Employment Medical Advisory Service,
were set up by the Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order 1978. The Northern
Ireland Department of Economic Development, through its Health and Safety
Inspectorate, is responsible for ensuring compliance with health and safety
legislation, which is broadly similar to that for Great Britain.
17 Public Finance
Public finance is concerned with taxation, expenditure and borrowing by central
and local government. Central government raises money from individuals and
companies by direct and indirect taxation and from National Insurance
contributions. It spends money on goods and services, such as health and
defence, and in payments to people, such as social security and pensions. Local
government raises revenue mainly through rates (local property taxes) and
provides services such as education, police, fire services and refuse collection.
Borrowing by nationalised industries and other public corporations also has to
be financed by government—from taxation or borrowing.
Decisions about public expenditure totals have to be taken in the light of their
consequences for taxation and borrowing. The Government usually reviews its
expenditure plans every year in the public expenditure survey and publishes the
resulting totals in the Autumn Statement around November. Details of the aims
of government expenditure and the output obtained are given in the annual
public expenditure White Paper which appears early in the year, before the
Budget.
The Government’s plans for financing expenditure over the next year,
including any tax changes, are set out in the Financial Statement and Budget
Report, published with the Budget. Details are announced subsequently in the
Finance Bill. Tax revenue and other receipts are paid into the Consolidated
Fund, the Government’s account at the Bank of England from which most of the
Government’s sterling expenditure is financed. Any excess of expenditure over
receipts is met by borrowing, most of it from the National Loans Fund, which is
also operated as an official sterling account at the Bank of England.
Spending authorities include central government departments as well as local
authorities (the latter now accounting for about one-quarter of public expendi¬
ture); lending to nationalised industries and certain other public corporations is
also contained in the planning total, which includes a reserve to cover
unforeseen expenditure. It does not include debt interest, which is volatile and
not susceptible to control in the short term. The estimated public expenditure
outturn in 1983-84 was £120,000 million; net debt interest was about £7,000
million.
Social security accounts for nearly 30 per cent of the 1984-85 planning total.
Defence accounts for about 13 per cent, as does health and personal social
services.
Most of the large programmes are classified as current expenditure—notably
pensions and social security payments. However, the public sector also invests
considerable sums in capital projects. Capital spending by the public sector
(including the nationalised industries) is expected to be over £21,000 million in
1984-85.
The public expenditure planning total is planned to increase in cash terms by
5 per cent, 4-5 per cent and 3-5 per cent respectively over the next three years,
starting in 1984—85 (much the same as the rise in the general price level
foreseen for those years). The plans are thus consistent with maintaining the
existing level of total expenditure in cost terms.
The Estimates
Each December government departments submit to the Treasury Estimates of
their cash requirements for the financial year beginning in the following April.
316
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Control and
Examination of
Public
Expenditure
Cash Limits
Comptroller and
Auditor General
Select
Committees
of the House of
Commons
After approval by the Treasury, these Supply Estimates are presented to
Parliament in March, at the same time as the Budget (see p 317). Parliament
approves them in July as part of the annual Appropriation Act, expenditure
between 1 April and this date being covered by Votes on Account approved before
the start of the financial year. Supplementary Estimates may also be presented
to Parliament during the course of the year. If any Supply Estimate is overspent,
the Public Accounts Committee (see below) will investigate fully before Parlia¬
ment is asked to approve any Excess Vote to balance the account. In each
parliamentary session up to three ‘Estimates days’ are available for debates on
the Supply Estimates, following scrutiny by select committees of the House of
Commons.
Some items of expenditure, for example, the salaries and pensions of judges,
are paid directly out of the Consolidated Fund (see below) as standing services
and are not subject to annual approval by Parliament.
Control of public expenditure additional to control inherent in parliamentary
approval of the Estimates is exercised through the system of cash limits.
Examination of public expenditure is carried out by select committees of the
House of Commons.
Some 40 per cent of public expenditure is subject to control by cash limits
(external financing limits in the case of nationalised industries). Another 40 per
cent consists of demand-determined’ services (for example, social security
benefits) on which, once policy and rates of payment have been determined,
expenditure in the short run depends on the number of eligible recipients. The
remaining 20 per cent is current expenditure of local authorities, which central
government does not directly control: however, the major part of the contribu¬
tion by central government to such expenditure, the rate support grant, is
subject to cash limits.
Once fixed, cash limits are not usually revised during the course of the year
unless a decision is taken to alter the level of provision for the service concerned.
There is, however, a limited facility for carrying forward underspending on the
capital components of cash limits. If any overspending of cash limits occurs, the
general policy is that a corresponding deduction is made from the limits for the
following year.
The Comptroller and Auditor General, an officer of the House of Commons, has
two functions. As Comptroller General he has the duty to ensure that all revenue
and other public money payable to the Consolidated Fund and the National
Loans Fund is duly paid and that all payments out of these funds are authorised
by statute. As Auditor General he audits, on behalf of the House of Commons,
accounts of the transactions of the Consolidated Fund and the National Loans
Fund (see pp 322, 328), Appropriation Accounts and various other accounts of
government departments, statutory boards and authorities, and other bodies.
With the aim of strengthening parliamentary control and supervision of public
expenditure, a National Audit Office (with the Comptroller and Auditor General
as its head) was set up in 1984.
Public expenditure is also examined by select committees of the House of
Commons, which study in detail the activities of particular government
departments and require the attendance of ministers and officials for cross-
examination. The Public Accounts Committee considers the accounts of each
government department and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s reports of
them and on the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of departmental
PUBLIC FINANCE
317
Reserve
THE BUDGET
expenditure. The Committee takes evidence from the official heads of depart¬
ments and submits to Parliament reports which carry considerable weight, and
its recommendations are taken very seriously by the departments and organisa¬
tions that it examines. The Government’s formal reply to the reports is
presented to Parliament by the Treasury in the form of a Treasury minute and
the reports and minute are debated annually in the House of Commons.
Planned expenditure includes an unallocated reserve to cover all contingencies
including revisions to the estimated size of demand-determined programmes,
policy changes and new initiatives taken during the course of the year. This
underlines the Government's intention to treat the planning total itself as a
control total.
The Budget usually in March or April—sets out the Government’s proposals for
changes in taxation and is the main occasion for an annual review of economic
policy. The proposals are announced to the House of Commons by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Budget statement and are published in the
Financial Statement and Budget Report. This report also contains a review of
recent developments in the economy, together with an economic forecast—one
of the two which the Government is required to publish each year under the
Industry Act 1975 (the other being contained in the Autumn Statement, the
announcement on the Government’s plans for public expenditure and changes
in National Insurance for the forthcoming year)—and sets out the fiscal and
monetary framework within which economic policy operates. This is the
medium-term financial strategy, introduced in 1980 to improve economic
performance over the medium term. In the 1984 Budget the strategy gave
illustrative ranges for monetary growth and projections for government receipts,
spending and borrowing to 1988-89. The Government’s aim is to maintain a
firm financial framework, with a progressive reduction in monetary growth and
public borrowing as a proportion of national output, in order to secure further
reductions in inflation and to create the conditions for sustainable growth.
The Budget statement is followed by the moving of a set of Ways and Means (or
Budget) resolutions in which the proposals are embodied. When passed by the
House of Commons, these resolutions give temporary effect, under the
Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1968, to certain of the tax proposals: they are
the foundation of the Finance Bill, in which the proposals are set out for detailed
consideration by Parliament, becoming law as the Finance Act. usually in the
following July. The effect of the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act is thus to
enable the Government to collect certain taxes provisionally, at the levels
provided by the Budget proposals, pending enactment of the Finance Bill.
The bulk of the tax proposals in the Budget are concerned with changes in the
rates or coverage of taxes, the introduction of new taxes or the abolition of
existing ones (for example, the National Insurance surcharge—see p 322—was
abolished in the 1984 Budget) and changes in the administrative machinery.
These changes are made not only with regard to the revenue required but also
with regard to their effect on the way the economy performs.
For two taxes—income tax and corporation tax—annual Ways and Means
resolutions followed by Finance Act clauses are required to maintain their
existence, since they are annual rather than permanent taxes. Thus, a Budget
and a Finance Act are necessary at or about the beginning of each financial year.
Tax changes can be made at other times of the year, however, either by specific
legislation or by the use of the regulator, which permits limited changes between
Budgets in value added tax (by up to 25 per cent) and the main excise duties (by
up to 10 per cent).
318
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SOURCES OF
REVENUE
Taxes on
Income
Income Tax
The three principal sources of tax revenue are: taxes on income, which include
income tax and corporation tax; taxes on capital, which include capital transfer
tax and capital gains tax; and indirect taxes, which include customs and excise
duties, value added tax (VAT), the National Insurance surcharge (until its
abolition—see p 322), rates (local property taxes which are set and collected by
local authorities to help to meet their expenditure), stamp duties and licence
duties (for example, on motor vehicles).
Table 30 shows the provisional revenue of central government from taxation
and other sources in 1983—84 and the forecasts for 1984—85.
Taxes on individual incomes are progressive in that larger incomes bear a
proportionately higher rate of tax. Thresholds and rate bands for income tax,
capital transfer tax and capital gains tax are raised automatically each year in
line with the rise in retail prices over the previous calendar year unless the
Government proposes otherwise and Parliament approves. The Inland Revenue
assesses and collects the taxes on income and capital and the stamp duties. The
Customs and Excise collects the most important taxes on expenditure (the
customs and excise duties and VAT).
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6 April. The basic
rate of 30 per cent applies to the first £15,400 of taxable income. A rate of 40 per
cent applies to the £15,401—£18,200 band, 45 per cent to the £18,201—£23,100
band, 50 per cent to the £23,101-£30,600 band and 55 per cent to the
£30,601-£38,100 band, ending with a maximum rate of 60 per cent on taxable
income over £38,100. These rates apply to both earned and investment incomes,
the former 15 per cent surcharge on investment income over £7,100 having
been abolished in the 1984 Budget.
A number of personal allowances and reliefs reduce the amount of a person’s
taxable income compared with gross income. The main allowances are £2,005
for the income of a single person or the earned income of a wife and £3,155 for
the income of a married man. Among the most important of the reliefs is that for
mortgage interest payments on borrowing for house purchase. Relief at the
basic rate is given ‘at source’ (that is, passed directly by the tax authorities to the
building society or bank making the loan rather than to the individual
taxpayer). Another relief is that under the business expansion scheme, whereby
certain investors in trading companies without a Stock Exchange quotation
(usually small companies) are able to obtain relief on up to £40,000 invested in
any one year.
Assuming only the basic personal allowances, a single person with an income
of £10,000 a year in 1984—85 pays £2,399 in income tax while a married man
with the same income pays £2,054. The amount of tax payable by a single
person varies from, for example, £899 on an annual income of £5,000 to
£18,757 on one of £45,000.
The income of married couples is usually taxed as one but a husband and wife
may choose to have the wife’s earnings charged separately for tax on condition
that the husband receives the single instead of the married personal allowance.
Any investment income is taxed jointly.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a Pay As You Earn
(PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the Inland
Revenue) by the employer, thus enabling them to keep as up to date as possible
with their tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in Britain
and on all income arising abroad of people resident in Britain. Interest on
certain British government securities belonging to people not ordinarily
resident in Britain is exempt. Britain has entered into agreements with many
countries providing for relief from double taxation; where such agreements are
PUBLIC FINANCE
319
not in force unilateral relief is often allowed. British residents working abroad
for the whole year benefit from 100 per cent tax relief. Until April 1985 those
working abroad for at least 30 days in a tax year qualify for relief at the rate of
12-5 per cent.
Table 30: Sources of Central Government Taxes and Other Receipts 1983-84
and 1984-85
Inland Revenue
Income tax
Corporation taxb
Petroleum revenue taxc
Capital gains tax
Development land tax
Capital transfer taxd
Stamp duties
1984-85
1983-84
Provisional
outturn
(£ million)
Budget
forecast
(£ million)
31,300
6,000
6,100
670
70
610
1,100
33,800
8,400
6,000
710
75
680
860
Percentage
of total3
34-5
8-6
61
0-7
01
0-7
0-9
Total Inland Revenue
45,900
Customs and Excise
Value added tax
Oil
Tobacco
Spirits, beer, wine, cider and perry
Betting and gaming
Car tax
Other excise duties
European Community own
resources
Customs duties, etc.
Agricultural levies
Total Customs and Excise
Vehicle excise duties e
National Insurance surcharge
15,300
5,600
3,800
3,900
630
700
25
1,120
225
31,300
2,020
1,700
50,500
18,000
6,100
4,100
4,000
650
700
20
1,230
200
35,000
2,140
900
51-5
18-4
6-2
4-2
41
0-7
0-7
1-3
0-2
35-7
2-2
0-9
Total taxation
Miscellaneous receipts f
Total
80,900
7,800
88,500
9,480
90-3
9-7
88,700
97,980
1000
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1984—85.
a Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
b Including advance corporation tax:
Net of repayments 2,100 3,000 3 1
c Including advance payments.
d Including estate duty: 9 6  
e Including driving licence receipts.
f Including the 10 per cent of own resources refunded by the European Community to meet the costs of collection,
other receipts from the Community and proceeds from special sales of assets.
320
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Corporation
Tax
Petroleum
Revenue
Tax
Taxes on
Capital
Capital Transfer
Tax
Capital Gains
Tax
Companies pay corporation tax on their profits, but the amount of taxable profit
is that remaining after deduction of allowances for investment in assets used for
the business and certain other costs. Only a proportion of any capital gains is
included in total profits, with the result that chargeable gains as a whole are
subject to a lower effective rate of tax. A company which distributes profits to its
shareholders is required to make to the Inland Revenue an advance payment of
corporation tax. In general, this payment is set against a company’s liability to
corporation tax on its income and the recipient of the distribution in respect of
which the advance payment was made is entitled to a tax credit, which satisfies
his or her liability to income tax at the basic rate.
The rate of corporation tax is fixed retrospectively in the Budget and Finance
Act for the past financial year; for the financial year 1983 (1 April 1983-31
March 1984) it was 50 per cent with a reduced rate of 30 per cent for small
companies. The main rate is to fall to 45 per cent in the financial year 1984, to
40 per cent in 1985 and to 35 per cent in 1986. This is a significantly lower rate
than applies in other industrialised countries. The previously high initial and
first-year allowances for various forms of capital investment are being phased
out, leaving a 4 per cent annual writing-down allowance for buildings and a 25
per cent writing-down allowance for machinery and plant. Relief for stock
appreciation has also been abolished.
Petroleum revenue tax (deductible in computing profits for corporation tax) is
charged on profits from the production, as opposed to the refining or other
forms of processing, of oil and gas under licence in Britain and on its
continental shelf. The rate of tax is 75 per cent. Each licensee of an oilfield is
charged on the profits from that field after deduction of certain allowances and
reliefs which, among other things, encourage exploration, appraisal and future
field development. The tax is computed at half-yearly intervals. Advance
payments of petroleum revenue tax can be made in the early years of production
from a field. These payments can be credited against petroleum revenue tax
subsequently due with any balance repaid five years after the first payment.
However, this system of advance petroleum revenue tax is to be phased out by
the end of 1986. The bulk of both taxes is collected in monthly instalments.
Capital transfer tax applies to transfers of personal wealth in three main areas;
lifetime gifts; transfers on death; and transfers relating to settled property (that
is any property held in trust). The tax is chargeable on a cumulative basis in
respect of lifetime transfers as they occur and on death as if the deceased had
given away the whole of his or her estate immediately before death. In both cases
the tax on a particular transfer is arrived at by adding to it the value of the
chargeable transfers made within 10 years up to the date of the transfer in
question. The rates of tax applicable are progressively higher on successive
slices of the cumulative total of chargeable transfers, with a lower scale of tax for
lifetime transfers than for transfers on death. The higher scale applies to
transfers made on death or up to three years before the transferor’s death. Under
both scales the first £64,000 of transfers is exempt. The rates on amounts over
this figure rise from 30 per cent (higher scale) and 15 per cent (lower scale) on
the slice between £64,000 and £85,000 to 60 per cent (higher scale) and 30 per
cent (lower scale) on the excess over £285,000.
Capital gains accruing on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax or,
in the case of companies, to corporation tax. The rate of tax is 30 per cent but
individuals are exempt from tax in respect of total net gains of up to £5,600 in
any one year and most trusts on gains of up to £2,800. The effects of inflation
can be partly allowed for when measuring gains. The tax on gifts and certain
PUBLIC FINANCE
321
Development
Land Tax
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added
Tax
Customs Duties
Excise Duties
deemed disposals of assets may be deferred until the assets are sold. Certain
assets, including the principal private residence, chattels worth less than
£3,000 (and any chattels with a predictable life of less than 50 years except those
on which the expenditure qualifies for a capital allowance), private motor cars,
and National Savings Certificates and Bonds are normally exempt. Gains on
government securities are exempt from the tax if they have been held for more
than 12 months.
Any assessable development value realised on the disposal of an interest in land
is chargeable to tax at the rate of 60 per cent but the first £75,000 of any such
development value realised in any financial year is completely exempt. Other
exemptions include the sale or development of owner-occupied residences.
Value added tax (VAT) is a broadly based tax, chargeable at 15 per cent. It is
collected at each stage in the production and distribution of goods and services
by taxable persons (generally those carrying on a business with a turnover of
more than £18,700 a year). The final tax is borne by the consumer. The taxable
person is charged by suppliers of goods and services with VAT (input tax) and
then charges the customer with VAT on goods and services supplied (output
tax). It is the difference between output and input tax that is paid to Customs
and Excise.
There are two methods by which certain goods and services are relieved from
VAT: one is by charging VAT at a zero rate (a taxable person does not charge tax
to a customer but reclaims any input tax paid to suppliers); the other is by
exemption (a taxable person does not charge a customer any output tax and is
not entitled to deduct or reclaim the input tax). Zero-rating applies to most food;
books, newspapers and periodicals; fuel (except for petrol and other fuels for
road use) and power; construction of new buildings; exports; certain interna¬
tional services; public transport fares; caravans and houseboats; young
children s clothing and footwear; drugs and medicines supplied on prescription;
and certain supplies by or to charities. Exemption applies to land (including
rents), insurance, postal services, betting, gaming (other than by gaming
machines and lotteries), finance, education, health, burial and cremation, and
supplies by trade unions and professional bodies to their members.
Customs duties are chargeable in accordance with the Common Customs Tariff
of the European Community (no such duties are chargeable on goods which
qualify as Community goods). Special customs import and export procedures
are operated under the Common Agricultural Policy and Community levies are
chargeable on a wide range of agricultural products from non-Community
countries.
Oils used for road fuel bear duty at the basic rate. Heavy oil not used for road fuel
and light oil used for furnace fuel bear a lower duty and, except for lubricating
oil, are zero-rated for VAT. Oil used as chemical feedstocks or otherwise than as
a fuel or lubricant in manufacturing is relieved from duty. There are duties on
spirits, beer, wine, made-wine, cider and perry, mainly related to alcoholic
strength. The cigarette duty is based partly on a charge per 1,000 cigarettes and
Partly on a percentage of retail price. Duty on other tobacco products is based on
the weight of the finished product. The principal betting duties are the general
betting duty, which is charged at a rate of 8 per cent of the stake money, except
for on-course betting, which is charged at 4 per cent; pool betting duty (which
applies to football pools), charged at a rate of 42-5 per cent of the stake money;
and bingo duty, charged at 10 per cent. Revenue is also raised from licences on
the operation of gaming machines and casinos.
322
Car Tax
Stamp Duty
National
Insurance
Surcharge
PUBLIC
SECTOR
BORROWING
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The licence duty on a private motor car or light van is £90 a year; for motor
cycles it is £9, £18 or £36 a year according to engine capacity. The licence duty
on goods vehicles is charged on the basis of gross weight and, if over 12 tonnes,
according to the number of axles; the duty is designed to ensure that such
vehicles cover at least their road costs through the tax paid (licence duty and fuel
duty). Taxis and buses are taxed according to seating capacity.
New cars, motor cycles, scooters, mopeds and some motor caravans, whether
British made or imported, are chargeable with car tax at 10 per cent on the
wholesale value. VAT is charged on the price including car tax.
Transfers of property (other than of stocks and shares) above a value of £30,000
are subject to stamp duty of 1 per cent. Transfers of stocks and shares are
subject to stamp duty regardless of the amount. Transfers to charities are
exempt.
The National Insurance surcharge is in the form of a levy paid by local authority
employers, along with their National Insurance contributions, of 1 per cent of an
employee’s earnings up to £250 a week except for those earning less than £34.
The proceeds are not paid into the National Insurance Fund but, together with
other tax receipts, go into the Consolidated Fund. The surcharge is to be
discontinued from April 1985, having been abolished for private sector
employers in October 1984.
A continuing reduction in the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) as a
percentage of gross domestic product is an important part of the Government’s
medium-term financial strategy; the percentage is projected to fall from 3-25 per
cent in 1983-84 to 2 per cent in 1985-86. As part of the policy of controlling the
rate of growth of the money stock, the Government seeks to -finance its
borrowing requirement (the excess of expenditure over tax revenue and other
receipts) by sales of long-term debt to the public outside the banking system.
The central government borrowing requirement in 1984—85 was set at £11,100
million, compared with an outturn of £12,200 million in 1983—84, and the
PSBR £7,200 million, compared with an outturn of £9,700 million in 1983—84.
Central government debt sales to the non-bank private sector totalled £12,800
million in 1983—84, of which £9,900 million was government stock (known as
gilt-edged stock as there is no risk of default) and £3,200 million national
savings instruments. Gilt-edged stock is marketable and is traded on The Stock
Exchange. Individuals may also make transactions through post offices in
stocks included on the National Savings Stock Register. Pension funds and
insurance companies have the largest holdings. The Government issues both
conventional and indexed stock (on which principal and interest are linked to
the movement in the retail prices index).
National savings instruments are non-marketable and are designed to attract
personal savings. Their importance relative to gilt-edged stock as a source of
funds has increased in recent years. The other principal debt instruments of
central government are Treasury bills and certificates of tax deposit. Treasury
bills are 91-day bills sold at a weekly auction to the discount houses, which
guarantee to take up the whole of the offer; certificates of tax deposit are
non-marketable and may be purchased by individuals or corporate bodies to be
tendered in settlement of a range of taxes.
The bulk of public corporations’ borrowing is met by central government
through the National Loans Fund although their temporary borrowing needs are
met largely from the market, often under Treasury guarantee. That part of local
authority borrowing met by central government is supplied by authorisation of
PUBLIC FINANCE
323
The National
Debt
Parliament through the Public Works Loan Board from the National Loans
Fund. (The Board remains an independent body even though it is merged for
administrative purposes with the former National Debt Office, forming the
National Investment and Loans Office.) The local authorities also borrow directly
from the market, both short-term and long-term, through a range of instru¬
ments. Some public corporations and local authorities also borrow on occasion,
under special statutory power and with Treasury consent, in foreign currencies.
Net central government borrowing each year represents an addition to the
National Debt. At the end of March 1984 the National Debt amounted to some
£143,000 million of which about £3,000 million was in currencies other than
sterling. Of the £140,000 million sterling debt, £109,000 million consisted of
gilt-edged stock; of this, 32 per cent had a maturity of up to five years, 43 per
cent a maturity ol over five years and up to 15 years and 25 per cent a maturity of
over 15 years or undated. The remaining sterling debt was made up mainly
of national savings (£20,000 million), certificates of tax deposits, Treasury
bills, and Ways and Means advances (very short-term internal government
borrowing).
18 Banking
and Financial
Institutions
Britain's position as a major financial centre reflects the wide range of
specialised financial services provided. The City of London has the greatest
concentration of banks in the world, the world’s biggest insurance market and a
Stock Exchange with a larger listing of securities than any other exchange, and
remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large number of
commodities. Its tradition of informal dealing and its position between the time
zones of the United States and the Far East enable it to complete large-scale
transactions with economy and speed. Among the major developments in the
activities of financial institutions in recent years have been the rapid growth in
the representation of overseas banks in London, the establishment of new
futures markets and (especially in the light of the agreement of The Stock
Exchange to certain changes—see p 333) alliances between different types of
financial institution in the interests of increased competitiveness.
The main institutions which form the British banking system are the Bank of
England (the central bank), the clearing banks (offering a wide range of
services), the National Girobank, the Trustee Savings Banks, the overseas
banks, the merchant banks, the discount market and the National Savings
Bank. Specialised financial services outside the banking system are provided by,
among others, finance houses, leasing companies, factoring companies, finance
corporations, pension funds, investment and unit trusts, building societies, the
insurance market. The Stock Exchange, the foreign exchange market, the
London gold market, commodity markets and futures markets.
The Bank The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and Royal
of England Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by the
Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. The Bank’s main functions
are to act as note-issuing authority, to advise the Government on financial
matters, to execute monetary policy, to act as banker to the Government and to
exercise prudential supervision over the banking system. It also manages the
Exchange Equalisation Account on behalf of the Treasury.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing
banknotes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed by
gold but by government and other securities. The Scottish and Northern Ireland
banks have limited rights to issue notes; these issues, apart from an amount
specified by legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by holdings of Bank
of England notes. Responsibility for the provision of coin for circulation lies with
the Royal Mint, a government department.
The Government's economic policy is based on the medium-term financial
strategy, which aims to achieve a continued fall in the rate of inflation by means
of successive reductions in the rate of growth in the money supply over a
five-year period. On behalf of the Government, the Bank conducts operations in
the financial markets designed to influence the trend rate of monetary growth.
Monetary targets for 1984—85 and illustrative ranges for 1985—86 to 1988—89
326
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Deposit
Banks
were announced in the Financial Statement and Budget Report 1984—85.
Targets for the later years will be decided nearer the time and account will be
taken of structural and institutional changes which may affect the economic
significance of the different monetary indicators.
As banker to the Government, the Bank of England is responsible for
arranging government borrowing and for managing the National Debt.
The Bank is able to influence money market conditions through its dealings
with the discount houses (see p 328), which developed in the nineteenth
century as bill brokers for industrialists. The discount houses hold mainly
Treasury, local authority and commercial bills financed by short-term loans
from the banks. If on any given day there is a shortage of cash in the banking
system as a result, for example, of large tax payments or heavy sales of
government securities, the Bank relieves the shortage either by buying bills from
the discount houses or by lending directly to them. This permits the banks to
replenish their cash balances at the Bank by recalling some of their short-term
loans to the discount houses.
The methods by which the Bank operates in the money markets, however,
have undergone some change. Until August 1981 the Bank was ready to lend
directly to the discount houses at rates at or near its announced Minimum
Lending Rate, in addition to its open-market dealings with the discount houses
in bills. Under subsequent arrangements, the Bank no longer undertakes to
announce continuously the rate at which it will supply cash to the market, but
conducts its operations in such a way as to keep short-term interest rates within
an unpublished band. More emphasis is now put on open-market operations in
bills than on direct lending to the discount houses.
Under the Banking Act 1979 deposit-taking businesses require authorisation
from the Bank of England unless they are specifically exempted from the
authorisation provisions of the Act. Institutions may be authorised either as
recognised banks or as licensed deposit-takers and are subject to the Bank of
England’s supervision.
On behalf of the Treasury, the Bank manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (EEA), which holds Britain’s official reserves of gold, foreign exchange,
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) on the International Monetary Fund and
European Currency Units (ECUs). Using the resources of the EEA, the Bank may
intervene in the foreign exchange markets to check undue fluctuations in the
exchange value of sterling.
The major deposit banks are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland and National Westmins¬
ter and, in Scotland, the Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale Bank and the Royal Bank
of Scotland. Their primary business is receiving, transferring and paying
deposits, together with providing overdraft and other loan facilities to personal
and commercial customers, who may deposit money in two main types of
account, current accounts and deposit accounts. Nearly two-thirds of all adults
have a current account and over one-third a deposit account. Although interest
is not usually paid on current accounts, withdrawals may be made on demand
and amounts transferred by cheque. Interest is paid on deposit accounts but
seven days’ notice is required for withdrawals. Bank profits arise from the
difference between the interest earned from lending plus fees charged for the
provision of payment services and the costs incurred, including the interest paid
to depositors. (Bank lending rates are determined by base rate, which may differ
between banks. The greater the creditworthiness of a borrower the smaller is the
premium charged above base rate.)
These banks provide full banking services throughout Britain. (Other
institutions, especially building societies (see p 331), have begun to compete
strongly in this area.) The ‘big four’ banks operate through some 11,000
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
327
National
Girobank
branches and sub-branches. National Westminster has the largest number
(3,200) followed by Barclays (2,900), Midland (2,300) and Lloyds (2,100). The
banks are increasingly involved in international banking activities and, since
the late 1970s, have lent more for house purchase. They have also acquired
substantial interests in finance houses and leasing agencies, some have set up
their own unit trusts and merchant banks and others have (consistent with
moves towards increased unification in the provision of financial services)
established links with traders in stocks and shares. The involvement of the
banks in the financing of small businesses is encouraged by the loan guarantee
scheme, under which 70 per cent of the value of loans is guaranteed by the
Government.
The banks' main liquid assets consist of balances at the Bank of England,
money at call (mainly loans to discount houses), their holdings of Treasury and
some other bills and short-dated British government securities. They also hold a
proportion of their assets as portfolio investments (mainly longer-dated British
government securities) or trade investments.
The bank giro, a credit transfer scheme, and direct debiting, by which a
creditor, with the prior approval of the debtor, may claim money due direct from
the latter s bank account, have greatly speeded the money transmission
services. An increasing number of banks have automatic cash dispensing
machines and many are also introducing more automated banking facilities.
Cheque cards entitle holders to cash a cheque up to the value of £50 at any office
of major British and Irish banks and are also generally acceptable as a guarantee
for payments by cheque up to that amount. Credit cards (Access and
Barclaycard) associated with the clearing banks are also a widely used method of
payment; Access operates within the international Mastercard system and
Barclaycard within the VISA system. Two clearing banks (Midland and
Clydesdale) issue uniform eurocheques; these are high-security printed cheques
which may be used to obtain cash or make payments at home or abroad,
supported by the uniform eurocheque card. Uniform eurocheques are made out
in the currency of the country in which they are being used. The other clearing
banks issue eurocheque encashment cards. These are not valid in Britain but
enable travellers overseas to cash domestic cheques, made out in sterling, at
designated banks. Thomas Cook, the travel subsidiary of Midland Bank, is to
issue travellers’ cheques denominated in ECUs (see p 326).
Membership of the London Bankers Clearing House, which deals with the
clearing of cheques and drafts, consists of the Bank of England, the London
clearing banks, the Co-operative Bank, the Central Trustee Savings Bank and
the National Girobank (see below). In 1983 cheques and drafts worth
£6,800,000 million passed through the London clearing system. Town clearing
enables transfers of funds between banks within the City of London to be settled
the same day, while the Clearing House Automated Payment System (CHAPS)
makes available same-day settlement elsewhere in Britain. A similar approach in
automated banking is the agreement by the clearing banks to introduce
point-of-sale terminals in retail outlets, which will enable the value of shoppers’
purchases to be deducted from their personal bank accounts.
National Girobank, part of the Post Office, is one of Britain’s fastest-growing
banks. It provides a wide range of banking and money transmission services for
both corporate and personal customers, operating through more than 20,000
post offices. It became a clearing bank in 1983. All accounts and transactipns
are maintained by a central computer at Bootle, Merseyside, which is linked to a
network of regional offices. In March 1984 Girobank had L5 million personal
customers, with balances of over £800 million. There were about 350 million
transactions in the year ended March 1984. Girobank’s corporate services
328
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trustee
Savings Banks
Overseas
Banks
Merchant
Banks
The Discount
Market
include cash and cheque collection, daily statements, wholesale deposits,
payment of wages, salaries and pensions, and loans and leasing. More than 200
local authorities use Girobank for rent collection. The bank’s international
services provide money transfer facilities for the 20 million account holders in
the European Community and other countries.
The range of banking services provided by Girobank includes current and
deposit accounts, personal loans, revolving loans, direct debits, standing orders,
cheque guarantee cards, bridging loans, travellers’ cheques and foreign
currency transactions, bureaux de change and Postcheques for drawing cash at
post offices in 31 countries.
The Trustee Savings Banks (TSBs), most of which were founded in the
nineteenth century, operate under their own trustees but are subject under
legislation to the supervision of the Trustee Savings Banks Central Board and
the Treasury. Following a planned programme of amalgamations, there were
four individual banks in June 1984 (compared with 67 in 1975) with about
1,620 branches, 13 million accounts and total deposits of £8,200 million. TSBs
provide a full range of banking services including cheque accounts and credit
services.
Interest is paid on seven-day and one-month deposits and a higher rate on
larger sums deposited for periods up to five years. Credit services include
personal loans, overdrafts and mortgages. The TSB has its own credit card,
Trustcard, which operates within the VISA system, and TSB Trust Company
provides a wide range of savings, insurance, life assurance and unit trust
facilities. The TSBs carry out wholesale commercial lending as well as lending to
smaller companies.
A major restructuring of the TSBs, involving, among other things, the issue of
publicly quoted shares especially to customers and staff, is expected to take
place in 1986.
Some 540 overseas banks and financial institutions were represented in Britain
in 1984 through branches, subsidiaries, representative offices and consortia. A
total of 470 were directly represented while 70 were represented only through a
stake in a consortium. Of those directly represented, 84 were from the United
States, 43 from Japan and 147 from Europe. They provide a comprehensive
banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the financing of trade
not only between Britain and other countries but also between third countries.
Merchant banks have traditionally been primarily concerned with acceptances1
and with the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf of their customers. Today
they have a widely diversified and complex range of activities with an important
role in international finance and the short-term capital markets, the provision of
expert advice and financial services to British industrial companies, especially
where mergers, takeovers and other forms of corporate reorganisation are
involved, and in the management of investment holdings, including trusts,
pensions and other funds. A number of merchant banks have formed alliances
with firms dealing in stocks and shares (as have some deposit banks—see
p 327).
The discount market, an institution unique to the City of London, provides a
financial mechanism which promotes an orderly flow of short-term funds by the
discount houses borrowing at call’ or at short notice from the banks and lending
1 The term is derived from the method of financing trade by which commercial bills are 'accepted’ or guaranteed
by a merchant bank against documents, after which they may be discounted for cash by a discount house or other
intermediary.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
329
National
Savings
National
Savings
Bank
National
Savings
Certificates
National
Savings
Income Bonds
to the Government by buying Treasury bills (the market guarantees to take up
the whole of the weekly offer of these 91-day bills). The discount houses have
recourse to the Bank of England as ‘lender of last resort’.
Assets of the discount houses consist mainly of Treasury and commercial
bills, government and local authority securities and negotiable certificates of
deposit denominated in both sterling and United States dollars. Discount
houses accept formal responsibility for covering the Government’s need to
borrow on Treasury bills, which are offered for tender each week.
The Department for National Savings is responsible for the administration of
government savings schemes: National Savings Bank accounts. National
Savings Certificates, National Savings Income Bonds, National Savings Deposit
Bonds, Premium Savings Bonds and Save As You Earn contracts. Government
policy has traditionally been directed towards encouraging investment, mainly
from personal savings, in these schemes, particularly as they represent a major
source of funds for financing the public sector borrowing requirement. At the
end of June 1984 National Savings totalled £27,000 million. Facilities are
provided by the Department for the purchase of government stocks: a selection
of over 50 stocks is held on the National Savings Stock Register. Facilities have
become increasingly competitive so that a larger share of personal savings is
raised directly for the public sector.
The National Savings Bank provides a system for depositing and withdrawing
savings at 20,000 post offices around the country or by post. There are about 18
million active accounts. Ordinary Accounts earn interest at 3 per cent a year (or
6 per cent if a minimum balance of £500 is maintained throughout the year);
the first £70 of annual interest is tax free. Up to £100 can be withdrawn on
demand at any Savings Bank post office (£250 for regular customers’) but a few
days' notice is required for larger amounts. Investment Accounts earn a highly
competitive single rate of interest, which is taxable although tax is not deducted
at source. One month’s notice is required for withdrawals. At the end of June
1984 the sum of the two accounts totalled £6,562 million,.
National Savings Certificates, in units of £10 (index-linked issue) and £25
(fixed-interest issue), are encashable at par at any time. Interest, which is free of
income tax and capital gains tax, is paid only on encashment. The maximum
permitted holding of the current Twenty-Eighth issue is £5,000. Under the
terms of the Second Index-linked issue of National Savings Certificates, the
repayment value is related to the movement of the retail prices index (subject to
the certificates being held for one year). If held for five years a bonus of 4 per cent
of the purchase price is added to the repayment value. Supplements of up to 2-4
per cent a year are applicable to index-linked certificates held between November
1982 and October 1984. The maximum permitted holding is £10,000. At the
end of June 1984 the total investment in all forms of National Savings
Certificate was over £15,000 million.
In exchange for monthly contributions of between £20 and £100, the National
Savings Yearly Plan, issued under National Savings Certificate regulations,
offers a rate of interest fixed for five years from the first payment (free from
British income tax). The period of contributions is a year but the plan can be
extended for one year at a time for as long as the saver wishes.
National Savings Income Bonds are designed to provide savers with a regular
monthly income. Bonds are sold in multiples of £1,000, with a minimum
holding of £2,000 and a maximum of £50,000. Repayment is at either three or
six months’ notice.
330
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National
Savings
Deposit
Bonds
Premium
Savings
Bonds
Save As You
Earn
OTHER
FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
Finance
Houses
Leasing
Companies
Factoring
Companies
National Savings Deposit Bonds enable people and organisations to accumulate
interest at a premium rate on lump-sum investments. Six weeks’ notice is given
of any changes in the interest rate, which is kept competitive. Bonds are
available in multiples of £50, subject to a minimum holding of £500 and a
maximum of £50,000. Three months' notice is required for repayment.
Premium Savings Bonds are in units of £1 (minimum purchase is £5) and
individual holdings are limited to £10,000. After a qualifying period of three
months the bonds give investors a chance to win tax-free prizes. There is a
weekly draw for prizes of £100,000, £50,000 and £25,000 and a monthly draw
offering thousands of prizes ranging in value from £50 to £250,000. The total
value of Premium Savings Bonds outstanding at the end of June 1984 was
nearly £1,700 million.
The Share Option Issue Series B of the Save As You Earn (SAYE) scheme is
available to individuals entitled to purchase shares under a Share Option
Scheme approved by the Inland Revenue. Regular payments of between £10 and
£50, deducted from pay over five years, qualify for bonuses equal to 14 and 28
monthly contributions on the fifth and seventh anniversaries respectively.
Interest at a rate of 6 per cent a year is payable on completed contracts repaid
between the fifth and seventh anniversaries and on repayment of uncompleted
contracts between the first and seventh anniversaries. Any interest or bonus is
free from British income tax and capital gains tax.
Many special financial facilities, supplementary to the credit facilities of the
banks, are provided through institutions outside the banking system. These
include institutions providing credit in specialised forms, such as finance
houses, leasing and factoring companies; finance corporations; institutions
which manage investments on behalf of the public, such as pension funds, and
investment and unit trusts; intermediaries which are less dependent on the
financial markets of the City of London, such as building societies; the
insurance market; institutions which provide financial services, such as The
Stock Exchange; the foreign exchange market; the London gold market;
commodity markets; and the financial futures market.
Finance houses are major suppliers of hire-purchase finance for the personal
sector and of short-term credit and leasing to the corporate sector. Some 80 per
cent of all their business is accounted for by the 43 firms which constitute the
Finance Houses Association (FHA). At the end of 1983 credit outstanding to the
members of the FHA was over £14,000 million.
Leasing companies buy and own plant or equipment required and chosen by
businesses and lease it at an agreed rental. This form of finance has grown
quickly in importance, partly because the leasing companies have been able to
take advantage of investment incentives to the benefit of customers whose tax
position would otherwise have made them unavailable. The restructuring of
capital allowances in the 1984 Budget, however, will reduce the advantage of
some forms of leasing after an interim period. In 1983 the 63 members of the
Equipment Leasing Association acquired assets in Britain valued at some
£2,900 million, which represented about 17 per cent of total private sector
investment in plant, machinery and vehicles.
Factoring consists of making cash available to a company in exchange for the
sums owing to it. Over the last 20 years factoring has developed as a major
financial service, covering international activities as well as domestic trade. In
1983 member companies of the Association of British Factors handled business
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
331
Finance
Corporations
Pension Funds
Investment
and Unit
Trusts
Building
Societies
of nearly £2,800 million and almost 3,200 companies made use of the
Association’s services.
Finance corporations meet the need for medium- and long-term capital
(including venture capital) when such funds are not easily or directly available
from traditional sources such as The Stock Exchange or the banks.
Investors in Industry (known as 3i) supports investment programmes over the
whole range of industry. During the year ended 31 March 1984 the corporation
invested £296 million. Within the last few years it has become increasingly
prominent in financing management buy-outs’, which involve the purchase of
businesses by managing and other staff from their owners. The shares in
Investors in Industry are owned by the Bank of England (15 per cent) and the
individual London and Scottish clearing banks.
Other finance corporations include Equity Capital for Industry, the Agricultu¬
ral Mortgage Corporation, the Commonwealth Development Finance Company
and the Commonwealth Development Corporation (the last two being no longer
confined to the Commonwealth in their activities).
Pension funds are administered by trustees in order to invest members’ pension
contributions, either directly in the market or through intermediaries such as
insurance companies. The market value of assets held by pension funds rose
from £2,000 million in 1957 to about £84,000 million in 1982 when 22 per cent
was in British government securities and 56 per cent in company securities. The
growth of pension funds over the last 25 years has been reflected in a marked
decrease in the proportion of shares held by individual investors.
Investment and unit trusts enable investors to spread their risks and obtain the
benefit of skilled management. Investment trusts are companies which observe
certain requirements of The Stock Exchange and the tax authorities and invest
in securities for the benefit of their shareholders. At the end of 1983 their
investments totalled over £13,400 million, of which more than one-half was held
overseas.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company and
a trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the managers sell units to
the public and also repurchase them on demand. The sums held must be
invested in securities. The costs of running the trust are met partly by an initial
charge which forms part of the price of a unit and partly by a periodic service
charge which is usually taken out of the trust’s income. Authorisation by the
Department of Trade and Industry is needed before units can be offered to the
public; this is granted only if the trust deed meets the Department’s require¬
ments. Trusts are allowed to hold up to 20 per cent of their assets in shares
traded on the Unlisted Securities Market (see p 333), in addition to the 5 per
cent of assets that they were already allowed to hold in unlisted securities,
whether or not traded on this market. In April 1984 there were 2-2 million unit
holdings with a total value of £13,200 million.
Building societies are non-profit-making mutual institutions which borrow
mainly short-term from individual savers, who are generally able to withdraw
their money on demand (although short-notice investments at higher rates of
interest have become increasingly popular) and provide long-term loans at
variable rates of interest on the security of private dwellings purchased for owner
occupation. They also lend to a very limited extent on the security of business or
commercial property. The Building Societies Association, their representative
body, advises members on levels of interest rates.
Building societies account for most lending for house purchase in Britain and
in recent years they have overtaken the banks as the principal repository for the
332
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Insurance
Market
Insurance
Companies
Lloyd's
personal sector’s liquid assets; over a half of all adults have building society
accounts. The societies now offer a wide range of services to investors; a variety
of saving schemes have been established, some societies provide cheque
facilities for their customers and automated cash withdrawal systems are being
developed.
Business is concentrated in the hands of a few large societies, the five largest
accounting for 55 per cent of the total assets of the movement. At the end of
1983 there were 206 registered building societies with total assets of £87,000
million and in the course of the year over £19,000 million was advanced in new
mortgages. Building societies are supervised by the Chief Registrar of Friendly
Societies under the Building Societies Act 1962. The Government has published
proposals for new legislation which would relax some of the restrictions in this
Act, allowing the societies to operate with greater freedom and to provide a wider
range of services.
The British insurance industry provides a comprehensive and competitive
service domestically and internationally. It has been estimated that British
insurers handle some 20 per cent of general insurance business placed on the
international market. The London market is the world’s leading centre for
insurance where, in addition to most British companies and Lloyd’s, a large
number of overseas companies are also represented. It is the world centre for the
placement of international reinsurance and, partly as a consequence, many
British companies have formed close relationships with overseas companies.
Some British insurance companies confine their activities to domestic business
but most large companies undertaking general business transact a substantial
amount overseas through branches, agencies or affiliated local companies.
Insurance companies carrying on business in Britain are supervised by the
Department of Trade and Industry under the Insurance Companies Act 1982.
About 850 companies are authorised to carry on one or more classes of
insurance business in Britain, of which 171 are from overseas.
Over 340 companies belong to the British Insurance Association and these
account for about 95 per cent of the world-wide business of the British
insurance companies market.
Life assurance is handled by some 290 authorised insurance companies and
is also available through certain friendly societies. Ninety per cent of this
business is transacted through the 80 members of the Life Offices' Association
or the nine members of the Associated Scottish Life Offices. Lloyd’s underwriters
also write short-term life business.
Lloyd’s, established in the seventeenth century, is an incorporated society of
private insurers in London. Although its activities were originally confined to
the conduct of marine insurance business, a very considerable world-wide
market for the transaction of other classes of insurance business in non-marine,
aviation and motor markets has been built up. Lloyd's, which does not accept
insurance itself, is regulated by a series of special Acts of Parliament, dating
from 1871 to 1982.
Lloyd's is not a company but a market for insurance administered by the
Council of Lloyd's, where business is carried out for individual underwriting
members for their own account and risk and in competition with each other and
with insurance companies. Insurance may only be placed through Lloyd's
brokers (see p 333), who negotiate with Lloyd’s underwriting agents on behalf of
the insured. Only elected underwriting members of Lloyd's, for whom insurance
is transacted with unlimited liability and who have met the most stringent
financial regulations laid down by the Council, are permitted to be represented
at Lloyd’s; these safeguards give security to a Lloyd's policy.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
333
Insurance
Brokers
International
Insurance
Services
The Stock
Exchange
There are some 22,000 underwriting members of Lloyd’s grouped into about
430 syndicates and represented at Lloyd’s by underwriting agents who accept
risks on behalf of the members of their syndicates.
Insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, are an essential part of the
Lloyd s market and a valuable part of the company market. Many brokers
specialise in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of
contracts between companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as
London representatives of the latter. The Insurance Brokers (Registration) Act
1977 provides for the registration of insurance brokers with the Insurance
Brokers Registration Council and makes Britain the first country to introduce
self-regulation of insurance brokers. In April 1984, 16,200 individuals and
4,900 businesses were registered with the Council. The British Insurance
Brokers’ Association, which sponsored the Act, has about 3,700 members. They
produce some £10,000 million annually in premiums for Lloyd’s and insurance
companies.
About one-half of the general (that is, non-life) business of members of the
British Insurance Association originates from about 100 overseas countries,
through establishments abroad, including overseas branches and agencies, and
through reinsurance placed on the London market.
In accordance with the Treaty of Rome, insurance and reinsurance in the
European Community are regulated by directives addressed to the governments
of member states and intended to harmonise the legislation of the various
member countries, thus providing a ‘common market’, which would avoid
distortion of competition. Directives cover reinsurance, compulsory motor
insurance, freedom of establishment for life and non-life insurers, Community
co-insurance and insurance intermediaries. These directives have been im¬
plemented in British legislation.
The Stock Exchange has its main trading floor and central administration in
London. There are also trading floors in Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester,
Birmingham and Dublin.
The number and variety of securities (stocks and shares) officially listed on
The Stock Exchange are greater than in any other market in the world and its
turnover of company securities is roughly equivalent to that of all the other
European exchanges combined. Some 7,000 securities are quoted on The Stock
Exchange; at the end of March 1984 these had a total market value of £830,000
million. About 5,200 securities of companies were quoted including a number of
leading overseas securities. Company issues represent four-fifths of the
securities at market valuation, the remainder being British, Irish Republic and
other overseas government and corporation stocks as well as eurobonds (see
p 334). Institutional investors, such as pension funds, now own a higher
proportion of ordinary shares than individuals. The Unlisted Securities Market
(USM), which deals generally in the securities of small companies unable or
unwilling to obtain a Stock Exchange listing, was opened in 1980, since when
the number of companies with shares traded has risen from about a dozen to
about 250. Trading in some 100 securities, largely those of small companies
trying to raise risk capital, can also be carried out directly with securities dealers
in the ‘over-the-counter’ market.
A market in traded options, in the shares of prominent British companies,
enables investors not only to buy options to purchase or sell shares in future at
pre-fixed prices but also to trade in the options themselves. In May 1984 trading
began in a stock index option.
The Stock Exchange has agreed to certain changes which will make it more
competitive internationally. In particular, minimum scales of commission on
334
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
The London
Gold Market
Commodity
Markets
Financial
Futures
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
dealings in securities are to be abolished and relaxation of certain membership
rules is likely. In 1984 The Stock Exchange published a document which
discussed possible alternatives to the system of single capacity (the separation of
functions of brokers—who act as agents for individuals and institutional
investors, such as pension funds and insurance companies—and jobbers, who
act as wholesalers to the brokers).
The securities industry is subject to a combination of statutory and
non-statutory regulation by the Council for the Securities Industry, which
provides cohesion between the self-regulatory elements. In 1984 the Gower
report on investor protection recommended, among other things, new legisla¬
tion to provide for the registration of all firms carrying out investment business
either directly with the authorities or through membership of a recognised
self-regulatory agency.
The market consists of banks and several firms of foreign exchange brokers
which act as intermediaries between the banks. It provides those engaged in
international trade with foreign currencies for their transactions. The foreign
exchange banks are in close contact with financial centres abroad and are able
to quote buying and selling rates for both spot and future delivery. The forward
market enables traders who, at a given date in the future, are due to receive or
make a specific foreign currency payment, to contract in advance to sell or buy
the foreign currency involved for sterling at a precise fixed exchange rate.
The eurocurrency market provides a network of bank deposits and loans
denominated in a currency other than that of the country in which the bank is
situated. The eurobond market performs a similar service in transferring funds
from lenders to borrowers but by means of bonds issued in currencies other
than that of the issuing country. Transactions in both markets tend to be in
large denominations. The markets developed in the late 1950s following the
restoration of convertibility between the major currencies partly in order to
avoid incurring the costs of exchange control and other regulations.
Anyone may deal in gold but, in practice, dealings are largely concentrated in the
hands of the five members of the London gold market, who meet twice daily to
establish a London fixing price for gold. This price provides a reference point for
world-wide dealings. Although much interest centres upon the fixings, active
dealing takes place throughout the day. Since the opening in 1982 of the
London Gold Futures Market, the only one in the European time zone, futures
dealings in the metal around the world have been possible 24 hours a day.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large
number of commodities, although most of the sales negotiated in London relate
to consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The need for
close links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance services
often determined the location of these markets in the City of London. There are
also futures markets in cocoa, coffee, grains (wheat and barley), rubber, soya
bean meal and oil, sugar, pigmeat, wool and non-ferrous metals (aluminium,
copper, lead, nickel, silver, tin and zinc), potatoes and gas oil. The markets are
collaborating in the development of new arrangements to safeguard partici¬
pants.
The London International Financial Futures Exchange trades on the floor of the
Royal Exchange. Some 240 banks and other financial institutions are full
members of the market, which allows parties affected by movements in interest
rates or exchange rates to reduce their vulnerability. Trading takes place in
financial instruments of differing maturities and denominated in a number of
currencies.
19 Overseas Trade
VISIBLE
TRADE
Commodity
Composition
Although small in area and accounting for only about 1 -2 per cent of the world’s
population, Britain is the fifth largest trading nation in the world—and, as a
member of the European Community, part of the world's largest trading area,
which accounts for about one-third of all trade.
Overseas trade has been of vital importance to the economy for hundreds of
years, and especially since the mid-nineteenth century, when the rapid growth
of industry, commerce and shipping was accompanied by Britain’s development
as an international trading centre. Exports of goods and services in 1983 were
equivalent to about 30 per cent of gross domestic product at factor cost. Britain
is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles, aerospace products, metal manufac¬
tures, electrical equipment and chemicals, and a significant oil exporter. It relies
upon imports for over one-third of total consumption of foodstuffs, and for most
of the raw materials needed for its industries. Invisible trade is also of great
significance to the economy, accounting for one-third of overseas earnings;
Britain’s net earnings from invisibles are second only to those of the United
States.
In 1983 Britain’s exports of goods were valued at about £60,700 million and its
imports of goods at about £61,200 million on a balance of payments basis (see
Table 31). Following a decline in export and import volume in 1981, both
increased in 1982 and 1983.
Table 31: Exports and Imports 1980-83 (balance of payments basis)
1980
1981
1982
1983
Value (£ million)
Exports f.o.b.a 47,422 50,977 55,565 60,658
Imports f.o.b.a 45,909 47,325 53,181 61,158
Volume index (1980 = 100)
Exports 1000 99-2 101-5 102-3
Imports 100-0 96-1 100-7 107-6
Unit value index (1980 = 100)
Exports 100-0 108-8 116-7 126-6
Imports 100-0 108-1 117-9 128-6
Terms of trade (1980 = 100)b 100-0 100-7 99-0 98-4
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a f.o.b. = free on board, that is all costs accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board the exporting vessel
having been paid by the seller.
b Export unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
Britain has traditionally been an importer of food and raw materials and an
exporter of manufactured goods. In recent years manufactured goods have
accounted for a growing proportion of imports but a declining proportion of
exports. They are still responsible, however, for the bulk of exports (see Table
336
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
32). By far the most important group is machinery and transport equipment,
which in 1983 accounted for 30 per cent of toted exports. Machinery alone
accounted for 21 per cent: mechanical machinery just under 12 per cent and
electrical machinery about 10 per cent. Chemicals accounted for 11 per cent.
The growth in importance of North Sea oil exports is reflected in the recent rapid
rise in the share of fuels in total exports, from 4 per cent in 1975 to 22 per cent
in 1983. Sectors which have become relatively less important include passenger
motor cars and textiles, the latter accounting for 2 per cent of exports in 1983,
compared with 5 per cent in 1970.
Recent changes in Britain’s import pattern are similar to those which have
affected other major industrialised countries, although to a lesser degree. There
has been a large rise in the share of finished manufactures and semi-finished
goods, particularly the former, which accounted for 42 per cent of imports in
1983, as against 23 per cent in 1970. Since 1962 imports of semi-manufactures
have formed a larger part of the total import bill than basic materials, reflecting
the tendency for producer countries to undertake processing of primary
products up to the semi-finished and occasionally finished stage. The decline in
the proportion of food imports reflects the increasing extent to which demand
Table 32: Commodity Composition of Trade 1983a
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (c.i.f.)'
£ million per cent £ million per cent
Non-manufactures 18,948
Food, beverages and tobacco 4,235
Basic materials 1,586
Fuels 13,127
Manufactured goods 39,919
Semi-manufactures 15,791
of which: Chemicals 6,929
Textiles 1,285
Iron and steel 1,331
Non-ferrous metals - 1,615
Metal manufactures 1,324
Other 3,307
Finished manufactures 24,128
of which: Machinery 12,888
Road vehicles 3,084
Clothing and footwear 989
Scientific instruments
and photographic
apparatus 2,046
Other 5,121
Miscellaneous 1,667
31-3
70
2-6
21-7
65-9
26-1
11-4
21
2-2
2-7
2-2
5*5
39-9
21-3
51
1-6
3-4
8-5
2-8
19,644
7,853
4,723
7,067
44,905
16,960
5,120
2,320
1,261
1,976
1,109
5,174
27,945
13,233
5,754
2,143
2,166
4,649
1,444
29-8
11-9
7-2
10-7
680
25-7
7-8
3-5
1-9
30
1-7
7- 8
42-3
20-1
8- 7
3-2
3-3
70
2-2
Total
60,534
100
65,993
100
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a On an overseas trade statistics basis. (This differs from a balance of payments basis because for imports it
includes the cost of insurance and freight and for both exports and imports includes returned goods.)
b c.i.f. = cost, insurance and freight, that is including shipping, insurance and other expenses incurred in the
delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in Britain. Some of these expenses represent earnings by
companies resident in Britain and are more appropriate to the invisibles account.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
OVERSEAS TRADE
337
Geographical
Distribution of
Trade
INVISIBLE
TRANSACTIONS
for food has been met by domestic agriculture and the smaller share of
expenditure devoted to food.
More than three-quarters of Britain's exports and imports are with developed
countries (see diagram below). In the last 30 years or so trade with Western
Europe has become increasingly important, representing about 60 per cent of
Britain's trade in 1983, compared with about 30 per cent in 1950.
European Community countries accounted for six of the top ten export
markets and for six of the ten leading suppliers of goods to Britain in 1983 (see
Table 33), with the Federal Republic of Germany being the largest single
supplier. The United States took 13-8 per cent of British exports, making it
Britain’s largest single market for the third year in succession. Recent features
of Britain’s trade have been a decline in the proportion of trade with other
Commonwealth countries, the emergence of oil-exporting countries as a major
market for exports and an increase in the share of imports from Japan from 3-4
per cent in 1980 to 51 per cent in 1983.
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1983
Exports
Total to
developed
countries
770/0
European
Community
440/0
Rest of Western
Europe
12%
North America
15%
Other developed countries 50/0
Imports
European
Community
46%
Rest of Western
Europe
16%
North America
140/0
Total from
developed
countries
83%
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Britain has nearly always earned a surplus from its invisible transactions and
there has not been a deficit since 1947. Transactions fall into three main
groups: services (receipts and payments arising from services, as distinct from
goods, supplied to and received from overseas residents); interest, profits and
dividends (income arising from outward and inward investment and other
capital transactions); and transfers between Britain and other countries. In
1983 there was a surplus estimated at £3,632 million on invisible earnings (see
Table 34).
Gross earnings from invisible exports amounted to £34,975 million in 1983,
equivalent to 58 per cent of the earnings from visible exports. Earnings from
services rose in value by 9 per cent in 1983 to £19,143 million; in volume terms
338
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
Table 33: Principal British Markets and Suppliers 1983;
Main markets
Value
(£ million)
Share
(per cent)
Exports
United States
Federal Republic of Germany
France
Netherlands
Irish Republic
Belgium/Luxembourg
Sweden
Italy
Saudi Arabia
Switzerland
Imports
Federal Republic of Germany
United States
Netherlands
France
Japan
Italy
Belgium/Luxembourg
Norway
Irish Republic
Switzerland
8,337
6,064
5,652
5,441
3,055
2,573
2,397
2,293
1,479
1,386
9,667
7,443
5,098
5,043
3,355
3,188
3,134
2,821
2,290
2,154
13- 8
100
9-3
90
50
4-3
4- 0
3- 8
2-4
2- 3
14- 6
11-3
7-7
7-6
5- 1
4- 8
4-7
4-3
3- 5
3-3
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a On an overseas trade statistics basis. Exports are f.o.b., imports c.i.f.
this represented a rise of about 1 per cent. Debits, at £15,241 million, were
about 10 per cent higher by value but unchanged in volume terms. The surplus
on services increased to £3,902 million in 1983, with improvements in civil
aviation, travel, and financial and other services more than offsetting the
sizeable worsening in the sea transport account.
The surplus on interest, profits and dividends is estimated to have been
£1,948 million in 1983, an increase of two-thirds over the previous year, as a
result of a substantially higher surplus on the private sector and public
corporations account. Earnings on portfolio investment (investment in overseas
securities) rose by about 64 per cent, reflecting the growth in overseas
investment following the abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and the fall in
the sterling exchange rate (which has the effect of increasing the sterling value
of earnings originally expressed in foreign currency). British oil companies
experienced a substantial improvement in earnings from overseas investments
in 1983, after several years of declining returns, due in large part to the strength
of the United States dollar.
The deficit on transfers in 1983 was £2,218 million, largely on government
transactions (mainly contributions to the European Community, contributions
and subscriptions to international organisations, and bilateral aid).
Britain remains committed to the open trading system, and to this end has
taken a leading part in the activities of such organisations as the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the
OVERSEAS TRADE
339
General
Agreement on
Tariffs and
Trade
Community
Trade
Agreements
Table 34: Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1983
£ million
Credits
Debits
Balance
Services 19,143 15,241 +3,902
Private sector and public corporations 18,673 13,939 +4,734
of which: Sea transport 3,023 4,099 -1,076
Civil aviation 2,665 2,237 +428
Travel 3,655 4,054 -399
Financial services3 2,745 — +2,745
Other 6,585 3,549 +3,036
General government 470 1,302 —832
Interest, profits and dividends 12,473 10,525 +1,948
Private sector and public corporations 11,857 8,757 +3,100
General government 616 1,768 -1,152
Transfers 3,359 5,577 -2,218
Private 1,138 1,349 -211
General government 2,221 4,228 -2,007
Total invisible transactions
34,975
31,343
+ 3,632
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1984 Edition.
aThe figure is obtained net of overseas payments, and similar earnings in Britain by overseas financial
institutions are negligible. For these reasons the item appears only as a credit entry.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). Since joining
the European Community in 1973, Britain has conducted many of these
activities in collaboration with its Community partners. Britain also partici¬
pates in the development of the Community’s commercial policy. The Commun¬
ity’s common customs tariff is, on average, at a similar level to the tariffs of other
major industrial countries.
Tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade have been considerably reduced in the
seven rounds of multilateral trade negotiations held since 1947 under the
auspices of the GATT, the most recent being the ‘Tokyo Round' (1973-79).
Britain has participated fully in these negotiations. The GATT met at ministerial
level in 1982 when a work programme designed to promote the liberalisation
and expansion of trade was agreed. GATT members also agreed to make
determined efforts to ensure that trade policies and measures were consistent
with the principles and rules of the GATT, and to resist protectionist policies in
formulating and implementing national trade policies. Britain has contributed
to the implementation of the GATT work programme, in particular to work on
trade in services, which is of great importance to Britain’s employment and
overseas earnings. Britain has also played a constructive role in recent
international efforts to further reduce trade protectionism.
With the exception of transitional tariff arrangements for certain products from
Greece, all tariffs on trade between Britain and the other European Community
countries have been eliminated. Britain applies the common customs tariff to all
countries neither belonging to, nor having any special arrangement with, the
Community, subject to special arrangements for some industrial materials.
The Community has reciprocal preferential trading agreements with the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries (Austria, Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland), Cyprus, Israel, Malta, Spain and
340
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONTROLS ON
TRADE
Import Controls
Export Controls
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES
Turkey, and non-reciprocal agreements with Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt,
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Yugoslavia, and a group of African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries (see below). Tariff preference is also given to developing
countries (under the Generalised Scheme of Preferences), the Faroe Islands and
the overseas dependencies and territories of member states.
Former Commonwealth preferential agreements have been phased out and
replaced, in the case of a number of developing Commonwealth countries in
Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific, by the trade provisions of the Lome
Conventions (1975 and 1981). A third Lome Convention is expected to enter into
effect from March 1985. A number of non-Commonwealth developing countries
within the same geographical area are also signatories.
Britain maintains few restrictions on its international trade. Most goods maybe
imported freely and only a narrow range of goods is subject to any sort of export
control.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and to the
European Community, Britain has progressively removed almost all quantita¬
tive restrictions imposed on economic grounds. Only about 7 per cent of
Britain’s visible imports of manufactures are subject to any form of non-tariff
restraint and about 80 per cent of imports are admitted into Britain duty free.
The few remaining quantitative restrictions mainly affect textile goods (in view
of the rapid contraction of the domestic textile industry) and stem primarily
from the Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA) under which there exists a series of
agreements covering international trade in textiles, designed to balance the
interests of both exporting and importing countries. A major review of the MFA
commenced in 1984. All quantitative restrictions have been removed from
imports of goods of Community origin, but certain internationally recognised
restrictions operated by the Department of Trade and Industry on a few goods
such as firearms, ammunition and nuclear materials continue to apply. Other
government departments operate certain restrictions on non-economic grounds
(on goods such as meat and poultry, animals, birds and plants and some of their
derivatives, controlled drugs, explosives, certain ‘citizen's band' radios and
indecent or obscene articles) for reasons of health, safety, conservation or social
policy.
The great majority of British exports are not subject to any government control
or direction. However, there are controls governing exports of military and
strategic significance which also apply to certain metals, metal products
(including certain British coins), waste and scrap. There are also controls on
cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, asses and mules, for humanitarian
purposes: on salmon and trout, to inhibit out-of-season fishing: on cattle, swine
and certain meat exported to another member state of the European Commun¬
ity, for health certification purposes; on endangered species of animals and
plants and some of their derivatives, in accordance with international agree¬
ments; on photographic material over 60 years old and valued at £200 or more
per item and other articles over 50 years old (including works of art) valued at
£3,000 or more; on documents, manuscripts and archives (other than printed
books) over 50 years old; on archaeological material irrespective of value; on
controlled drugs; on British spirits (beverages) in casks of less than 40 litres;
and on Common Agricultural Policy products.
The Government assists exporters by creating conditions favourable to the
export trade and by providing information and advice about opportunities for
trade in other countries, services designed to help exporters and improve
exporting practices, and credit insurance facilities.
OVERSEAS TRADE
341
British Over¬
seas Trade
Board
Export Credit
Insurance
BALANCE OF
PAYMENTS
The British Overseas Trade Board (BOTB) directs Britain’s official export
promotion services, which include the provision of export intelligence, assist¬
ance to British exporters in appointing agents and researching potential
markets overseas, help at trade fairs and other promotional events overseas, and
support for firms participating in trade missions. It mainly comprises repre¬
sentatives ol commerce and industry with personal involvement in exporting,
but also includes representatives of the Department of Trade and Industry, the
Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD), and the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office; it operates under the general authority of the Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry, who is the president.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult the regional offices of
the BOTB throughout Britain and, through these offices, the commercial posts
of the British Diplomatic Service overseas. The Scottish Export Office (Industry
Department for Scotland), the Welsh Office and the Industrial Development
Board for Northern Ireland (Department of Economic Development) also act as
BOTB regional offices.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department provides credit insurance for
about one-third of the country’s export trade and insures exporters of both
goods and services against non-payment by overseas buyers. The main risks
covered include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer, governmental
action which stops the British exporter receiving payment, new import
restrictions, and war or civil disturbance in the buyer’s country. Cover may
commence from the date of shipment or from the date of contract (at higher
premiums).
This insurance may be supplemented by unconditional guarantees of
repayment given direct to banks financing exporters, whether in sterling or in
foreign currencies. Alternatively, for contracts over £1 million the ECGD will
guarantee loans direct to overseas buyers enabling them to pay on cash terms, or
'lines of credit’ similarly covering an agreed buying programme of an overseas
country. The banks provide finance against these guarantees. The ECGD is also
prepared to support the issue of performance bonds in the commercial market
in respect of cash or near-cash contracts worth over £250,000.
Investment insurance is provided for new British investment overseas against
expropriation, war damage and restrictions on remittances.
In 1984 a government-appointed committee recommended the replacement of
the ECGD by a state-owned corporation. The committee’s recommendations are
currently under consideration by the Government.
The balance of payments statistics record transactions between residents of
Britain and non-residents. The transactions are classified into three groups:
current account (visibles and invisibles); investment and other capital trans¬
actions; and official financing. The balance on current account shows whether
Britain has had a surplus of income over expenditure.
Traditionally Britain has had a deficit on visible trade and a surplus on
invisible trade and this was again the case in 1983. However, in 1980, 1981 and
1982 visible trade was also in surplus (see Table 35); the current account
surpluses for 1980—82 averaged over 2 per cent of gross domestic product. In the
previous 20 years there was only one other year, 1971, in which a visible trade
surplus was recorded. Britain’s net self-sufficiency in oil, with a substantial
surplus on oil trade emerging in the last three years, has had a very beneficial
effect on the visible trade balance. There was a visible trade deficit in 1983,
however, as the British economy came out of the recession before most of its
competitors. Total investment and other capital transactions resulted in a net
outflow of £3,648 million from Britain, partially reflecting the current account
surplus.
342
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Capital Flows
External Assets
and Liabilities
A description of visible trade and invisible transactions is given on p 335 and
capital transactions are described below.
Table 35: Britain’s Balance of Payments 1977-83
£ million
1977 1980 1981 1982 1983
-2.284 +1,513 +3,652 +2,384 -716
+ 2,337 +2,116 +3,569 +2,822 +3,632
Current balance +53 +3,629 +7,221 +5,206 +2,916
Financial account
Investment and other
capital transactions +4,169
Allocation of Special
Drawing Rights —
Official financing:
Net transactions with
overseas monetary
authorities +1,113
Foreign currency borrowing
(net) +1,114
Official reserves3 -9,588
Balancing item +3,139
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1984 Edition.
a Drawings on (+)/additions to (- ).
-1,450
+ 180
-140
-941
-291
-987
-7,353
+ 158
-145
-1,587
+ 2,419
-713
-3,187
-163
+ 26
+ 1,421
-3,303
-3,648
-36
+249
+603
-84
Current account
Visible trade balance
Invisible transactions
balance
Britain’s exchange controls were abolished during 1979 and residents are free to
acquire foreign currency for any purpose including direct and portfolio
investment overseas. Controls on the lending of sterling abroad have also been
removed and non-residents may freely acquire sterling for any purpose. Gold
may be freely bought and sold. The abolition of exchange controls means that
Britain meets its full obligations on capital movements under the OECD Code on
Capital Movements and under European Community directives. The Govern¬
ment welcomes both inward and outward investment. Outward investment
helps to develop markets for British exports, while providing earnings in the
form of interest payments, profits and dividends. Foreign investment in Britain
often helps to increase the efficiency of industry by introducing new technologi¬
cal developments.
In 1983 direct investment overseas by British (non-oil) companies was £2,609
million and investment by oil companies and miscellaneous investment was
£1,841 million, while British residents’ portfolio investment overseas totalled
£6,110 million, considerably higher than in 1979. The inflow of direct, portfolio
and other investment into Britain amounted to £5,445 million. An analysis of
investment and other capital transactions is given in Table 36.
At the end of 1983 Britain’s aggregate identified external assets were valued at
£172,478 million: £153,492 million belonging to the private sector (£121,725
million of investment overseas and £31,767 million of banking and commercial
OVERSEAS TRADE
343
claims) and £18,986 million to the public sector including official reserves (gold,
convertible currencies and IMF Special Drawing Rights) estimated at £12 805
million.1
Table 36: Analysis of Investment and Other Capital Transactions 1981-83 a
  £ million
1981 1982 1983
Overseas investment in Britain:
British public sector
British private sector
British private investment overseas
Official long-term capital
Import creditb
Export creditb
Foreign currency borrowing or
lending abroad by British banks
Changes in external sterling
liabilities0
External sterling lending by
British banks d
Other external borrowing or lending
Other transactions
Total
+188 +320 +695
+3,270 +3,105 +4,750
-10,660 +10,724 -10,560
-336 -337 -389
+130 -220 -33
-969 -1,165 -1,484
+ 1,462 +4,271 +1,167
+ 2,756 +4,520 +4,133
-2,954 -3,299 -1,386
~341 +89 -77
+101 +253 -464
-7,353 -3,187 -3,648
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1984 Edition
,nc™se 1+1 - ’■
Bib,ring and "”ne> ■"
At the end of 1983 direct private investment overseas (investment in
branches, subsidiaries and associated companies), excluding oil, totalled
£46,425 million, portfolio investment £57,900 million and investment by oil
companies £14,600 million. At the end of 1981 (the latest year for which data
are available) more than four-fifths of direct investment was in developed
countries. Over one-third of the total was in the United States and just under
one-fifth in the European Community. In terms of industries, manufacturing
accounted for 37 per cent of direct investment holdings, distribution for 28 per
cent, oil for 20 per cent and banking and insurance for the remaining 15 per
Britain’s aggregate identified external liabilities were valued at £116 529
million at the end of 1983. Overseas investment in the private sector accounted
or £47,172 million, comprising £23,275 million of direct investment (excluding
that of oil companies), £9,600 million of portfolio holdings of British companv
securities and £12,950 million of investment by overseas oil companies. At the
end of 1981 investment from developed countries accounted for virtually all of
overseas direct investment in Britain, with 57 per cent originating in the United
States and 23 per cent in the European Community. Slightly under 50 per cent
was in manufacturing industry.
20 Promotion
of Science and
Technology
Government
and Scientific
Research
Britain has for centuries encouraged research and innovation, and its record of
achievement in relation to size of population is in many respects unsurpassed
This record has been maintained throughout the twentieth century For
example, fundamental contributions to modern molecular genetics were made
OUtc°f thC Stmcture of the molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) by Professor Francis Crick, Professor Maurice Wilkins, and an American
coUeague, James Watson, at Cambridge University in 1952. More recent
achievements mdude the research carried out by Mr Patrick Steptoe and Dr
Robert Fdward8 which made possible the birth of the world’s first test-tube baby
in Britain m 1978, and work on brain and body scanners (based on
computerised X-ray readings, nuclear magnetic resonance or ultrasonics) and
on monoclonal antibodies (used to diagnose animal diseases and which have the
potential to combat human virus diseases). Other notable contributions in
recent years have been made by Professor Dennis Gabor on holography (the
production of three-dimensional images using lasers), Dr Brian Josephson on
superconductivity (abnormally high electrical conductivity at low temperatures)
Professor Stephen Hawking on black holes (hypothetical regions of space). Sir
Martm Ryle and Professor Antony Hewish on radio-astrophysics, and Professor
Frederick Sanger on molecular biology. Nobel prizes for science have been won
by bb British citizens, a number exceeded only by the United States.
f7«on in Britain °n research and development in 1981 was some
£5,800 million 2-3 per cent of the gross domestic product. About half was
provided by industrial enterprises, with a significant contribution also being
made by private endowments, trusts and charities. The other half was financed
by the Government, which carries out roughly a quarter of Britain’s research
and development in its own establishments. Government finance for research
and development also went to industry and the universities. Considerable
expenditure is directed towards applied research and the development of new or
improved materials, products and processes. In many areas Britain participates
in European and other international projects.
Responsibility for basic civil science in Britain rests with the Secretary of State
r Education and Science, and responsibility for technology mainly with the
Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, but in all cases the Prime Minister has
overal! respons^ihty. Other government departments are concerned with
research and development related to their functions. Government responsibility
for space activities is undertaken by the Secretary of State for Trade and
Industry, the Secretary of State for Education and Science (through the Science
346
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and Engineering Research Council), and the Secretary of State for Defence
according to the nature of the project. Applied research and development is
undertaken in accordance with the ‘customer—contractor principle’ under
which government departments, as customers, define their research require¬
ments. The work is undertaken by contractors including government laborator¬
ies, research councils, universities, research associations and industry. Depart¬
ments with major scientific or technological needs generally have a Chief
Scientist’s organisation, which helps to formulate requirements, select the most
suitable contractors and co-operate with them to obtain the best value for
money.
Advice on scientific and technological matters is provided by the Advisory
Board for the Research Councils, the Advisory Council for Applied Research and
Development (ACARD), and a committee of Chief Scientists and Permanent
Secretaries. These bodies ensure that scientific questions are brought before
ministers as appropriate and that scientific priorities reflect those of the
Government as a whole.
ACARD (whose members include senior industrialists and academics) pro¬
duces reports on applied research, design and development in Britain; the
application of research and technology, developed in Britain and elsewhere, for
the benefit of both the public and private sectors in accordance with national
economic needs; and the co-ordination (in collaboration with the Advisory Board
for the Research Councils) of these activities with research supported through
the Department of Education and Science. It also advises on Britain’s role in
international collaboration in applied research, design and development related
to technology.
Research and
Development
Expenditure
Total government expenditure on research and development in 1984—85 is
estimated (at outturn prices) to be some £4,200 million. The largest departmen¬
tal research and development budget is that of the Ministry of Defence. The main
civil departments involved are the Department of Education and Science, which
supports the research councils and the universities; the Department of Trade
and Industry; the Department of Energy; the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food and the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland; the
Department of the Environment; and the Department of Transport.
The
Department of
Education and
Science
The Department of Education and Science discharges its responsibilities for
basic and applied civil science mainly through the five research councils to
which it allocates funds from its science budget (£550 million in 1984—85). The
councils and their allocations are; the Science and Engineering Research
Council (£278-8 million), the Medical Research Council (£117-2 million), the
Natural Environment Research Council (£65-9 million), the Agricultural and
Food Research Council (£46-5 million) and the Economic and Social Research
Council (£22 million). Science budget grants are also made to the British
Museum (Natural History), the Royal Society and the Fellowship of Engineering.
The allocations provide support for research in the form of grants and contracts
to universities, polytechnics and elsewhere, research units and other establish¬
ments of the research councils, postgraduate support and subscriptions to
international scientific organisations. The Department is also responsible for
some aspects of international scientific relations and helps to co-ordinate
government policy regarding scientific and technical information.
The Department is also the main source of funding for the universities, whose
allocations are determined by the University Grants Committee. Although
individual universities decide upon the allocation of their resources between
teaching and research, the proportion committed to research is generally
believed to be between 25 and 30 per cent.
The Advisory
Board for the
Research
Councils
THE RESEARCH
COUNCILS
Science and
Engineering
Research
Council
Research
Es ta blishm en ts
International
Collaboration
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 347
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils advises the Secretary of State on
civil science, particularly with regard to the research council system, on the
support of postgraduate students, on the proper balance between national and
international scientific activities, and on the allocation of the science budget
among research councils and other bodies. It also promotes close liaison
between the councils and users of their research. Its membership includes the
chairman or secretary of each of the research councils, the chairman of the
University Grants Committee, the Chief Scientists from departments with a
major interest in the work of the research councils, the Chief Scientific Adviser,
Cabinet Office, and independent members drawn from universities, industry
and the Royal Society.
Each of the five research councils is an autonomous body established under
Royal Charter with membership drawn from the universities, professions,
industry and the Government. They conduct research through their own
research establishments and by supporting selected research in universities and
other higher education establishments. They also receive income for research
commissioned by departments under the customer—contractor principle and
from the private sector. Income from commissioned research is particularly
important for the Agricultural and Food Research Council and the Natural
Environment Research Council.
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) supports basic research
in astronomy, geophysics, the biological sciences, chemistry, mathematics,
physics, and engineering and applied sciences, in furthering its primary
purpose of sustaining standards of postgraduate education and research in the
universities and polytechnics. A large proportion of SERC’s resources is devoted
to the provision of research grants to help academic staff to carry out
fundamental research, either in their own institutions or in the Council’s
research establishments or elsewhere; the encouragement of active collabora¬
tion between higher education establishments and industry, particularly in
areas of national importance; the award of studentships to suitable graduates
for training in methods of research or a specialised branch of science or
engineering of importance to British industry; and the award of fellowships to
promising scientists or engineers to enable them to carry out their own
independent research programmes.
SERC maintains four research establishments: the Daresbury Laboratory at
Warrington (Cheshire), the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux
(East Sussex), the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, and the Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory at Chilton (Oxfordshire). The establishments are centres of special¬
ised research, and are also used for the development and operation of central
experimental facilities beyond the resources of an academic institution. They
provide support for scientists whose research needs access to facilities run by
international research organisations, such as the powerful particle accelerators
at the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) near Geneva,
Switzerland, and the high-flux neutron source at the Institut Laue-Langevin
(ILL) at Grenoble, France.
SERC provides national contributions to CERN, the civil science programme of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, the Anglo-Australian Telescope, and the
European Incoherent Scatter Facility; and part of Britain’s contribution to the
European Space Agency (see p 354). It also contributes to the European Science
Foundation, and shares with its French and Federal German partners the
control of the ILL nuclear reactor at Grenoble. In addition, SERC encourages
348
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Engineering
Astronomy
Nuclear Physics
Natural
Sciences
scientists and engineers to initiate or extend collaborative projects with
colleagues overseas by using its fellowships, studentships and grant schemes.
Developments in engineering research and training related to the needs of
industry are major concerns of SERC. Some special programmes are being
supported within a general effort to develop research and postgraduate training
in university and polytechnic engineering departments. Among subjects receiv¬
ing major support are information technology (including software engineering,
intelligent knowledge-based systems and device fabrication), radio communica¬
tions, the application of computers to manufacturing, biotechnology, marine
technology, polymer engineering, materials, particulate technology, medical
engineering, combustion engines and coal technology. The Teaching Company
Scheme, jointly sponsored by SERC and the Department of Trade and Industry,
supports collaborative ventures between academic engineering departments
and industrial companies to improve their manufacturing methods and
performance. A network providing an interactive computing facility to universi¬
ties is serviced at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory.
Britain has a leading position in most major branches of astronomy including
radio astronomy, infra-red astronomy, X-ray astronomy and theoretical re¬
search. Its role in optical astronomy (carried out in university departments and,
within SERC, at the Royal Greenwich Observatory and the Royal Observatory,
Edinburgh) is expected to be restored as a result of three optical telescopes
which will form the basis of a new international observatory on the island of La
Palma in the Canary Islands. Two telescopes (the Isaac Newton Telescope, 2-5 m
in diameter, and a 1-m telescope) are in use, while the 4-2-m William Herschel
Telescope will be operational in 1986. Other instruments used include the
Anglo-Australian Telescope, of 3-9-m diameter, at Siding Spring, Australia, in a
project with the Australian Government, and a 3-8-m infra-red telescope, the
largest telescope in the world designed specifically to make infra-red observa¬
tions, at Mauna Kea, Hawaii. Also on Hawaii SERC, in collaboration with the
Netherlands, has under construction a special 15-m radio telescope for
observing wavelengths of less than a millimetre; much of the observation will
eventually be carried out under remote control from Britain and the Netherlands
using computer communications networks. Cambridge and Manchester univer¬
sities are the main centres for research in radio astronomy, with substantial
support from SERC.
The Starlink network of computer systems, centred at Chilton and located at
many centres of astronomical research in Britain, provides and co-ordinates
image processing and data reduction facilities for use by British astronomers.
SERC establishments concerned with the provision of facilities for university
research in nuclear physics are at Chilton, which supports university teams
engaged in experiments in particle physics at CERN and other overseas centres,
and the Daresbury Laboratory, where there is a 20 million-volt tandem
accelerator for research into nuclear structure. Projects using these and other
facilities are funded through research grants to universities.
Support is provided for high-quality research in biological and natural sciences,
mathematics and science-based archaeology. Where experimental facilities are
too expensive to be financed by individual universities and polytechnics, central
facilities have been provided. For example, since 1980 the Daresbury Laboratory
has operated a synchrotron storage ring which provides high-intensity electro¬
magnetic radiation used in a wide range of experiments in materials science,
surface physics, crystallography and molecular biology. Other central facilities
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
349
The Technical
Change Centre
Medical
Research
Council
Natural
Environment
Research
Council
include a high-powered laser facility at Chilton, which is used to study plasmas,
and a spallation neutron source, also at Chilton, to provide a pulsed beam of
neutrons.
The Technical Change Centre in London, funded jointly by SERC, the Economic
and Social Research Council and the Leverhulme Trust, conducts and promotes
study and research into the choice, management and acceptability of technical
change with relevance to the national economy.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is the main government agency for the
support of biomedical research. Its major research establishments are the
National Institute for Medical Research at Mill Hill, London, which carries out
fundamental research relevant to medicine, the Clinical Research Centre at
Northwick Park Hospital, London, and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at
Cambridge. The Council also has over 50 research units, mostly located in
university departments, medical schools and hospitals in Britain. In addition to
the work it supports in its own establishments, the Council provides further
support for research through grants to workers in universities, polytechnics and
other centres, and through awards granted for those undertaking research
training. Its primary objective is to advance knowledge that will improve the level
of health. Major areas of activity include neurosciences, molecular and cell
biology, reproduction and development, and cancer.
The MRC is assisted by four advisory boards: the Neurobiology and Mental
Health Board; the Cell Biology and Disorders Board: the Physiological Systems
and Disorders Board; and the Tropical Medicine Research Board.
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) is responsible for encourag¬
ing, planning and executing research in the physical and biological sciences
relating to man’s natural environment and its resources. The work is broadly
divided into groups defined as: the Solid Earth (its physical properties and
mineral resources): Seas and Oceans (their behaviour and living and mineral
resources): Inland Waters (their behaviour and living resources); Terrestrial
Environments (natural ecosystems and their resources): Atmosphere (its
structure and interactions); and a number of interdisciplinary studies including
pollution and the physical and biological properties of the Antarctic environ¬
ment. Research programmes being expanded include those on geological work
in connection with deep drilling and mapping, which is important for future
mineral and energy exploration; new means of insect pest control using viruses
harmless to man; environmental biotechnology; forestry; estuarine processes;
atmospheric chemistry; Antarctic research; the climate; remote sensing by
satellite, for resource and ecological surveys; and ocean modelling. NERC is also
involved extensively in contract research and is able to provide public
authorities, industry and commerce with experienced personnel and material
facilities for such work across the spectrum of environmental science.
The Council’s research institutes are: the British Antarctic Survey, the British
Geological Survey, the Institute of Hydrology, the Institute of Marine Biochemis¬
try, the Institute for Marine Environmental Research, the Institute of Oceano¬
graphic Sciences, the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, the Institute of Virology
and the Sea Mammal Research Unit. The Council also operates the Research
Vessel Services and maintains a central computing service in support of
all its institutes.
Research institutes aided by council grants are: the Freshwater Biological
Association, the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, the
Scottish Marine Biological Association and the Unit of Comparative Plant
Ecology.
350
Agricultural
and Food
Research
Council
Economic and
Social
Research
Council
UNIVERSITY
RESEARCH
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Agricultural and Food Research Council (AFRO has eight research
institutes under its direct control: the Animal Breeding Research Organisation,
the Institute for Research on Animal Diseases, the Institute of Animal
Physiology, the Food Research Institute, the Letcombe Laboratory, dealing with
the growth of crops in relation to soil conditions and cultivation, the Meat
Research Institute, the Poultry Research Centre, and the Weed Research
Organisation. There are five AFRC units associated with universities and one
computing centre, in Harpenden (Hertfordshire). The AFRC is also responsible
for 15 independent state-aided agricultural research institutes, notably the
Rothamsted Experimental Station, at Harpenden, which is the largest agricultu¬
ral research institute in Britain (and was the first in the world to be established,
in 1843), and deals with research on soils, fertilisers, crop physiology and crop
husbandry: and the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering, at Silsoe
(Bedfordshire). There are also seven independent institutes in Scotland
financed by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland which
receives advice from the AFRC on their scientific programme and staffing.
Under the AFRC’s long-term strategy, greater emphasis is being given to the
expanding areas of science related to agriculture and food, especially in human
food and nutrition research. Several organisational changes are planned
including the consolidation of related research programmes on a reduced
number of sites.
The interest of the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) covers the
broad areas of social affairs, education and human development, industry and
employment, economic affairs, environment and planning, and government and
law. The ESRC sponsors a number of designated research centres and initiates
research into such topics as industrial policy, energy policy, population studies,
central and local government, young people in society, and inner city areas.
Grants are provided for research projects at universities and other institutions,
and awards made to postgraduate students. The ESRC also has five research
units: the Industrial Relations Research Unit; the Cambridge Group for the
History of Population and Social Structure; the Research Unit on Ethnic
Relations; the Centre for Socio-legal Studies; and the Social and Applied
Psychology Unit (run jointly with the Medical Research Council).
Of the total estimated university expenditure on scientific research in the
academic year 1982-83 (£590 million), the largest government contribution
(£340 million) was through the University Grants Committee.
Scientific research in the universities and other institutions of higher
education is also supported through the research councils. This support takes
two forms. First, nearly two-thirds of the postgraduate students in science and
technology receive maintenance awards from the research councils, through
postgraduate studentships. These awards are in some cases for periods of up to
three years of training in research work and in others for shorter periods for
advanced studies. Secondly, grants and contracts are given to the universities
and other institutions by the research councils for specified projects, particular¬
ly in new or developing areas of research. The AFRC, MRC and ESRC maintain a
number of research units within universities. In addition, the research councils
provide central facilities in their own establishments for use by university
research workers. The other main channels of support for scientific research in
the universities are various government departments, the Royal Society,
industry and the independent foundations.
A number of universities in industrial centres have acquired outstanding
reputations in studies relating to their local industries, and on a national scale
close relationships are fostered between the universities, industry and the
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
351
CHARITABLE
FOUNDATIONS
PROFESSIONAL
INSTITUTIONS
The
Fellowship of
Engineering
THE LEARNED
SOCIETIES
Royal Society
Government in numerous joint projects. Britain has more than 20 science parks
constructed or planned. These are sites, usually near universities, containing
science-based industries and designed to facilitate commercial developments in
advanced technology through collaboration between university and industrial
scientists and technologists.
Charitable foundations sponsoring research in Britain include: the Cancer
Research Campaign, the Chester Beatty Institute for Cancer Research, the Ciba
Foundation, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the Institute for Cancer
Research, the Leverhulme Foundation, the Nuffield Foundation, the Wellcome
Trust and the Wolfson Foundation.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many
ot which promote their own disciplines or are interested in the education and
professional well-being of their members. The Council of Science and Tech-
nology Institutes has 15 member institutes representing, among others,
biologists, chemists, mathematicians, metallurgists, physicists and geologists.
The Fellowship of Engineering, formed from distinguished engineers in the
Royal Society and the leading chartered engineering institutions, advises the
Government and other relevant bodies on all aspects of engineering. It also
arranges lectures, seminars and conferences on matters of national importance
in engineering. The Fellowship was incorporated by Royal Charter in 1983. Up
to 60 leading engineers from industry, the academic world and the public service
in Britain are elected each year and there were 562 Fellows in 1984.
More than 300 learned societies in Britain play an important part in the
promotion of science and technology. Through meetings, publications and
recognition by the scientific community, they help to maintain high profession¬
al and academic standards and facilitate the spread of knowledge. The Royal
Society, the oldest of these societies, is also the national academy of science,
while the Royal Colleges in the various fields of medicine and the Fellowship of
Engineering have similar leading roles in their areas. In addition, the Royal
Society of Arts, the Royal Institution and the British Association for the
Advancement of Science are also broadly concerned with the promotion of
science and technology. In Scotland the Royal Society of Edinburgh, founded in
1783, is concerned with the promotion of science and literature.
The Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for Improving
Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique place in Britain’s
scientific affairs and is equivalent to national academies of sciences in other
countries. It is the oldest such academy in the world to have enjoyed continuous
existence. There are today three main categories of Fellowship: Royal Fellows;
Foreign Members, of whom there are about 85; and the main body of Fellows
numbering about 1,000. Election to the Fellowship, which is for life, is
restricted to 40 people a year. The Royal Society is governed by a council of 21
members. The President of the Society is consulted on scientific appointments
to research councils (other than the Economic and Social Research Council) and
Fellows serve on most of the governmental advisory councils and committees
concerned with research.
The Royal Society recognises the highest standards of scientific and technolo¬
gical achievements through its elections to the Fellowship and the award of its
medals and endowed lectureships. It awards 14 medals (not all annually)
including the Copley Medal (its highest award) and three Royal Medals, while
there are seven endowed lectureships. The Society encourages research through
352
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Royal Society
of Arts
Royal
Institution
British
Association
the award of grants and research appointments. It administers 18 research
professorships, of which four are supported from private funds and the
remainder from its parliamentary grant. A further 11 senior research fel¬
lowships and 120 other research fellowships are supported in British universi¬
ties. Grants for research are made from its private funds and from its
parliamentary grant, and particular funds are available for scientific investiga¬
tions and expeditions, for travel by individual scientists, for studies in the
history of science and for scientific publications. The dissemination of scientific
knowledge is encouraged by a programme of scientific discussion meetings and
through its publications. It has an extensive library of works relating to the
history of science. The council gives advice to the Government and other bodies
on matters relating to science and technology and their application, and study
groups on particular aspects of science are established at intervals to prepare
reports which are widely distributed to the scientific community. A number of
committees of the council, some of them jointly with other bodies, promote
improvements in education in science subjects and emphasise the importance
of the applied sciences and engineering in industry.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. As the national
academy of science, it represents Britain in all but two of the 19 international
unions comprising the International Council of Scientific Unions. It is a
member of the European Science Foundation and certain other organisations,
and also plays a leading part in international scientific programmes. It has
agreements for exchange visits by scientists and co-operative research with
many academies throughout the world, and maintains informal relations to
promote scientific co-operation with many other countries; some 3,000 visits
abroad for periods ranging from a few days to two years are supported annually.
The largest formal scheme is the European Science Exchange Programme,
which provides for fellowships (usually of one year) and study visits (lasting
about two months) with 15 other countries in Western Europe.
The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement of
Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) is concerned with arts, architecture and
design, science and technology, industry and commerce, the environment and
education. Since its foundation in 1754, one of the Society’s principal objects
has been to promote the progress of all branches of practical knowledge, chiefly
by means of lectures and conferences, and by the publication of a monthly
journal designed to enable leading authorities to report on developments of
public as well as specialist interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating the
introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for
teaching the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the
‘promotion of chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving arts
and manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’. Its
character, however, was largely determined by the early nineteenth-century
work of Sir Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday, who established a tradition of
research. Today the Royal Institution has extensive laboratories which under¬
take research on subjects including fast chemical kinetics, photosynthesis and
solar energy. Lectures are given on recent developments in science and other
branches of knowledge with particular emphasis on encouraging young people
to take an interest in science.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 to
promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief
activities is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as well as by
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
353
Zoological
Gardens
Botanical
Gardens
Scientific
Museums
eminent scientists. In addition, the Association plans special lectures, exhibi¬
tions, conferences and discussions, appoints study groups and publishes
pamphlets. The Association has 16 branches and five lectureships for young
scientists (dealing with the physical, biological and social sciences) to encourage
scientists to make their activities known to wider audiences. The British
Association has made an important contribution to the development of science
by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles to the discovery and
application of scientific knowledge.
The Zoological Society of London, whose main function is as a scientific
organisation, runs the world-famous London Zoo, opened in 1828, which
occupies 14 hectares (36 acres) of Regent’s Park, London. In 1931 the Society
opened Whipsnade Park Zoo near Dunstable (Bedfordshire) where over 2,000
animals roam a 200-hectare (500-acre) park. The Society is responsible for the
Institute of Zoology, which carries out research in conservation and comparative
medicine. It also organises scientific meetings and symposia for zoologists,
publishes scientific journals and maintains one of the largest zoological libraries
in the world. Other well-known zoos (of which there are some 150 in Britain)
include those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester, Dudley, Chessington, Marwell
(near Winchester) and Jersey. There are also a number of ‘safari parks’
containing reservations of wild animals through which the public can pass in
closed motor cars.
The Royal Botanic Gardens (founded in 1759) cover 121 hectares (300 acres) at
Kew (west London) and a 187-hectare (462-acre) estate at Wakehurst Place,
Ardingly (West Sussex). They contain the largest collections of living and dried
plants in the world. The Herbarium is primarily concerned with research into
the classification of plants and the preparation of floras and plant lists as well as
the identification of about 50,000 specimens a year from overseas. A Conserva¬
tion Unit gathers and provides information on endangered species of plant on a
world-wide basis. The study of plant anatomy, plant biochemistiy, cytology and
genetics is undertaken in the Jodrell Laboratory at Kew. The laboratory’s plant
physiology section is based at Wakehurst Place where research is being carried
out into seed germination and storage and a seed bank of temperate and tropical
species is maintained. A wide range of living plants, comprising some 110,000
different kinds of plant representing most families, is displayed at Kew.
The Royal Botanic Garden at Edinburgh was founded in 1670. Associated
gardens are the Logan Botanic Garden at Ardwell near Stranraer, the Younger
Botanic Garden at Benmore near Dunoon, and Dawyck Garden at Stobo near
Peebles. The large collection of living plants, both out of doors and in
greenhouses, is used for taxonomic research (into plant classification).
The British Museum (Natural History) is one of the world's principal centres for
the general study of natural history, particularly for specialised research into
taxonomy. It has five scientific departments: botany, entomology, mineralogy,
palaeontology and zoology. It possesses extensive collections of extant and fossil
animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and meteorites. The Science Museum
illustrates the development of pure and applied science in all countries, but
chiefly in Britain. The geology of Britain is probably known in more exact detail
than that of any other country in the world, and the British Geological Survey
has an outstanding collection of exhibits in the Geological Museum. These three
museums are in South Kensington, London. Other important collections
include the Museum of Science and Industry, in Birmingham, the Museum of
the History of Science, at Oxford, and the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh.
354
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INTER¬
NATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
SPACE
ACTIVITIES
Britain is represented on the European Community committee concerned with
co-ordination of national policies on scientific and technological research and
implementation of joint projects of interest to the Community, and the
Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Other inter-governmental
organisations involved in scientific co-operation with which Britain is con¬
cerned include: European Co-operation in Science and Technology; specialised
agencies of the United Nations such as the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation; the International Atomic Energy Agency;
the Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Energy Agency; the European
Organisation for Nuclear Research; the European Space Agency; the European
Molecular Biology Laboratory; the International Agency for Research on Cancer;
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation Science Committee. Among
non-governmental organisations Britain is represented in the international
unions comprising the International Council of Scientific Unions (see p 352).
The five research councils, the Royal Society and the British Academy were
founder members of the European Science Foundation set up in 1974. Since
1968 Britain has signed over 35 inter-governmental agreements with other
countries on co-operation in science and technology or technical co-operation.
These agreements are usually intended to promote mutually beneficial ex¬
changes and are administered by various government departments.
There are science and technology sections in the British Embassies in
Washington, Paris, Bonn and Tokyo, while staff in other British Embassies and
High Commissions also promote contacts in science and technology between
Britain and the countries to which they are accredited. They serve all central
government departments concerned in overseas scientific affairs, as well as
research councils and the Royal Society, which is the main representative of
Britain in areas of non-governmental collaboration. Increasing use of their
services is being made by industrialists. Reports from the embassies on overseas
science and technology are disseminated to over 1,000 British companies.
Administrative support for the overseas scientific network is provided by the
Department of Trade and Industry’s Overseas Technical Information Unit.
The British Council (which promotes an understanding of Britain overseas
through cultural, educational and technical co-operation) fosters co-operation
between British scientists and those of overseas countries to promote among
overseas specialists a better understanding and knowledge of Britain and its
scientific achievements, and, in the developing countries, to identify and
manage development projects in the technological, scientific and educational
sectors. The Council helps British scientists to visit other countries, makes its
own awards for postgraduate study in Britain by scientists from overseas and
supervises programmes for senior specialists and students who come to Britain
through United Nations agencies or bilateral technical co-operation schemes.
A number of government departments have an interest in space activities,
including the Department of Trade and Industry, the Department of Education
and Science (through the Science and Engineering Research Council) and the
Ministry of Defence. Expenditure on civil space activities in 1983—84 was about
£84 million.
Britain is a member of the European Space Agency (ESA) together with
Belgium, Denmark, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Irish
Republic, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. The Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry is responsible for leading the British delegation to
the ESA and for British participation in its space applications programmes, and
in Spacelab, a manned laboratory first launched aboard the United States Space
Shuttle in 1983.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
355
In 1982 Britain joined the ESA’s ‘Ariane’ launcher programme, having
previously been involved in the development and production of equipment for
the project through the bilateral agreement with France. The ESA is sending a
mission to observe Halley’s Comet, intercepting it in March 1986, and the
British-built Giotto spacecraft is due to be launched aboard the Ariane rocket in
July 1985. The Department also promotes technological development in
Britain’s space industry through a national space programme; the industry has
advanced and wide-ranging capabilities, particularly in telecommunications.
British industry has led all the ESA-developed communications satellites
including the Orbital Test Satellite, the MARECS series for the International
Maritime Satellite Organisation and the ECS series .for the European organisa¬
tion Eutelsat. A much larger satellite, OLYMPUS, is under development and is
expected to be launched in 1987. The Department of Education and Science,
through the Science and Engineering Research Council, provides Britain’s
representatives and financial contribution for the ESA’s scientific satellite
programme. Participation in the ESA’s science programme provides the main
space opportunities for British experimenter groups and, in competition with
other European science groups, Britain has been selected to participate in all
but one of the ESA’s science missions.
There are bilateral arrangements for space research with other countries,
notably the United States through its National Aeronautics and Space Adminis¬
tration (NASA). British experiments have already provided information which
has helped to increase scientific knowledge, especially in astronomy, astrophy¬
sics and geophysics, including climate research. The AMPTE mission, a
collaborative project of Britain, the United States and the Federal Republic of
Germany, was set up to study space plasma physics and involved the launch of
three spacecraft on a single rocket in August 1984. Britain plans to put an X-ray
telescope on board the Federal Republic of Germany’s X-ray satellite ROSAT, due
to be launched in 1987. Other international satellite missions are being
planned.
21 Promotion
of the Arts
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest standards of
professional performance to the enthusiastic support and participation of
amateurs. London is one of the leading world centres for drama, music, opera
and dance, and festivals held in towns and cities throughout the country attract
much interest. Many British playwrights, composers, sculptors, painters,
writers, actors, singers, choreographers and dancers enjoy international
reputations. Television and radio play an important role in bringing a wide
range of artistic events to a large audience. At an amateur level, activities which
make use of local talent and resources take many forms: choral, orchestral,
operatic, dramatic and other societies for the arts abound, and increasing
numbers of people take an interest in crafts such as pottery, weaving and
woodwork. New arts activities introduced by the ethnic minorities are beginning
to flourish, and range from Indian dance to Pakistani poetry and Caribbean steel
bands.
Policies Policies for the arts aim to sustain activity in the performing and visual arts, and
to maintain and develop the nation’s heritage of art and cultural objects, literary
material and archive and information stores. These objectives seek to meet the
need for public information and education, and appreciation and enjoyment of
the nation’s cultural heritage and talents. The Government plans to maintain
existing levels of support for arts activities at a time of economic constraint: to
encourage private funding of the arts by various means including sponsorship;
and to make the arts more available to people in the regions. An important
concept in its funding policy is the ‘arm’s length principle' by which government
funds are distributed to arts organisations indirectly, through bodies such as
the Arts Council.
Promotion and patronage of the arts are the concern of both official and
unofficial bodies. The Government and local authorities play an active part, and
a substantial and increasing amount of help also comes from private sources,
including trusts and commercial concerns.
The Minister for the Arts, a Minister of State at the Privy Council Office, is
responsible for general arts policy, and the Office of Arts and Libraries
administers government expenditure on national museums and art galleries in
England, the British Library, the Arts Council and other national arts and
heritage bodies. Responsibility for the upkeep of ancient monuments and
historical buildings is exercised by the Department of the Environment, and the
regulation of the film industry and broadcasting is conducted by the Depart¬
ment of Trade and Industry and the Home Office, respectively. The Secretaries of
State for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are responsible for the national
museums, galleries and libraries in their countries, and for other cultural
matters.
Local authorities support a wide range of artistic activities. They maintain
more than 1,000 local museums and art galleries, provide grant aid for
358
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
Arts Councils
professional and voluntary organisations including orchestras and theatre,
opera and ballet companies, and undertake direct promotions through local arts
councils. They also contribute to the cost of new or converted buildings for the
arts.
Arts education in schools, colleges, polytechnics, evening institutes and
community centres is the responsibility of central government education
departments, in partnership with local education authorities and voluntary
bodies.
Planned government expenditure through the Office of Arts and Libraries
amounts to some £257 million in 1984—85. About 25 per cent of current
expenditure is being spent on the nine national galleries and museums in
England, some 20 per cent on the British Library, and about 40 per cent (£100
million) channelled through the Arts Council to support the performing and
visual arts throughout Britain. Grants are also made to bodies including the
British Film Institute, the Crafts Council, certain other museums, and to the
National Heritage Memorial Fund. The Fund, an independent body set up in
1980, provides assistance to organisations wishing to acquire, for the public
benefit, land, buildings, works of art and other objects associated with the
national heritage. Additional expenditure in Scotland, Wades and Northern
Ireland amounts to some £26 million.
Proposed spending on the arts and libraries by locad authorities in 1984—85 is
some £407 million; nearly 90 per cent of current expenditure by the authorities
in England is on the public library service, and the remainder on local museums
and art galleries.
Industrial and commercial concerns offer a vitad and growing source of
sponsorship and patronage to a wide range of arts, including exhibitions,
concerts and opera seasons, and are often advised by the Association for
Business Sponsorship of the Arts and the Arts Council. A new unit with
responsibility for sponsorship policy has been set up in the Office of Arts and
Libraries, and an incentive scheme was launched in 1984 to provide grants
totalling up to £1 million in a full year to match new business sponsorships. The
value of business sponsorship is currently some £13-5 million a year.
The main objects of the Arts Council of Great Britain, established by Royal
Charter in 1946, are to develop and improve the knowledge, understanding and
practice of the living and performing arts, to increase their accessibility to the
public, and to advise and co-operate with government departments, local
authorities and other organisations. The Council gives financial help and advice
to many organisations, from the major opera, dance and drama companies,
orchestras and festivals, to the smallest touring theatres and experimental
groups. It encourages such interests as contemporary dance, mime, jazz,
literature, photography and art films, and helps professional creative writers,
choreographers, composers, artists and photographers through a variety of
subsidy schemes. It also promotes art exhibitions and tours of opera, dance and
drama companies and of contemporary music groups, and provides funds for
specialist training courses in the arts. Under a development programme for the
next decade, launched in 1984, the Council is increasing its funding of the arts
in the regions and reducing its support for activities in London. In the first five
years support for new activities is being concentrated in five main areas of the
arts—art, dance, drama, music and education—focusing on 12 centres of
population. Increased funding and responsibilities are also being given to the
regional arts associations (see p 359).
Organisations in Scotland and Wales receive their subsidies through the
Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils, which are committees of the Arts Council of
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
359
Regional Arts
Associations
Arts Centres
British Council
Broadcasting
Organisations
Festivals
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
Great Britain with a large measure of autonomy. Northern Ireland has an
independent Arts Council with aims and functions similar to those of the Arts
Council of Great Britain.
Regional co-operation in arts patronage is encouraged through 15 regional arts
associations in England and Wales, which aim to ensure that the arts are more
widely available and that artists receive support at regional as well as national
level. They offer financial assistance to artists and arts organisations, and advise
on, and in some cases promote, activities. They are financed by the Arts Council,
the British Film Institute, the Crafts Council and local authorities, and these
interests are represented on the governing bodies of the associations.
About 200 arts centres in Britain provide opportunities for enjoyment of and
participation in the arts. The centres are supported mainly by regional arts
associations and local authorities with some help from the Arts Council and
other organisations. Many theatres and art galleries provide a focal point for the
community by offering facilities for other arts.
The British Council promotes knowledge of British culture and literature
overseas and maintains libraries in most of the countries in which it is
represented. The Council may initiate or support overseas tours by British
theatre companies, orchestras, choirs, and opera and dance companies, as well
as by individual actors, musicians and artists. It promotes fine arts and other
exhibitions overseas, organises British participation in international exhibi¬
tions, and encourages professional interchange in all cultural fields between
Britain and other countries.
Both the BBC and the independent television companies broadcast a wide
variety of drama (including adaptations of novels and stage plays), performances
of opera, ballet, and orchestral and other music, and general arts magazine
programmes and documentaries. These have won many international awards
at festivals such as the Prix Italia Television Festival and the Montreux Inter¬
national Television Festival. Independent television companies also make grants
for the promotion of the arts in their regions.
The BBC has orchestras employing many of Britain’s full-time professional
musicians, and each week it broadcasts nearly 100 hours of serious music (both
live and recorded) on its Radio 3 channel. It regularly commissions new music,
particularly by British composers, and sponsors concerts, competitions and
festivals.
Considerable interest and enthusiasm is shown for the 240 professional arts
festivals which take place each year. The Edinburgh International Festival,
featuring a wide range of different arts, is the largest of its kind in the world.
Well-known festivals concentrating on music include the Three Choirs Festival,
which has taken place annually for more than 250 years in Gloucester,
Worcester or Hereford; the Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to contemporary
British music; and the Aldeburgh and Bath festivals. Among others catering for
a number of art forms are the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, the Llangollen
International Musical Eisteddfod and the festivals in Belfast, Buxton, Malvern,
Chichester, Harrogate, Salisbury, Windsor and York.
Britain is the world’s foremost country for theatre, and has a long and rich
dramatic tradition. As well as companies based in London and other major cities
and towns, numerous touring companies visit a wide range of theatres,
community festivals and halls throughout Britain including arts and sports
360
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Theatre for
Young People
centres and working men's clubs. Contemporary British playwrights who have
received recognition at home and overseas include Harold Pinter, Tom Stoppard,
Alan Ayckbourn, Caryl Churchill and David Edgar; Tom Stoppard’s play The
Real Thing won four United States ‘Tony’ awards in 1984 for best play, best
direction, best actor and best actress. The musicals of Andrew Lloyd Webber,
such as Cats and Jesus Christ, Superstar, have enjoyed considerable success
both at home and overseas. Among the best-known directors are Sir Peter Hall,
Trevor Nunn, Peter Brook, John Schlesinger and Terry Hands, while the many
British performers who enjoy international reputations include Dame Peggy
Ashcroft, Lord Olivier, Sir John Gielgud, Sir Alec Guinness, Vanessa Redgrave,
Jeremy Irons and Glenda Jackson. British designers such as John Bury, Ralph
Koltai and Carl Toms are internationally recognised.
Britain has some 300 theatres intended for professional use which can seat
over 200 and up to 2,300 people. Some are privately owned, but most are owned
either municipally or by non-profit-distributing organisations. Some 60 of these
house resident theatre companies which receive subsidies from the Arts
Council. London is the main focus with a hundred or so West End and suburban
theatres, 12 of which are permanently occupied by subsidised companies. These
include the National Theatre, which stages a wide range of modern and classical
plays in its three auditoria in the South Bank arts complex; the Royal
Shakespeare Company which, while still performing in Stratford upon Avon,
also produces plays by Shakespeare and his contemporaries, as well as relevant
modern work, in its two auditoria in the City’s Barbican Centre for Arts and
Conferences; and the English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre, which
produces the work of the most talented new playwrights.
Outside London most cities and many large towns have at least one theatre:
some, like the Palace Theatre, Manchester, and the Theatre Royal, Nottingham,
date from the nineteenth century and have been handsomely restored. Others,
like the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, and the Theatre Royal, Plymouth, have been
built to the latest designs. Some universities such as those in Aberystwyth,
Exeter and Newcastle upon Tyne have theatres which house professional
companies playing to the general public. Most regional repertory companies
mount about eight or ten productions a year; some also have studio theatres in
addition to the main auditorium, where they present new or experimental
drama and plays of specialist interest. Repertory theatres also frequently serve
the function of a social centre and meeting place, by offering a wide range of
events such as concerts, poetry recitals and exhibitions, and by providing
restaurants, bars and theatre shops. Successful productions from regional
theatre companies often transfer to London's West End, while the largest
regional theatres receive visits from the National Theatre or the Royal
Shakespeare Company.
A number of companies provide theatre for young audiences. Unicorn Theatre
for Young People and Polka Children’s Theatre, both in London, produce
specially written plays for those under 11 years old. Polka also tours throughout
the country, as does a company called Flying Tortoise. The Young Vic Company
in London and Contact Theatre Company in Manchester produce plays for
teenage audiences. There are numerous Theatre-in-Education companies which
perform in schools for all age ranges and abilities. Some of these companies
operate independently (such as Theatre Centre, which plays in London, and
tours further afield), while others are attached to regional repertory theatres
such as the Belgrade in Coventry and the Playhouse in Leeds. Most regional
repertory theatres also mount occasional productions aimed at younger
audiences, and concessionary ticket prices for those at school, college or
university are generally available. There are also a number of puppet companies.
SPORTING RECORDS
Tessa Sanderson set a new Olympic record for the javelin (69-56 metres) when
she won the gold medal in the 1984 Olympic Games - the first won by a British
javelin thrower.
Richard Noble
established a new
world land speed
record on 4 October
1983 in Thrust 2, a
34,000-horsepower
car with Rolls-Royce
jet engines. At Black
Rock Desert, Nevada,
United States, he
drove over two T6-km
(1-mile) runs at an
average speed of more
than 1,018 km/h
(633 mph), beating
the previous record by
17 km/h (11 mph).
RECREATION
A new public swimming
pool in Fulham, London.
The roller-coaster, with
its double corkscrew
section - one of several
adventure rides for
pleasure-trippers at the
Alton Towers amusement
park in Staffordshire.
THEATRE AND FILM
The spectacular set devised for the
London production of Andrew Lloyd-
Webber’s musical Starlight Express
enables performers (representing
trains) to roller-skate around the
auditorium at speeds of up to 48 km/h
(30 mph). The trellis bridge on the
right swings into position to link
different sections of skating track.
The set, built by the Production
Office, also includes laser lights,
computer-controlled lanterns and
fibre-optic effects.
SupeiTed and his friend Spottyman
are cartoon characters in a TV series
devised for S4C, the Welsh Fourth
Channel. The series, one of many
British film and video exports, has
been sold to the Disney Channel in the
United States.
THE ARTS
D. H. Lawrence, born a
hundred years ago in 1885,
was one of the most
important twentieth-
century English writers of
novels, short stories, poems
and essays. This portrait, by
Jan Juta, was painted in
1920, ten years before his
death.
Robert Pye’s Quillion was
among 60 works by 35
artists, assembled for a year¬
long exhibition (1983-84)
near Port Tblbot, West
Glamorgan, in one of a
growing number of sculpture
parks in Britain. The works
of Henry Moore, Barbara
Hepworth and Anthony Caro
were also represented. Many
of the sculptures are being
retained permanently and
supplemented by specially
commissioned works.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
361
Dramatic
Training
Amateur
Theatre
MUSIC, OPERA
AND DANCE
Music
Orchestral and
Choral
Choirs
Training for actors and stage managers is provided mainly in drama schools,
among which the best known are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, the
Central School of Speech and Drama, the London Academy of Music and Drama,
and the Drama Centre (all in London), and the Bristol Old Vic School, the Royal
Scottish Academy of Music and Drama (Glasgow) and the Manchester
Polytechnic School of Drama. There are a number of theatre design courses,
often based in art schools, which train designers for the stage. Several
universities offer courses in drama.
There are several thousand amateur drama societies throughout Britain. Their
work is encouraged by a number of bodies, such as the British Theatre
Association, the National Drama Conference, the Scottish Community Drama
Association and the Association of Ulster Drama Festivals. Amateur companies
sometimes receive financial support from local government, regional arts
associations and other bodies.
The widespread interest in classical music in Britain is reflected in the large
audiences at choral and orchestral concerts and at performances of opera, dance
and chamber music, while pop music, folk music, jazz, light music and brass
bands all have substantial followings.
Seasons of orchestral and choral concerts are promoted every year in many of the
large towns and cities. The principal concert-halls in central London are the
Royal Festival Hall, next to which are the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell
Room accommodating smaller-scale performances; the Barbican Hall (part of the
Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences); the Royal Albert Hall, where the
world-famous seasons of BBC Promenade Concerts are given each summer; the
Wigmore Hall, a recital centre; and St John’s, Smith Square.
The leading symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the London
Symphony (resident at the Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences), the
Philharmonia, the Royal Philharmonic, the BBC Symphony, the Royal Liverpool
Philharmonic, the Halle (Manchester), the City of Birmingham Symphony, the
Bournemouth Symphony, and the Ulster and the Scottish National. The BBC’s
orchestras provide broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There
are also specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English
Chamber Orchestra, the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the Academy of
Ancient Music, the Bournemouth Sinfonietta, the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle
upon Tyne), the Scottish Baroque Ensemble and the Scottish Chamber
Orchestra. The London Sinfonietta specialises in performing contemporary
music. Groups playing authentic early instruments are attracting increasing
interest throughout the country.
British conductors such as Sir Colin Davis and Simon Rattle reach a wide
audience through their recordings as well as by their performances, and the
works of composers such as Sir Michael Tippett, the late Sir William Walton and
the late Lord (Benjamin) Britten enjoy international acclaim. The Master of the
Queen’s Music, Malcolm Williamson, holds an office within the Royal Household
with responsibility for organising and writing music for state occasions.
Among the principal choral societies are the Bach Choir, the Royal Choral
Society, the Cardiff Polyphonic Choir, the Edinburgh Choral Union and the
Belfast Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading orchestras have close links
with particular choirs, such as the Philharmonia Chorus and the London
Symphony Chorus. The English tradition of church singing is represented by
choirs such as those of King’s College Chapel, Cambridge, and Christ Church
Cathedral, Oxford. There are many male-voice choirs in Wales and in certain
parts of England.
362
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Pop Music
Jazz
Opera and
Dance
Dance and Mime
Companies
Training in
Music, Opera
and Dance
Among the characteristics of modern pop music are the diversity of styles, the
frequency with which new styles and stars emerge, and the short lifespan of
many groups. Usually electric guitars and drums provide the instrumental
basis, but there has been an increasing use of brass instruments, while many
new groups have abandoned traditional instruments for electronic synthesisers.
Pop music is an integral part of ‘youth culture’, and has been so since the early
1960s when groups such as The Beatles and The Rolling Stones, and later The
Who, Led Zeppelin and Pink Floyd, achieved international success. British
groups have continued to appeal to audiences world-wide and often set new
trends in music; some of the more recent groups to have achieved international
renown are Dire Straits, The Police, Culture Club and Duran Duran. Well-known
individual performers include David Bowie, Elton John and Rod Stewart.
Jazz has an enthusiastic following in Britain and is played in numerous clubs
and public houses. A national jazz centre is to be opened in London in 1985.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House, Covent
Garden, London. The Royal Opera and Royal Ballet, which rank among the
world's finest companies, are supported by a permanent orchestra. Seasons of
opera in English are given by the English National Opera at the London
Coliseum. Sadler’s Wells Theatre is the home of Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet and
the New Sadler’s Wells Opera Company, and stages many of the London
performances of visiting opera and dance companies. Scottish Opera has
regular winter seasons at the Theatre Royal in Glasgow, and tours mainly in
Scotland and northern England. Welsh National Opera has seasons in Cardiff
and other cities and, with Kent Opera, provides most of the touring productions
in England. Opera North, based in Leeds, undertakes tours in the north of
England. Opera in Northern Ireland is promoted by the Northern Ireland Opera
Trust and the Studio Opera Group.
An opera season for which international casts are specially assembled is held
every summer at Glyndebourne in Sussex; this is followed by an autumn tour by
Glyndebourne Touring Opera using different casts.
Dance companies also include: London Festival Ballet, which divides its
performances almost equally between London and the regions; Ballet Rambert
(Britain’s oldest ballet company, which re-formed in 1966 as a leading modern
dance company); Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow; London Contemporary
Dance Theatre (which provides regular seasons of • contemporary dance in
London besides touring extensively); and Northern Ballet Theatre, based in
Manchester, which also tours widely throughout England. Extemporary Dance
Company and Moving Picture Mime Show also provide programmes throughout
the year. Four modern dance groups are supported by regional arts associations
and about 35 small dance and mime groups or solo performers are assisted by
the Arts Council.
Professional training in music is given mainly at colleges of music. The leading
London colleges, which are grant-aided, include the Royal Academy of Music, the
Royal College of Music, the Guildhall School of Music and Drama and Trinity
College of Music. Outside London the main centres are the Royal Scottish
Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow, the Royal Northern College of Music in
Manchester, the Welsh College of Music and Drama, Cardiff, and the Birming¬
ham School of Music. The National Opera Studio provides advanced training
courses. The leading dance schools are the Royal Ballet School, the Rambert
Academy and the London School of Contemporary Dance which, with many
private schools, have helped in raising British dance to its present high
standard. Dance is now a subject for degree studies.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
363
FILMS
Government
Support
for the
Film Industry
British Film
Institute
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated to the international Jeunesses
Musicales, encourages attendance by young people at opera, dance and concert
performances. Special performances for children include the Robert Mayer
Concerts, held in London on Saturday mornings. Ludus Dance in Education
Company and Outreach (in the north of England) work mainly with young
people. Scottish Ballet Steps Out works in schools throughout Scotland.
Many children learn to play musical instruments at school, and some take the
examinations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music. The
National Youth Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and of Wales and other
youth orchestras are noted for their high standards. Over a third of the players
in the European Community Youth Orchestra come from Britain. There is also a
National Youth Jazz Orchestra.
British films, actors and the creative and technical services which support them
have achieved notable successes in international film festivals and other events.
Besides feature films, including co-productions with other countries, the
industry produces films for television as well as promotional, advertising and
training films.
There are about 1,310 cinema screens in Britain, and estimated attendances
in 1983 amounted to 66 million. Cinema attendance figures declined rapidly
between the mid-1950s and 1982, since when there has been a slight increase;
in 1954 the average weekly cinema audience was some 25 million, but by 1983 it
was about 5 per cent of that figure. Major reasons for the decline have been
competition from television viewing, the rapid rise in the use of home
video-cassette recorders, and the effect of the economic recession on the
spending power of a predominantly young cinema-going public.
Declining revenues from the box office have led to a reduction in the number
of new feature films being made by British film companies. This trend is now
being partially offset, however, by the growing involvement of television
companies in film production and by the success of certain low-budget films.
Another development has been the growth of grant-aided regional film theatres
and film societies offering alternative programmes to those of the commercial
cinema chains.
The Government does not invest directly in feature films. At present a levy on
cinema admissions, the Eady Levy, provides a fund to benefit film makers. The
National Film Finance Corporation receives money from the fund for the
production of feature films, and also provides loans for scriptwriting and other
pre-production costs. The rest of the fund is distributed to makers of eligible
films in proportion to a film’s takings. Grants from the levy can also be made to
the Children’s Film and Television Foundation, the British Film Institute
Production Board and the National Film and Television School (see p 364). The
Government makes a grant to the Scottish Film Council and, as part of the
funds allocated each year in support of the Welsh language, to the Welsh Films
Board.
Following a review of the film industry the Government has decided, in view of
the diminishing revenue received from the Eady Levy and the financial burden
which it places on cinemas, to introduce legislation in 1985 to abolish the levy.
In addition, the National Film Finance Corporation will be replaced by a private
company to be financed by a government grant of £10 million over five years,
together with new investment of a similar amount from private sources, for the
production and development of low- and medium-budget films.
The development of film and television as an art is promoted by the British Film
Institute, founded in 1933, and in Scotland by the Scottish Film Council. The
364
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Children’s
Films
Training in Film
Production
Cinema
Licensing
and Film
Censorship
Institute, whose government grant in 1984—85 is £7-7 million, offers direct
financial and technical help to new and experienced film makers who cannot
find support elsewhere, and helps to fund film and video workshops in liaison
with the Channel Four Television Company. It administers the National Film
Theatre in London and the National Film Archive, and has a library from which
films and video-cassettes may be hired. The Institute’s Information Division has
extensive international collections of books, periodicals, scripts, stills and
posters, offers an information service on all aspects of film and television, and
produces a range of publications, including the British National Film and Video
Catalogue which records films ^nd video-cassettes available in Britain. The
Education Department produces study materials and offers an advisory service
to teachers of film and television at all levels of formal education and increasingly
in adult education.
The National Film Archive contains nearly 75,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, and over 10,000 television programmes. The
National Film Theatre has two cinemas showing films of outstanding historical,
artistic or technical interest, and is unique in offering regular programmes
unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of the
films. Each autumn it mounts the London Film Festival, at which some 100 of
the finest new films from all over the world are screened.
The British Film Institute has promoted and helps to fund the development of
some 40 regional film theatres, and is involved in establishing film and
television centres with a range of activities and facilities in a number of major
cities. It also co-operates with the regional arts associations and grant-aids their
film activities. In Wales, the Welsh Arts Council acts as the Institute’s agent. In
Scotland, the Scottish Film Council is responsible for regional film theatres and
administers the Scottish Film Archive; it is also responsible for promoting the
use of film and television in education. Together with the Scottish Arts Council
it makes grants towards film production in Scotland. Grants in Northern Ireland
are made by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
The Children's Film and Television Foundation produces and distributes
entertainment films specially designed for children. In view of the rapid decline
of the children’s matinee movement (only some 50 cinemas now provide
programmes for children on Saturday mornings) the Foundation’s films are
increasingly shown through the medium of video and television.
An independent National Film and Television School, financed at present
primarily by grants from the Government and the Eady Levy, offers courses for
writers, directors, producers and camera technicians. Training in film produc¬
tion is also given at the London International Film School, the Royal College of
Art, and at some polytechnics and other institutions.
Local authorities have powers to license cinemas and censor films. They have a
legal duty to prohibit the admission of children under 16 to unsuitable films,
and may censor films for adults. In considering the suitability of films the
authorities normally rely on the judgment of an independent body, the British
Board of Film Censors, to which most films for public showing are submitted.
The Board was set up on the initiative of the cinema industry, to ensure that a
proper standard was maintained in films offered to the public. It does not use
any written code of censorship, and may require cuts to be made before granting
a certificate to a film; very rarely, it refuses a certificate. Films passed by the
Board are put into one of five categories: U meaning universal—suitable for all;
PG, meaning parental guidance, in which some scenes may be unsuitable for
young children; 15 and 18, for people of not less than 15 and 18 years of age
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
365
Documentary
Films
VISUAL ARTS
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
respectively; and Restricted 18, for restricted showing only at segregated
premises to which no one under 18 is admitted—for example, licensed cinema
clubs.
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain was founded in
1929 when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive and
imaginative kind for the Government, and later for commercial organisations.
The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then, British
documentary technicians have continued to produce, for both cinema and
television, high-quality factual films which have won numerous international
awards. The British Industrial and Scientific Film Association promotes the use
of films in industry, science and commerce.
Government departments sponsor a wide range of documentary information
programmes on film, video tape and slide for education and training. Program¬
mes are also made for overseas television. The majority are produced through
the Central Office of Information and are commissioned from commercial film
companies. Several major documentary film libraries provide films on hire or
free of charge to a wide variety of educational, industrial and other users.
The Arts Council funds, promotes and distributes films on the arts. The films
(many of which have won international awards) cover all arts subjects and are
intended for educational and television use both in Britain and overseas.
State support for painting and sculpture mainly takes the form of maintenance
and purchase grants for the national museums and galleries, purchase grants
for municipal museums and galleries, and grants towards the cost of art
education. The Government also encourages high standards of industrial design
and craftsmanship through grants to the Design Council.
The Arts Council maintains its own collection of contemporary British art,
and organises or offers grants or guarantees for a variety of exhibitions
throughout the country. It runs the Hayward and Serpentine galleries in London
and supports a number of art and photography galleries in London and the
regions, such as Arnolfini in Bristol and the Museum of Modern Art in Oxford.
The Council also provides support for artists and photographers through
purchasing, and commissioning fellowships and residences. Grant aid is also
available to support art and photography books and magazines. The Welsh and
Northern Ireland Arts Councils have galleries in Cardiff and Belfast respectively.
A number of modern British sculptors and painters have a high international
reputation, and have received many international prizes and commissions for
major works in foreign cities. Among the best known are Henry Moore, Elisabeth
Frink, Francis Bacon and David Hockney.
Over 1,000 museums and art galleries are open to the public, including the
major national collections and a wide variety of municipally and independently
owned institutions. Some 20 million people visited the national galleries and
museums in 1983.
The Government is advised on policy matters by the Museums and Galleries
Commission, which also promotes co-operation between national and provincial
institutions. Nine area museum councils provide technical services and advice
on conservation, display, documentation and publicity.
The national museums and art galleries in London contain some of the world’s
most comprehensive collections of objects of artistic, archaeological, scientific,
historical and general interest. They are the British Museum (including the
Museum of Mankind and the Natural History Museum), the Victoria and Albert
Museum, the Science Museum, the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the
366
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Collections
Finance
National Portrait Gallery, the Imperial War Museum, the National Army
Museum, the Royal Air Force Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the
Wallace Collection and the Geological Museum. Some of these museums also
have branches outside London, examples being the National Railway Museum
(York) and the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television (Bradford)
which are part of the Science Museum.
New developments planned or in progress include the building of extensions
to the Tate Gallery, to house the large collection of paintings bequeathed by the
nineteenth-century artist, J. M. W. Turner, and a national Theatre Museum, to
be opened in Covent Garden, London.
There are three national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the
National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the Royal Scottish Museum
(including the Scottish United Services Museum), and the National Galleries of
Scotland (comprising the National Gallery of Scotland, the Scottish National
Portrait Gallery and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art). A new Museum
of Scotland, to record the country’s cultural heritage, is planned. The National
Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at St Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh
Folk Museum is housed, an Industrial and Maritime Museum in Cardiffs
dockland, the Museum of the Woollen Industry at Drefach Felindre, and the
North Wales Quarrying Museum at Llanberis. Northern Ireland has two national
museums: the Ulster Museum in Belfast and the Ulster Folk and Transport
Museum, County Down (the latter was Britain’s ‘Museum of the Year’ in 1983).
Most of the national collections are administered by independent trustees.
The Royal Scottish Museum, administered by the Scottish Education Depart¬
ment, will become independent in 1985 or 1986.
Other important collections in London include the Armouries in the Tower of
London, the Museum of London, Sir John Soane’s Museum, the Courtauld
collection (which is to move to Somerset House in the Strand), and the London
Transport Museum. In Buckingham Palace the Queen’s Gallery has exhibitions
of pictures from the extensive royal collections.
Most cities and towns have museums devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually administered by the local authorities but sometimes by local
learned societies or by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and Cambridge are
rich in museums, many of them associated with the universities, such as the
Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, the oldest in the country, and
the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. Many private art collections in historic
family mansions, including those owned by the National Trust, are open to the
public, while an increasing number of open air museums depict the regional life
of an area or preserve early industrial remains (for example, the Weald and
Downland Museum in Sussex, the North of England Open Air Museum in
Durham, and the Ironbridge Gorge Museum in Shropshire). Among the newest
museums to have been established are the National Horseracing Museum at
Newmarket, the Jorvik Viking Centre, a reconstruction of the Viking settlement
in York, and a new maritime museum in Portsmouth, housing the restored
wreck of the Mary Rose, the flagship of Henry VIII, which sank in 1545 and was
raised in 1982. The new Burrell gallery in Glasgow houses a world-famous
collection of tapestries, paintings and objets d art.
All national collections are financed mainly from government funds. Besides
meeting administrative and maintenance costs, the Government provides
annual purchase grants. Museums and art galleries maintained by local
authorities, universities and private benefactions receive help in building up
their collections through annual government grants administered by the
Victoria and Albert, Science and Royal Scottish Museums. Financial and
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
367
Museums
Association
Exhibitions
The Art Market
Crafts
practical assistance is also given by the Arts Council and by trusts and voluntary
bodies including the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, the National Art-
Collections Fund, the Contemporary Art Society and the Association for
Business Sponsorship of the Arts. Pre-eminent works of art accepted by the
Government in place of capital transfer tax are allocated to public galleries.
Financial help may also be available from the National Heritage Memorial Fund.
The independent Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries
and their staffs belong and which also has many overseas members, is a focus
for the collection of information and discussion of matters relating to museum
administration, and a training and examining body for professional qualifica¬
tions.
In addition to temporary exhibitions organised by the Arts Council and by the
national and regional museums and galleries, many exhibitions are held in the
galleries of dealers. There are also a number of national art exhibiting societies,
the most famous of which is the Royal Academy of Arts at Burlington House. The
Academy holds an annual Summer Exhibition, in which the works of hundreds
of professional and amateur artists are included, and important exhibitions of
foreign art. The Royal Scottish Academy holds annual exhibitions in Edinburgh.
There are also children’s exhibitions, including the National Exhibition of
Children’s Art.
London is a major centre for the international art market, and regular sales of
works of art take place in the main auction houses, two of the longest
established being Sotheby’s and Christie’s. Certain items are covered by export
control. These are: works of art and collectors’ items over 50 years old and worth
more than £8,000 (more than £2,000 in the case of British historical portraits);
photographic material over 60 years old and worth more than £200;
documentary material over 50 years old; and British archaeological material over
50 years old. A licence is required before such items can be exported, but this is
granted automatically in the case of objects imported into Britain within the last
50 years. The application for a licence is considered by the Department of Trade
and Industry, and, if the Department's expert advisers recommend the
withholding of a licence, the matter is referred to the Reviewing Committee on
the Export of Works of Art. If the Committee considers a work to be of national
importance it can advise the Government to withhold the export licence for a
specified time to give a public museum or art gallery an opportunity to buy at a
fair price.
Government grants for the crafts, amounting to some £1-8 million in 1984—85,
are administered in England and Wales by the Crafts Council. The Council holds
regular exhibitions at its London gallery (which also houses a crafts resource
centre, including a slide library) and publishes Crafts magazine, books on crafts
subjects, and slides. It runs a number of grant, loan and bursary schemes to
help people at different stages in the development of their art and is involved in
promotional and marketing schemes. The Council runs activities in education
and manages a British crafts shop at the Victoria and Albert Museum. Funding
is given to the Welsh Arts Council and the regional arts associations in England
for the support of crafts activities, and also to the British Crafts Centre, a
membership organisation for craftsmen and craftswomen which holds exhibi¬
tions and sells work through its London gallery.
Scotland receives a separate government grant which is administered by the
Crafts Consultative Committee of the Scottish Development Agency.
368
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training in Art
and Design
LITERATURE
AND
LIBRARIES
Authors’
Copyright
Literary and
Philological
Societies
Books
Most practical education in art and design is provided in colleges of art, further
education colleges and private art schools. Degrees at postgraduate level are
awarded by the Royal College of Art. Art is also taught at an advanced level at the
four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions.
Courses at universities and polytechnics concentrate largely on academic
disciplines such as the history of art. The leading institutions include the
Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the University of London and the
Department of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London. Art
has a place in all school curricula, and the Society for Education through Art
encourages, among other activities, the purchase by schools of original works of
art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools exhibition.
The study of literature is included in the curricula of all schools, and most
colleges and universities. There are free public libraries throughout the country,
private libraries and many private literary societies. Book reviews are featured in
the press and on television and radio and there are numerous periodicals
concerned with literature. Recognition of outstanding literary merit is provided
by a number of awards, including the Booker, W. H. Smith & Son, and
Whitbread prizes. Awards to encourage young writers include those by the
Somerset Maugham Trust Fund and the E. C. Gregory Trust Fund. Many
British writers are internationally recognised; in 1983 the Nobel Prize for
literature was awarded to the novelist William Golding. Other well-known living
authors are Graham Greene, Anthony Burgess, Margaret Drabble and Iris
Murdoch, while distinguished British poets include Philip Larkin, Ted Hughes
and Seamus Heaney. The title Poet Laureate is conferred on a poet who receives
a stipend as an officer of the Royal Household; the last holder of the title was Sir
John Betjeman, who died in 1984.
A scheme, begun in 1982, gives authors the right to receive payment from
government funds for the use of their books borrowed from public libraries.
The author of any original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is
automatically protected by the Copyright Act 1956 and its related international
conventions1 from the unauthorised reproduction of the work both before and
after publication. The author of the work is the first owner of the copyright, and
the normal term of copyright in published original works is the life of the author
and a period of 50 years after his or her death.
Societies to promote literature include the English Association and the Royal
Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of Historical,
Philosophical and Philological Studies (the British Academy) is the leading
society for humanistic studies.
Other specialist societies include the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several
societies devoted to particular authors, the largest of which is the Dickens
Fellowship. A number of societies, for example, the Poetry Society, sponsor
poetry readings and recitals. There are also a number of clubs and societies,
such as the Poetry Book Society, which distribute selected new books to their
members.
In 1983 British publishers issued over 51,000 separate titles: nearly 39,000 new
ones, and over 12,000 reprints and new editions. There has been an increase in
the number of book clubs, where books may be bought by mail order.
1 A copyright work first published in Britain has automatic copyright in all countries which are members of the
Berne Copyright Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention. The law on copyright is under review.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
369
Libraries
University
Libraries
Leading organisations representing book production and distribution in¬
terests are the Publishers’ Association and the Booksellers’ Association. The
British Council publicises British books and periodicals through its libraries in
over 60 countries, its programme of book exhibitions (about 270 exhibitions
were mounted in 1983-84) and its publications, including the monthly British
Book News. The Book Development Council also promotes British books
overseas. The National Book League, with a membership including authors,
publishers, booksellers, librarians and readers, encourages interest in books
and arranges exhibitions in Britain and overseas.
The British Library, the national library for the United Kingdom, is organised in
three divisions. The Reference Division, which receives a copy of each new book,
pamphlet or newspaper published in Britain and acquires significant literature
from other countries, includes the Department of Printed Books, holding about
9 million titles; the Department of Manuscripts; the Department of Oriental
Manuscripts and Printed Books; the Science Reference Library, which holds
collections in modern science, technology, patents, trade marks and designs;
the India Office Library and Records; and a preservation service. The Lending
Division at Boston Spa, West Yorkshire, has nearly 4-5 million volumes,
including some 56,000 current periodicals, available on loan to other libraries. It
also has access to many millions of books in other libraries and is the national
centre for inter-library lending within Britain and between Britain and
countries overseas. The Bibliographic Services Division processes the material
deposited with the British Library for inclusion in its catalogues and publishes
the British National Bibliography, which lists all new books and new editions
published in Britain, and other bibliographic records. It also provides auto¬
mated information services of bibliographic data for libraries and their users
throughout Britain. The National Sound Archive became part of the Library in
1983. Its collections include nearly half a million discs and over 35,000 hours of
recorded tape, which are available to the public through a free listening service.
The Research and Development Department is a major source of funding for the
support of research and development in library and information services.
Construction of a new building for the British Libraiy’s London services began
in 1982. Under copyright legislation, the National Libraries of Scotland and of
Wales, the Bodleian Library of Oxford University and the Cambridge University
Library can claim copies of all new British publications.
Some of the national museums and government departments have important
libraries. The Public Record Office contains the records of the superior courts of
law and of most government departments, as well as famous historical
documents. The Scottish Record Office in Edinburgh serves the same purpose.
The National Register of Archives (maintained by the Historical Manuscripts
Commission) contains particulars of local and private records.
Besides the few great private collections, such as that of the London Library,
there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions. Examples
are the libraries of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the Royal
Commonwealth Society, the Royal Geographical Society, the British Theatre
Association, the Royal Academy of Music, the National Library for the Blind and
the National Book League.
The university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are unmatched by those of the
more recent foundations, although the combined library resources of the
colleges and institutions of the University of London total some 7-9 million
volumes, the John Rylands University Library in Manchester contains some 3-3
million volumes, and the university libraries of Edinburgh, Birmingham,
Glasgow, Liverpool and Leeds each have over 1 million volumes. Many
370
Special
Libraries
Public
Libraries
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
universities have important research collections in special subjects; examples
include the Barnes Medical Library at Birmingham and the British Library of
Political and Economic Science at the London School of Economics.
Many associations, commercial and industrial organisations, as well as
government departments and other national institutions, operate library and
information services. Although most of these are primarily intended for use
within the organisation, many special libraries can be used, by arrangement, by
people interested in the special area covered, and the specialist publications held
are often available for inter-library lending.
Local library authorities have a duty to provide a free lending and reference
library service in their areas. Britain's network of libraries, consisting of 5,500
service points, has a total stock of some 137 million books. About one-third of
the total population are members of public libraries. Some areas are served by
mobile libraries, and domiciliary services cater for people unable to visit a
library. Many libraries have collections of records, audio- and video-cassettes,
and musical scores for loan to the public, while a number also lend from
collections of works of art, which may be originals or reproductions. Most
libraries hold documents on local history, and nearly all provide children’s
departments, while reference and information sections and art, music, commer¬
cial and technical departments meet the growing and more specific demands in
these fields. The information role is one of increasing importance for many
libraries, and they are making greater use of information technology including
microcomputers and reference data bases.
22 The Press
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold per person in Britain
than in most other developed countries. On an average day nearly three out of
four people over the age of 15 read a national morning newspaper and about one
in two reads an evening newspaper. National papers have a total circulation of
over 15 million on weekdays and 18-2 million on Sundays though the total
readership is considerably greater.
There are over 120 daily (Monday to Saturday) and Sunday newspapers and
about 1,000 weekly newspapers. These figures include certain specialised
papers with circulations limited not by region but by interest; for instance,
business, sporting and religious newspapers, and newspapers in foreign
languages.
The press caters for a variety of political views, interests and levels of
education. There is no state control or censorship of the press, but it is subject
to the general laws on publication (see p 378). Newspapers are almost always
financially independent of any political party and are not obliged to follow any
specific line. Where they express pronounced views and have obvious political
leanings, these derive from traditional, proprietorial and other non-party
influences. In order to preserve their character and traditions, a few newspapers
and periodicals are governed by various trustee-type arrangements. Others have
management arrangements to ensure editors’ authority and independence.
Against this background of press freedom, Britain’s position within UNESCO
discussions on a ‘new world information order’ and other communications
questions has been to oppose measures which could have the effect of
sanctioning the use of the media as an instrument of government policy and
limiting the free flow of information. At the same time, it has reaffirmed its
willingness to support efforts to improve communications systems in the
developing world, with the International Programme for the Development of
Communications (set up in 1980) acting, as originally conceived, as a clearing
house through which each country’s communications needs can be assessed
and funds sought from all possible aid sources.
Unlike most of its European counterparts the British press receives no
subsidies and relatively few tax and postal concessions. Newspaper and
magazine sales and advertising receipts are zero-rated for value added tax.
Registered newspapers receive a concession on postal rates, and there are
concessions on ‘per-word’ rates for international press telegrams and photo¬
telegrams. Like all postal customers, publishers can obtain reductions in
charges for regular bulk postings.
Newsprint, some 90 per cent of which is imported, forms roughly a third of
average national newspaper costs, while labour represents about 45 per cent.
Revenue from sales accounts for varying proportions of income; these are
relatively small in the case of some high circulation newspapers and periodicals
which derive considerable earnings from their advertising.
Newspaper Ownership of the national, London-evening and regional daily newspapers is
Ownership concentrated in the hands of a number of large press publishing groups (the
groups controlling the national press are listed in Table 37). There are, in
addition, some 200 independent regional and local newspaper publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised as limited liability companies,
individual and partner proprietorship survives. The large national newspaper
372
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and periodical publishers are major corporations with interests ranging over the
whole field of publishing and communications; some have shares in indepen¬
dent television and radio contracting companies while others are involved in
industrial and commercial activities.
The law provides safeguards against the risks inherent in undue concentra¬
tion of the means of communication. For instance, if it appears that newspaper
shareholdings in television programme companies have led or are leading to
results contrary to the public interest, the Independent Broadcasting Authority
may, with the consent of the Home Secretary, notify the companies that their
programmes may cease to be transmitted. There is a similar stipulation for
independent local radio: if a local newspaper has a monopoly in the area, it is not
allowed to have a controlling interest in the local radio station. In addition, it is
unlawful to transfer a newspaper or newspaper assets to a proprietor whose
newspapers have an average daily circulation amounting, with that of the
newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies without the written
Table 37: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date
Controlled by
Circulation3
average
Jan.—June
1984
National dailies
‘Populars’
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1964)
Qualities’
The Daily Telegraph (1855)
Financial Times (1888)
The Guardian (1821)
The Times (1785)
Fleet Holdings 1,981,675
Associated Newspapers Group 1,800,783
Pergamon Press 3,365,293
Fleet Holdings 1,370,942
The People’s Press Printing Society 29,235
News International 4,186,907
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 1,259,519
Pearson Longman 216,400
The Guardian and Manchester
Evening News 473,159
News International 381,075
National Sundays
‘Populars'
The Mail on Sunday (1982)
News of the World (1843)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
Sunday People (1881)
■Qualities’
The Observer (1791)
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
Sunday Times (1822)
Associated Newspapers Group 1,584,707
News International 4,280,713
Fleet Holdings 2,602,933
Pergamon Press 3,523,000
Pergamon Press 3,377,282
George Outram & Co 773,883
Telegraph Newspaper Trust 737,265
News International 1,313,337
a Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations (founded in 1931 and consisting of publishers,
advertisers and advertising bureaux) and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the period. The
circulation figure of the Morning Star is otherwise audited (the figure given is for July to December 1983).
THE PRESS
373
The ‘National’
Press
Regional
Newspapers
England
Wales
consent of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. Except in certain
limited cases, consent may be given only after the Secretary of State has referred
the matter to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and received its report.
Ten morning daily papers and eight Sunday papers (see Table 37) circulate
throughout the country, and are known as national newspapers. They are
produced in London (where Fleet Street is the traditional centre for the press),
but six of the dailies and five of the Sundays also print northern editions in
Manchester (accounting for about a quarter of the total production of the
national press). An edition of the Financial Times is also printed in Frankfurt in
the Federal Republic of Germany.
The leading Scottish papers. The Scotsman and the Glasgow Herald, have a
considerable circulation outside Scotland.
National newspapers are often thought of as either ‘quality’ or ‘popular’ papers
on the basis of differences in style, content and format (broadsheet or tabloid,
though this is not a rigid distinction). Four dailies and three Sundays are
usually described as quality newspapers. The three Sunday qualities and three
populars produce colour supplements as part of the paper.
The slow decline in newspaper circulations as a whole was reversed in 1983
and circulation totalled 33-2 million in 1984 (compared with 36 million in
1973). This figure conceals the fact that the circulation of some newspapers has
remained generally steady, while that of others has increased.
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, over 95 morning or
evening dailies and Sundays and some 950 newspapers appearing once or twice
a week) provide mainly regional and local news. The daily newspapers also give
coverage of national and international affairs. Generally, regional evening
newspapers are non-political, while the morning newspapers adopt a more
positive political stance and tend to be independent or conservative in outlook.
Of the morning papers the Yorkshire Post (Leeds) and the Northern Echo
(Darlington) have circulations of over 87,400 and 89,900 respectively and two
provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun (Newcastle upon Tyne) and the
Sunday Mercury (Birmingham)—liave circulations of nearly 124,000 and
172,000 respectively. Circulation figures of evening papers start at about
11,000; most are in the 20,000 to 90,000 range, although the Manchester
Evening News and the Birmingham Evening Mail have circulations of over
275,000 and the Liverpool Echo of over 200,000. Weekly papers are of mainly
local appeal and are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most have
circulations in the 5,000 to 30,000 range.
The one London evening newspaper. The Standard, has sales of some
480,000. The local weeklies (about 107) include papers for every district in
Greater London. They circulate in as many as six to eight local editions of
individual papers, affiliated in some cases to larger groups. As elsewhere, there
is a range of free distribution newspapers (see p 374).
A number of evening newspapers, using the latest production technology, are
published in the outer metropolitan area.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in Cardiff;
its circulation of just over 76,000 is mainly in south Wales. In north Wales the
Daily Post, published in Liverpool, gives wide coverage to events in the area.
Evening papers published in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff; the South
Wales Argus, Newport; the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea; and the Evening
Leader, Wrexham. Their circulation range is between 43,000 and 99,000. North
Wales is also served by the Liverpool Echo, while the Shropshire Star covers
parts of north and mid-Wales, and there is coverage to a smaller extent by the
Manchester Evening News.
374
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Ethnic
Publications
Free
Distribution
Newspapers
The Periodical
Press
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The weekly press (some 60) includes English-language papers, some of which
carry articles in Welsh, bilingual papers, and Welsh-language papers. In 1983
the Government made a grant of £2-5 million for the support of the Welsh
language: of this, £18,000 was set aside to help Welsh community newspapers.
Scotland has seven morning, five evening and three Sunday newspapers. The
morning papers, with circulations of between about 92,000 and over 738,000
are The Scotsman, published in Edinburgh; the Glasgow Herald; the Daily
Record (sister paper to the Daily Mirror); the Dundee Courier and Advertiser; the
Aberdeen Press and Journal; the Paisley Daily Express; and the Scottish Daily
Express (printed in Manchester). The evening papers have circulations in the
range of about 13,000 to over 175,000 and are the Evening News of Edinburgh,
Glasgow’s Evening Times, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post, Aberdeen’s
Evening Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the
Sunday Mail, the Sunday Post and the Scottish Sunday Express (printed in
Manchester).
Weekly and local newspapers number about 130, with the Hamilton Advertiser
and the Falkirk Herald having the largest circulations.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening and one Sunday
paper, all published in Belfast with circulations ranging from 44,000 to
147,000. They are the News Letter (unionist) and the Irish News (nationalist),
the evening Belfast Telegraph and the Sunday News. There are 42 weekly
newspapers.
There are over 60 ethnic newspapers and magazines published in Britain by
members of minority groups; over 40 of these are printed in Asian languages
and the remainder in English.
Many free distribution newspapers (mostly weekly and financed largely by
advertising) circulate throughout Britain, half of them published by established
newspaper publishers. Following a rapid growth in recent years there are now
thought to be nearly 600 free newspapers, with a total circulation of 28 million.
The 6,000 periodical publications are classified as ‘general’, ‘specialised’, ‘trade’,
‘technical’ and ‘professional’. There are also about 500 ‘house magazines’
produced by industrial undertakings, business houses or public services for the
benefit of their employees and/or clients. The ‘alternative’ press probably
includes several hundred further titles, most of them devoted to radical politics,
community matters, religion, the occult, science or ecology.
General and specialised periodicals include magazines of general interest;
women’s magazines; publications for children; religious periodicals; fiction
magazines; magazines dealing with sport, motoring, gardening, pop music,
hobbies and humour; computer magazines; journals specialising in a wide
range of subjects; and the publications of learned societies, trade unions,
regiments, universities and other organisations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are; Radio Times and TV Times
Magazine, each of which has a circulation of about 3 3 million, and Woman s
Weekly, Woman’s Own, Woman, Weekly News (which sells mainly in Scotland)
and My Weekly, with circulations in the 750,000 to 1-5 million range. The
leading journals of opinion are The Economist, a politically independent
publication covering a wider range of topics than its title implies; the New
Statesman, which reviews politics, literature and the arts from an independent
socialist point of view; the Spectator, which covers much the same subjects from
an independent conservative standpoint; Tribune, which represents the views of
the left wing of the Labour Party; New Society, covering the sociological aspects
THE PRESS
375
New
Printing
Technology
News Agencies
of current affairs; and New Scientist, which reports on science and technology in
terms which the non-specialist can understand. Articles and features relating
largely to the British Broadcasting Corporation’s (BBC) television and radio
programmes appear in The Listener. Punch, traditionally the leading humorous
periodical, and Private Eye, a satirical fortnightly, also cover public affairs.
Financial Weekly and Investors Chronicle are periodicals for people with
business and investment interests.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, generally appeal to the
more serious reader.
Trade, technical, business, scientific and professional journals are an
important aspect of British publishing, many having a considerable circulation
overseas. Their publication ranges in frequency from twice weekly to quarterly.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout Britain. In Wales there
are also several monthly and quarterly journals published in both Welsh and
English; in Scotland there are three monthly illustrated periodicals, a weekly
paper devoted to farming interests, a number of literary journals and numerous
popular magazines; and Northern Ireland has weekly, monthly and quarterly
publications covering farming, the linen industry, building, motoring, politics
and social work.
The heavy labour costs of newspapers and periodicals continue to encourage
publishers to look for ways of increasing productivity, often by using the new
composing technology which dispenses with traditional ‘hot metal’ typesetting,
and uses photographic methods to reproduce an image. It can combine
photocomposition with computer storage and handling of data, and substitutes
electronic for manual methods. It presents possibilities for reorganisation which
can have effects throughout a newspaper office and may raise difficult problems
of manning levels, health and safety; the introduction of the ‘on-line’ system, for
example, under which text can be fed at electronic speeds to the computer store
(and recalled for checking on visual display units) and can be passed between
the store and the photosetters, can affect all the traditional departments of a
newspaper up to the printing stage. One system provides portable terminals for
reporters to use when working away from the office. Approximately half of the
national Sunday newspapers and two dailies now use computer technology,
while its use in the provincial press, which has generally led the way in adopting
the new techniques, is much more widespread.
The three principal news agencies in Britain are: Reuters Ltd, an international
news organisation registered in London, The Press Association Ltd and The
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd.
Following the sale of shares in the company in mid-1984, Reuters Ltd is a
publicly owned company whose shareholders mainly represent press interests.
Provisions relating to the ownership and voting rights of different categories of
shares seek to ensure compliance with the principles of integrity, independence
and freedom from bias traditionally associated with the company. Reuters
employs some 3,600 full-time staff in 74 countries. Of these, over 600 are
journalists, of whom nearly 500 work outside the United Kingdom. The
Company’s world-wide communications network makes use of satellites, cables
and microwave radio. It is connected to computerised message handling
systems and data banks located around the world. Services include general news
for the media delivered by teleprinter and specialised economic news services for
business, which are made available to subscribers by teleprinter and video
display and retrieval terminals. Reuters serves subscribers in 158 countries
including news agencies, newspapers, radio and television stations, govern-
376
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training for
Journalism
merits, financial institutions, stock and commodity brokerage houses and
industry.
The Press Association Ltd, the British national news agency, is co-operatively
owned by the principal newspapers of the United Kingdom outside London, and
of the Irish Republic. It provides a complete service of home news, including
general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all branches of financial,
commercial and sports news; and includes in its services to regional papers the
world news of Reuters and the Associated Press. News is teleprinted from
London, certain items being available in teletypesetting form. Its photographic
department provides London and regional newspapers with a daily service of
pictures from home and overseas; these are wired to the regional press. Its
Special Reporting Service supplies reports of local or special interest. Press
Association Features provides exclusive rights to syndicated articles and visual
features. In 1984 the Press Association’s general home news became available on
screen to non-media as well as media clients by means of telephone and viewdata
terminals.
The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd (Extel), an independent news agency,
supplies financial and sporting news services and transmits specialist racing
services by telephone and video terminals from offices throughout Britain.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by Associ¬
ated Press Ltd and by United Press International, which are British subsidiaries
of United States news agencies.
A number of other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and news
services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other cities,
mostly specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical require¬
ments. Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in some
countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which represents
the principal press organisations, sets and conducts examinations, and
organises short training courses for journalists.
The two methods of entry into newspaper journalism are selection for a
one-year NCTJ pre-entry course at a college of further education or direct
recruitment by a regional or local newspaper. Both categories of entrant take
part in an apprenticeship scheme consisting of ‘on-the-job’ training, and
block-release courses for those who have not attended a pre-entry course. There
is also a centre providing courses of a similar pattern for press photographers.
Other training facilities include postgraduate courses in journalism at Univer¬
sity College, Cardiff, and at the City University (London), and courses provided
by the Newspaper Society Training Service for regional newspapers in
such subjects as circulation, advertising, industrial relations and management.
The NCTJ co-operates closely with other bodies responsible for training in
printing, publishing and professional photography.
Under the Harry Brittain Memorial Fellowship Scheme, awarded by the
Commonwealth Press Union, several young Commonwealth journalists each
year spend three months working and studying in Britain, while the Reuter
Foundation, established in 1982, awards several fellowships each year to
journalists from developing countries to study information technology at Oxford
University. The Thomson Foundation holds training courses for journalists
from all parts of the world and provides consultants and tutors for courses in
journalism held overseas.
Training for work with periodicals has traditionally been done ‘in company’
but formal courses of instruction are becoming more widely available. The
London College of Printing offers a one-year pre-entry course in periodical
journalism and a two-year business studies course, incorporating periodical
THE PRESS
377
Press
Institutions
The Press
Council
Advertising
Practice
journalism. In addition, all the larger publishing houses provide in-company
training which includes periods in the classroom to supplement work experi¬
ence. A training scheme which is in force throughout the periodical publishing
industry is administered by the Periodical Training Trust (PTT).
The most important employers’ organisations are the Newspaper Publishers
Association, whose members publish national newspapers in London and
Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which represents the regional, local and
London suburban, press; the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society, which repre¬
sents the interests of daily and Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the Scottish
Newspaper Proprietors Association, which represents the owners of weekly
newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern Ireland Newspapers, whose
members are the proprietors of weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland; and the
Periodical Publishers Association, whose membership embraces the majority of
independent publishers of business and professional periodicals and consumer
magazines.
Organisations representing journalists are the National Union of Journalists,
with nearly 33,000 members and the Institute of Journalists with over 2,000
members. All practising journalists (including those engaged in radio, tele¬
vision, public relations, freelance journalism and book publishing editorial
work) are eligible for membership of either, but not both. Two main printing
unions are concerned with the press; the Society of Graphical and Allied Trades
(SOGAT) ’82, with over 225,000 members, and the National Graphical Associa¬
tion 1982, with some 131,000 members, about 45,000 of whom work on
newspapers.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors with about 500 members aims to
maintain the professional status and independence of editors, defend the
freedom of the press, and improve the education and training of journalists. The
British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to
which most editors of house journals belong. The Institute of Printing is the
professional body to which most newspaper production executives belong.
The Press Council comprises equal numbers of press and non-press members,
with an independent chairman. Its aims are: to preserve the established freedom
of the press; to maintain the character of the press in accordance with the
highest professional and commercial standards; to keep under review any
developments likely to restrict the supply of information of public interest and
importance; to deal with complaints about the conduct of the press or the
conduct of individuals and organisations towards the press (the Council’s
complaints committees comprise equal numbers of press and non-press
members); to report on developments in the press which may tend towards
greater concentration or monopoly; to make representations on appropriate
occasions to the Government, the United Nations and press organisations
abroad; to publish its adjudications and periodic reports recording its work; and
to review from time to time developments in the press and the factors affecting
them. The Council’s annual reports include press statistics and articles on the
structure of leading press groups.
Advertising practice in the press is regulated and controlled by the Advertising
Standards Authority, an independent body which aims to promote and enforce
the highest standards of advertising in the interests of the public and the
industry, in particular through the British Code of Advertising Practice. The
aims of this code are to ensure that advertisements are legal, decent, honest and
truthful; that they are prepared with a sense of responsibility to the consumer;
that they conform to the principles of fair competition as generally accepted in
378
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Press and
the Law
business; and that no advertisement brings advertising into disrepute or
reduces confidence in advertising as a service to industry and the public.
The press has generally the same freedom as the individual to comment on
matters of public interest.
Apart from legal requirements to register newspapers and periodicals and to
reproduce the printer's imprint', there are no specific press laws but certain
statutes include sections which apply to the press.1 These relate to such matters
as the extent of newspaper ownership in television and radio companies; the
transfer of newspaper assets; restrictions on the reporting of certain types of
court proceedings; the right of press representatives to be admitted to meetings
of local authorities; restrictions on the publication of advertisement and
investment circulars, which are governed by Acts dealing with the publication of
false or misleading descriptions of goods and services and with fraud, and of
advertisements of remedies for certain diseases, which are covered by public
health legislation; agreements between British Telecom and newspaper pro¬
prietors on telegraphic communications, which must comply with telegraphs
legislation; restrictions on certain types of prize competition; and copyrights,
which come under copyright laws.
In certain circumstances, where the defence authorities and press representa¬
tives in the Defence, Press and Broadcasting Committee2 agree that publication
of information on particular topics would be detrimental to the national
interest, defence notices (‘D’ notices) are circulated to the news media
requesting that such information should not be published. Compliance with
these requests is expected, but they have no legal force; the final responsibility
for the decision whether or not to publish lies solely with the editor or publisher
concerned.
Of particular relevance to the press are such laws as those on contempt of
court, official secrets, libel and defamation. A newspaper may not publish
comments on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice
the courts’ reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings, nor
may it publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence
the result. The obtaining and publication of information of a confidential or
security nature from state and official sources is affected by the official secrets
legislation. Newspapers are also liable to proceedings for seditious libel and
incitement to disaffection. The majority of legal proceedings against the press
are libel actions brought by private individuals. In such cases, the editor,
proprietor, publishers, printer and distributor of the newspaper, as well as the
author, may all be held responsible.
v:
1 A code of conduct on trade union closed shops has been issued under the Employment Act 1980. In relation to
the press the code considers the position of editors and journalists and the essential freedom to collect and
publish information and to publish comment and criticism.
2 A committee, under the chairmanship of the Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence (a senior civil
servant), composed jointly of officials from government departments concerned with national security and
representatives of the press and broadcasting organisations.
23 Television
and Radio
Broadcasting is based on the tradition that it is a public service accountable to
the people through Parliament. Two public bodies—the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA)—provide
television and radio services throughout the country. In Wales the Welsh Fourth
Channel Authority (WFCA) is responsible for programmes on one channel. The
authorities work to broad requirements and objectives placed on them by
Parliament, but are otherwise independent in the day-to-day conduct of
business.
This independence carries with it certain obligations over programmes and
programme content. Programmes must display, as far as possible, a proper
balance and wide range of subject matter, impartiality in matters of controversy
and accuracy in news coverage, and must not offend against good taste. Codes of
guidance on violence in television programmes, particularly during hours when
large numbers of children are likely to be viewing, are operated by both
authorities. A code of advertising standards and practice is also operated by the
IBA. (The BBC does not broadcast advertisements.) A complaints commission
deals with allegations of unfair treatment or infringement of privacy in
programmes. Legislation was passed in 1984 to classify publicly available video
recordings according to their suitability for different audiences.
The Home Secretary regulates broadcasting generally, is answerable to
Parliament on broad policy questions, and may issue directions on a number of
technical and other matters.
Television viewing is by far the most popular leisure pastime in Britain,
average viewing time per person being about 21 hours a week. Virtually eveiyone
has access to television. Some 35 per cent of households have two or more
receivers. The growth in ownership of video-cassette recorders—about 25 per
cent of households—and equipment (including home computers) for playing
television games has for many people increased the choice of entertainment
available in the home. Practically every home also has a radio set, and car radios
and portable sets have made radio a major daytime diversion.
Households with television must buy an annual licence costing £15 for black
and white or £46 for colour. Over 18-6 million licences were current in February
1984, about 15-3 million for colour.
The British The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by Royal Charter and by
Broadcasting a Licence and Agreement. The Corporation of 12 governors (each appointed by
Corporation the Queen on the advice of the Government and including separate governors for
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) is responsible for all aspects of
broadcasting. Committees advise them on a wide range of matters including the
social effects of television, religious broadcasting, music, agriculture, schools
broadcasting, further education, programmes for ethnic minorities, science and
engineering, and charitable appeals. The governors appoint the Director-
General. who is chairman of the BBC's board of management.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
control the policy and content of television and radio programmes intended
380
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The
Independent
Broadcasting
Authority
The Programme
Companies
primarily for reception in their respective areas. Local radio councils, repre¬
sentative of the local community, advise on the development and operation of
the BBC’s local radio stations.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally from the sale of
television licences. This is supplemented by profits from trading activities,
including television programme exports, sale of recordings and publications
connected with BBC programmes, hire and sale of educational films, film library
sales, and exhibitions based on programmes. Nearly three-quarters of expendi¬
ture on domestic services relates to television. The BBC meets the cost of local
radio stations while some local education authorities help to make educational
programmes. The BBC’s External Services are financed by a grant-in-aid from
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, determined each year by the Govern¬
ment.
The IBA’s constitution and finances are governed by statute. Its 12 members
(three of whom have responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are
appointed by the Home Secretary. The IBA does not produce radio or television
programmes; these are provided by independent programme companies and by
the Channel Four Television Company (a wholly owned subsidiary of the IBA) for
Channel 4 (see p 381). The IBA’s main functions are to appoint the companies,
supervise programme arrangements, control advertising and build, own and
operate transmitting stations. Its chief executive officer, the Director General, is
supported by a headquarters and regional office staff covering all technical and
administrative services.
The IBA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish, Northern
Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educational broadcasting,
religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertising. A specialist panel
advises on advertisements of a medical nature. Local committees advise on local
radio services.
The IBA’s finance comes from annual rental payments made by the television
and radio programme companies. The television and some independent local
radio programme companies also pay to the IBA, for transfer to the Government,
a levy related to their profits.
Fifteen television programme companies hold contracts to provide television
programmes in the 14 independent television regions (two companies share the
contract for London, one providing programmes during the week and the other
at the weekend). A contract to provide a national early morning television
service, transmitted on the ITV network, is held by an additional company. The
companies operate on a commercial basis, deriving most of their revenue from
the sale of advertising time. The financial resources, advertising revenue and
programme production of the companies vary considerably, depending largely
on the size of population in the areas in which they operate. Although
newspapers can acquire an interest in programme companies, there are
safeguards to protect the public interest.
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the
programmes to be broadcast in its area. These are produced by the company
itself and by other programme companies or bought from elsewhere. The five
largest companies, serving London, north-west England, East Midlands, West
Midlands and Yorkshire, provide more programmes for broadcast elsewhere on
the national network than do the smaller ones. A common news service is
provided by Independent Television News Ltd, a non-profit-making company in
which all the programme companies are shareholders. Negotiations for the
supply, exchange and purchase of programmes and their co-ordinated transmis¬
sion through the independent television network take place largely on the
TELEVISION AND RADIO
381
Television
Network Programme Committee, which consists of representatives of all the
programme companies and of the IBA.
Similar principles apply to independent local radio. The programme com¬
panies are under contract to the IBA, operate under its control and are financed
by advertising revenue. News coverage is supplied as a common service by
Independent Radio News.
Four television channels are in operation. BBC 1 and BBC 2 are owned by the
BBC; ITV (Independent Television) is controlled by, and Channel 4 is owned by,
the IBA; all four channels broadcast on 625 lines ultra-high frequency (uhf).
About 99 per cent of the population (over 95 per cent for Channel 4) live within
range of transmission.
Apart from a break during the second world war the BBC has been providing
regular television broadcasts since 1936. All BBC 2 programmes and the vast
majority of those on BBC 1 are broadcast on the national network. Approxi¬
mately 70 per cent of the BBC’s network programmes for 1983—84 were pro¬
duced in London and 30 per cent elsewhere in Britain.
Through co-ordinated planning on its two services the BBC caters simul¬
taneously for people of different interests. While both services cover the whole
range of television output, BBC 1 presents more programmes of general
interest, such as light entertainment, sport, current affairs, children’s program¬
mes and outside broadcasts, while BBC 2 places greater emphasis on minority
interests, but also provides documentaries, travel programmes, serious drama,
music, programmes on pastimes and international films. An early morning
television service providing about 2 Vi hours of news, information and light
entertainment started on BBC 1 in January 1983. The service runs from
Monday to Friday but may later be extended into the weekend.
The first regular independent television programmes began in London in
1955. On average each of the 14 ITV areas transmitted over 100 hours of
television programmes a week in 1983—84, nearly two-fifths of them comprising
informative programmes—including news, documentaries, and programmes on
current affairs, education and religion. Almost three-quarters of the program¬
mes are produced by the programme companies. A national early morning
television service on ITV, which opened in February 1983, provides three hours
of news, information, current affairs and light entertainment daily.
Channel 4, which began broadcasting in November 1982, provides a national
television service throughout Britain, except in Wales which has a correspond¬
ing service (Sianel 4 Cymru—S4C—see below). The IBA must ensure that
programmes on Channel 4 are complementary to those of ITV, catering for
tastes and interests not normally provided for by the original independent
service. It must provide a suitable proportion (about 15 per cent) of educational
programmes, encourage innovation and experiment, and include a substantial
proportion of programmes from independent producers. Channel 4 broadcasts
for over 60 hours a week, about half of which is devoted to informative
programmes. The service, both nationally and in Wales, is financed by
subscriptions from the programme companies in return for advertising time in
Channel 4 programmes broadcast in their own regions. In Wales, programmes
on the fourth channel are run and controlled by the Welsh Fourth Channel
Authority appointed by the Home Secretary. The Authority is required to ensure
that a substantial proportion (some 22 hours a week) of the programmes are in
Welsh and that programmes broadcast between 18.30 and 22.00 hours are
mainly in Welsh. At other times the Welsh fourth channel shows national
Channel 4 programmes.
Britain is one of the world’s foremost exporters of television productions,
many of which have won international awards. In 1983 these included two of the
382
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cable
Services
Radio
BBC
External
Services
top awards at the Montreux International Television Festival and a grand award
in the documentary category and 12 gold medals in a number of subject
categories at the New York International Film and Television Festival.
Hitherto, about 14 per cent of households with television sets have received their
television services by cable. The vast majority of cable systems have been used
solely to relay broadcast television and radio services in order to improve
reception quality, to avoid ‘screening’ by buildings or the local topography, or
because external aerials are not allowed on some residential buildings.
However, one local community cable television and four local community cable
sound-only stations in operation enable people both to see and hear program¬
mes about local topics and issues and to take part in making the programmes.
Seven cable operators have been providing subscription television (‘Pay-TVj
services in 13 areas for an experimental period since 1981. All operators of cable
systems are licensed by the Home Secretary and British Telecom. Commercial
relay operators are represented by the Cable Television Association of Great
Britain.
Legislation has been introduced in Parliament to allow a much more general
expansion of cable television. It is intended that cable investment should be
privately financed; that regulation should be as light as possible to allow the
development of a wide range of services and facilities, and flexible enough to
adapt to changing technology; and that there should be certain safeguards for
existing broadcasting services. A new national Cable Authority is to award
franchises, supervise programme services and promote cable development. In
the mean time, licences have been awarded to 11 cable systems which will serve
as pilot projects, and some of the existing cable operators, formerly relaying
broadcast services, have been licensed to offer additional services on their
existing systems.
BBC Radio has four national channels. Radio 1 broadcasts rock and pop music,
while Radio 2 provides music and light entertainment as well as being the
principal channel for the coverage of sport. Radio 3 broadcasts mainly serious
music as well as drama, poetry and short stories, talks and documentaries, and
Test Match cricket (on medium wave only). Radio 4 is the main speech network,
providing the principal news and information service, as well as drama, comedy
shows and panel games; it also carries parliamentary coverage and live relays of
major public events.
There are 30 BBC local radio stations serving England and the Channel
Islands, and regional radio services in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, as
well as 43 ILR (independent local radio) stations distributed throughout Britain.
Further BBC and ILR stations are planned. About 90 per cent of the population
is served by BBC or independent local radio stations. Broadcasts provide a
comprehensive service of local news and information, music and other
entertainment, education, consumer advice and coverage of local events, and
offer listeners a chance to air their views, often by using the phone-in technique.
There are also some 200 hospital and some 20 university closed-circuit radio
stations.
The BBC External Services broadcast by radio world-wide, using English and 36
other languages, for 720 hours a week. The main objectives are to give unbiased
news, reflect British opinion and project British life, culture and developments
in science and industry. News bulletins, current affairs programmes, political
commentaries and topical magazine programmes form the main part of the
output, with a full sports service, music, drama and general entertainment.
The languages in which the External Services broadcast and the length of time
each is on the air are.prescribed by the Government. Apart from this the BBC
TELEVISION AND RADIO
383
Advertising
Parliamentary
and Political
Broadcasting
has full responsibility and is completely independent in determining the content
of news and other programmes. A plan to improve audibility is being
implemented.
The BBC World Service broadcasts for 24 hours a day in English and is
supplemented at peak listening times by programmes of special interest to
Africa.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are re-broadcast by the radio
services of many countries. Re-broadcasting involves direct relays from BBC
transmissions and the use of recorded programmes supplied through the BBC
tape and disc Transcription Service. There are some 3,000 re-broadcasts weekly
of World Service programmes in about 150 countries. The Transcription Service
offers programmes to about 100 countries.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most extensive
language teaching undertaking in the world. English lessons are broadcast
weekly by radio with explanations in 30 other languages, and recorded lessons
are supplied to 300 stations in 90 countries. English by Television programmes
are shown in more than 60 countries.
Another part of the External Services, the Monitoring Service, listens to and
reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news and
comment from overseas to the BBC, the press and the Government.
Radio for overseas is also produced by the radio services of the Central Office of
Information (COI). A wide range of recorded material is sent to radio stations in
over 90 countries. COI television services provide material such as documentary
and magazine programmes for distribution to overseas stations.
The BBC does not give publicity to any firm or organised interest except when it
is necessary to provide effective and informative programmes. It must not
broadcast any commercial advertisement or any sponsored programme.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television but advertisers can
have no influence on programme content or editorial control. Advertisements
must be clearly distinguishable and separate from programmes, and the amount
of time given to them must not be so great as to detract from the value of the
programmes as a medium of information, education or entertainment. Advertis¬
ing is normally limited to seven minutes in any one hour of broadcasting time,
and averaged over the day’s programmes must not exceed six minutes per hour.
The independent local radio stations are normally limited to a maximum of nine
minutes of advertising each hour. The IBA has a code governing standards and
practice in advertising on television and radio and giving guidance on the types
and methods of advertisement which are prohibited; this includes advertising
with a political or religious object or on behalf of cigarettes or betting.
Advertisements may not be inserted in certain types of programme, such as
broadcasts to schools. The IBA has endorsed the Principles for Advertising by
Direct Satellite Broadcasting which have been drawn up by the European
Broadcasting Union.
The Government has no general privileged access to radio or television but
government publicity material to support non-political campaigns may be
broadcast on independent radio and television. This is prepared through
the COI and broadcast and paid for on a normal commercial basis. Short
public service items, concerning health, safety and welfare, are also produced by
the COI for free transmission by the BBC and independent television and
radio.
Parliamentary reporting includes a daily factual and impartial account of
proceedings in Parliament. Proceedings, including those of committees, are
broadcast on radio, some live and others in recorded form in radio and television
384
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technical
Developments
International
Relations
news and current affairs programmes. Parliament is not televised; however, in
late 1983 the House of Lords voted in favour of televising some of its proceedings
for an experimental period.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are transmitted periodically on radio
and television, under rules agreed between the major political parties, the BBC
and the IBA, and there are special arrangements for the period following the
announcement of a general election.
One of the most important recent developments has been the introduction of
smaller, lighter cameras and video recorders for use on location. Electronic
news-gathering equipment, whereby pictures can be transmitted directly to a
studio or recorded on video tape on location, reduces significantly the time
before an item can be broadcast. Other developments include the use of new
types of video tape recorders, the increasing use of computers to generate
graphical shapes such as captions and credits, and the improvement of the
quality of video tape pictures.
Recent developments by the BBC include the ACE digital television standards
converter, probably the most advanced in the world, which is used to convert
pictures between the European and American standards. Another BBC develop¬
ment is the NICAM system used to carry high-quality sound programme signals
across the country. Both of these systems have been licensed to commercial
manufacturers. The BBC has also developed a data-labelling system for sound
programmes which will make programme and station selection much easier.
Research includes investigations into stereo sound for television, digital
transmission of signals over fibre-optic cables, improved picture displays, and
many aspects of satellite broadcasting. IBA engineers were the first in the world
to introduce a fully digital field rate standards converter to improve the
interchange of programmes between areas using the 525-line system and those
using the 625-line system. Current IBA research projects include the further
development of digital techniques for studio applications and inter-city links,
and a study of the future use of satellites for broadcasting which has included
the development of a new C-MAC transmission system for use on future direct
broadcast satellites. C-MAC has been accepted by the Government as the United
Kingdom satellite transmission standard, and during 1983 was recommended
by the European Broadcasting Union as a world standard.
By the late 1980s direct broadcasting by satellite, by which television pictures
are transmitted directly from space into people’s homes, could be available
throughout Britain. The Government has paved the way for a consortium to be
set up involving the BBC, the IBA and other commercial interests. This would
start services on three of the five satellite channels allocated to the United
Kingdom by international agreement.
The BBC and IBA have co-operated in the development of a teletext system,
known by the BBC as CEEFAX and the IBA as ORACLE. The use of teletext
allows the television signal to carry additional information which can be selected
and displayed as ‘pages’ of text and graphics on receivers equipped with the
necessary decoders. The system is also used to provide programme subtitles,
which are of great benefit to the deaf and hard of hearing. Over 95 per cent of
teletext sets throughout the world are based on the British system, and working
services operating to the British standard are in use or on trial in 13 countries,
including Australia, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States.
British Telecom’s public viewdata service, ‘Prestel’, offers a wide range of
information which is transmitted via the telephone and viewed on the screen of
a television receiver.
The BBC and the IBA are active members of the European Broadcasting Union.
This body manages Eurovision, the network of television programme exchange,
TELEVISION AND RADIO
385
and is responsible for the technical and administrative arrangements for
co-ordinating the exchange of programmes over the Eurovision network and
intercontinental satellite links; it also maintains a technical monitoring station
where frequency measurements and other observations on broadcasting
stations are carried out. The Union also provides a forum linking the major
public services and national broadcasters of Western Europe and other parts of
the world and co-ordinates co-operation in radio and television.
The BBC is a partner in Visnews, which supplies world newsfilm to 269
television stations in 86 countries and is the most widely used newsfilm agency
in the world. United Press International, Paramount Pictures and Independent
Television News jointly provide an international newsfilm service to more than
100 overseas television organisations via the Eurovision network and by
satellite.
The BBC is an associate member of the Asian Pacific Broadcasting Union, and
belongs to the Commonwealth Broadcasting Association, whose members
extend to each other such facilities as the use of studios, recording channels and
programme contributions. The BBC also provides technical aid, particularly in
training the staff of other broadcasting organisations throughout the world;
members of the BBC’s staff are seconded for service overseas.
The Government finances a number of overseas students on broadcasting
training courses at the BBC, the British Council (which aims to promote a wider
knowledge of Britain and the English language abroad and to develop closer
cultural relations between Britain and other countries) and the Thomson
Television College, which is based in Glasgow.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International Telecom¬
munications Union, the United Nations agency responsible for regulating and
controlling all international telecommunications services (including radio and
television), for allocating and registering all radio frequencies and for promoting
and co-ordinating the international study of technical problems in broadcast¬
ing. The BBC is also represented on the United Kingdom Committee of the
International Special Committee on Radio Interference. The BBC maintains a
number of offices overseas.
24 Sport and
Recreation
ORGANISATION
AND
PROMOTION
Sports Councils
The British invented and developed many of the sports and games which are
now played all over the world, and there is widespread interest in most kinds of
sport throughout the country. Large crowds attend occasions such as the
association football Cup Final at Wembley Stadium, the international rugby
matches at Twickenham, Murrayfield and Cardiff Arms Park, the Wimbledon
lawn tennis championships, the classic horse races. Grand Prix motor racing
and the cricket Test matches. Extensive coverage of sport on television has
helped to generate interest in a wide variety of sports including basketball,
darts, snooker, ice skating, skiing and athletics.
Levels of participation in sport have been rising due mainly to the increases in
leisure time and facilities, greater mobility and rising living standards. A
growing awareness of the importance to good health of regular exercise has been
reflected in recent years by an upsurge of interest in jogging and marathon
running. It is estimated that about one-third of the adult population regularly
takes part in outdoor sport, and about a quarter in indoor sport. Men greatly
outnumber women in active sport.
The Government has long recognised the importance of physical activity for
the general welfare of the community; the social role that sport can play has
become more important at a time of high unemployment and rapid change in
work and leisure patterns. The policy for the development of sport in Britain is to
encourage further increases in participation, especially among young people
and those nearing retirement; to provide adequate facilities for the whole
community, especially in the inner cities and in deprived rural areas; and to
continue the encouragement of high standards of performance.
A Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State in the Department of the Environment
co-ordinates government policy on sport and active recreation and, since 1983,
on children's play. The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland have responsibilities in their areas. Most sports and recreation facilities
are provided by local authorities.
The Government provides financial and other assistance through a number of
official bodies and schemes. Some of these bodies, such as the Sports Councils
and the Countryside Commissions, have specific responsibilities for sport and
recreation, and help other public and private bodies to provide facilities. Others,
for example, the Forestry Commission, the British Waterways Board, the Nature
Conservancy Council and the regional water authorities, provide recreational
amenities in addition to their main functions.
Government assistance for the development of sport in Great Britain is
channelled through three independent bodies—the Sports Council (for England
and for general matters affecting Britain as a whole), the Sports Council for
Wales and the Scottish Sports Council. (In Northern Ireland the Department of
Education makes direct grants to local authorities and voluntary sports bodies
towards the capital cost of facilities. The Sports Council, which is financed by
388
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PROVISION OF
FACILITIES
the Department, has limited grant-making powers.) The Councils allocate
government funds amounting to some £36 million in 1984—85. They award
grants for sports development, coaching and administration to the governing
bodies of sports and other national organisations, and administer the national
sports centres. Grants and loans are made to voluntary organisations and local
authorities to assist the provision of sports facilities. In some circumstances
grants are also given to commercial organisations. The Councils assist British
representatives at international sports meetings and encourage links with
international and overseas organisations. They also have information centres
providing data on a wide range of sports topics. The Sports Council consults
with the Central Council of Physical Recreation, comprising members of the
national governing and representative bodies of sport and physical recreation in
England. The equivalent bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are the
Scottish and Welsh Sports Associations and the Northern Ireland Council of
Physical Recreation.
Nine regional councils for sport and recreation in England, on each of which
sporting, countryside and local authority interests are represented, advise on
investment in and the planning of sporting facilities.
Local authorities are the main providers of land and large-scale facilities for
community recreation; their total expenditure on sport and recreation
amounted to some £800 million in 1983—84. Provision of facilities was
substantially increased in the 1970s to meet the increasing demand and to
encourage further expansion of participation. The facilities provided include
parks, lakes, playing fields, sports halls, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming
baths and sports centres catering for a wide range of activities.
Increased emphasis is being placed on the need to improve facilities for sport
in areas of urban stress, and schemes worth some £20 million were supported in
1983—84 as part of the Government's urban programme. A further £3 million
was granted over the two years 1983—84 towards sports and recreational
facilities on reclaimed sites under the Derelict Land Scheme. In recognition of
the special problems of Merseyside the Government granted £2-5 million over
the three years to 1984—85 for sporting projects in that area.
In addition to the recreational facilities provided by public authorities, many
facilities are made available by local voluntary clubs. Some cater for indoor
recreation, but more common are those providing sports grounds, particularly
for games such as cricket, association and rugby football, hockey, tennis and
golf. Clubs linked to business firms often cater for a wide range of activities.
Commercial facilities include tenpin bowling centres, ice- and roller-skating
rinks, squash courts, golf courses and driving ranges, curling rinks and riding
stables.
Publicly maintained schools must provide for the physical education of their
pupils. All (except those solely for infants) are expected to have a playing field or
the use of one, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Some have other
amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls designed for dance
and movement. Sport and recreation facilities are also provided at institutions
of higher and further education (some of which have departments of physical
education), and there are ‘centres of sporting excellence’, often at universities
and other colleges, which enable selected young athletes to develop their talents
and provide, where appropriate, for their educational needs.
In order to achieve the maximum use of existing sports facilities, the
Government is encouraging greater community use of sports centres and other
facilities owned by businesses and public sector bodies; wider use of school
sports facilities is similarly being promoted by the Sports Council.
SPORT AND RECREATION
389
Sports Centres
Private
Sponsorship
Children’s
Play
SPORTS
ORGANIS¬
ATIONS
Six national sports centres, five in England and one in Wales, are run by the
Sports Council, and provide a range of competition and training facilities. As
well as offering residential courses for national teams, coaches and enthusiasts
from all over Britain, the centres are used extensively by local sports clubs and
the local community. Combined facilities for a range of sports are provided at
three of the centres: Crystal Palace in south-east London, Bisham Abbey in
Buckinghamshire and Lilleshall in Shropshire. Crystal Palace provides major
competition venues for athletics and swimming and a variety of indoor sports,
and Lilleshall is also the training headquarters of the Football Association. The
other three are specialist centres: the National Sailing Centre, Cowes, Isle of
Wight; the National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire,
which caters for rowing, canoeing and water-skiing: and the Plas-y-Brenin
National Centre for Mountain Activities in north Wales. The Sports Council for
Wales runs the National Sports Centre for Wales in Cardiff and the National
Outdoor Pursuits Centre at Plas Menai in north Wales, which was opened in
1982.
The Scottish Sports Council operates three national sports training centres:
Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore for outdoor pursuits, Inverclyde at Largs for
general sports, and a national water sports training centre on Great Cumbrae
Isle in the Firth of Clyde. The Sports Council for Northern Ireland operates one
national facility, the Northern Ireland Mountain Centre at Tollymore in County
Down.
Some 600 purpose-built indoor sports centres serve local rather than national
needs: in Northern Ireland there has been a major development of multi-purpose
centres. Several privately run centres cater for specialised interests, such as the
National Equestrian Centre, run by the British Equestrian Federation, and the
Ludwig Guttmann Sports Centre for the Disabled, Stoke Mandeville.
Increasing numbers of sports receive financial sponsorship from commercial
organisations. The estimated value of commercial sponsorship was some £100
million in 1983. Sponsorship may take the form of financing specific events, or
it may be granted to individual sports organisations. The Sports Aid Foundation
and Sports Aid Trust raise and distribute funds from industry, commerce and
private sponsors in order to assist the training of talented individual sportsmen
and sportswomen. They make grants on the recommendation of the governing
bodies of sport. The Scottish and Welsh Sports Aid Foundations and the Ulster
Sports and Recreation Trust fulfil similar functions. Sponsorship advisory
services are also run by the Sports Councils.
In 1983 the main government responsibility for children's play in England was
given to the minister with responsibility for sport, and a new charity. Play
Board, launched with government support (including support from the Welsh
Office). Play Board’s main objective is to promote facilities for play, recreation
and other leisure-time opportunities for children.
The National Playing Fields Association, a national charity, has for many years
encouraged the provision of playing fields and recreational facilities, specialis¬
ing in the needs of children and young people, including the young disabled.
There are affiliated associations in Scotland and Northern Ireland and in the
counties of England and Wales.
Individual sports are run by independent governing bodies whose functions
usually include drawing up rules, holding events, regulating membership,
selecting and training national teams and promoting international links. There
are also organisations representing people who take part in more informal
physical recreation, such as walking and cycling.
390
The British
Olympic
Association
Sport for
Disabled
People
POPULAR
SPORTS AND
RECREATIONS
Association
Football
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, organises the participation
of British teams in the Olympic Games. The Association’s committee consists of
representatives of the 26 sports in the programme of the Olympic Games
(summer and winter). It determines the size of the British team, raises funds,
makes all the arrangements and provides a headquarters staff for the
management of the team.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled, founded in 1961, encourages
greater sporting and recreational opportunities for disabled people. The
Association, which receives an annual Sports Council grant, provides advice on
physical recreation, arranges sports meetings, and encourages the provision of
facilities throughout the country. It co-ordinates and develops the activities of
its 31 member associations representing all categories of handicap—physical,
mental and sensory. The United Kingdom Sport Association for People with
Mental Handicap was established in 1981.
The first sports stadium in the world designed for the disabled was opened at
Stoke Mandeville, Buckinghamshire, in 1969, and is owned and maintained by
the British Paraplegic Sports Society. Annual national games organised by
several of the associations for the disabled take place at Stoke Mandeville,
Crystal Palace in London and at other locations; the Seventh World Wheelchair
Games (or Paralympics) were held at Stoke Mandeville in 1984. As part of the
International Year of Disabled People in 1981 several initiatives were launched
by the Sports Councils and other bodies to increase the participation of disabled
people in sport, and there are growing opportunities in virtually every sport at
both competitive and non-competitive levels.
Some of the major sports and recreations in Britain are described below. The
increased provision of sports centres has improved opportunities for participa¬
tion in indoor sports such as basketball, volleyball, fencing, judo, the martial
arts (karate, aikido and kendo), gymnastics, squash, table tennis and shooting.
Almost all outdoor sports have continued to gain in popularity, including the
high-risk' activities such as rock-climbing and sub-aqua diving. The number of
people enjoying the recreational amenities of the countryside, rivers and
coastline is similarly growing. Two new sports introduced from overseas which
have gained rapidly in popularity are windsurfing and hang-gliding; the flying of
microlight aircraft is one of the newest sports to achieve a keen following.
Sportsmen may be professionals (paid players) or amateurs. Some sports,
such as Rugby Union, hockey and rowing are amateur but in others the
distinction between amateur and professional status is less strictly defined, or
does not exist.
The largest spectator sport and one of the most popular participation sports,
association football was first developed and codified in England during the
nineteenth century, and is controlled by separate football associations in
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England over 350 clubs are
affiliated to the English Football Association (FA) and some 40,000 clubs to
regional or district associations. The full-time professional clubs in England and
Wales belong to the Football League (92 clubs) and in Scotland to the Scottish
Football League (38 clubs); the clubs play in four divisions in England and Wales
and three in Scotland. In Northern Ireland, 14 semi-professional clubs play in
the Irish Football League. During the season, which lasts from August until
May, attendances at Canon League (that is, English league matches) total about
19 million. The Football Association, formed in 1863, and the Football League,
formed in 1888, were both the first of their kind in the world.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup, the Milk Cup (formerly the
League Cup), the Scottish FA Cup, the Scottish League Cup, the Irish Cup and
SPORT AND RECREATION
391
Athletics
The Highland
Games
Badminton
the Welsh FA Cup are organised on a knock-out basis, and the finals are played
at Wembley Stadium, London, at Hampden Park, Glasgow, at Windsor Park,
Belfast, and on a two-leg home and away basis in Wales. National teams play in
European competitions, the World Cup competition and other international
matches. England, Scotland and Northern Ireland played in the final stages of
the World Cup competition held in Spain in 1982. English clubs were European
club champions (Liverpool three times, Nottingham Forest twice and Aston Villa
once) for six consecutive years between 1977 and 1982, and Liverpool became
champions again in 1984. Aberdeen won the European Cup-Winners Cup in
1983, and Ipswich Town and Tottenham Hotspur won the Union of European
Football Associations cup competition in 1981 and 1984 respectively.
Violence associated with football both at home and overseas has been a subject
of growing concern: the Government and the football authorities have issued
guidelines to clubs aimed at controlling and reducing the problem, and the
Government has negotiated similar guidelines with other European govern¬
ments. Measures to contain violence have been particularly successful in
Scotland.
The Sports Council, using specially allocated funds, has made grants to a
number of clubs and local authorities to enable them to modernise or expand
football facilities in areas of urban deprivation.
Amateur athletics is governed in England by the Amateur Athletic Association
(which, formed in 1880, was the first national governing body for athletics) and
by the Women’s Amateur Athletic Association. Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland have their own associations. International athletics and the selection of
British teams are the concern of the British Amateur Athletic Board, which also
administers coaching schemes. For the Olympic Games and the world and
European championships one team represents the United Kingdom but
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland compete separately in the
Commonwealth Games and also organise their own international meetings.
Athletics is attracting increasing numbers of participants, both men and
women, in part because of wide television coverage of athletics events and the
success of British competitors.
Many British athletes, especially middle-distance runners, have enjoyed
distinguished reputations: in 1954, for example. Dr Roger Bannister became
the first man to run a mile in under four minutes. More recently Britons won 16
medals at the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles, including gold medals in the
decathlon (Daley Thompson), the 1,500 metres (Sebastian Coe) and the javelin
(Tessa Sanderson). Four world records were held by Britons in August 1984: the
800 metres and the mile by Sebastian Coe, the 1,500 metres by Steve Ovett and
the 5,000 metres by David Moorcroft. Daley Thompson (decathlon) and Steve
Cram (1,500 metres) were both gold medallists at the 1983 world athletics
championships in Helsinki.
The next Commonwealth Games will be held in Edinburgh in 1986.
The Scottish Highland Games, at which sports (including tossing the caber,
putting the weight and throwing the hammer), dancing and piping competi¬
tions take place, attract large numbers of spectators from all over the world.
Among better-known Highland Games are the annual Braemar Gathering,
which is traditionally attended by the Royal Family, the Argyllshire and Cowal
Gatherings and the meeting at Aboyne.
The origins of badminton are not clear, but the Badminton Association of
England, which together with the Scottish, Welsh and Irish Badminton Unions
today organises the sport in Britain, was formed in 1893 and the first
392
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Basketball
Billiards and
Snooker
Boxing
tournament was promoted five years later. By 1914 the game had spread to
many other Commonwealth countries and is now played throughout the world.
Badminton expanded rapidly in the 1970s and is played in a variety of locations
ranging from sports centres to village halls; some 2 million people are estimated
to play the game in Britain, 1 -2 million of them regularly. British women players
have done particularly well in the sport: Nora Perry and Jane Webster of England
were world champions in 1982. The England women's team won a silver medal,
and the men s a bronze, at the 1984 world team championships. The English
team (men and women) are reigning European and Commonwealth Games
champions.
Basketball is played in Britain both indoors and outdoors. There are over 1,100
senior clubs and the game is played in most secondary schools and many other
institutions; in all, over 1 million people participate and its popularity is
increasing rapidly. The English Basket Ball Association is the governing body of
the sport in England, and there are similar associations in Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland; all are affiliated to the Federation Internationale de Basketball
Amateur. The leading English clubs play in a national league and the main
events of the year are the national championship finals, held at Wembley Arena
in London, and the men's national cup final, staged at the Royal Albert Hall.
The character of the present game of billiards was established in Britain at the
end of the seventeenth century. Snooker, a more varied game invented by the
British in India in 1875, has greatly increased in popularity and become a major
spectator sport as a result of widespread television coverage of the professional
tournaments. It is estimated that between 5 and 6 million people now play the
game. British players have an outstanding record in snooker and the major
professional championships have been largely dominated by them. The main
tournament is the annual Embassy World Professional Championship, held in
Sheffield; British winners of this event include Ray Reardon (six times), John
Spencer (three times), and more recently Terry Griffiths (1979), Alex Higgins
(1972 and 1982) and Steve Davis (1981, 1983 and 1984). England won the State
Express World Team Championships in 1981 and 1983 and Wales in 1980.
The controlling body of both games is the Billiards and Snooker Control
Council, which holds the copyright of the rules. The Professional Players
Association organises professional championships.
Boxing as a British sport is one of the oldest, probably originating in Saxon
times. Its modern form, also adopted in many overseas countries, dates from
1865 when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules eliminating
much of the brutality that had characterised prize-fighting and making skill the
basis of the sport. Boxing is both amateur and professional, and in both strict
medical regulations are observed.
The Amateur Boxing Association controls all amateur boxing in England
including schoolboy, club and association boxing, and boxing in the armed
services. There are separate associations in Scotland and Wales; Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Boxing Association. The associations organise
various amateur boxing competitions, and teams from England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland take part in international competitions such as
the European and world championships; a British team competes in the
Olympic Games.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control,
founded in 1929. The Board appoints inspectors, medical officers and repre¬
sentatives to ensure that regulations are observed and to guard against
overmatching and exploitation. British boxing has a distinguished record and
SPORT AND RECREATION
393
Bowls
Chess
Cricket
at various times British boxers have held European and world championship
titles. Recent holders of European or world titles include Colin Jones, Barry
McGuighan, Charlie Magri and Tony Sibson.
Bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. In the south of
England the game is called lawn bowls and is played on a flat green; in the
northern areas of England and the Isle of Man a variation called crown green
bowls is played, so called because the centre of the green is higher than its
boundaries. Lawn and crown green bowls are mainly summer games; in winter
indoor bowls, played on synthetic greens, is growing in popularity. At one time
regarded as a pastime for the elderly, bowls is increasingly played by adults of all
ages. Over 2,640 lawn bowling clubs are affiliated to the English Bowling
Association, which, together with the Bowling Associations of Scotland, Wales
and Ireland and the English Women’s Bowling Association, play to the rules of
the International Bowling Board. Other associations, including the English
Bowling Federation, are not under the Board’s control. The British Crown Green
Bowling Association is the governing body of crown green bowls, and has nearly
2,000 affiliated clubs.
Chess has increased greatly in popularity over the past ten years and England
now ranks among the top five chess-playing nations (Scotland and Wales are
separately represented). There are local chess clubs and leagues throughout the
country and the game is widely played in schools and colleges. Important
domestic competitions include the annual Grieveson Grant British Cham¬
pionships, held at a different resort each year, the Leigh Grand Prix, a circuit of
weekend tournaments, and The Times British Schools Chess Tournament, a
knock-out competition open to all schools. The best known international events
are the annual ACE Hastings International tournament and the Phillips and
Drew Kings, a biennial Grandmaster tournament held at County Hall in London.
The governing bodies of the game are the British Chess Federation, the Scottish
Chess Association (the oldest such body in the world, celebrating its centenary
in 1984) and the Welsh and Ulster Chess Unions. The first British player to
achieve the status of Grandmaster for over-the-board chess was Tony Miles in
1976, and eight Britons now hold that title; Nigel Short, aged 19, became the
world’s youngest Grandmaster in 1984.
Cricket is among the most popular of summer sports and is sometimes called
the English national game, having been played as early as the 1550s. Among the
many clubs founded in the eighteenth century is the Marylebone Cricket Club
(MCC), which reframed the laws of the game. The Club is based at Lord's cricket
ground, the administrative centre of the game. Cricket in Britain is now
governed by the Cricket Council consisting of representatives of the Test and
County Cricket Board (representing first-class cricket), the National Cricket
Association (representing club and junior cricket) and the MCC.
Cricket is played in schools, colleges and universities, and in most towns and
villages amateur teams play weekly games from late April to the end of
September. In England there is a network of league cricket contested by teams of
Saturday afternoon players; in the Midlands and the north of England these
teams include a full-time professional. The game is also played to a lesser extent
in Scotland and Wales.
The main competition in professional cricket is the sponsored First Class
County Championship of three-day games played by 17 county teams, who also
take part in three one-day sponsored competitions—two knock-out competi¬
tions and a Sunday League. Some of the best supported games are the annual
series of five-day sponsored Test matches played between England and a touring
394
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Darts
Field Sports
team from Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, the West Indies or Sri
Lanka. A team representing England usually tours one or more of these
countries in the British winter. One-day international games also attract large
crowds. A World Cup is played every four years, with some of the smaller
cricketing nations as well as the major countries competing.
Cricket is also played by women and girls, the governing body being the
Women's Cricket Association, founded in 1926. Women's cricket clubs have
regular weekend fixtures, and junior sides play both eleven and six-a-side
competitions. Test match series are played against Australia, India, New
Zealand and the West Indies and other international matches take place. The
women's World Cup, in which England competes, is held every four years.
Darts, an indoor game which has its origins in medieval archery, consists of
throwing three metal darts at a round, segmented board numbered one to 20.
Played mainly in public houses as a casual recreation to accompany drinking, it
has gained in popularity as a result of widespread television coverage of the
professional game. As many as 9 million people at a time watch televised darts
contests and it is estimated that over 3 million people play the game regularly.
Darts is organised in Britain by the British Darts Organisation, which forms
part of the World Darts Federation: its rules have become the code for the world
sport. The Organisation arranges events in Britain which bring entrants from
as many as 45 countries. Every two years a World Cup tournament is held:
England won it in 1983.
The main individual title in the game is the Embassy World Professional
Championship. British players have dominated the event and in 1984 the title
was won by Eric Bristow of England.
The British Field Sports Society looks after the interests of all field sports
(including hunting, fishing, stalking, shooting, falconry and hare coursing).
The Society is a member of the British Shooting Sports Council which is the
representative body for the recreational use of firearms.
Fox hunting on horseback with a pack of hounds is the most popular British
hunting sport, but there are also stag and hare hunting and the fast-developing
sport of hunting mink. The fox-hunting season lasts from early November to
April and there are over 400 packs of hounds of all kinds in Britain. The sport is
not without its critics, but a large number of people take a keen interest in it.
Game shooting as an organised sport probably originated in the early part of
the nineteenth century. Game consists of grouse, black-grouse, partridge,
pheasant and ptarmigan, species which are protected by law during a close
season when they are allowed to breed on numerous estates supervised by
gamekeepers. It is necessary to have a licence to kill game, and a certificate
issued by the police to own a shot-gun. The Game Conservancy, formed by
landowners, farmers and others interested in game conservation, collects
information and studies factors controlling game population.
The most popular country sport is fishing, and there are about 4 million
anglers in Britain. Many fish for salmon and trout, particularly in the rivers and
lochs of Scotland and in Wales, but in England and Wales the most widely
practised form of fishing is for coarse fish such as pike, perch, carp, roach, dace,
tench, chub and bream. Angling clubs in England affiliate to the National
Federation of Anglers (there are similar bodies in Scotland. Wales and Northern
Ireland) and many clubs organise angling competitions. National cham¬
pionships are organised by the Federation, which also enters a team in the
World Angling Championship. Freshwater fishing usually has to be paid for:
most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs by private owners, while trout and
salmon fishermen may rent a stretch of river, join a club, or pay for the right to
SPORT AND RECREATION
395
Golf
Hockey
Ice Skating
Lawn Tennis
fish by the day, week or month. Coastal and deep-sea fishing are free to all (apart
from salmon and sea trout fishing which is by licence only).
Golf originated in Scotland where it has for centuries borne the title of the Royal
and Ancient Game. The Royal and Ancient Golf Club, the oldest club and the
governing body of the sport for most of the world, is situated at St Andrews on
the east coast. Golf is played throughout Britain and there are golf courses in the
vicinity of most towns, some of them owned by local authorities. The main event
of the golfing year and one of the world’s leading tournaments is the Open Golf
Championship; other important events include the Walker Cup match for
amateurs and the Ryder Cup match for professionals, which are played between
Britain and the United States and Europe and the United States respectively.
Among the leading British professional players are Nick Faldo, Sandy Lyle, Mark
James, Brian Barnes, Bernard Gallagher, Peter Oosterhuis and Sam Torrance.
Variants of hockey have been played in Britain for at least five centuries, and
some, like hurling in Ireland and shinty in Scotland, are still played. The modern
game was started in the nineteenth century by the Hockey Association (of
England) which was founded in 1886. The Hockey Rules Board controls the
rules of the game. There are some 1,000 men’s hockey clubs throughout Britain,
many of which have boys’ sections, and many boys’ schools also play the game.
Cup competitions and leagues are played at national, division or district, and
club levels both indoors (six-a-side) and outdoors, and there are regular
international matches.
The controlling body of women’s hockey in England is the All-England
Women’s Hockey Association (founded in 1895) to which are affiliated some
1,000 clubs and about 2,400 schools; there are similar associations in Scotland,
Wales and Ireland. County, club and school championships for both outdoor and
indoor hockey are played annually in England. The first international women’s
hockey match took place in 1896; nowadays a match is played annually at
Wembley Stadium (in addition to those played in other parts of the country).
Men’s and women’s hockey are Olympic sports. The British men’s team won a
bronze medal at the 1984 Olympic Games.
Ice skating became popular in Britain in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries and takes three main forms; ice dancing, figure skating and
speed-skating. The governing body for the sport is the National Skating
Association of Great Britain, founded in 1879. Participation in ice skating is
concentrated among the under-25s. There are some 40 ice rinks in Great
Britain, a small number compared with many other European countries. In
spite of this, British couples have won the world ice dance championships 17
times in its 32-year history, and Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean were world
ice dance champions for four successive years between 1981 and 1984,
European champions in 1981, 1982 and 1984, and gold medal winners at the
Sarajevo winter Olympic Games in 1984. John Curry and Robin Cousins were
Olympic gold medal winners for figure skating in 1976 and 1980 respectively.
The modern game of lawn tennis originated in England in 1872 and the first
championships were played at Wimbledon in 1877. The controlling body in
Great Britain, the Lawn Tennis Association, was founded in 1888; Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Lawn Tennis Association. The main event of the
season is the annual Wimbledon fortnight, widely regarded as the most
important tennis event in the world: this draws large crowds, with the ground at
the All England Club accommodating over 30,000 spectators. There are also
national and county championships and national competitions for boys' and
girls’ schools. International events include the Davis Cup and Kings Cup for men
396
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Motor Sports
Mountaine ering
and Rock-
Climbing
Racing
and the Federation Cup for women. Women from Britain and the United States
compete annually for the Wightman Cup.
Among the most popular spectator sports in Britain are motor racing and
rallying and motor-cycle racing. The governing body for four-wheeled motor
sport is the RAC (Royal Automobile Club) Motor Sports Association, which
issues competition licences for a variety of motoring competitions and organises
both the RAC Rally, an event in the contest for the World Rally Championship,
and the British Grand Prix, held annually at either the Silverstone or Brands
Hatch racing circuits, which counts towards the Formula One World Motor
Racing Championship.
British car constructors, including Lotus, McLaren and Williams, have
enjoyed outstanding successes in Grand Prix racing and Britain has had six
world champion motor racing drivers, the most recent being Jackie Stewart
(1969, 1971 and 1973) and James Hunt (1976). Other variants of motor-car
sport which are popular include autocross, drag racing and karting.
Motor-cycle racing is governed by the Auto-Cycle Union, and the most
important events of the year are the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy races and the
British Grand Prix. Speedway racing, governed by the Speedway Control Board,
and motocross are also popular. Three British riders have been individual world
motor-cycle champions at 500 cc: Mike Hailwood (1962—65), Phil Read (1973—
74) and Barry Sheene (1976—77).
The Project Thrust Team regained the world land speed record for Britain in
October 1983 when Richard Noble drove the jet-powered car Thrust 2 at an
average speed of 633-468 mph over one mile in Nevada, in the United States.
The popularity of mountaineering and rock-climbing has increased greatly in
recent years. Clubs in the British Mountaineering Council and the Mountaineer¬
ing Council for Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport, number nearly
330, ranging from national clubs such as the Alpine Club (founded in 1857, the
oldest mountaineering club in the world) and the Scottish Mountaineering
Club, to small regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. The National Centre for
Mountain Activities is at Plas-y-Brenin in north Wales, and climbing takes place
at other Sports Council centres at Plas Menai, north Wales, Aviemore in
Scotland and Tollymore in Northern Ireland. A number of local education
authorities and national bodies such as the Outward Bound Trust have also
established mountaineering training centres. The most popular areas in Britain
for climbing include the Peak District of Derbyshire, and the mountains of the
Lake District, Snowdonia in north Wales and the Western Highlands of
Scotland.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring mountain ranges
and climbing many of the great mountains of the world, achieving, for example,
the first ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865, of Everest in 1953, of Kangchenjunga
in 1955, of Everest by its south-west face in 1975, and of the south face of
Gosainthan (in the Himalayas) in 1982.
Horse-racing takes two forms—flat racing (from late March to early November)
and steeplechasing and hurdle racing (from late July to early June). The Derby,
run at Epsom, is the outstanding event in the flat racing calendar. Other classic
races are: the Two Thousand Guineas and the One Thousand Guineas, both run
at Newmarket; the Oaks, run at Epsom; and the St Leger, run at Doncaster. The
most important steeplechase and hurdle race meeting is the National Hunt
Festival Meeting held at Cheltenham in March. The Grand National, run at
Aintree near Liverpool, is the world's best-known steeplechase and dates from
1837.
SPORT AND RECREATION
397
Riding
Rowing
The Jockey Club administers all horse-racing in Britain. Its rules are the basis
of turf procedure and it also licenses racecourses. Racing takes place on most
days (excluding Sundays) throughout the year and about 12,500 horses are in
training. British thoroughbreds continue to be a source of the world’s best
bloodstock.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare (one of Britain’s most
popular spectator sports) takes place at 100 tracks licensed by local authorities.
Meetings are usually held two or three times a week at each track, up to a
maximum of 130 days a year. The rules for the sport are drawn up by the
National Greyhound Racing Club, which is the sport’s judiciary body. The
Stewards of the Club are also responsible for overall administration and
organisation and the licensing of racecourses to race under their rules. The
representative body is the British Greyhound Racing Board.
Horse riding takes a number of forms ranging from general recreational riding
to show jumping. The art of riding is promoted by the British Horse Society,
which is concerned with the welfare of horses, road safety, bridleways and
training. It also runs the British Equestrian Centre at Stoneleigh in Warwick¬
shire where activities take place throughout the year. With some 33,000
members the Society is the parent body of the Pony Club and the Riding Club
movements, which hold rallies, meetings and competitions culminating in their
annual national championships. Horse trials are held during the spring and
autumn under the auspices of the Society. Three-day events (comprising
dressage, cross-country riding and showjumping) held each year include those
at Badminton (Avon) in April; Windsor (Berkshire) in May; Braham (Yorkshire)
in June; Burghley House (Lincolnshire) in September; and Wylye (Wiltshire) in
October.
Showjumping is promoted by the British Show Jumping Association, which
has over 15,000 members and 1,531 shows affiliated to it. The major show
jumping events each year include the Royal International Horse Show and the
Horse of the Year Show in London, and the Olympia International Show
Jumping Championships.
The authority responsible for equestrian activities (other than racing) at
international level is the British Equestrian Federation, which co-ordinates the
work of the British Horse Society and the British Show Jumping Association.
British equestrian teams have an outstanding record in international competi¬
tions: a British team won the three-day event world championship held at
Luhmuhlen, West Germany, in September 1982, and Lucinda Green won the
individual gold medal. Silver medals were won by both the three-day event and
the showjumping teams at the 1984 Olympic Games, while Virginia Holgate
won the bronze medal in the three-day event individual competition. Well-known
show jumpers include David Broome, Malcolm Pyrah, Harvey Smith and Nick
Skelton.
Oarsmanship is taught in many schools, colleges and rowing clubs (including
women’s clubs) throughout Britain. The governing body of the sport in England
is the Amateur Rowing Association, and there are similar bodies in Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland. There are about 480 rowing clubs, and each year
some 246 regattas and head races are held in England and Wales under
Association rules.
The University Boat Race (between eight-oared crews from Oxford and
Cambridge) originated in 1829 and has been rowed on the Thames almost every
spring since 1836. The Head of the River Race in March (also on the Thames) is
the largest assembly of racing craft in the world, with more than 430 eights
racing in procession. At the Henley Regatta in Oxfordshire, founded in 1839,
398
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Rugby Football
Sailing
Skiing
crews from all over the world compete each July in various kinds of races over a
straight course of 1 mile 550 yards (about 2-1 km).
The National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, near Nottingham, has
a rowing course of Olympic 2,000-metre standard, as does Strathclyde Park in
west-central Scotland. Britain won the gold medal in the coxed fours event at the
1984 Olympic Games.
Rugby Football takes its name from Rugby School, in Warwickshire, where it
was first played in 1823. The game is played according to two different codes:
Rugby Union (a 15-a-side game) is played by amateurs while Rugby League (a
13-a-side game) is played by professionals as well as amateurs. Rugby Union is
played throughout Britain under the auspices of the Rugby Football Union in
England and similar bodies in Wales, Scotland and Ireland. Important domestic
competitions include the County Championship in England, the national club
knock-out competitions in England and Wales and the Scottish League Cup
Championship. International matches between England, Scotland, Wales,
Ireland and France are played each year and there are overseas tours by the
national sides and by the British Lions, a team representing Great Britain and
Ireland.
Rugby League is played mainly in the north of England. The governing body of
the professional game is the Rugby Football League, which sends touring teams
representing Great Britain to Australia and New Zealand: annual matches are
also played against France. The Challenge Cup Final, the major club match of
the season, is played at Wembley Stadium in London. The amateur game is
governed by the British Amateur Rugby League Association; annual matches are
played between England and France.
Sailing has always been popular in Britain, and the Royal Yachting Association
(RYA) has over 1,500 affiliated clubs. Some 640 practical and shore-based
teaching centres, including the National Sailing Centre at Cowes in the Isle of
Wight and the Scottish National Water Sports Training Centre in the Firth of
Clyde, offer RYA courses in all branches of the sport. One of the world’s principal
regattas takes place each year at Cowes, and major events are held at other
British sailing centres. Britons have undertaken many notable voyages. Sir
Francis Chichester was the winner of the first single-handed transatlantic race
in 1960 and made a solo circumnavigation of the world in 1966—67. The first
non-stop solo circumnavigation was achieved by Robin Knox-Johnston in 1968.
In 1976 Clare Francis held the record for the fastest single-handed crossing of
the Atlantic, as did Naomi James in 1980. Rodney Pattison won gold medals in
the ‘Flying Dutchman’ class at the Olympic regattas of 1968 and 1972 with his
crews Ian McDonald-Smith and Christopher Davies, and in 1976 Reg White,
crewed by John Osborne, won the gold medal in the ‘Tornado’ catamaran class.
Jo Richards and his crew Peter Allam won a bronze medal in the ‘Flying
Dutchman’ class at the 1984 Olympics.
When there is sufficient snow, skiing takes place in several parts of Britain. The
governing body of the sport is the British Ski Federation and there are separate
national councils. Skiing in Scotland has become very popular, especially at the
winter sports centres established in the Cairngorms, Deeside, Glencoe and
Glenshee, where ski-runs equal to those in other areas of Europe have been
developed. Ski-lifts, ski-tows and professional instruction of a high quality are
now available. There are also some 80 artificial ski-slopes throughout Great
Britain. Skiing on grass using free-revolving caterpillar tracks or rollers has
recently gained popularity, and there is increasing interest in cross-country
SPORT AND RECREATION
399
Squash Rackets
Sub-Aqua
Swimming
GAMBLING
skiing. There are over 170 ski clubs in Britain, and it is estimated that about
half a million people take part in the sport.
Squash rackets originated at Harrow School in the 1850s. The Squash Rackets
Association was formed in 1929 to promote and organise the game and there are
separate governing bodies for Scotland, Wales and Ireland. The governing body
of women’s squash in Britain is the Women’s Squash Association, founded in
1934. Squash enjoyed a period of very rapid growth during the 1970s and
remains a fast-growing sport. There are over 8,000 squash courts in England,
and the estimated number of players in Britain, both professional and amateur,
is about 2-8 million. The main tournament is the British Open Championship.
The outstanding British player of the game has been Jonah Barrington, for
several years the world’s leading player and British Open Champion six times
between 1966 and 1972.
Underwater activities are varied and include exploratory diving (for example,
wreck and reef diving), snorkel diving and underwater photography. The British
Sub-Aqua Club is the governing body for all underwater activities and promotes
underwater exploration, science and sport. The Club is the largest of its kind in
the world, with over 30,000 members and more than 1,000 clubs in Britain and
overseas. The Scottish Sub-Aqua Club governs the sport in Scotland.
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people in Britain, many of whom learn to
swim at public baths, schools or swimming clubs. Instruction and coaching are
provided by qualified teachers who hold certificates awarded by the Amateur
Swimming Association, to which over 1,700 clubs are affiliated. The Association
also draws up and enforces regulations for amateur swimming, diving,
synchronised swimming and water polo championships and competitions in
England. Separate associations control the sport in Scotland and Wales.
Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish Amateur Swimming Association. A
number of British swimmers have had great success and David Wilkie and
Duncan Goodhew won gold medals at the 1976 and 1980 Olympics respectively.
At the 1984 Olympics, Britons won a silver and four bronze medals.
Various forms of betting and commercial gaming are permitted under strict
regulations, and the total money staked in Great Britain in 1983 (excluding
gaming machines) was about £5,800 million. It has been estimated that over 90
per cent of adults gamble at some time or another, some 40 per cent regularly.
Gaming includes the playing of casino and card games, gaming machines and
licensed bingo, thought to be played by about 5 to 6 million people on a fairly
regular basis. Betting takes place mainly on horse or greyhound racing, and on
football matches (usually through football pools). Racing bets may be made at
racecourses and greyhound tracks, or through some 11,000 licensed off-course
betting offices which take nearly 90 per cent of the money staked. A form of pool
betting (totalisator betting) is organised on, and off, course by the Horserace
Totalisator Board (HTB). Bookmakers and the HTB contribute a levy to the
Horserace Betting Levy Board which promotes the improvement of horse racing
and breeding and the advancement of veterinary science.
In addition, legislation allows local authorities and certain other bodies to
hold lotteries.
'• I
Appendix 1
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p). There
are eight coins: £1; 50p; 20p; lOp; 5p; 2p; Ip: and Vap.
Bank of England notes are issued for sums of £1, £5, £10, £20 and £50.
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
= 1 foot
= 1 yard
= 1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint
— 1 quart
- 1 gallon
= 1 bushel
= 1 quarter
16 oz
14 lb
112 lb
20 cwt (2,240 lb)
2,000 lb
2-54 centimetres
30-48 centimetres
0-914 metre
1 -609 kilometres
= 1
= 1
1 square inch
1 square foot
1 square yard
1 acre
square mile
6-452 square centimetres
929-03 square centimetres
0-836 square metre
0-405 hectare
2-59 square kilometres
0-568 litre
1- 136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2- 909 hectolitres
1 ounce (oz)
1 pound (lib)
1 stone (st)
1 hundredweight (cwt)
1 long ton
1 short ton
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6-35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
1-016 tonnes
0-907 tonne
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
(Use the figures in the central column with those to the left or right, depending
on which conversion is required. For example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and
1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
Metres
Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
0-394
0-787
1-181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
8 3-150
9 3-543
3- 937
10
0-914
1- 829
2- 743
•658
•572
•486
•401
•315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-094
2187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11-265
f 2-875
14-484
16093
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
0-405
0-809
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-768
22-239
24-711
402
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kilo- Av.
grammes Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
36-368
40-914
45-460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
1.255
2- 511
3- 766
5- 021
6- 277
7- 532
8- 787
10- 043
11- 298
12- 554
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-797
1- 593
2- 390
3- 186
3- 983
4- 780
5- 576
6- 373
7- 169
7-966
Thermometrical Table
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit.
100° Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit
To convert “Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by %:
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by %, then add 32.
Bank and Public Holidays
Tuesday 1 January
Wednesday 2 January
Monday 18 March
Friday 5 April
Monday 8 April
Monday 6 May
Monday 27 May
Friday 12 July
Monday 5 August ,
Monday 26 August
Wednesday 25 December
Thursday 26 December
in Britain, 1985
New Year's Day
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Extra day because St Patrick’s Day falls
on a Sunday (Northern Ireland only)
Good Friday
Easter Monday (England, Wales and
Northern Ireland only)
Early May Bank Holiday
Spring Bank Holiday
Orangeman's Day (Northern Ireland only)
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Summer Bank Holiday (England, Wales
and Northern Ireland only)
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Chapter 1
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 8
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Appendix 2
Guide to Sources
The principal official periodical sources used in the preparation of this edition are given below:
Land'and People
Social Trends, Population Trends, Regional Trends, Employment Gazette, General Household
Survey, Family Expenditure Survey, BTA's Digest of Tourism Statistics
Overseas Relations
British Aid Statistics
Defence
Statement on the Defence Estimates
Justice and the Law
Criminal Statistics. England and Wales, Criminal Statistics, Scotland
The Environment
General Household Survey, Housing and Construction Statistics, Northern Ireland Housing
Statistics, Digest of Environmental Pollution and Water Statistics
National Economy
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book')
Framework of Industry
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book'), British business
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Report on the Census of Production. Monthly Digest of Statistics, Employment Gazette, British
business
Energy and Natural Resources
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, Development of the Oil and Gas Resources of the
United Kingdom (the Brown Book ), United Kingdom Mineral Statistics
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Annual Review of Agriculture
Transport and Communications
Transport Statistics. Great Britain
Employment
Employment Gazette. New Earnings Survey
Public Finance
Financial Statement and Budget Report. The Government's Expenditure Plans
Overseas Trade
Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics. United Kingdom Balance of Payments (the 'Pink
Book'). British business
Promotion of Science and Technology
Economic Trends. British business
404
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Full purchasing details of these and other British Government publications can be obtained from
the annual list Government Publications issued by Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO), which
has agents overseas. The list includes all Bills and Acts of Parliament and the official
parliamentary report Hansard, White Papers, annual reports, reports of official committees and
most publications of government departments including the Central Statistical Office, which
publishes a Guide to Official Statistics. HMSO also sells in Britain many titles published by
international organisations such as the United Nations, the European Community and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
A Catalogue of British Official Publications not published by HMSO, published by Chadwyck-
Healey, lists the more specialised departmental publications. Details of this and other commercial
publications are available from bookshops or, overseas, from the British Council.
Index
Items are indexed under England. Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where they are
matters peculiar to these countries: otherwise they are indexed under the relevant subject
headings.
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
A 
Abortion 126
Accidents 66, 279
fire casualties 66
road 279
Administrative tribunals 116-17
Advertising 174, 238, 377—8, 383
broadcasting 383
industry 238
outdoor, control of 174
press, practice 377—8
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 347
Advisory bodies 50
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 312
Agriculture 51, 54, 55, 218, 263—72,
350
advisory services 269
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 271,350
agricultural workers 269
health and safety 269
tenancy legislation 269
and Fisheries, Department of,
for Scotland 54
animals 264—5, 269—70
diseases, control of 270
welfare 269—70
Common Agricultural Policy 268
crofts 269
crops 265—6
cereals 265—6
fodder crops 266
sugar 266
Department of (Northern Ireland) 55
diseases and pests, control of 270
education and training 271
exports 267
farms 263—4
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 51
government policy 268—70
grants and subsidies 268—9
health and safety 269
horticulture 266—7
land use 263
livestock 264—5
cattle 264, 265
pigs 265
poultry 265
sheep 264—5
machinery 218
marketing 267
co-operatives 267
pesticides 270-1
plant diseases and pests,
control of 270
price guarantees 268
production 264—7
research 271—2, 350
smallholdings 269
tenancy legislation 269
tractors 218
veterinary medicinal products 271
Aid to developing countries 82—7
bilateral aid 83—5
financial aid 84
technical co-operation 84—5
multilateral aid 85
official and other flows 83
voluntary agencies 85—6
Aircraft 94-5, 223-5, 290-4
aerospace industry 223—5
civil 290—4
military 94—5
Alcoholic drinks 220— 1
Alcoholism 127
Ambulance services 125
Architecture 172—3
406
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Armed forces 92—3
Arms control and
disarmament 79-80
Army 93—4
combat forces 93—4
see also Defence
Arts 51, 352, 357-70
and Libraries, Office of 51
art market 367
British Council 359
broadcasting and 359
centres 359
Councils 358—9
crafts 367
dance 361,362—3
drama 359—61
festivals 359
films 363-5
finance 358
government policies 357—8
literature and libraries 368—70
museums and art galleries 365
music 361-2, 362—3
opera 361, 362, 362—3
promotion of 357—70
Regional Arts Associations 359
Royal Society of 352
visual 365—8
training in 368
Atomic energy
see Nuclear energy
Auction houses 239
B 
Balance of payments 341—3
capital flows 342
external assets and liabilities 342—3
Bank of England 325—6
Banking 325—30
see also Financial institutions
Beverages industry 226, 227—8
Birth rates 19
Blood transfusion 125
Books 231,368—9
Botanical gardens 353
Britain 1—4, 18—28
economic and social pattern 23—28
historical outline 1—4
physical features 18—19
population 19—23
social framework 19—28
see also England, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and Wales
British Airways 291—2
British Association for the
Advancement of Science 352—3
British Broadcasting Corporation
379-80, 381, 382-3
see also Broadcasting
British Council 68, 359
British Film Institute 363—4
British Olympic Association 390
British Overseas Trade Board 341
British Rail 283—5
British Standards Institution 199
British Technology Group 203
see also Science and technology
British Telecom 295—7
see also Telecommunications
Broadcasting 359, 379—85
advertising 383
arts, broadcasting of 359
British Broadcasting
Corporation 379—80, 381, 382—3
External Services 382—3
radio 382
television 381
cable services 382
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 380—1
programme companies 380—1
television 381
international relations 384—5
parliamentary 383—4
political 384
technical developments 384
Brush industry 230
Budget 317
Building
see Construction industry
Bus and coach services 281—2
Business and Technician
Education Council 154
Business services 238—9
c 
Cabinet 47-8
meetings 47—8
Office 48
Cable TV 382
Capital 320—1,342
flows 342
taxes on 320—1
see also Taxation and duty
Cars
see Motor vehicles
INDEX
407
Catering trades 238
Ceramic and refractory goods 215
Channel Islands 3—4
historical outline 3—4
Charities 351
research sponsored by 351
Chemicals industry 215—17
agricultural chemicals 216
industrial chemicals 216
paint 216
pharmaceuticals 217
soap and toilet preparations 217
Children 111-13, 126, 132-3,
134-5, 305-6, 364, 389
child benefit 134—5
child care 132—3
adoption 133
children’s play 389
employment 305—6
films for 364
health services for 126
in trouble 111—13
Churches 181—4
Anglican Communion 182
co-operation among 184
England, Church of 181—2
Free Churches 182—3
non-Christian religious
communities 184
Roman Catholic Church 183—4
Scotland, Church of 182
Civil aviation 290—4
air traffic 291
airports 293—4
development 294
ownership and control 293—4
Authority 291
British Airways 291-2
operations 291—2
government responsibilities 290—1
independent airlines 292
navigation services 293
safety 293
traffic control 293
Civil defence 96
Civil engineering 233
Civil Service 55—9
central management 56—7
conditions of service 57—8
Diplomatic Service 57
Northern Ireland 56
political and private activities 58
promotion 57
recruitment and training 57
security 58—9
structure 56—7
Clothing industry 228, 230
Coal 206, 250-3
consumption 252
development 252
European Coal and Steel
Community 206
industry 250—3
National Coal Board 250—2
production and productivity 250
research 253
Commission for Racial
Equality 28
Commodity markets 334
Commons, House of
see Parliament
Commonwealth 74—7
consultation 75
dependencies 77
Foundation and other organisations
76
organisations 76-7
Secretariat 75—6
technical co-operation 76
Commonwealth Foundation 76
Communications see Post Office and
Telecommunications
Companies 205, 209, 238—9, 330—1
advertising 238
company law 209
computer services 238
factoring 330-1
management consultancy 239
market research 239
small firms 205
Competition policy 116, 206—8
anti-competitive practices 207
European Community policy 208
monopolies and mergers 206—7
public sector 207
Restrictive Practices Court 116
restrictive trade practices 207—8
Comptroller and Auditor
General 316
Computers 149—50, 220, 238
in schools 149—50
manufacture 220
services 238
Confederation of British
Industry 311
Conference centres 239
Conservation 171—7, 353
advertising, outdoor, control of 174
architectural standards 172—3
areas 172
408
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
areas of outstanding natural
beauty 174—5
coastal 173—4
Countryside Commissions 174
derelict land, reclamation 176
green belts 173
historic buildings 172
land registers 176—7
national parks 174—5
national scenic areas 175
nature conservation 175—6
open country 175
public footpaths 175
tree preservation 173
zoological gardens 353
Construction industry
214, 219, 232-3
building materials 214
civil engineering projects 233
housing construction 232—3
machinery 219
overseas construction 233
research and advisory services 233
structure 232
Consumer protection 208—9
consumer advice and information
208-9
Copyright, authors’ 368
Coroners’courts 107
Council for National Academic
Awards 153
Countryside Commissions 174
Courts 54, 103-7, 113-17
civil 113-17
coroners’ 107
criminal 103—7
Restrictive Practices Court 116
Scottish Courts Administration 54
Crafts 367
Crime 97—113
criminal courts 103—7
appeals 105
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 99
criminal justice 97—113
criminals, treatment of 107—13
criminological research 98—9
statistics 98
Crown Office 54
Crown, The
see Monarchy and Royal family
Cultural and social life
9-10, 11-12, 14, 17-18
HM Customs and Excise 51,321-2
duties 321—2
D 
Dance 361,362—3
dance and mime companies 362
training 362—3
Data-processing equipment 220
Death grant 136
Defence 51, 89—96
armed forces 92—3
Army 93—4
civil 96
combat forces 93—5
contribution to NATO 90—1
Ministry of 51
NATO strategy 90
Northern Ireland 91—2
organisation and management 89—90
overseas commitments 91
personnel 92
procurement 95—6
production 95—6
research and development 95
reserve and auxiliary forces 92—3
Royal Air Force 94—5
Royal Navy 93
sales 96
strategic nuclear forces 93
see also North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Dependencies 77
Deposit banks 326—7
Design 199, 368
industrial 199
training in 368
Development see Economy
and Regional development
Diplomatic Service 57
Disabled people 131, 135—6, 302, 390
benefits and pensions 135—6
employment services for 302
social services for 131
sport for 390
Discount market 328—9
Divorce 20
Drama 359—61
amateur theatre 361
professional theatre 359—60
training 361
young people, theatre for 360
Drugs 126—7
E
East—West relations 78—9
INDEX
409
Economic and Social Research
Council 350
Economy 6—9, 11, 13—14, 16—17,
23-8, 55, 185-92, 350
background 186—8
employment 187
fixed investment 187
inflation and competitiveness
186-7
oil, offshore 188
output 187
post-war developments 186
sterling 188
trade 187—8
economic and social pattern 23—8
Economic and Social Research
Council 350
Economic Development, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 55
government policy 188—9
management of 189
national income and
expenditure 189—92
resources, use of 189
see also Balance of payments;
Industry; Public finance; and
Trade, overseas
Education 51,54, 55, 110, 143—59,
198, 271, 274, 304, 346, 361, 362-3,
364, 368
administration 144
adult and continuing 154—5
agricultural 271
aids in 149
and Science, Department of 51,346
art and design 368
Business and Technician Education
Council 154
careers education and guidance 150
computers in schools 149—50
Council for National Academic
Awards 153
curriculum 147—8
dance 362—3
Department of (Northern Ireland) 55
drama 361
English (as foreign language)
teaching 157
examinations, secondary school
148-9
film production 364
finance 144, 151
forestry 274
management 198
music 362—3
Open University 153
overseas links 156—7
English (as foreign language)
teaching 157
exchanges 156
overseas students in Britain 157
policies 143—4
polytechnics 153
post-school 150—5
finance 151—2
institutions 151, 152—3
teaching methods 155
prison, education in 110
religious 148
research on 155—6
schoolchildren, health and welfare
150
schools 144—50
Scottish Education Department 54
special educational needs 147
standards of 149
students 152
teacher training 154
teachers 147, 154, 155
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 148, 304
universities 152—3
youth service 158—9
see also Students, Training and
Universities
Elderly 130-1, 134
retirement pension 134
social services for f30—1
Elections 35—6, 60—1
local government 60—1
parliamentary 35—6
Electrical engineering 220—1
Electricity supply industry 253—7
consumption 253—4
generation 254
nuclear energy 256—7
research 257
structure 253
Electronic engineering 220-1, 221-2
Employers’ organisations 310—11
Confederation of British Industry
310-11
Employment 51, 135, 136, 187,
299-314
additional benefits 307
amenities 307
employers’ health services 307
children 305—6
conditions of 304—7
Department of 51
410
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
discrimination 305
earnings 306
government responsibilities 302—3
health in 313—14
holidays 306—7
human relations in industry 307
immigrants 305
industrial relations 311—13
law 304-6, 309-10
safety in 313—14
services 302—3
careers service 303
disabled people, services for 302
geographical mobility schemes
302-3
Professional and Executive
Recruitment 303
sickness benefit 135
trade unions 307—10
training services 303—4
trends 187, 299
unemployment 136, 299—301
women 305—6
work, hours of 306
see also individual industries.
Industrial relations. Trade unions
and Unemployment
Energy 51,241—62
coal 250—3
consumption 242—3, 247, 250, 252,
253-4
Department of 51
efficiency 243
Energy Efficiency Campaign 243
Energy Efficiency Office 243
electricity 253—7
gas, offshore 244, 247—50
natural resources, and 241—62
Offshore Supplies Office 244
oil, offshore 244—7
policy 242
renewable sources 257—8
see also Coal, Electricity supply
industry. Gas, Nuclear energy
and Petroleum
Engineering 199, 217—19, 220—1,
221-2, 225-6, 233, 347-9, 351
civil engineering projects 233
Council 199
electrical 220—1
electronic 220—1, 221—2
The Fellowship of 351
instrument 220, 222
marine 225—6
mechanical 217—19
Science and Engineering Research
Council 347—9
see also individual industries
England 1-2, 4-10, 181-2, 261, 373
Church of 181—2
cultural and social life 9—10
economy 6—9
government 4—6
historical outline 1—2
regional newspapers 373
water resources 261
Enterprise zones 165
Environment 23—4, 51,55, 161—80,
349
advertising, outdoor 174
air, control of pollution of 179
architecture 172—3
coast 173—4
conservation 171—7
Countryside Commissions 174
Department of 51
Department of (Northern Ireland) 55
green belts 173
housing 165—71
land 176-7, 177-8
Natural Environment Research
Council 349
nature protection 175—6
noise 180
open country 175
planning 161—5
pollution control 177—80
public footpaths 175
radioactivity 180
sea, control of pollution in 178—9
trees and woodland 173
water quality 178
Equal opportunities 26
Ethnic minorities 27—8, 305, 374
employment, discrimination in 305
publications 374
see also Race relations
European Community 69—74, 129,
140, 205-6, 208, 268, 273, 339-40
Common Agricultural Policy 268
competition policy 208
European Coal and Steel
Community 206
European Investment Bank 206
European Regional Development
Fund 205—6
external relations 71—3
finance 73
fisheries policy 273
health arrangements 129
INDEX
411
institutions 70—1
internal policies 73—4, 129, 140,
205-6, 208, 268, 273
regional policy and aid 205—6
social security 140
trade policy 339—40
Exchange 206, 334
foreign exchange market 334
Risk Guarantee Scheme 206
Excise duties
see Taxation and duty
Exhibition and conference
centres 239
Expenditure 189—92, 315—17, 321—2
consumers’ 190—2
public 191, 315—17
taxes on 321—2
see also Public expenditure
Exports 51, 340, 341
controls 340
credit insurance 341
Export Credits Guarantee
Department 51, 341
see also individual industries
and Trade, overseas
F 
Factoring companies 330
Families 126, 131, 138
family income supplement 138
health services for 126
social services for 131
Family planning 126
Farming
see Agriculture
Fellowship of Engineering, The 351
Films 239-40, 363-5
British Film Institute 363—4
censorship 364—5
children’s 364
cinema licensing 364
documentary 365
government support 363
industry 239—40
training in production of 364
Finance and Personnel, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 55
Financial institutions 168, 325—34
Bank of England 325—6
building societies 168, 331—2
commodity markets 334
deposit banks 326—7
discount market 328—9
factoring companies 330
finance corporations 331
finance houses 330
financial futures 334
foreign exchange market 334
insurance market 332—3
investment and unit trusts 331
leasing companies 330
London gold market 334
merchant banks 328
National Girobank 327—8
National Savings Bank 329
overseas banks 328
pension funds 331
Stock Exchange 333—4
Trustee Savings Banks 328
Fire services 65—6
fire casualties 66
fire losses 66
fire prevention 66
research 66
special services 66
Fisheries 272—4
administration 273
European Community policy 273
fleets 272—3
freshwater 274
landings 272
limits 273
research 273
Food 129-30, 226-7, 264, 267, 271,
350
Agricultural and Rood
Research Council 271, 350
bacon curing 226
bakery products 227
confectionery 227
dairy products 226—7
exports 267
fish products 226
fruit 227
home production 264
industries 226—7
marketing 267
meat products 226
research 271, 272, 350
safety of 129—30
vegetables 227
Footwear industry 228, 230
Foreign and Commonwealth
Office 51
Forestry 274—5
Commission 274
education 274
Northern Ireland 275
412
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
policy 274
private 274
research 274—5
Freight services 280—1,285, 286,
286-7, 288-9, 291
Fuel
see Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Energy, Gas, Nuclear
energy and Petroleum
Fur goods 228
Furniture industry 230
G 
Gambling 399
Gas 244. 247-50
offshore 244, 247—50
consumption 250
production 249
research 250
structure 249
transmission and storage 249—50
Glass industry 215
Government 4—6, 10—11, 12—13,
15-16. 29-66
advisory bodies 50
Cabinet 47—8
meetings 47—8
Office 48
composition 46—7
departmental ministers 46
junior ministers 47
Lord Chancellor and
Law Officers 47
Ministers of State 47
non-departmental ministers 47
Prime Minister 46
departments of 49—55
functions 50—5
Northern Ireland Assembly 44—5
see also Civil Service, Local
government, Ministers, Monarchy,
Parliament, Public expenditure and
Public finance
Great Britain see Britain, England,
Scotland and Wales
Green belts 173
H 
Handicapped people
see Disabled people
Health 51, 54, 55. 110-11, 121-30,
150, 307, 313-14, 349
and Social Security, Department of 51
and Social Services, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 55
arrangements with
other countries 129
centres 123
district nurses 123
education 127—8
employers’ health services 307
employment, health in 313—14
environmental 129—30
family practitioner services 123
group practices 123
infectious diseases, control of 130
midwives 123
National Health Service 121—30
admin is tra ti on 12 2—3
finance 122—3
health service commissioners 122
hospitals and specialist
services 123—7
primary health care 123
specialist services 123—7
primary, care 123
prisoners, health services for 110—11
private medical treatment 124
professions 128—9
research 128, 349
safety of medicines 128
schoolchildren, health services for 150
Scottish Home and Health
Department 54
smoking and 127—8
visitors 123
Health and Safety Commission
313-14
Health and Safety Executive 313-14
Historic buildings 172
Home and Health Department,
Scottish 54
Home Office 51
Horticulture 266—7
Hospices 126
Hospitals 123—7
and specialist services 123—7
rehabilitation 125
Hotels and catering 238
House of Commons 35, 316—17
see also Parliament
House of Lords 34—5
see also Parliament
Housing 23-4, 138-9, 165-71,
232-3, 331-2
administration 167—8
INDEX
413
associations 170
benefit 138—9
building societies 168, 331—2
characteristics 167
construction 232—3
home ownership 168
mortgage loans 168
improvements 170—1
privately rented 169—70
public sector 168—9
slum clearance 171
Human rights 81
I 
Immigration 23, 305
employment of immigrants 305
Imports 340
controls 340
see also Trade, overseas
Income 189-92, 306, 312, 318-20
Manpower Economics, Office of 312
national, and expenditure 189—92
personal, and expenditure 189—90
sources of 190, 306
taxes on 318—20
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 380— 1
programme companies 380—1
Industrial relations 309—10, 311-13
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 312
collective bargaining 311—12
joint consultation 311—12
legislation 309—10
Manpower Economics, Office of 312
statutory negotiating machinery 313
Industry 53, 54, 55, 110, 187, 189,
193-210, 211-40, 307, 331, 375
British Technology Group 203
construction, 214, 219, 232—3
Department for Scotland 54
development agencies 204
Economic Development, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 55
European Community and 205—6
government policies for 200—9
human relations in 307
industrial and intellectual property,
protection of 209—10
industrial associations 194—5
industrial design 199
industrial financing 196, 202, 203,
331
industrial output 187, 189, 195—6,
212-13
industrial plant and steelwork 218
investment in 196, 202, 203, 331
incentives 202, 203
management education 198—9
manufacturing 211—31
mechanical handling equipment
219
nationalised industries 201—2
privatisation 201—2
organisation and production
193-200
prison industries 110
productivity 196
regional development 203—4
research and development 197—8,
202-3
rural industries 204—5
services 233—40
small firms 205
standards 199—200
technological advance 197, 203, 375
Trade and. Department of 53
see also individual industries.
Employment, European
Community and Research
and development
Inflation 186
Information, Central Office of 52
Inland Revenue 52
Board of 52
see also Taxation and duty
Instrument engineering 220, 222
Insurance market 332—3
brokers 333
companies 332
international insurance services
333
Lloyd’s 332—3
Investment 187, 196, 202, 203, 206,
213, 331,342-3
European Investment Bank 206
in industry 187, 196, 202, 203, 213
overseas 342—3
unit trusts 331
Invisible trade 337—8
see also Trade, overseas
Ireland: historical outline 2—3
Iron and steel 206, 213—14, 218
European Coal and Steel
Community 206
products 213—14, 218
Isle of Man 3—4
historical outline 3—4
414
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
J 
Jewry 184
Judges 118
Justice 97-120
and the law 97—120
civil 113-17
criminal 97—113
L 
Land 1-28, 176, 177-8, 263, 321
and people 1—28
development land tax 321
pollution control 177—8
reclamation 176
registers 176
use 176, 263
Law 39-41,47, 52, 97-120, 209,
304-6,309-10, 378
administration of the 117—20
centres 119
civil courts 113—15
appeals 114
civiljustice 113—17
civil proceedings 115—16
legal aid 119—20
company 209
coroners’courts 107
criminal courts 103—7
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 99
criminaljustice 97—113
criminal trials 106—7
jury 106
legal aid 120
employment 304—6, 309—10
government responsibilities,
in administration of 117— 18
judges 118
legal aid, advice and assistance
119-20
legal profession 118—19
legislative proceedings,
parliamentary 39—41
delegated legislation 41
Officers 47
Officers' Department 52
press, legal requirements 378
prosecution 103—4
reform 120
terrorism, measures to combat 99
trade unions, legal framework 309—10
Leasing companies 330
Leather industry 228, 230
Legal profession 118—19
Leisure trends 28
Libraries 51, 368—70
Arts and. Office of 51
public 370
special 370
university 369—70
Life, expectation of 20
Literature 368—9
literary and philological societies 368
Living standards 24—6
Lloyd’s insurance market 332—3
Local government 59—65, 168—9
authorities, types of 59—60
complaints system 65
elections 60—1
finance 63—4
capital expenditure 64
control of 64
current expenditure 63
loans 64
rates 64
functions and services 61—2
housing 168—9
internal organisation 62
officers and employees 62—3
London 333—4, 334
Financial Futures Exchange,
International 334
gold market 334
Stock Exchange, The 333—4
Lord Advocate’s Department 54
Lord Chancellor’s Department 52
Lords, House of
see Parliament
Lorries 280—1
M  
Machine tools 218
Machinery 217-19
Management and Personnel
Office 52
Management consultancy 239
Manpower Economics, Office of 312
Manufacturing 211—31
industries 211—31
investment 213
output 212—13
process machinery 219
Market research 239
Marriage 20
Mechanical engineering 217-19
INDEX
415
Medicine 128, 349
medical research 128, 349
Medical Research Council 349
safety of medicines 128
Mental health services 110-11, 131
Merchant banks 328
Metal manufacture 213—14, 217,
219-20
iron and steel 213—14
metal products 217,219—20
non-ferrous metals 214
Migration 22
Milk 226-7
production 226—7
Minerals 213—15, 258—60
mineral products 213—15
non-fuel 258—60
explora tion 258
production 258—60
Mines and quarries 219, 253
mining machinery 219
research 253
see also Coal
Ministers 46—9
ministerial responsibility 48—9
ministerial salaries 47
of State 37
of the Crown 47
Prime Minister 46
Monarchy 29—32
accession 30
acts of government 30—2
ceremonial 32
coronation 30
royal income and expenditure 32
royal visits 32
succession 29—30
Monopolies and mergers 206—7
see also Competition policy
Motor vehicles 222—3, 233, 322
car tax 322
industry 222—3
retail distribution 233
Motor cycles 223
industry 223
Museums and galleries 353, 365—7
exhibitions 367
finance 366—7
Museums Association 367
national and other collections 365—6
scientific museums 353
Music 361—3
choirs 361
jazz 362
orchestral and choral 361
pop 362
training in 362—3
N 
National Coal Board 250
National Debt 323
National Girobank 327—8
National Health Service 121—30
see also Health
National income 189—92
National Insurance 134—6, 137—8,
322
benefits and allowances 134—6
contributions 134
supplementary benefit 137—8
surcharge 322
National parks 174—5
National Physical Laboratory
199-200
National Savings 329—30
Bank 329
Certificates 329
Deposit Bonds 330
Income Bonds 329
Premium Savings Bonds 330
Save As You Earn 330
Nationalised industries 201—2
see also individual industries
Nationality 22—3
NATO
see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Natural Environment Research
Council 349
Natural resources 241—62
Navy
see Royal Navy
New towns 162—4
News agencies 375—6
Newspapers 371—4
see also Press
Non-departmental public bodies
49-50
North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation 90—1
Britain’s contribution 90—1
strategy 90
Northern Ireland 14—18, 44—5, 55,
56, 91-2, 99, 104, 105, 113, 115, 118,
204, 261-2, 275, 309, 314, 374
Assembly 44—5
civil courts 115
Civil Service 56
416
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
criminal courts 104, 105
cultural and social life 17—18
defence 91—2
economy 16—17
employment, health and safety in 314
forestry 275
government
background to civil
disturbances 15
direct rule and political
initiatives 15—16
government departments 55
Agriculture 55
Economic Development 55
Education 55
Environment 55
Finance and Personnel 55
Health and Social Services 55
industrial development
measures 204
law, government responsibility
in administration of 118
press 374
terrorism, measures to combat 99
trade unions 309
water resources 261—2
young offenders, treatment of 113
Nuclear deterrent 93
Nuclear energy 256—7
British Nuclear Fuels 256
nuclear power programme 256
research 256
o 
Offenders, treatment of 107—13
children 111—13
non-custodial treatment 107—9
probation 108-9
prisons 109—11
sentencing 107
young adult offenders 113
Office machinery industry 220
Offshore Supplies Office 244
Oil
see Petroleum
Old people
see Elderly
Open University 153
Opera 361,362, 362—3
training 362—3
Ordnance Survey 52
Overseas Development
Administration 52
Overseas relations 67—87, 359
administration 67—8
British Council 68, 359
Commonwealth 74—7
development co-operation 82—7
in terna tional economy 86—7
European Community 69—74
international organisations,
membership of 82
international peace
and security 77—80
United Nations 80—2
P 
Paper and board industries 230— 1
Parliament 32—45, 52, 316—17,
383-4
broadcasting of proceedings 383—4
functions 33
House of Commons 35
House of Lords 34—5
legislative proceedings 39—41
delegated legislation 41
meeting of 33—4
parliamentary committees 41—3,
316-17
joint committees 42
of the whole House 41
party committees 42—3
select committees 42, 316—17
standing committees 41—2
parliamentary control 43—4
Parliamen tary Commissioner
for Administration 44
Parliamentary Counsel Office 52
parliamentary electoral system 35—6
parliamentary privilege 44
parliamentary procedure 38—9
political party system 36—8
Patents 209—10
Paymaster General’s Office 52
Pension funds 331
Pensions 134, 135, 139—40
retirement 134
war 139—40
widows' 135
Periodicals 374—5
Petroleum 188, 244—7, 320
consumption 247
land-based oilfields 246
offshore 188, 244—7
effect on economy 188
equipment and services
INDEX
417
industry 244
oilfields 244
pipelines 247
refineries 246
research 247
revenue tax 320
structure of industry 244—6
trade 247
Planning 161—5, 176
development plans 161—2
enterprise zones 165
inner cities 164—5
Urban programme 164—5
land registers 176
major schemes 162
new towns 162—4
public participation 162
Plastics industry 231
Police 99—103
authorities and chief constables 100
central authorities 100
common services 101—2
forces 100
powers of arrest 102—3
status and duties 101
Political parties 36—8, 390
broadcasts 384
party system 36—8
Pollution control 177—80
administration 177
air 179
land 177
marine 178—9
noise 180
radioactivity 180
recycling and reclamation 178
water 178
Polytechnics 153
Population 19—23, 27, 52
age distribution 20-1
birth rates 19
Censuses and Surveys, Office of 52
distribution 21—2
divorce rates 20
ethnic minorities 27
immigration 23
marriage rates 20
migration 22
mortality, causes of 20
nationality 22—3
sex ratio 20—1
Ports 286—8
development 287—8
traffic 286—7
Post Office 297-8, 327-8
National Girobank 327—8
specialist services 298
Pottery industry 215
Power stations 254—7
Press 371—8
advertising practice 377—8
Council 377
ethnic publications 374
free distribution newspapers 374
institutions 377
journalism, training for 376—7
legal requirements 378
national 373
new technology 375
news agencies 375—6
newspapers 373—4
Northern Ireland 374
ownership 371—2
periodical 374—5
regional 373—4
Scotland 374
Wales 373-4
Prestel 296
Prime Minister 46
Printing and publishing 231,368—9,
375
newspapers, new technology 375
Prisons and prisoners 109—11
discharge and after-care 111
education 110
industries 110
medical service 110
parole 110
privileges and discipline 111
psychological service 110—11
remission of sentence 109—10
welfare 111
Privy Council 45—6
committees 45—6
Probation 108—9
Procurator General 52
Public expenditure 191,315—17
control and examination of 316—17
cash limits 316
Com p troiler and Audi tor
General 316
select committees of House
of Commons 316—17
Estimates 315—16
reserve 317
Public finance 191, 315—23
Budget 317
public expenditure 191,315—17
public sector borrowing 322—3
revenue, sources of 318—22
418
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
see also Balance of payments,
Public expenditure and
Taxation and duty
Public sector borrowing 322—3
National Debt 323
Publishing 231,368-9
authors’ copyright 368
books 368—9
printing and publishing
industries 231
9 
‘Quangos’ 49—50
R 
Race relations 27—8, 305
Commission for Racial Equality 28
employment, discrimination in 305
Race Relations Act 27
Radio 379-80, 382-3, 385
BBC External Services 382—3
see also Broadcasting
Railways 223, 282—6
British Rail’s subsidiary activities 285
freight 285
operations 283
passenger services 283—5
private 285—6
urban 282
vehicles industry 223
Rates 64
Recreation 231,387—99
see Sport
Refineries
see Petroleum
Regional development 203—4, 205—6
administrative arrangements 204
assisted areas and related
measures 203—4
development agencies 204
European Community policy
and aid 205—6
investment incentives 203
Northern Ireland 204
Renewable sources of energy 257—8
Research and development
66, 95, 98-9, 128, 155-6, 197-8,
202-3, 233, 247, 250, 253, 257, 262,
271-2, 273, 274-5, 345-51, 354-5,
390
agricultural 271—2, 350
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 271, 350
broadcasting 390
charitable foundations 351
coal industry 253
construction 233
criminology 98—9
defence 95
Economic and Social
Research Council 350
educational 155—6
electricity supply industry 257
nuclear research 257
expenditure 346
fire prevention 66
fisheries 273
food 271, 272, 350
forestry 274—5
gas supply and use 250
government responsibilities
345-6
industrial 197—8, 202—3
medical 128, 349
Medical Research Council 349
Natural Environment Research
Council 349
petroleum technology 247
professional institutions 351
Research Councils 347—50
Advisory Board for the 347
Science and Engineering Research
Council 347—9
astronomy 348
engineering 348
international collaboration 347
natural sciences 348—9
nuclear physics 348
research establishments 347
Technical Change Centre 349
space 354—5
university 350— 1
water industry 262
Restrictive Practices Court 116
Retail trades 235-8
hotels and catering 238
trends 236—7
diversification 237
promotions 237
shopping centres 237
supermarkets, superstores
and hypermarkets 236—7
technology, use of 237
vehicle and petrol retailing 237—8
Roads 277—82
government responsibilities 278
INDEX
419
haulage 280—1
licensing 280— 1
structure of industry 280
passenger services on 281—2
safety 279
Royal Air Force 94—5
forces 94—5
see also Defence
Royal family 32
see also Monarchy
ceremonial 32
income and expenditure 32
visits 32
Royal Institution 352
Royal Navy 93
forces 93
see also Defence
Royal Society 351—2
Royal Society of Arts 352
Rubber industry 231
s 
Safety 66, 128, 129-30, 180,269,
279, 290, 293, 313-14
agricultural workers 269
civil aviation 293
employment, safety in 313—14
Northern Ireland 314
fire prevention 66
food, safety of 129—30
Health and Safety Commission
313-14
Health and Safety Executive 313—14
medicines, safety of 128
radioactivity 180
roads 279
sea, safety at 290
Schools 144-50, 361, 362, 364
careers education and guidance
150
computers 149—50
curriculum 147—8
dance schools 362
drama schools 361
educational aids 149
educational standards 149
examinations, secondary school
148-9
film schools 364
health and welfare in 150
independent 146
management of 145
nursery 145
primary 145—6
religious education in 148
secondary 146
special educational needs 147
teachers 147
see also Education
Science and technology 51, 197, 203,
224-5, 237, 345-55, 375
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 347
astronomy 348
botanical gardens 353
British Association 352—3
British Technology Group 203
Education and, Department of 51,
346
international co-operation 354
learned societies 351—3
natural sciences 348—9
newspaper production,
new technology in 375
nuclear physics 348
promotion of 345—55
retail trades, use of technology in 237
Royal Institution 352
Royal Society 351—2
Science and Engineering Research
Council 347—9
scientific museums 353
space technology 224—5, 354—5
technology and industry 197, 203,
375
zoological gardens 353
see also Research and development
and Universities
Scotland 2, 12-14,53-5, 103, 105,
106, 112-13, 114-15, 118, 175, 182,
204, 261,309, 374
Church of 182
civil courts 114—15
criminal courts 103, 105, 106
cultural and social life 14
economy 13—14
government 12—13
government departments 53—5
Agriculture and Fisheries 54
Central Services 54
Crown Office 54
Development 54
Education 54
Home and Health 54
Industry 54
Lord Advocate's 54
Scottish Courts Administration
54
420
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
historical outline 2
law. government responsibility
in administration of 118
national scenic areas 175
press 374
Scottish Development Agency 204
trade unions 309
water resources 261
young offenders, treatment of
112-13
Sea 178-9. 288-90
marine pollution, control of 178—9
safety at 290
transport 288—90
Service industries 233—40
business services 238—9
distribution 234—8
retail trades 235—8
wholesale trades 234—5
film and TV 239-40
tourism 240
Shipbuilding and marine
engineering 225—6
Shipping 286—8, 288—90
cargo services 288—9
government responsibilities
289-90
merchant fleet 288
ownership 288
passenger services 289
ports 286—8
safety 290
Small firms 205
Smoking 127—8
and health 127—8
Social life 9-10, 11-12, 14, 17-18
Social security 51, 133—40, 322
arrangements with other countries
140
benefits 134—40
contributions 134
family income supplement 138
Health and, Department of 51
housing benefit 138—9
National Insurance 134—6, 137—8,
322
supplementary benefit 137—8
taxation 140
war pensions and related services
139-40
see also Children, Disabled people,
Employment, Health, Housing,
National Insurance, Pensions and
Women
Social services 55, 130—3, 141—2
Health and, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 55
personal 130—3
children 132—3
disabled 131
elderly 130—1
families 131
men tally ill and men tally
handicapped 131
social workers 133
voluntary 141-2
Social welfare 121-42
see also Health, Social security
and Social services
Solvent abuse 127
Space activities 224—5, 354—5
space systems, manufacture
224-5
Sport 231, 387-99
children's play 389
facilities, provision of 388—9
private sponsorship 389
organisation and promotion 387—8
organisations 389—90
British Olympic Association 390
sport for disabled people 390
popular sports 390—9
association football 390—1
athletics 391
badminton 391—2
basketball 392
billiards and snooker 392
bowls 393
boxing 392—3
chess 393
cricket 393—4
darts 394
field sports 394—5
golf 395
Highland Games 381
hockey 395
ice skating 395
lawn tennis 395—6
motor sports 396
mountaineering and
rock climbing 396
racing 396—7
riding 397
rowing 397—8
rugby football 398
sailing 398
skiing 398
squash rackets 399
sub-aqua 399
swimming 399
INDEX
421
sports centres 389
Sports Councils 387—8
sports equipment industry 231
Standards 199—200
British Standards Institution 199
for products and processes 199
measurement 199—200
National Physical Laboratory
199-200
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 53
Steel
see Iron and steel
Sterling 188, 206
Exchange Risk Guarantee Scheme
206
Stock Exchange, The 333-4
Students 152, 157
overseas, in Britain 157
Supplementary benefit 137—8
T 
Tariffs and Trade, General
Agreement on 339
Taxation and duty 140, 318—22
capital gains tax 320
capital transfer tax 320
car tax 322
corporation tax 320
customs and excise duties 321—2
development land tax 321
income tax 318—19
National Insurance surcharge 322
petroleum revenue tax 320
social security benefits and 140
stamp duty 322
value added tax 321
Teachers 147, 154, 155
teaching methods 155
training 154
Technical Change Centre 349
Technology
see Science and technology
Telecommunications 294-7
British Telecom 295—7
data communications 297
Prestel 296
private sector services 297
telegrams 297
telephone services 295—6
exchanges 295
overseas services 296
transmission 295—6
telex 297
Television 239-40, 379-82, 383-5
cable 382
industry 239—40
see also Broadcasting
Terrorism 99
Textiles 215, 217, 218-19,
228-30
carpets 229
cotton 229
hosiery and knitwear 229
industries 228—30
jute 229
linen 229
machinery 218—19
man-made fibres 215,217
wool 229
Theatre 359—61
see also Drama
Timber industry 230
Tobacco industry 226, 228
Tourism 205, 240
government support 205
industry 240
Toys and games industries 231
Trade, overseas 53, 187-8, 247,
335-43
and Industry, Department of 53
balance of payments 341—3
British Overseas Trade Board 341
commodity composition 335-7
controls on 340
European Community policy
339-40
General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade 339
geographical distribution 337
government services 340—1
invisible 337—8
oil 247
policy 338—9
trends 187—8
visible 335—7
see also Balance of payments,
European Community, Exports,
Imports and Visible trade
Trade unions 307— 10
legal framework 309—10
Northern Ireland 309
Scotland 309
Trades Union Congress 308—9
see also Industrial legislation
Training 57, 148, 154,271,303—4,
361, 362-3, 364, 368, 376-7
agricultural 271
Civil Service 57
422
BRITAIN 1985: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
dance 362—3
dramatic 361
film production 364
journalism 376—7
musical 362—3
operatic 362—3
Opportunities Scheme 304
services 303—4
to employers 304
teachers 154
Technical and Vocational
Education Initiative 148, 304
visual arts and design 368
Transplant surgery 124—5
Transport 53, 222—6, 277—94
air 290—4
bus and coach services 281—2
Department of 53
equipment manufacturing
222-6
inland 277—86
passenger services 281—2, 283—5,
289, 291
policy 289—90, 290—1
ports 286—8
public transport operators 281
railways 282—6
urban 282
roads ‘277—82
haulage 280—l
safety measures 279, 290, 293
sea 288—90
taxis 282
traffic in towns 280
waterways, inland 286
see also Civil aviation; Waterways,
inland; Ports; Railways; Roads
and Shipping
Travel
see Tourism
HM Treasury 52, 53
Solicitor’s Department 52
Trustee Savings Banks 328
u 
Ulster
see Northern Ireland
Unemployment 136, 299—301
benefit 136
Unit trusts 331
United Nations 80—2
economic and social affairs 81—2
human rights 81
international peace and security 81
Universities 152—3, 350—1,
369-70
libraries 369—70
Open University 153
research 350-1
Urban programme 164—5
V 
Visible trade 335—7
commodity composition 335—7
geographical distribution 337
see-also Trade, overseas
Visual arts 365—8
crafts 367
Voluntary social services 141—2,
158-9
organisations 141—2
young people 159
youth services 158—9
w 
Wales 1-2, 10-12, 53, 204, 261,
373-4
cultural and social life 11—12
economy 11
government 10—11
historical outline 1—2
press 373—4
water resources 261
Welsh Development Agency 204
Welsh Office 53
War pensions 139—40
Water resources 178, 260—2
development projects 262
England and Wales 161
statutory water companies 261
supplies 261
wa ter a u thori ties 261
Northern Ireland 261—2
pollution control 178
research 262
Scotland 261
Waterways, inland 286
Welsh Office 53
Wholesale trades 234—5
Widows 135
benefits and pensions 135
INDEX
423
Women 26, 134-5, 305-6
benefits and pensions 134—5
employment 305—6
equal opportunities 26
young adult offenders 113
Youth service 158—9
organisations 158—9
voluntary service 159
workers 158
Y   
Youth 113, 360 ? : 
theatre for 360 Zoological gardens 353
Printed in the UK for HMSO
Dd 737777 R0028 Cl70 12/84
.s-'
Border
Forest
Parle •
Galloway
.Forest Park
Northui
Moors
inowdonia
brest Park
Brecon
Beacons
Dartmoor
Major conservation
and recreation areas
National parks
Forest parks
Areas of
outstanding
natural beauty
(national scenic
areas in Scotland)
Heritage coast
(primary nature conservation
zones in Scotland)
Tourist Board
area boundaries
London
South East
Southern 3
West Country 4
Thames & Chilterns 5
Heart of England 6
East Anglia 7.
East Midlands 8
North West 9
Yorkshire & Humberside 10
Cumbria 11
Northumbria 12
Wales 13
Scotland 14
Northern Ireland 15
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
See
page
Glen More M
Forest Park
V
□ueen Elizabeth
Forest Park A
Pembroki
Coast
60 miles
Inverness
rle of Lochalsh
wdeen
Fort William
;k-upon-Tweed
Prestwick
Hawick
.Coleraii
Dumfries
Tondonderry \ ,
Ballymena ,f
M22
Antrim®*?
annorw^ jj
A
A Ne'
Penrith
Darlingti
Workingl
Enniskil
(Scarborough
Barrow-in-Fi
Burnley Bradford
:aster ^
ichester
Sheffield
Chestei
Shrewi
Birminghai
lorthai
Colchester
OxfordA
.Swindon
Readii
^ Qatwicl
Soutrampton
Tauntor
Motorways and major trunk roads
Motorways
completed ■■■■■■■
under construction
proposed ■■Manana
Other trunk roads
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
See page 5
upon Tyne
and
Blackpool
Holy
Great
Yarmoutf
Milford
20 40 60 miles
