AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
fcTyneside
Blackpool
Liverpi
Birkenhe<
:tingham
fouthend
Medway Towns
Aldershi
tmouth
Bournemouth
Population density
and major urban areas
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
i
Population density
(persons per sq km)
over 750
mm
450-749
250-449
150-249
75-149
under 75
Major urban areas
over 500,000
population
200,000-499,000
population
100,000-199,000
population
as of 1981 census
Glasgow
The density of population is shown by county
for England and Wales, by region for Scotland,
and by Education and Library Board areas for
Northern Ireland.
Urban areas are defined as continuous
built-up sites; they include transport
and mining and quarrying areas and
any areas completely surrounded
by built-up sites. Most of the
named urban areas are ■ ' , ;
designated by the 'M §p
largest town pHM|
within them.
sPlymouth
i i i
20 40 60 miles
0 20 40 60 miles
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prepared by the Central Office of Information
LONDON: HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
HMSO
BOOKS
HMSO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 01-873 9090
General enquiries 01-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)
HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London, WC1V 6HB 01-873 0011 (Counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061-834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181
HMSO's Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers
United States of America & Canada
UNIPUB, 4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
©Crown copyright 1990
First published 1990
-<*•
/V
ISBN 0 11 701430 3
Contents
Page
Introduction ix
1 Land and People 1
Introduction 1
The Four Lands 4
The Social Framework 21
2 Government 33
The Monarchy 33
Parliament 37
The Privy Council 48
Her Majesty’s Government 49
Government Departments 52
The Civil Service 60
Local Government 64
Fire Services 71
3 Overseas Relations 73
Membership of the European Community 75
The Commonwealth 84
International Peace and Security 88
Britain and the United Nations 92
Other International Organisations 94
Development Co-operation 95
4 Defence 101
Finance and Management 107
Defence Procurement 108
Civil Defence 109
5 Justice and the Law 111
The Law 111
Criminal Justice 111
Civil Justice 132
Administration of the Law 136
6 Social Welfare 141
National Health Service 141
Personal Social Services 156
Voluntaiy Social Services 161
Social Security 164
7 Education 173
The Youth Service 195
8 Planning, Housing and Urban Regeneration 197
Planning 197
Urban Regeneration 199
Housing 206
9 Environmental Protection
Conservation
Control of Pollution
10 Religion
213
213
218
227
11 National Economy
233
12 Framework of Industry
Introduction
Performance
Organisation and Ownership
Government Policies and Legislation
Functioning and Regulation of Markets
Research and Innovation
243
243
243
245
249
257
262
13 Manufacturing and Service Industries
Manufacturing
Construction
Service Industries
267
267
286
287
14 Energy and Natural Resources
Energy
Non-fuel Minerals
Water
295
295
312
314
15 Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Agriculture
Fisheries
Forestry
317
317
327
329
16 Transport and Communir^tions
Inland Transport
Ports
Shipping
Civil Aviation
Communications
331
331
341
343
345
349
17 Employment
355
18 Public Finance
373
19 Banking and Financial Institutions
385
20 Overseas Trade
21 Promotion of Science and Technology
22 Promotion of the Arts
23 The Press
399
411
425
443
24 Television and Radio
453
25 Sport and Recreation 463
Appendix 1 481
Currency 481
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures 481
Thermometrical Table 482
Bank and Public Holidays in Britain, 1990 482
Appendix 2 483
Guide to Sources 483
Index 485
Diagrams
Changes in Food Consumption in Great Britain between 1980 and 1987
The Royal Family
Planned Receipts and Expenditure of General Government 1988-89
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1987
Maps
Physical features
Population density and major urban areas
Major conservation and recreation areas
Motorways and major trunk roads
Britain
The European Community
Urban Policy Initiatives
The Assisted Areas
Oil
Gas
Coal
Electricity
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
Main Railway Passenger Routes
>. endpapers
6
75
202-3
255
298
302
304
307
313
338
Photographs
The Restoration of York Minster
World Heritage Sites
Education
London’s Inner City
Museums
Environmental Protection
Technological Innovations
Conservation and Recreation Areas
Wytch Farm
Invisible Exports
Overseas Construction and Aid
The City
Changes in ‘Fleet Street’
Sport
Performing Arts
Farming
Glasgow: European City of Culture 1990
Craft Industries
between pp 70 and 71
betweenpp 134 and 135
between pp230 and 231
between pp 326and 327
between pp 3 90 and 391
between pp 454 and 455
Acknowledgments for use of photographs appear on p 504.
Introduction
Britain 1990 is the forty-first official handbook in the series; it has been
prepared by the Central Office of Information on behalf of the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office. The handbook is widely known as an
established work of reference and is the mainstay of the reference
facilities provided by British information services in many countries. It
is sold by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office throughout the world.
Britain 1990 describes many features in the life of the country,
including the workings of the Government and other major institu¬
tions. It does not attempt an analytical approach to current events.
Care should be taken when studying British statistics to note whether
they refer to England, to England and Wales (considered together for
many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which
comprises England, Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom
(which is the same as Britain, that is, Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) as a whole.
The factual and statistical information in Britain 1990 is compiled with
the co-operation of other government departments and agencies, and of
many other organisations. Sources of more detailed and more topical
information (including statistics) are mentioned in the text and a guide
to official sources is given in Appendix 2.
The text, generally, is based on information available up to August/
September 1989.
Reference Services
Overseas Publications and Foreign Languages
Central Office of Information, London.
Land and People
Physical
Features
Introduction
Britain comprises Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland) and Northern
Ireland, and is one of the 12 member states of the European Community. Its full
name is the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Britain constitutes the greater part of the British Isles, a geographical term for a
group of islands lying off the north-west coast of mainland Europe. The largest
of the islands is Great Britain (the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland).
The next largest comprises Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. Off the
southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south west are
the Isles of Scilly; off north Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by the
large archipelago known as the Hebrides and to the north east of the Scottish
mainland are Orkney and Shetland. All these have administrative ties with the
mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the Channel Islands between
Great Britain and France are largely self-governing, and are not part of the
United Kingdom.
With an area of some 244,100 sq km (94,250 sq miles), Britain is about the
same size as the Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand or Uganda, and half
the size of France. It is just under 1,000 km (some 600 miles) from the south
coast to the extreme north of Scotland and just under 500 km (some 300 miles)
across in the widest part. No place in Britain is more than 120 km (75 miles)
from tidal water. The prime meridian of 0° passes through the old observatory at
Greenwich (London).
The seas surrounding the British Isles are shallow, usually less than 90 m (50
fathoms or 300 ft), because the islands lie on the continental shelf. The shallow
waters, warmed by the North Atlantic current, are important because they
provide breeding grounds for fish.
The climate is generally mild and temperate. The prevailing winds are
south-westerly and the weather from day to day is mainly influenced by
depressions moving eastwards across the Atlantic. It is subject to frequent
changes but to few extremes of temperature. It is rarely above 32°C (90°F) or
below — 10°C (14°F). Near sea-level in the west the mean annual temperature
ranges from 8°C (46°F) in the Hebrides to 11°C (52°F) in the extreme south west
of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the east. The mean monthly
temperature in the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetland), ranges from 3°C (37°F)
during the winter (December, January and February) to 11°C (52°F) during the
summer (June, July and August); the corresponding figures for the Isle of
Wight, in the extreme south, are 5°C (41°F) and 16°C (61°F). The average annual
rainfall is more than 1,600 mm (over 60 inches) in the mountainous areas of the
west and north but less than 800 mm (30 inches) over central and eastern parts.
Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year, but, on average, March to
June are the driest months and September to January the wettest. The
distribution of sunshine shows a general decrease from south to north, a
decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with altitude. During May, June
and July (the months of longest daylight) the mean daily duration of sunshine
Historical
Outline
England and
Wales
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
varies from five hours in northern Scotland to eight hours in the Isle of Wight;
during the months of shortest daylight (November, December and January)
sunshine is at a minimum, with an average of an hour a day in northern
Scotland and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
The word ‘Britain’ derives from Greek and Latin names probably stemming from
a Celtic original, which is also reflected in the name of the region of
north-western France (‘Brittany’ in English) settled by migrants from Britain in
the fifth and sixth centuries ad. Although, in the prehistoric time-scale, the
Celts were relatively late arrivals in the British Isles (following cultures which
had produced such notable monuments as the stone circles of Avebury and
Stonehenge), it is only with them that Britain emerges into recorded history,
and the term ‘Celtic’ is often used rather generally to distinguish the early
inhabitants of the British Isles from the later Anglo-Saxon invaders.
Following sorties by Julius Caesar in 55 and 54 bc, Britain was occupied by
the Romans in the first century ad and an ordered civilisation was established
under their rule for two or three hundred years, except in the territory north of
Hadrian’s Wall (the wall across northern England built on the orders of Hadrian,
Roman Emperor from ad 117 to 138) and in some western areas. Christian
missionaries arrived not only in Roman Britain but also in Scotland and Ireland.
The final Roman withdrawal in the fifth century, however, followed a long period
of increasing disorder during which the island began to be raided from northern
Europe—mainly by peoples traditionally described as Angles (from Schleswig),
Saxons and Jutes. It is from the Angles that the name ‘England’ derives. In the
following two centuries the raids turned into settlement and a number of small
kingdoms were established (with the Britons, or Celts, maintaining an
independent existence in the areas now known as Wales and Cornwall). Among
these kingdoms, more powerful ones emerged, claiming overlordship over the
whole country, first in the north (Northumbria), then in the central area
(Mercia), and finally in the south (Wessex). However, further raids and
settlement by the Vikings from Scandinavia occurred, although in the tenth
century the Wessex dynasty defeated the invading Danes and established a
wide-ranging authority in England. A second wave of Danish invasions,
however, led to the establishment of a Danish dynasty in England between 1017
and 1042, when the Wessex line was restored.
The last successful invasion of England took place following a disputed
succession, when Duke William of Normandy (a duchy established by the
Vikings and owing only nominal allegiance to the French king) enforced his
claims by defeating the English at the Battle of Hastings in 1066. There was
considerable settlement by Normans and others from France, French became
the language of the nobility for the next three centuries and the legal and, to
some extent, social structure was influenced by that prevailing across the
Channel. The monarchy established by William and his successors was, in
general, more effective than its predecessors and it began to establish its
authority over increasingly wide areas of the British Isles.
Wales had remained a Celtic stronghold, although often within the English
sphere of influence. Conflict between the various princes was frequent within
Wales and unity was achieved only temporarily. However, with the death in
battle in 1282 of Prince Llywelyn, Edward I launched a successful campaign to
bring Wales under English rule, with Wales being placed for the most part under
the same laws as England, and Edward’s heir being created Prince of Wales in
1301, a title which has subsequently been bestowed upon the eldest son of the
Sovereign. Continued strong Welsh national feeling was indicated by the rising
led by Owain Glyndwr at the beginning of the fifteenth century, but a new
LAND AND PEOPLE
3
Scotland
Ireland
dimension to the situation was provided by the accession to the English throne
in 1485 of Henry VII of the Welsh House of Tudor. The Acts of Union of 1536 and
1542 united England and Wales administratively, politically and legally.
Hadrian’s Wall had not proved to be an insurmountable barrier between the
Romans and their northern neighbours, and expeditions both by the Romans
into Scotland and by the Scottish people known as Piets into England took
place. In the sixth century the Scots from Ireland or ‘Scotia’ settled in the area of
Scotland now known as Argyll. Lothian was English in population, and Welsh
Britons moved north from the invading English into Strathclyde. A united
kingdom emerged in the ninth century while Scotland, like England, was
endeavouring to defend itself against the Vikings. The establishment of a
powerful monarchy in England, however, was to pose an intermittent but
considerable threat to Scottish independence throughout the Middle Ages and
well into the sixteenth century.
The eventual unification of the crowns reflected the fact that, as a result of the
Reformation (see p 5), old national antagonisms had become less important
than religious differences. Elizabeth I died in 1603 and, as she had no children,
was succeeded by the next in line to the throne, the Protestant James Stuart,
James VI of Scotland, who ascended the English throne as James I of England.
England, Wales and Scotland were henceforth known as Great Britain. Apart
from the union of the monarchies, however, England and Scotland remained
separate during the seventeenth century, except for an enforced unification by
Oliver Cromwell early in the period of the Commonwealth (1649-60), after he
had defeated royalist forces in Scotland. By the beginning of the following
century political and economic arguments for a closer union were apparent in
both countries. Eventually, in 1707, both sides agreed on the formation of a
single parliament for Great Britain, although Scotland retained its own system
of law and church settlement. The Union was put under strain when Queen
Anne died in 1714 and George, Elector of Hanover (descended from a daughter of
James I), succeeded the Stuarts on the British throne. ‘Jacobite’ rebellions,
aiming to restore the Stuarts, took place in 1715 and 1745 but were
unsuccessful.
In Ireland, out of a patchwork of Celtic and pre-Celtic peoples similar to that in
Britain, a number of kingdoms had emerged before the Christian era; any
supremacy established by one over the others in the following 1,000 years was of
a temporary nature. Ireland, however, did not escape the incursions of the
Vikings, who dominated the country during the tenth century.
In 1169 Henry II of England launched an invasion of Ireland, the overlordship
of which he had been granted by the Pope, who was anxious to bring the Irish
church into full obedience to Rome. Although a large part of the country came
under the control of Anglo-Norman magnates, little direct authority was
exercised from England during the Middle Ages.
The Tudor monarchs showed a much greater tendency to intervene in Ireland.
Henry VIII’s assumption of the title of King of Ireland in 1541 arose from his
desire to apply the Reformation settlement and thereafter the religious issue was
to produce far-reaching consequences. The determination to establish royal
authority in Ireland was strengthened during the reign of Elizabeth I by the fear
that the country might be used by Philip of Spain in his efforts to subjugate
England, and a series of campaigns was waged against Irish insurgents. The
main focus of the resistance was the northern province of Ulster and, with its
collapse in 1607, Ulster became an area of settlement by immigrants from
Scotland and England. (There was settlement by immigrants elsewhere in
Ireland, though on a lesser scale.)
4
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Channel Islands
and Isle of Man
The English civil war of 1642 to 1652 led to further risings in Ireland, which
were crushed by Cromwell. The restoration of the monarchy in 1660 was
followed by the accession of the Roman Catholic James II to the throne in 1685,
and there was more fighting after his deposition three years later in favour of his
nephew and son-in-law, the Protestant William of Orange and his wife Mary.
During most of the eighteenth century there was an uneasy peace; towards its
end various efforts were made by British governments to achieve stability. In
1782 the Irish Parliament (dating from medieval times) was given legislative
independence; the only constitutional tie with Great Britain was the Crown. The
Parliament represented, however, only the privileged Anglo-Irish minority, who
had obtained possession of most of the agricultural land, and Catholics were
excluded from it. Against the background of an abortive rebellion in 1798 and
the prospect of intervention by France (with which Great Britain was at war
between 1793 and 1815) the Irish Parliament was induced to vote for union with
what, from 1801, was to be the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland.
The ‘Irish question’ continued as one of the major problems of British politics
during the nineteenth century. In 1886 the Liberal Government introduced a
Home Rule Bill which would have given an Irish Parliament authority over most
internal matters while reserving to Britain control over external affairs. This led
to a split in the Liberal Party and the failure of the Bill. It was not until 1914 that
Home Rule was enacted by the Government of Ireland Act. Its implementation
was, however, prevented both by the threat of armed resistance on the part of
the Protestant majority in Ulster and by the outbreak of the first world war.
A nationalist uprising in Dublin in 1916 was suppressed, but with the end of
the first world war a guerrilla force known as the Irish Republican Army (IRA)
began operations against the British administration. In 1921 a settlement was
reached under which six of the nine counties of the province of Ulster received
their own Parliament, but remained represented in and subject to the supreme
authority of the British Parliament, while the remainder of Ireland, as the Irish
Free State (later to become the Irish Republic), became a self-governing state
outside the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Although the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man are not part of the United
Kingdom, they have a special relationship with it because of the antiquity of
their connection with the Crown. The Channel Islands were integrated into the
Duchy of Normandy in the tenth and eleventh centuries and have been
dependent territories of the Crown since the Norman Conquest. The Isle of Man
was under the nominal sovereignty of Norway until 1266, when it was ceded to
Scotland, subsequently passing to the Earls of Derby for a period, but eventually
coming under the direct administration of the Crown in 1765. Today the
territories have their own legislative assemblies and systems of local administra¬
tion and of law , and their own courts. The British Government is responsible
for their defence, their international relations and, ultimately, their good
government.
The position of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man in the European
Community is broadly that the islands remain outside the Community except
for customs purposes and for certain aspects of the Common Agricultural Policy.
The residents benefit from Community provisions relating to the free movement
of people or services only if they have close ties with Britain.
The Four Lands
In the following pages there are brief descriptions of a number of aspects of
social, economic and political life for each of the four countries, England, Wales,
LAND AND PEOPLE
5
ENGLAND
Scotland and Northern Ireland, with some additional material on the political
situation in Northern Ireland. (Statistics on the four lands are contained in
Table 1.)
Table 1: General Statistics
England Wales Scotland
Northern
Ireland
United
Kingdom
Population
(’000, mid-1988 estimate)
Area
(sq km)
Population density
(persons per sq km)
Gross domestic product
(£ per head, 1987)
Employees in
employment
(’000, June 1988)
Percentage of
employees in:
(June 1988)
agriculture, forestry and
fishing
energy and water supply
manufacturing
construction
service industries
Unemployment rate
(per cent, seasonally
adjusted, June 1989)
47,536 2,857
364
19,252
1-3
20
24-5
4-3
68-8
5-7
138
891
2- 3
3- 3
24-6
4- 8
65-1
8-2
5,094
130,439 20,768 78,772
65
6,205 4,991 5,725
1,928
1- 5
2- 2
20-5
7-5
68-3
9-4
1,578
14,121
112
4,690
497
3-9
1-7
20-6
5-2
68-7
15-3
57,065
244,100
234
6,059
22,568
1-4
21
23-2
4-6
68-6
6-3
England is predominantly a lowland country. There are upland regions in the
north (the Pennine Chain, the Cumbrian mountains and the Yorkshire
moorlands) and in the south west in Devon and Cornwall. For the most part,
however, the country is undulating or flat and, in the south, crossed by low
ranges of hills, including the Cotswolds and the Kent and Sussex Downs. The
greatest concentrations of population are in the London and Thames estuary
areas, the West Yorkshire and north-west industrial cities, the Midlands
conurbation around Birmingham, the north-east conurbations on the rivers
Tyne and Tees, and along the Channel coast.
The Church of England, which was separated from the Roman Catholic
Church at the time of the Reformation, is the Established Church in England;
the Sovereign must always be a member of the Church and appoints its two
archbishops and 42 other diocesan bishops.
The English language is descended from the German tongue spoken by the
Anglo-Saxons in the fifth and sixth centuries, subsequently being influenced by
Latin and Norse vocabulary, and then transformed with the settlement by the
Normans from France. English is spoken throughout Britain and in many other
Britain
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Grampian
Strathdyde
/ Northumberland
Dumfries and
Galloway
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Cumbria
North Yorkshire
Humberside^
Lancashire
.Derbyshire;:
Lincolnshire
Staffordshire
.‘••j Leicester .•••■
WALES
Cambridge 'i,
Hereford and /.
Worcester
Cornwall
English Channel
Atlantic
Ocean
IRISH
REPUBLIC
1. Greater Manchester
2. Nottinghamshire
3. Shropshire
4. West Midlands
5. Warwickshire
6. Northamptonshire
7. Bedfordshire
8. Hertfordshire
9. Buckinghamshire
10. Greater London
11. West Glamorgan
12. Mid Glamorgan
13. South Glamorgan
Isles of Scillv
Shetland Islands
SCOTLAND
Islands
150 km
j
T
100 miles
International boundaries
Country boundaries
County boundaries
(regional boundaries
in Scotland)
I Wear
North Sea
ENGLAND
BELGIL
FRANCE
Channel Islands
LAND AND PEOPLE
7
Government
The Economy
countries. A recent study suggests that it is used as an official language in over
60 countries, more than any other international language.
England has no government minister or department exclusively responsible for
its central administration of domestic affairs, in contrast to Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. Instead, responsibility is shared among a number of
government departments, whose responsibilities in some cases also cover
aspects of affairs in Wales and Scotland. There are 523 Members of Parliament
for England in the House of Commons, and arrangements are made for the
discussion of regional affairs. Of the two major political parties, the Conserva¬
tives find their support chiefly in suburban and rural areas and have a large
majority of the parliamentary seats in the southern half of England and in East
Anglia, while the Labour Party derives its main support from urban industrial¬
ised areas. As at August 1989 England had 357 Conservative Members of
Parliament, 155 Labour, 7 Social and Liberal Democrat, 3 Social Democrat and
the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Local government is administered through a two-tier system of counties
subdivided into districts, except in London, where local government is the
responsibility of 32 borough councils and the Corporation of the City of London.
Eight ‘standard’ regions in England are delimited principally for statistical
purposes: South East, East Anglia, South West, West Midlands, East Midlands,
Yorkshire and Humberside, North West and North. They play no part in local
government and frequently do not coincide with the regional units adopted by
central government departments.
The legal system of England comprises on the one hand a historic body of
conventions, known as ‘common law’ and ‘equity’, and on the other, parliamen¬
tary and European Community legislation. Common law stems from the work of
the king’s judges after the Norman Conquest of 1066, who sought to bring
together into a single body of legal principles the various local customs of the
Anglo-Saxons. Great reliance was placed on precedent, and the practice of
reporting on cases began in the thirteenth century. Equity law derives from the
practice of petitioning the king’s Chancellor in cases not covered by common
law. The English legal system is therefore distinct from many of those of Western
Europe which have codes deriving from Roman law. The Habeas Corpus Act
1679 is a fundamental statute forbidding imprisonment without trial.
Up to the eighteenth century the English economy was mainly agrarian and the
chief manufacture was wool cloth. London as the capital city, and a major port
and mercantile centre, and the textile areas (East Anglia, south-western
England and West Yorkshire) were the most populous and prosperous regions.
In the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, however, rapid growth took
place in the Midlands, the north west, West Yorkshire and the north east, where
the coalfields and iron ore deposits permitted Britain to become the first
industrialised nation, basing its wealth on coalmining, on the manufacture of
iron and steel, heavy machinery and textiles, on shipbuilding and on trade.
London enhanced its position with the growing strength of the economy but
East Anglia and the West Country, remote from areas of industrial development,
were affected by agricultural depression, and entered a period of relative decline.
In the twentieth century a second period of industrialisation, based on new
sources of energy, new manufacturing industries and new forms of transport,
has continued to change the broad pattern of regional and industrial develop¬
ment in England. In the 1920s and 1930s the northern industrial centres saw
their traditional industries weakened owing to fluctuations in world trade and
competition from other industrialising countries and, in some cases, from
8
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
substitute products. London, its surrounding counties and the West Midlands
generally benefited from the newer, more mobile, industries. These included
chemicals (such as pharmaceuticals, dyes, plastics and artificial fibres),
electrical and electronic engineering, vehicle manufacture, aircraft building!
instrument engineering, aluminium and rubber manufacture and manufacture
of a wide range of consumer goods, including processed food, drink and tobacco
products as well as durables.
In the second half of the century economic trends and population growth have
tended to favour smaller towns and rural areas, particularly those in parts of
southern England and East Anglia. Employment in service industries accounts
for an increasing share of total employment, expansion being particularly
marked in financial and business services. New businesses in the service sector
are being created at a rapid rate, and this growth is linked to a marked rise in
self-employment. New forms of service activity have been developing; for
example, the growth of computer services and information systems such as
viewdata and teletext.
London is one of the world s leading centres of banking, insurance and other
financial services. Decentralisation of some office services from the capital and
improvements in road systems such as the M4 and M25 motorways have led to
an expansion in the service sector and high technology industries in the
surrounding regions; there has been an increase in retailing activity with the
trend towards large shopping developments on the outskirts of towns, designed
for shoppers with cars. All the national newspapers have recently moved their
editorial and printing facilities from their traditional Fleet Street base to other
parts of London (such as the Docklands) or other areas of the countiy, on the
introduction of new computer-based technology. London and the neighbouring
counties account for much advertising and market research activity, half of
central government services and a significant proportion of non-food wholesale
distribution in England. After London and the South East (where 77 per cent of
employees are engaged in the service sector), the South West has the next most
important concentration of service industries.
East Anglia has been the fastest-growing English region in both population
and employment since the 1960s. Although largely agricultural, high-technology
industiy has in recent years developed throughout the region. One significant
example is the Cambridge Science Park, containing a number of science-based
companies and research organisations with close collaborative links with the
University. Food processing, diesel engines, electronics and instrument en¬
gineering are the strongest industries. Other particular growth points have been
Peterborough and the east coast ports, which benefit from their relative
proximity to the northern European Community countries and from recent
improvements to the road and rail network. The service sector has been growing
in Cambridge, Ipswich and Norwich.
Greater London and the industrial cities of the West Midlands, the North West,
Yorkshire and Humberside and the North continue to represent the largest
concentrations of manufacturing industry. London is an important area for
products of all kinds, including food and drink (especially brewing), instrument
engineering, electrical and electronic engineering, clothing, furniture and
printing. Of importance in the surrounding south-eastern counties are oil
refining (along the Thames and near Southampton), pharmaceuticals, pumps,
valves and compressors, instrument engineering, micro-electronics and compu¬
ter hardware and software (particularly along the ‘M4 corridor’ in Berkshire, in
Hertfordshire, and around Chelmsford), motor vehicles, aerospace, building
materials, timber, paper and plastics products. There is diversity, too, in the
North West, with significant activity in food processing (especially grain milling,
bread, flour, confectionery and biscuits), chemicals, textile machinery, insu-
LAND AND PEOPLE
9
lated wires and cables, computers, motor vehicles, aerospace, clothing, glass
making (with the world’s largest flat glass maker, Pilkington, in St Helens),
paper and rubber products. Lancashire is the centre of the cotton and allied
textile industries.
The characteristic manufactures of the West Midlands are metals (steel tubes,
iron castings and non-ferrous metals), machine tools, electrical engineering,
motor vehicles, carpets, pottery (with about 70 per cent of Britain’s ceramics
industry located in Staffordshire) and rubber production. Of the other regions,
Yorkshire and Humberside has important shares of cocoa, chocolate and
confectionery production, iron and steel, machine tools, textile machinery,
woollen and worsted goods (producing about two-thirds of Britain’s wool
textiles), carpets, clothing and glass containers. The North has general
chemicals, iron and steel, process plant, marine engineering, and clothing; the
East Midlands has steel tubes, iron castings, about two-thirds of Britain’s
hosiery and knitted goods industry, and footwear; and the South West has food
and drink processing, aerospace, a range of engineering industries and paper
products.
A number of industrial areas (in the North, the North West, Yorkshire and
Humberside and the West Midlands) which suffered as a result of the decline in
traditional manufacturing employment are benefiting from the Government’s
regional industrial policy, which aims to reduce regional disparities in
employment opportunities by making investment incentives available in the
areas of greatest need, especially those which have been dependent on declining
industries. Policies to encourage enterprise have been intensified under the
Enterprise Initiative, launched in 1988 and aimed particularly at small- and
medium-sized businesses. Its objective is to increase competitiveness in
connection with the establishment of the single European market in 1992, and
to expand opportunities for wealth creation.
In agriculture, the number of mixed holdings has been falling, as part of a
general tendency towards greater specialisation. Dairying is most common in
the west of England, where the wetter climate encourages the growth of good
grass; sheep and cattle are reared in the hilly and moorland areas of northern
and south-western England; and arable farming, pig and poultry farming and
horticulture are concentrated in the east and south. Horticulture is also
important in the West Midlands. Forestry is mainly found in the North, South
East and South West regions. The principal fishing ports are on the east coast
and in the South West.
England has plentiful energy resources in its coalfields and has access to
offshore oil and gas reserves. About 61 per cent of Britain’s deep-mined coal is
produced in the Midlands and Yorkshire coalfields, the latter being the most
productive in the country. The world’s first large-scale nuclear power station was
established at Calder Hall in Cumbria in 1956, while substantial investment in
reprocessing capacity is being undertaken nearby. Other nuclear power stations
are on coastal sites, including seven around the coasts of southern England.
Important mineral deposits in England include aggregates for the construction
industry (sand, gravel and crushed rock), industrial minerals (including clay,
salt from the North West and china clay from Cornwall), tin ore, also from
Cornwall, and iron ore from the East Midlands and Humberside. Water
resources include the Kielder Reservoir (Northumberland), one of Europe s
largest artificial lakes.
A motorway network has been constructed in England since the 1950s and
comprises four long-distance arterial routes linking London and the cities of the
Midlands, the North and North West and the South West, the London orbital
route, and over 30 shorter motorways. In 1989 the Government announced that
the motorway and trunk road programme was to be more than doubled to
10
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cultural and
Social Life
£12,000 million; a number of motorways are to be widened to accommodate the
increasing levels of road traffic.
Considerable investment is in progress in the railways, both to improve
inter-city services and to provide new rolling-stock for local services. In 1986 the
British and French governments jointly announced their decision to facilitate
the construction of a fixed link across the Channel in the form of twin
single-track rail tunnels to carry through rail services, linking Britain directly
with the European rail system, and a drive-on, drive-off vehicle shuttle service
using specially designed shuttle trains. Construction began in 1988 and
services through the tunnel are planned to start in 1993. In March 1989 British
Rail announced its proposed route for a new railway line, designed for
high-speed trains, to link the Channel Tunnel with London.
The major airports are Heathrow (the busiest international airport in the
world) and Gatwick, both serving London, and Manchester, Luton and
Birmingham. Construction has begun of a new passenger terminal in connec¬
tion with the first phase of the development of Stansted as London’s third
airport.
Tourism, catering and the leisure industries have expanded considerably in
recent years. Over half of expenditure by overseas visitors in Britain takes place
in London, although areas outside London, encouraged by government policies
to expand tourism in the regions, are becoming increasingly popular with
overseas tourists, while the South West is the most popular region for domestic
tourism. Each region has its own particular attraction for tourists. For example,
a number of areas, including Northumberland and Cumbria (whose peaks
include Scafell, England’s highest point, at 978 m, 3,210 ft), have hills and
lakes which attract walkers, climbers and riders.
Cultural life in England takes so many forms that a brief summary can only
attempt to suggest its variety. Among London’s main cultural features are over
100 theatres, including some 50 in the ‘West End’, together with fringe and
suburban theatres; about a dozen major centres for music concerts, ballet and
opera; four major art galleries; a dozen major museums (with over 80 smaller
galleries and museums); and over 140 West End, local and independent
cinemas. Much the same broad range of cultural interests is reflected in many
other cities and towns. The Museums Association lists some 1,600 art galleries,
museums and similar institutions in the rest of England.
There are many tourist attractions in England: of those charging admission
Madam Tussaud’s (an exhibition in London of waxworks of famous people),
Alton Towers (near Cheadle in Staffordshire), and the Tower of London received
most visitors in 1988 (over 2 million each); of those with free admission
Blackpool Pleasure Beach (6-5 million visitors), the British Museum in London
and Albert Dock in Liverpool (over 3-5 million each), were the most popular.
Social clubs and working men’s clubs, non-profit-making clubs which attract
well-known entertainers, are found in most cities and towns. In addition, many
rural or outdoor recreations are strongly supported and there is active interest
in numerous games and sports, many of which were devised in Britain.
The English love of gardens and landscapes is associated with a tradition of
sightseeing visits to the many countiy houses, gardens and unspoilt rural and
coastal areas. There are seven national parks, six forest parks, 34 designated
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’, ten environmentally sensitive areas, about
197 country parks approved by the Countryside Commission, over 6,000
conservation areas, 800 km (500 miles) of designated heritage coastline and
about 2,000 historic buildings and over 2,000 gardens listed by the English
Tourist Board. Newer developments include the opening of safari and wildlife
parks and of‘theme’ parks devoted, for example, to maritime history, which offer
LAND AND PEOPLE
11
WALES
Government
The Economy
a diversity of entertainments as well. Many regions and towns have associations
with the great English writers and artists, such as William Shakespeare
(Stratford-upon-Avon), William Wordsworth (the Lake District), Arnold Bennett
(Stoke-on-Trent), the Bronte sisters (Yorkshire), Thomas Hardy (Dorset) and
John Constable (Essex).
Wales is a country of hills and mountains with extensive tracts of high plateau
and shorter stretches of mountain ranges deeply dissected by river valleys. The
highest mountains are in Snowdonia in the north west; the highest peak is
Snowdon (1,085 m, 3,560 ft). The lower-lying ground is largely confined to the
relatively narrow coastal belt and the lower parts of the river valleys. The main
areas of settlement are in the southern valleys and coastal areas, where
two-thirds of the population live. The chief urban centres are Cardiff, Swansea,
Newport and Wrexham. Wales is a principality; Prince Charles, the heir to the
throne, was invested by the Queen with the title of Prince of Wales at Caernarfon
Castle in 1969, when he was 20.
The country has its own Welsh language, spoken (according to the 1981
census) by 19 per cent of the population, chiefly in the rural north and west. The
Welsh name of the country is Cymru. Measures adopted since the 1960s have
helped to revive the use of the language, which is of Celtic origin and closely
resembles Breton, spoken in Brittany in France. They include recognising the
equal validity of Welsh with English in law courts, the encouragement of
bilingual education in schools, and the extended use of Welsh for official
purposes and in broadcasting. Welsh-language television programmes are
transmitted in Wales by Sianel 4 Cymru (Channel 4 Wales). A Welsh Language
Board was established in 1988 to advise on matters relating to the Welsh
language.
There is no established church in Wales, the Anglican church having been
disestablished in 1920 following decades of pressure from adherents of the more
evangelical Methodist and Baptist persuasions. Methodism in particular spread
rapidly in Wales in the eighteenth century, assuming the nature of a popular
movement among Welsh speakers and finding strong support later in industrial
communities.
The country returns 38 Members of Parliament and there are special arrange¬
ments for the discussion of Welsh affairs. For the last 60 years the industrial
communities of Wales have tended to support the Labour Party in elections,
ensuring a Labour majority in Wales. Wales has 25 Labour Members of
Parliament, 7 Conservative, 3 Plaid Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) and 3 Social and
Liberal Democrat. Substantial administrative autonomy is centred on the
Secretary of State for Wales, who is a member of the Cabinet and has
wide-ranging responsibilities relating to the economy, welfare services and the
provision of amenities. The headquarters of the administration is the Welsh
Office in Cardiff, which also has an office in London. In 1979 proposals for the
establishment of an elected Welsh assembly in Cardiff to take over policymaking
and executive powers from central government were rejected in a referendum
held in Wales. Local government is exercised through a system of elected
authorities similar to that in England, and the legal system is identical with the
English one.
The south Wales coalfield was developed during the latter part of the industrial
revolution in the middle of the nineteenth century, creating populous urban
which drew labour from the rural areas and from England and Ireland.
However, the economy was narrowly based, mainly on coal, iron, steel and
tinplate, and contracted sharply during the 1920s and 1930s, resulting in
severe employment problems and substantial emigration.
12
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Notable features of the past three decades have been the continuing
contraction of coalmining and iron and steel production (although Wales still
accounts for about one-third of Britain s steel production), the advent of a more
diverse range of manufacturing industries and the growth of service industries.
Wales is developing as an important centre for electronics in Britain and several
new high-technology businesses in electronics and related industries have been
established. Inward investment by overseas companies (especially Japanese and
United States high-technology concerns) has been considerable, and there are
over 260 overseas-owned or associated firms in Wales, employing about 51,000
people and accounting for around one in five jobs in the manufacturing sector.
In 1988, for example, Ford Motor of the United States announced investment of
over £600 million to expand its engine plant at Bridgend, Mid Glamorgan, which
is expected to create up to 4,000jobs. The financial and business services sector
is expanding rapidly, as companies such as Rothschild’s, the Trustee Savings
Bank and the National Provident Institution have relocated major parts of their
operation in Wales, providing support for industrial development.
South Wales remains the principal industrial area, but new industries and
firms have been introduced in north-east Wales, around Wrexham and Deeside,
and light industry has also been attracted to the towns in the rural areas in mid-
and north Wales. An important refinery complex has developed around Milford
Haven, one of Britain s major oil ports. A development corporation was set up in
1987 to stimulate the regeneration of the Cardiff Bay area, and in 1988 the
Government announced a programme designed to improve economic, environ¬
mental and social conditions in the south Wales valleys. Regional aid in the
valleys since the programme began has covered projects involving 7,500 new
jobs and private investment of about £180 million. The Welsh Development
Agency is investing about £66 million in factory building, and it is expected that
a total of 1,100 hectares (2,800 acres) of derelict land in the valleys will be
cleared. More than 1,000 companies based in Wales have made use of business
reviews and consultants advisory services under the Government’s Enterprise
Wales initiative, launched in 1988.
Agriculture occupies about 80 per cent of the land area, the main activities
being sheep and cattle rearing in the hill regions and dairy farming in the
lowlands. Wales accounts for about 11 per cent of forest area in Britain and over
20 per cent of Forestry Commission timber production.
Wales produces about 6 per cent of Britain’s deep-mined coal and 10 per cent
of opencast production, including all of its anthracite. The biggest pumped-
storage power station in Europe is at Dinorwig, while there are nuclear power
stations at Wylfa and Trawsfynydd. Wales exports about half of its water supply
to England.
Good communications exist in the south, with motorway links across the
Severn Bridge to southern England and the Midlands, and high-speed rail
services to a number of destinations in England. The main road along the north
Wales coast is being upgraded and a second crossing of the Severn is planned.
Transatlantic flights to New York from Cardiff-Wales airport were introduced in
1989.
There has been expansion in the tourist and catering trades and in some areas
of public administration. With its coastal resorts, and three national parks
(Snowdonia, the Brecon Beacons and the Pembrokeshire Coast), as well as other
areas of picturesque hill, lake and mountain country, Wales attracts many
tourists, especially for outdoor holidays.
Cultural and
Social Life
There is much literary, musical and dramatic activity in Wales and there is a
National Library and National Museum. Welsh literature is one of the oldest in
Europe. The country is well known for its choral singing and the Welsh National
LAND AND PEOPLE
13
SCOTLAND
Government
Opera has an international reputation. The special festivals of Wales, known as
eisteddfodau, encourage Welsh literature and music. The largest is the Royal
National Eisteddfod of Wales, held annually, entirely in Welsh, and consisting of
competitions in music, singing, prose and poetry. The town of Llangollen has
extended its eisteddfod to include artists from all over the world in the annual
International Musical Eisteddfod. Famous modern Welsh artists have included
the opera singers Sir Geraint Evans and Dame Gwyneth Jones and the poet
Dylan Thomas. An active local press includes a number of Welsh language
publications. Great interest is aroused by the annual rugby football competition
in which sides from Wales, England, Scotland, Ireland and France take part.
Health services are provided mainly under the National Health Service,
administered by the Welsh Office, while personal social services and education
(except at university level) are provided mainly through the local authorities.
Educational provision is similar to that in England, except for the use of Welsh
in some schools, particularly in the Welsh-speaking, largely rural, areas. The
collegiate University of Wales, founded in 1893, comprises six member
institutions.
Scotland may be divided broadly into three areas: the sparsely populated
highlands and islands in the north, accounting for just over half the total area of
the country; the central lowlands, containing three-quarters of the population
and most of the industrial centres and cultivated farmland: and the southern
uplands, containing a number of hill ranges, which border on England. The
highest mountains are the Grampians in the central highlands, with Ben Nevis
(1,343 m, 4,406 ft) the highest peak. The chief cities are the capital Edinburgh,
the main industrial centre Glasgow, and the two regional centres Aberdeen and
Dundee.
The period from 1750 onwards has seen considerable and continuous
emigration of Scots to England and overseas. However, the rate slowed markedly
in the 1970s as the offshore oil and gas industries developed and there was
inward migration to the north east of Scotland, although the large outflow of
people from Strathclyde has continued, but at a lower level. In the mid¬
nineteenth century, as Scotland industrialised rapidly, there was large-scale
immigration from Ireland.
The period from 1750 until the beginning of the twentieth century was also
one of stability and economic progress, and of achievements in many fields.
Among the famous people to emerge were David Hume, Robert Burns, Sir Walter
Scott, Adam Smith, Robert Adam, James Watt, John MacAdam, Lord Kelvin,
Alexander Graham Bell, James Clerk Maxwell and Marie Stopes.
The Church of Scotland, which became the established church in 1690, has
complete freedom in all matters of doctrine, order and discipline. It is a
Protestant church which is Presbyterian in form, being governed by a hierarchy
of church courts, each of which includes lay people.
There are special arrangements for the conduct of Scottish affairs within the
British system of government and separate Acts of Parliament are passed for
Scotland where appropriate. The 72 Scottish seats in the House of Commons are
represented by 49 Labour Members of Parliament, 10 Conservative, 9 Social and
Liberal Democrat and 4 Scottish National. Since 1959 Scotland, like Wales, has
had a majority of Labour Members of Parliament. Administrative tasks relating
to a wide range of economic and social functions are the responsibility of the
Secretary of State for Scotland, a member of the Cabinet, working through the
Scottish Office, with its administrative headquarters in Edinburgh and an office
in London. A proposal for an elected assembly for Scotland, on which a
referendum was held in 1979, failed to gain the support of the required 40 per
14
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Economy
cent of the electorate, even though a majority of those voting gave it their
approval.
Local government generally operates on a two-tier basis broadly similar to that
in England and Wales but established by separate legislation. The three islands
councils (for Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles) are single-tier authorities.
The principles and procedures of the Scottish legal system (particularly in civil
law) differ in many respects from those of England and Wales, stemming, in
part, from the adoption of elements of other European legal systems, based on
Roman law, during the sixteenth century.
Scotland has experienced the same pressure on its traditional industries as the
north of England and Wales. However, over the past decades its economy has
been transformed, with a developing oil and gas industry, and investment by
overseas companies making significant contributions to the growth of modern,
technologically based industries. In 1988 the Government announced proposals
to bring the training, enterprise functions and environmental improvement
activities currently administered by the Scottish Development Agency and the
Training Agency into a new agency known as Scottish Enterprise. Its main
function would be to contract with a network of employer-led local agencies
throughout Scotland. These would be responsible for assessing the needs of
their local labour markets, before arranging for the provision of training and
business support.
Engineering remains a major industry, accounting for over a quarter of the
manufacturing workforce, but there has been a significant trend towards lighter
engineering products and rapid expansion in electronics (including micro¬
electronics). By mid-1988 about 230 plants were employing some 44,000
workers, one of the biggest concentrations of the electronics industry in Western
Europe. Scotland accounts for over 60 per cent of Britain’s output of integrated
circuits and for over 11 per cent of European output.
Since the early 1970s the Scottish economy has also benefited from the
growth of offshore-related industries following the discovery of oil and gas under
the northern North Sea. In the 1980s up to about 100,000 jobs have arisen
directly or indirectly as a result of North Sea activities. Many of these jobs reflect
overseas investment solely related to the exploration and development of North
Sea resources, but oil and gas developments have stimulated other industries,
including engineering and petrochemicals.
Traditional industries, such as coal, steel and shipbuilding, have experienced
a long-term decline in employment. Other traditional manufactures, such as
high-quality tweeds and other textiles, and food and drink products, remain
important. There are over 100 whisky distilleries in Scotland and the industry is
a major export earner.
Northern and north-east Scotland (particularly Aberdeen) have benefited most
from offshore developments. However, Strathclyde, by far the most populous
region, has experienced serious industrial decline and population loss, particu¬
larly in Glasgow. In the remainder of the central belt and in the five new towns
(East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Livingston, Irvine and Cumbernauld) trends have
generally been more favourable. In Lothian the large concentration of financial
and other service industries centred on Edinburgh has been a helpful influence.
Problems of inner city dereliction and decay in Scotland are being tackled with
urban renewal projects designed to stimulate economic development and
improve the local environment.
Scotland has about one-third of Britain’s total agricultural land, but 71 per
cent of it consists of hill grazing for cattle and sheep. About 11 per cent of the
agricultural area is used for crops, and 58 per cent of this is under barley.
Scotland accounts for nearly half of Britain’s forest area and for over 40 per cent
LAND AND PEOPLE
15
Cultural and
Social Life
of public sector timber production; the bulk of new planting in Britain takes
place in Scotland, most of it in the upland and mountain areas. New amenity
woodland is planned in the area between Glasgow and Edinburgh, under a
government initiative designed to improve the environment of central Scotland.
Fishing remains an important activity; more than 75 per cent of total landings of
fish in Britain are made at Scottish ports.
In Scotland nuclear and hydro-electric generation supply a higher proportion
of energy than in any other part of Britain. Since Scotland’s fifth nuclear power
station—the 1,400-MW Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor at Torness (Lothian)—
became operational in 1988, about 60 per cent of Scotland’s electricity
requirements have been met by nuclear power. Large supplies of unpolluted
water form a major resource.
Communications, both domestic and international, have improved in many
areas, particularly in the north and north east, owing to the stimulus of the
offshore oil industry and to road- and bridge-building programmes. The offshore
oil industry has also encouraged expansion in financial and business services,
which have traditionally been strong in Scotland and are now one of the
fastest-growing sectors of the Scottish economy.
Tourism, which makes a significant contribution to the economy and to
employment in Scotland as a whole, is estimated to generate, both directly and
indirectly, nearly 132,000 jobs. The Glasgow Garden Festival in 1988 attracted
4-3 million visitors and provided a major incentive for the long-term develop¬
ment of part of the city.
A vigorous cultural life in Scotland has as its highlight the annual Edinburgh
International Festival, one of the world’s leading cultural events. Notable
performing arts bodies are the Scottish National Orchestra, Scottish Opera,
Scottish Ballet, Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Baroque Ensemble and
the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra. Scotland possesses excellent collections
of the fine and applied arts, notably in the National Galleries of Scotland, the
Royal Museums of Scotland and the City of Glasgow Museum and Art Galleries
(including the Burrell collection, opened in 1983). Glasgow has been designated
as European City of Culture for 1990.
A language of ancient Celtic origin, Scots Gaelic is spoken by some 80,000
people, mainly in the islands and north west of Scotland. It is the indigenous
language, with its own literary background. Scottish people in the lowlands have
for centuries spoken Scots (or Lallans), a derivative of the Northumbrian dialect
of Old English, which has its own recognised literary tradition and has seen a
revival in poetry in recent times.
An active press includes six national daily morning newspapers, six local
evening newspapers and four national Sunday newspapers. Television program¬
mes are produced by BBC Scotland and by three independent companies,
covering the highland, lowland and border regions. BBC Radio Scotland covers
most of the population.
Local authorities are responsible for the provision of most education, except at
university level; secondary education in Scotland is almost completely organised
on comprehensive lines. There are eight universities, of which four (St Andrews,
Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh) were established in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, while the other four have been established since 1964. The
educational tradition has been particularly strong in Scotland, helping many
Scots to positions of eminence in the arts and sciences.
Over 55 per cent of Scotland’s housing has been built since 1945, a higher
proportion than in either England or Wales. The tenure pattern in Scotland is
very different from that in the rest of Britain, with 48 per cent of housing rented
from the public sector, compared with 26 per cent for Great Britain as a whole.
NORTHERN
IRELAND
Government
Background to
Civil
Disturbances
Direct Rule
and Political
Initiatives
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
As in the rest of Britain, there has been a noticeable growth in owner-occupied
housing in recent years.
Scotland’s cultural and historic associations, its varied scenic beauty, and the
opportunities for sport and recreation are particular attractions. Golf originated
in Scotland, and courses at St Andrews, Gleneagles, Turnberry, Muirfield, Troon
and Prestwick are internationally renowned. Skiing is growing in importance,
with centres at Aviemore, Glenshee, Glen Coe and the Lecht, and further
developments are planned.
Northern Ireland is at its nearest point only 21 km (13 miles) from Scotland. It
has a 488-km (303-mile) border in the south and west with the Irish Republic. At
its centre lies Lough Neagh, Britain’s largest freshwater lake (381 sq km,
147 sq miles). Many of the principal towns lie in valleys leading from the Lough,
including the capital, Belfast, which stands at the mouth of the river Lagan. The
Mourne Mountains, rising sharply in the south east, include Slieve Donard,
Northern Ireland’s highest peak (852 m, 2,796 ft).
Just under two-thirds of Northern Ireland’s population are descendants of
Scots or English settlers who crossed to north-eastern Ireland mainly in the
seventeenth centuiy; most belong to the Protestant faith, and have a traditional
loyalty to the maintenance of the union with Great Britain. The remainder, over
a third, are Irish in origin and mainly Roman Catholic; many of them are
nationalist in political opinion, favouring union with the Irish Republic.
Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom, but for 50 years from 1921 it
had its own devolved Parliament in which the mainly Protestant Unionists
consistently formed the majority and therefore constituted the Government after
successive elections. Nationalists, who are predominantly Roman Catholic,
resented this domination and their effective exclusion from political office. An
active and articulate civil rights movement emerged during the late 1960s.
Reforms were made but sectarian disturbances developed, which required the
introduction of the Army in 1969 to support the police in keeping the peace.
Subsequently, sectarian divisions were exploited by the actions of terrorists
from both sides, but most notably by the Provisional Irish Republican Army,
who claimed to be protecting the Roman Catholic minority.
From 1969 the Northern Ireland Government enacted reforms aimed at
securing the minority’s right to an effective voice in public bodies. A police
authority representative of all sections of the community was created and
commissioners became responsible for investigating complaints of maladminis¬
tration, including discrimination, against government departments and local
authorities. A central housing executive became responsible for all public sector
house-building and the allocation of houses according to need. Local govern¬
ment was restructured and electoral law, including the franchise and the
arrangements for reviewing electoral boundaries, was reformed.
Despite this reform programme, the inter-communal violence continued and the
United Kingdom Government concluded that the best hope of ending terrorism
and achieving political progress would be for the United Kingdom Parliament
and Government to take over responsibility for law and order in Northern
Ireland. The Northern Ireland Government felt unable to accept this and
resigned, and in 1972 direct rule began, with a United Kingdom Cabinet
minister becoming responsible for the functions previously exercised by the
Northern Ireland Government.
Several attempts have been made to secure a stable and effective devolved
government supported by both sides of the community. A new constitution
which devolved powers to an elected legislative assembly, and a ‘power-sharing’
LAND AND PEOPLE
17
The
Anglo-Irish
Agreement
executive representing all sections of the community, encountered Protestant
‘loyalist’ opposition culminating in a general strike in 1974. In 1976 an elected
constitutional convention failed to agree on a system of government that would
command widespread acceptance. In 1978 a planned framework for a form of
devolution to consolidate common ground among the political parties was
rejected. In 1980 a political conference also failed to reach agreement and in
1981 the appointment of a Northern Ireland Council to advise the Secretary of
State was proposed, but rejected by the political parties in Northern Ireland.
In 1982 a new 78-member Assembly was elected and given responsibility for
making proposals for devolving powers on a basis which would command
widespread acceptance throughout the community. In the meantime, it
performed scrutinising and consultative functions, commenting upon draft
legislation and initiating reports on such matters as industry and education.
Some members refused to take their seats on election. The unionist parties, who
had a majority in the Assembly, decided not to fulfil the Assembly’s statutory
functions in March 1986 in protest at the Anglo-Irish Agreement (see below),
and in June the Government dissolved the Assembly, while expressing the hope
that a future Assembly, acceptable to and enjoying the support of both sections
of the community, would play a responsible part in the administration of
Northern Ireland.
The Government’s policy continues to be based on two fundamental prin¬
ciples. First, that there will be no change in Northern Ireland’s constitutional
status as part of the United Kingdom without the consent of a majority of people
in Northern Ireland. This is in accordance with internationally accepted
principles of democracy. A ‘border poll’ in 1973 showed that a clear majority
wished Northern Ireland to remain part of the United Kingdom, and in
subsequent elections parties which support that position have continued to
receive the majority of votes. Secondly, the Government continues to believe that
a devolved form of administration would best meet Northern Ireland’s needs,
provided that it is acceptable to both parts of the community.
Northern Ireland returns 17 members to the United Kingdom Parliament. In
the last general election in 1987 the seats (and votes) were distributed as follows:
Ulster Unionist 9 (37-8 per cent), Democratic Unionist 3 (11-7 per cent), Ulster
Popular Unionist 1 (2-5 per cent). Social Democratic and Labour 3 (21 1 per
cent), and Sinn Fein 1(11-4 per cent); the last-mentioned member has not taken
his seat. The Alliance Party received 10 per cent of the votes but no seats.
In November 1985 the United Kingdom and the Irish Republic concluded an
Agreement aimed at promoting peace and stability in Northern Ireland. The
Agreement, which is binding in international law, has two main features. First,
it affirms that no change in the status of Northern Ireland would come about
except by the consent of a majority of its people—which is recognised not to exist
at present; but that, if at some time a majority formally consented to a united
Ireland, both parties would support legislation to that effect. Secondly, it
establishes an Intergovernmental Conference, through which the Irish Govern¬
ment can put forward views and proposals on specified matters affecting
Northern Ireland affairs (so far as they are not the responsibility of a devolved
administration). The Conference has met frequently and discussed a wide range
of issues affecting Northern Ireland. The Conference also acts as a forum for
promoting cross-border co-operation, in particular on security. The Conference
has no executive role or decision-making powers, and the Agreement makes
clear that there is no derogation from the sovereignty of either the United
Kingdom Government or the Irish Government: each retains full responsibility
for the decisions about administration of government within its own jurisdic¬
tion. In a joint review of the Conference recently carried out by both
18
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Human Rights
and Security
Policy
governments they agreed that it had proved its value and that it would be
developed further.
The Agreement was generally welcomed by the minority community, but there
is considerable antipathy among Unionists, who believe that it gives the Irish
Republic undue influence in the affairs of Northern Ireland. In the Government’s
view, the Agreement offers benefits to both traditions in Northern Ireland
without detracting from the rights of either.
The Government is committed to the protection of human rights in Northern
Ireland. The United Kingdom is a signatory to the European Convention on
Human Rights and allows the right of individual petition. Legislation passed in
1973 outlaws discrimination by public bodies, including the Government, on
the grounds of religious belief or political opinion. It also set up the independent
Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights, which advises the Govern¬
ment on the effectiveness of anti-discrimination legislation and on other human
rights issues. In 1987 a central community relations unit was established
within the Government to advise on all aspects of relations between the two
traditions in Northern Ireland. Its main roles are to advise on the impact on
community relations of Government policies and programmes and to bring
forward ideas on future action.
Discrimination in employment by public and private employers is also illegal
and the Fair Employment Agency was established in 1976 to investigate
complaints and enforce fair practices. The recently introduced Fair Employment
(Northern Ireland) Act 1989 outlaws indirect discrimination and will, among
other things, oblige employers actively to promote and practise equality of
opportunity and to submit annual returns on the religious composition of their
workforce. It also replaces the Agency by a Fair Employment Commission, which
will be able to investigate employment practices and issue legally enforceable
directions to the employer, requiring specific measures to be taken. A new Fair
Employment Tribunal will adjudicate on complaints about religious or political
discrimination and have the power to enforce the Commission’s directions. New
sanctions against employers in breach of their statutory obligations will include
the withholding of government grants and public sector contracts.
While terrorism continues, certain emergency powers are in force. These
include special powers of arrest in respect of certain serious crimes, non-jury
courts to try those offences, and the proscription of organisations involved in
terrorism. There has been much concern to reconcile these powers as far as
possible with respect for individual liberties, and the powers are balanced by
specific safeguards; the measures are temporary, need annual renewal by
Parliament and are subject to annual independent review.
Most traditional rights, including freedom from persecution and freedom of
speech, remain in force. However, in the belief that terrorists should not be
allowed to draw support and sustenance from access to television and radio, the
Government has banned the broadcasting of direct statements by representa¬
tives of proscribed organisations or their supporters.
The security forces are accountable to the law; if they break it, their members
are liable to prosecution through the courts like any other members of the
community. In addition, there is an independent police complaints commission
to supervise police investigations into more serious complaints and, at its
discretion, the investigation of others. Northern Ireland’s legal system, and the
safeguards it enshrines, are broadly similar to those in England and Wales.
The use of violence as a means of overcoming political differences has been
condemned by the overwhelming majority of people living in Northern Ireland
and, although terrorism continues, the overall level of violence is much lower
than in the early 1970s. Over 2,750 people have been killed as a result of the
LAND AND PEOPLE
19
terrorist campaign since 1969. The police take the primary role in maintaining
order; the Army’s task is one of assisting the civil authorities, and the number of
soldiers on service has been considerably reduced. Security policy rests on the
principle of fair and effective enforcement of the law by bringing terrorists to
justice through the courts. They are tried for criminal offences and not for
political beliefs. At the heart of the policy is a determination to reduce the level of
terrorism and to develop the effectiveness of the police to the point where
military involvement in the maintenance of law and order is no longer needed.
The Economy Situated on the western edge of Europe and having a small domestic market,
Northern Ireland has always had strong trading links with the rest of the United
Kingdom. Population and industry are concentrated on the eastern seaboard,
while the rest of the country remains predominantly rural in character and
reliant mainly upon agriculture for its livelihood. Since the end of the second
world war two dominant trends have been apparent in the economy. First,
employment in the traditionally important industries (shipbuilding, linen and
agriculture) has declined. Secondly, there has been fast growth in the numbers
seeking work, reflecting the relatively high rate of natural increase of the
population, which is only partly offset by emigration from the province. These
trends have combined to produce an unemployment rate in Northern Ireland
persistently higher than that found in any other region in Britain. Since
mid-June 1987 the unemployment rate has dropped from over 18 per cent to
15-6 per cent in July 1989.
In Northern Ireland, as with other developed economies, there has been a
switch in emphasis from agriculture and manufacturing towards services.
However, agriculture (predominantly livestock and livestock products) is still an
important industry, accounting for 8 per cent of civil employment, over three
times the proportion in Britain as a whole. Belfast has Britain’s largest
shipyard, and aerospace engineering is one of Northern Ireland’s biggest
manufacturing industries. Other well-established industrial activities include
the manufacture of textile machinery and a wide range of engineering products,
tobacco and clothing. There has also been extensive development in vehicle
components, oil-well equipment, electronics, telecommunications equipment,
carpets, synthetic rubber, and food processing and packaging. The linen
industry is currently enjoying a revival (farms are experimenting with growing
flax).
To meet the special problem of unemployment successive governments have
offered more generous incentives than are available in the rest of the country to
encourage new investment both from within Britain and from overseas. In the
two financial years to March 1989 the various industrial development agencies
promoted almost 20,000 job opportunities in manufacturing, craft and trade-
able services; total investment associated with these jobs was over £820 million.
The establishment of enterprise zones in Belfast and Londonderry and the
designation of Aldergrove airport as a freeport serve as additional incentives to
investment. In Belfast a new central unit has been set up to co-ordinate the work
of eight action teams—each with a budget of £500,000—designed to tackle the
social, economic and environmental problems of the city’s most disadvantaged
areas.
In July 1988 the Making Belfast Work initiative was launched to address the
particular social, economic and environmental problems in the most disadvan¬
taged areas of Belfast. For the three year period starting in 1988-89, some £65
million—in addition to main programmes—has been allocated to create jobs and
businesses, improve levels of skill, enhance the physical environment and
improve health and living conditions. The Government is seeking to help local
communities help themselves and to enlist the support of the private sector.
20
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cultural and
Social Life
The modern diversification of the economy has helped to stimulate output,
productivity and incomes, and has assisted in narrowing the gap between living
standards in Northern Ireland and those in the rest of the United Kingdom.
Manufacturing output increased by 5 per cent between 1983 and 1987 while
output per employee hour rose by 9 per cent over this period. Gross domestic
product per person, which tends to be depressed in Northern Ireland relative to
the country as a whole, rose none the less from just under two-thirds of the
British average in 1963 to some 77 per cent in 1987. Average earnings in 1988
were just under nine-tenths of the national average.
The principle underlying Northern Ireland’s financial relations with the rest of
the country is that it has parity, both of taxation and services, with England,
Scotland and Wales. To maintain social services at the level of those in Great
Britain, to meet the cost of security measures, and to compensate for the natural
disadvantages of geography and lack of resources, the United Kingdom
Government’s subvention to Northern Ireland in 1988—89 was £1,699 million.
The Anglo-Irish Agreement expressed the intention of both signatories to
promote the economic and social development of those areas which had suffered
from the instability of recent years and to try to secure international support for
this work. In 1986 the British and Irish Governments signed an agreement
setting up the International Fund for Ireland and donations have been received
from the United States, Canada, New Zealand and the European Community. By
the end of 1988 the Fund had committed over £44 million to specific projects to
cover business enterprise, tourism, agriculture and fisheries, urban develop¬
ment, training and exchanges overseas, industrial promotion, and science and
technology. Two investment companies, one on each side of the border, provide
venture capital to new businesses. Three-quarters of the Fund is being spent in
Northern Ireland and the rest in the Irish Republic’s border counties.
In day-to-day social life Northern Ireland is in many ways similar to that in the
rest of the United Kingdom. For thousands of visitors (about 930,000 in 1988),
as well as for local people, Northern Ireland’s landscape and natural features, its
cultural traditions and festivals continue to offer special attractions. For many
North Americans the land from which their forebears emigrated (a number of
United States presidents have been descended from Northern Ireland families)
has a unique interest. The story of this contribution to American life, the history
of Northern Ireland, and aspects of its culture—from the dialects and strong
literary tradition (poets like Louis MacNeice and Seamus Heaney have inter¬
national reputations) to the songs, dances and folk art—are recorded in the
Ulster—American Folk Park, the Ulster Museum and the Ulster Folk and
Transport Museum.
The Government provides financial support for arts and cultural activities
related to the Irish language. Over 20,000 secondary school pupils currently
study Irish; full degree courses and research programmes are available at
Northern Ireland’s two universities.
The Arts Council of Northern Ireland is a major contributor to cultural life,
which encompasses classical and traditional music, opera, literature, poetry,
drama, ballet and the visual arts. The annual Belfast Festival at Queen’s
University is the second largest international festival in Britain. Among
musicians who have achieved international distinction are the flautist James
Galway, the soprano Heather Harper and the pianist Barry Douglas, winner of
the International Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow in 1986.
The National Health Service provides both hospital and practitioner services,
and health and personal social services correspond fairly closely to those in the
rest of the United Kingdom, although the administrative framework is different.
While publicly maintained schools are open to children of all religions, in
LAND AND PEOPLE
21
practice, Protestants and Roman Catholics are for the most part educated in
separate schools, although there are seven maintained integrated schools and
one independent integrated school. The Government favours the principle of
integrated education and has put forward proposals under which it will be a
statutory responsibility for the Education Department to encourage the aims of
such education. Contrary to developments in the rest of the United Kingdom,
emphasis on the comprehensive principle in secondary schools has been very
small. Links between the two universities and industry are well developed.
Considerable progress has been made in improving housing and the urban
environment, notably in Belfast; in the last ten years the housing stock in
Northern Ireland has increased by about 12 per cent and owner-occupation from
51 per cent to more than 60 per cent. Major town centre developments are taking
place in Belfast, Londonderry and other towns which provide greatly improved
shopping facilities. Planning and conservation arrangements are similar to
those in the rest of the country.
Distinctive local television and radio programmes are broadcast and there is a
local press; national radio and television networks are received, however, and
the national press is sold widely. Sport has an important role in the community,
and many world-class sportsmen and sportswomen have come from Northern
Ireland, including Barry McGuigan and Dave McAuley (boxing), Dennis Taylor
and Alex Higgins (snooker), Joey Dunlop (motor cycling) and Avril Malley (judo).
The Social Framework
The way of life of the people of Britain has been changing rapidly in the second
half of the twentieth century. As in many other countries, underlying causes
include a lower birth rate, longer expectation of life, a higher divorce rate,
widening educational opportunities, technical progress and a higher standard
of living.
With 57-1 million people in 1988, Britain ranks about fifteenth in the world in
terms of population. This compares with 38 -2 million in 1901, about 9 million at
the end of the seventeenth century and some 2 million at the end of the eleventh
century. Early figures are based on contemporary estimates, but from the
beginning of the nineteenth century relatively plentiful and reliable information
is available. Most of it comes from two main sources: the regular flow since 1837
of statistical information based on compulsory registration of births, marriages
and deaths, and the censuses taken regularly every ten years since 1801
(because of war there was no census in 1941). The next census will be in 1991.
After 1975 the population fell slightly for about three years, for the first time
(other than in war) since records began, reflecting a temporary decline in the
birth rate. Since then the upward trend has been resumed, except for a slight
decline in 1982. Projections suggest that population growth will continue at a
low rate. Britain’s total population is expected, on mid-1985 projections, to be
57-5 million in 1991, 59 million in 2001 and 59-4 million in 2011.
In 1988 there were 787,600 live births in Britain, 12,000 more than in 1987.
Births outnumbered deaths (649,200) by 138,400. The total period fertility rate
(an indication of the average family size) remains below 21, the level leading to
the long-term replacement of the population, although it is projected to increase
from 1-8 in 1988 to 2 0 by the beginning of the twenty-first century.
Several factors may have contributed to the relatively low birth rate in recent
years (13-8 live births per 1,000 population in 1988). The trend towards later
marriage and the trend towards postponing births have led to an increase in the
average age at which women have their children (27-2 years in 1988 compared
22
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mortality
Marriage and
Divorce
with 26-6 in 1978). Another feature is the current preference for smaller families
than in the past, which has led to a significant decline in the proportion of
families with four or more children. In 1987, 23 per cent of households in Great
Britain consisted of a married couple with one or two children only, compared
with 5 per cent of households which consisted of a married couple with three or
more children.
Contraception has become more widespread and effective, making it easier to
plan families, and voluntary sterilisation of men and women has also become
more common. Of all pregnancies in 1988, 39-6 per cent were conceived outside
marriage and of these over one-third were terminated by legal abortion.
At birth the expectation of life for a man is about 72 years and for a woman 78
years, compared with 49 years for men and 52 years for women in 1901. The
improving health of the population has mainly had the effect of increasing
young people’s chances of reaching the older age groups. Life expectancy in the
older age groups has increased relatively little.
The general death rate has remained about the same for the past 40 years, at
about 12 per 1,000 population. However, there has been a considerable decline
in mortality at most ages, particularly among children and young adults. The
infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under one year old per 1,000 live births)
was 9 0 in 1988; neonatal mortality (deaths of infants under four weeks old per
1,000 live births) was 4-9 in 1988; and maternal mortality is about 0-06 per
1,000 live births.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising
standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical
facilities, improved health measures, better working conditions, education in
personal hygiene, and the smaller size of families. Deaths resulting from
infectious diseases (notably tuberculosis) have virtually disappeared, although
as in other countries the spread of the disease AIDS (Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome) is causing concern; by the end of August 1989, 2,561
cases of AIDS had been reported, of which 1,352 had resulted in the patient’s
death. Deaths caused by circulatory diseases (including heart attacks and
strokes) now account for nearly half of all deaths; mortality from heart disease in
Britain remains high compared with that of other developed countries, and in
1987 the Government launched a major national heart disease prevention
campaign. The next largest cause of death is cancer (responsible for nearly
one-quarter of deaths). Cigarette smoking is the greatest preventable cause of
illness and death in Britain, accounting for some 100,000 premature deaths a
year, but there has been a significant decline in the incidence of smoking, with
35 per cent of adult males and 31 per cent of adult females smoking cigarettes in
1986, as against 52 and 41 per cent respectively in 1972.
In 1988 there were 394,000 marriages in Britain, of which 36 per cent were
remarriages (of one or both parties), compared with about 20 per cent in 1971
and 14 per cent in 1961. Some 33 per cent of all marriages in 1988 were
remarriages where both parties had been divorced. Of the population aged 16 or
over in England and Wales in 1987, 59 per cent were married, 26 per cent single,
9 per cent widowed and 6 per cent divorced. The trend of the 1960s towards
earlier marriage was reversed at the beginning of the 1970s, since when there
has been a slow increase in the average age for first marriages, which in England
and Wales is now 26 for men and 24 for women.
In 1988 about 13 decrees of divorce were made absolute for every 1,000
married couples in England and Wales, compared with two per 1,000 in 1961.
The rates are lower in Scotland and Northern Ireland. In 1988 about 153,000
divorces were granted in England and Wales; the proportion granted to wives
LAND AND PEOPLE
23
Age and Sex
Structure
Distribution
of Population
was about 71 per cent. The average age of people at the time of divorce in
England and Wales is now about 38 for men and 35 for women.
Another feature, common to many other Western European countries, has
been a considerable increase in cohabitation. Over one-quarter of women in
Great Britain marrying during the period 1980 to 1984, where the marriage was
the first for both parties, had lived with their husbands before marriage
(compared with 7 per cent for those married in the early 1970s) and about 19 per
cent of non-married women aged 18 to 49 were cohabiting during 1987.
Cohabitation occurs more frequently for separated or divorced women than for
single women. There is some evidence of a growing number of stable
non-married relationships in that two-thirds of births outside marriage (which
now account for 23 per cent of live births in Britain compared with 6 per cent in
1961) are registered by both parents.
Although the total population has remained relatively stable in the last decade,
there have been noticeable changes in the age and sex structure, including a
decline in the proportion of young people under 16 and an increase in the
proportion of elderly people, especially those aged 85 and over. The estimated
age distribution of the British population in mid-1988 was roughly as follows:
under 16 years, nearly 20 per cent: 16—64, 64 per cent; and 65 and over, 16 per
cent. Some 18 per cent of the population were over the normal retirement ages
(65 for men and 60 for women), compared with 15 per cent in 1961.
In mid-1988 there were an estimated 29-3 million females and 27-8 million
males in Britain, representing a ratio of over 105 females to every 100 males.
There are about 5 per cent more male than female births every year. Because of
the higher mortality of men at all ages, however, there is a turning point, at
about 48 years of age, at which the number of women exceeds the number of
men. This imbalance increases with age so that there are many more women
among the elderly.
The population density is about 234 inhabitants per sq km, which is well above
the European Community average of 143 per sq km. England is the most
densely populated with 364 people per sq km (with Greater London having a
density of 4,263 people per sq km), and Scotland the least densely populated
with 65 people per sq km, while Wales and Northern Ireland have 138 and 112
people per sq km respectively.
Table 2 gives figures for some of Britain’s largest urban areas. About half of
the population lives in a belt across England, with south Lancashire and West
Yorkshire at one end, the London area at the other, and the industrialised
Midlands at its centre. Other areas with large populations are: the central
lowlands of Scotland; north-east England from north of the river Tyne down to
the river Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast
from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less densely populated areas are the eastern
fringes of England between the Wash and the Thames estuary, and the far south
west. Most of the mountainous parts, including much of Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland and the central Pennines, are very sparsely populated.
Since the nineteenth century there has been a general trend, especially in
London, for people to move away from the congested urban centres into the
suburbs. There has also been a geographical redistribution of the population
from Scotland and the northern regions of England to East Anglia, the South
West and the East Midlands. Another feature has been an increase in the rate of
retirement migration, the main recipient areas (where in some towns the elderly
can form over one-third of the population) being the south coast of England and
East Anglia.
24
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Migration
Nationality
Table 2: Size and Population of the Main Urban Areas, Mid-1988
Area
  Population
sq km sq miles (thousands)
Greater London
Birmingham
Leeds
Glasgow
Sheffield
Liverpool
Bradford
Manchester
Edinburgh
Bristol
Coventry
Belfast
Cardiff
1,580
264
562
198
368
113
370
116
261
110
97
140
120
609-7
102-0
217-0
76-3
141- 9
43- 6
142- 9
44- 9
100-6
42-3
37-3
54-0
46-3
6,735-4
993-7
709-6
703-2
528-3
469-6
464-1
445-9
433-5
377-7
306-2
299-6
283-9
From 1983 to 1987 the earlier trend of net population loss from Britain due to
migration had reversed, but in 1988 there was again a net loss of 21,000.
Between 1984 and 1988 some 998,000 people left Britain to live abroad and
about 1 • 1 million came from overseas to live in Britain, so that net immigration
increased the population by about 114,000.1 Of the 237,000 departing residents
in 1988, 26 per cent left for Australia, Canada or New Zealand, 15 per cent for
other Commonwealth countries, 25 per cent for other European Community
countries, 13 per cent for the United States and 6 per cent for the Middle East.
Of the 216,000 new residents, 17 per cent came from Australia, Canada or New
Zealand, 19 per cent from other Commonwealth countries, 24 per cent from
other European Community countries, 11 per cent from the United States and 8
per cent from the Middle East. The number of migrants from the European
Community countries more than doubled between 1974—78 and 1984—88, while
those going to these countries increased by only 50 per cent. There was also a 50
per cent increase both in the number of residents from the United States moving
to Britain as well as those moving from Britain to the United States, over the
same period. In 1988 about 41 per cent of those coming into Britain, and about
60 per cent of those going abroad, were British citizens.
Nationality legislation is embodied in the British Nationality Act 1981, which
came into force on 1 Januaiy 1983. Under this Act, citizenship of the United
Kingdom and Colonies was replaced by three citizenships: British citizenship
for people closely connected with Britain, the Channel Islands, and the Isle of
Man; British Dependent Territories citizenship for people connected with the
dependencies; and British Overseas citizenship for those citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies who did not acquire either of the other citizenships.
Almost all citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had the right of
abode in Britain when the Act came into force acquired British citizenship.
British citizenship is acquired automatically at birth by a child born in Britain
if his or her father or mother is a British citizen or is settled in Britain. A child
International migration statistics used here exclude movements to and from the Irish Republic.
LAND AND PEOPLE
25
Immigration
adopted in Britain by a British citizen is a British citizen. A child born abroad to
a British citizen born, adopted, naturalised or registered in Britain is a British
citizen by descent. The Act safeguards the citizenship of a child born abroad to a
British citizen in Crown service, certain related services, or in service under a
European Community institution.
British citizenship may also be acquired by registration by certain children
born in Britain who do not automatically acquire such citizenship at birth or
born abroad to a parent who is a citizen by descent; by British Dependent
Territories citizens, British Overseas citizens, British subjects under the Act
(three very limited categories) and British protected persons after five years’
residence in Britain (except for people from Gibraltar, who may be registered
without residence); and by naturalisation for Commonwealth citizens, citizens
of the Irish Republic, and foreign nationals. The British Nationality (Falkland
Islands) Act 1983 conferred British citizenship (with effect from 1 January
1983) on those Falkland Islanders who did not acquire it under the 1981 Act.
For naturalisation, which is at the Home Secretary’s discretion, five years’
residence, good character and sufficient knowledge of English, Welsh or
Scottish Gaelic are required, except for the spouse of a British citizen, who
needs only three years’ residence and no language qualification.
Special arrangements covering the status of British Dependent Territories
citizens connected with Hong Kong when the territory returns to the People’s
Republic of China in 1997 are made by the Hong Kong (British Nationality)
Order 1986. Under this, such citizens are entitled, before 1997, to acquire a
status known as British National (Overseas) and to hold a passport in that
status.
In 1988, 65,000 people acquired citizenship by naturalisation or registration
in the United Kingdom.
Immigration into Britain is controlled by the Immigration Act 1971 (as amended
by the British Nationality Act 1981 and the Immigration Act 1988) and the
Immigration Rules made in accordance with the Act. British citizens under the
British Nationality Act 1981 and those Commonwealth citizens who had the
right of abode before 1 January 1983 (when the 1981 Act came into force) have
the right of abode and are not subject to immigration control. Those who do not
have this right require permission to enter and remain in Britain, which is given
in accordance with the Rules. These Rules, which are subject to the scrutiny of
Parliament and which may be changed from time to time, set out the
requirements to be met by those seeking entry, whether in a temporary capacity,
for example as students or visitors, or with the intention of taking employment
or setting up in business or for settlement as the dependants of a person already
settled in Britain. All nationals from certain countries require prior entry
clearance before they can enter Britain. Other nationals subject to immigration
control require entry clearance when coming to settle in Britain and in certain
other circumstances. Visas and other entry clearances are normally obtained
from the nearest British diplomatic post in a person’s home country.
In accordance with Britain’s obligations under the Treaty of Rome, European
Community nationals do not require entry clearances, nor are they subject to
restrictions on their freedom to take or seek work. Britain similarly respects its
obligations under the United Nations Convention and Protocol relating to the
Status of Refugees. These include granting refugees the right of access to courts
and the right to work, to education, to public relief and to freedom of religion.
In 1988 some 49,300 people were accepted for settlement, some 3,300 more
than in 1987. A quarter of these were from the South Asian sub-continent.
Wives and children accounted for nearly half the total acceptances.
26
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE
ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL
PATTERN
This section deals (to some extent in broad and informal terms) with social
developments affecting many sections of the population.
The majority of people (some 97 per cent) live in private households (in
families or on their own). The remainder include residents in hotels, and people
in the armed services and in educational or other institutions. In 1987 just
under four-fifths of people living in private households lived in a unit headed by
a married couple.
Among many changes in household and family structure is the continuing fall
in the average size of households in Great Britain from over four people in 1911
to 3 09 in 1961 and 2 -52 in 1987. The fall reflects a greater proportion of people
living on their own (10 per cent) or in one-parent families, the increasing
number of elderly people (more of whom are living alone), and the preferences of
parents for smaller families. The trend towards smaller households (25 per cent
of households consist of one person) is expected to continue and the number of
one-person households is forecast to increase substantially in the next few
years.
Housing,
Transport
and the
Environment
Home ownership is actively encouraged by the Government, and a growing
proportion of households, over 65 per cent, own or are buying their own homes,
owner-occupation being higher among married couples than for single, divorced
or widowed household heads. The number of owner-occupied dwellings rose
from over 4 million in 1951 to over 14-5 million in 1988. Four British
households out of five live in houses rather than flats.
Recent housing developments have been concentrated in suburban areas.
Many families now live in houses grouped in small terraces, or semi-detached or
detached, usually of two storeys with gardens, and providing two main
ground-floor living rooms, a kitchen, from two to four bedrooms, a bathroom,
and one or two lavatories. Originally, many houses were located in ‘ribbon
development’ along main roads, but in recent years housing estates have nearly
always been sited away from main roads. In inner urban areas slum clearance
and redevelopment were major features of post-1945 public housing program¬
mes. While high-rise flats were popular in the 1960s and 1970s, the emphasis in
new building is now on low-rise, high-density designs, often incorporating
gardens or patios, while many older buildings are being restored and converted
to provide modern homes under the Government’s Action for Cities initiative.
Housing standards are continually improving; some 98 per cent of households
in Great Britain have exclusive use of a bath or shower, and a similar proportion
sole use of an inside lavatory (high percentages by international standards),
while 73 per cent have central heating.
An important influence on the planning of housing and services has been the
growth of car ownership; about 64 per cent of households have the use of at least
one car (or van), including 19 per cent with the use of two or more. Greater
access to motorised transport and the construction of a network of modern
trunk roads and motorways have resulted in a considerable increase in personal
mobility and changed leisure patterns, and have influenced the design of
housing estates and shopping areas. Most detached or semi-detached houses in
new suburban estates have garages, and out-of-town shopping centres, often
including large supermarkets and do-it-yourself stores, are usually planned for
the motorist.
The growth in car ownership has brought very great benefits but also a
number of problems, notably, in many towns and cities, increased congestion,
noise and air pollution arising from motor vehicle emissions. Cars, taxis and
motorcycles accounted for more than four-fifths of all passenger transport in
Great Britain in 1987, compared with about half in 1961. Many public transport
services have been reduced or withdrawn, especially in rural areas. However,
LAND AND PEOPLE
27
Living
Standards
greater competition in express coach services has resulted in more long-distance
and commuter coach services being provided, and deregulation of local bus
services in 1986 is beginning to have an impact, the most important effect being
the introduction of minibuses in many areas. Since 1986 the amount of lead
measured in the air has fallen by half, following a reduction in the maximum
permitted lead content in petrol in Britain, and unleaded petrol is now widely
available and increasingly used by motorists.
Over the past 30 years there has been a steady reduction of the main
atmospheric and freshwater pollutants that were of concern in the past,
producing dramatic improvements in, for example, the quality of the air in cities
and the condition of major rivers. Various forms of pollution from traffic and
industrial processes remain a problem in some areas, however; a phased
programme to reduce further sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions
from large combustion plants is being introduced, and Britain is taking action
to protect and enhance the quality of the North Sea by reducing inputs of
dangerous substances into rivers and estuaries, and ceasing the dumping of
industrial waste. The Government is playing a full part in efforts by the
international community to protect the global environment, and in 1989 hosted
an international conference on the protection of the ozone layer.
There is a high degree of concern for the environment, as shown by the growth
in the number of organisations (especially voluntary societies) concerned with
conservation. Voluntary membership of environmental organisations rose
sharply between 1971 and 1987: for example, membership of the Royal Society
for the Protection of Birds rose from 100,000 to over 450,000, and that of the
National Trust from 280,000 to 1-6 million.
Marked improvements in the standard of living have taken place during the
twentieth century, but until recently at a slower rate than in some other major
industrialised countries. Although gross domestic product (GDP) per head fell in
the early 1980s, Britain has experienced an economic recovery and has had
eight successive years of sustained growth at an annual average rate of 3 per
cent, with growth since 1980 being higher than in the other major European
Community countries. In the year to the second quarter of 1989 GDP grew by
around 2 per cent in real terms, with growth occurring in most sectors of the
economy.
Long-term trends in the pattern of expenditure show a substantial rise in
expenditure on housing, televisions, video recorders, telephones, electrical and
some other durable goods, motor vehicles and a range of services. Some durable
goods, such as televisions and refrigerators, are available in more than 95 per
cent of households. Of durable goods shown in the table on p 28, ownership of
telephones, freezers (including fridge-freezers) and central heating systems is
growing most rapidly; other durable goods which have grown in popularity
include music centres and other audio equipment, video recorders and home
computers. Nearly one-third of households in Great Britain have a microwave
oven.
The general level of nutrition remains high. Over the last 25 years there have
been substantial rises in the consumption of poultry, instant coffee and
processed (including frozen) vegetables and fruit, while home consumption per
person of mutton and lamb, beef and veal, bread, potatoes, eggs, milk, butter,
sugar, tea and some other foods has fallen (see diagram on p 29). However,
another feature has been an increase in the number of meals eaten away from
home, either at work or in restaurants, and a growth in the consumption of food
from ‘take-away’ and ‘fast-food’ shops. In addition, the proportion of conveni¬
ence foods eaten has grown as women increasingly work outside the home and
have less time to prepare meals, and as the variety of prepared foods and
28
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 3: Availability of Certain Durable Goods
percentage of households with goods
Central Heating Washing
Cars (full or partial) Machines Freezers Televisions Telephones
1979 57 55 74 40 97 67
1987 64 73 74 74 98 83
Source: General Household Survey.
‘cook-chill’ meals has risen in line with the growth in ownership of refrigerators
and freezers; There is some evidence of consumption of food being influenced by
health factors, for example, people are drinking more skimmed milk at the
expense of whole milk and eating more wholemeal instead of white bread.
Between 1961 and 1987 the consumption of brown and wholemeal bread
increased over 2 -5 times and the consumption of butter fell by two-thirds during
the same period. The Government is encouraging the widest availability of
wholesome food, while giving high priority to consumer safety.
There was little change in alcohol consumption between 1978 and 1987. Beer,
with lager (now estimated to account for over half of beer sales), remains much
the most popular alcoholic drink. A high proportion of beer is drunk in public
houses (‘pubs’), which are a traditional social centre for many people, and in
clubs. Following the relaxation of restrictions on opening hours of public houses
under the Licensing Act 1988, there are signs that they are becoming more
popular with families: more meals are being served and the consumption of
non-alcoholic drinks is increasing. Consumption of light (table) wine has
increased considerably in recent years, although there has been little change in
the consumption of higher strength wines such as sherry and port. The pattern
of spirits consumption has also been changing, with a decline in the
consumption of whisky and gin, and higher consumption of some other spirits.
Alcohol abuse has become a problem, although the level is well below that in
some other European Community countries.
Employment has been increasing since 1983, representing the longest period
of continuous employment growth for nearly 30 years. However, the pattern of
employment has altered considerably, with a decline in employment in
manufacturing industry being accompanied by a long-term increase in the
numbers employed in service industries. Another feature has been an increase
in the number of self-employed, now accounting for nearly 10-5 per cent of the
workforce. The educational standards of adults have risen, with 11 per cent of
those aged 25-29 in Great Britain holding a degree or equivalent qualification in
1987, compared with 6 per cent of those aged 50-59. In public sector schools in
Britain the average number of pupils per teacher has fallen to 18-3 in 1987,
compared with 23-2 in 1971.
Earnings from employment are the main source of income for most people; in
1986 wages and salaries accounted for 60 per cent of household income. The
distribution of pre-tax income has remained relatively stable over a long period,
the lower 50 per cent of income earners accounting for some 22 to 24 per cent of
pre-tax income since 1949. Income before tax of the self-employed is less evenly
distributed than total income, mostly because of the very large incomes of a
small number of people, mainly professionals such as lawyers, accountants and
doctors. The combined effect of the tax system and the receipt of benefits is to
redistribute incomes on a more equal basis.
LAND AND PEOPLE
29
Women
Changes in Food Consumption in Great Britain
between 1980 and 1987
-11%
Milk and
cream
Poultry
+19%
Margarine
+4%
-41%
_47% Mutton
Butter an^ lamb
Other fruit
and
fruit products
+48%
Brown and
wholemeal
bread
+51%
Other vegetables
and
vegetable products
+20%
-3%
Fresh
fruit
-6%
Fresh
vegetables
-27%
-17%
Tea
White
bread
Wealth is much less evenly distributed, with the top 1 per cent of the
population aged 18 or over owning about 20 per cent of marketable wealth, and
the top 10 per cent having 54 per cent. The inclusion of‘non-marketable’ rights
in occupational and state pension schemes reduces these shares substantially to
around 11 and 36 per cent respectively. Since the mid-1970s there has been
little change in the distribution of marketable wealth or in that of marketable
wealth plus occupational and state pension rights. The proportion of net wealth
held in shares has been declining, but the Government’s privatisation pro¬
gramme has had a major effect on the pattern of share ownership, with a survey
early in 1989 indicating that 20 per cent of the adult population in Great Britain
were shareholders, as against 7 per cent in 1979.
Considerable changes have occurred in the twentieth centuiy in the economic
and domestic lives of women, due, in part, to the removal of almost all sex
discrimination in political and legal rights. At the heart of women’s changed role
has been the rise in the number of women, particularly married women, at work.
With later marriages and the availability of effective methods of contraception
there has been a decline in family size. Women as a result are involved in
child-bearing for a shorter time and this, together with a variety of other factors
which have made housework less burdensome, has made it possible even for
women with young children to combine raising a family with employment. The
growth of part-time work, job-sharing and flexible working hours, together with
training and retraining schemes, allows women to take advantage of more
employment opportunities.
Women comprise 43 per cent of the workforce in Great Britain and the
proportion of married women who work outside the home has grown to over 50
per cent of those between the ages of 16 and 60. By the mid-1990s the numbers
of young people entering the workforce will have declined substantially and it is
expected that the shortfall will be met to a considerable extent by recruiting
more married women. There is still a significant difference between women’s
30
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Equal
Opportunities
Ethnic and
National
Minorities
and men’s earnings but the equal pay legislation which came into force at the
end of 1975 has narrowed the gap. Women’s average hourly earnings, exclusive
of overtime (for full-time employees), increased from just over a half of those of
men in 1970, to about three-quarters in 1988. Women’s wages remain relatively
low partly because women tend to work in lowly paid sectors of the economy and
they work less overtime than men.
The Sex Discrimination Acts 1975 and 1986 make discrimination between men
and women unlawful in employment, education, training and the provision of
housing, goods, facilities and services. Discriminatory advertisements which
breach the Act are also unlawful. In most cases complaints of discrimination are
dealt with by industrial tribunals since they concern employment; others maybe
taken before county courts in England and Wales or the sheriff court in
Scotland. Under the Equal Pay Act 1970, as amended in 1984, women in Great
Britain are entitled to equal pay with men when doing work that is the same or
broadly similar, or work which is of equal value. There is similar legislation on
sex discrimination and equal pay in Northern Ireland. The Equal Opportunities
Commission, set up in 1975 (1976 in Northern Ireland under separate
legislation), has powers to enforce the Sex Discrimination Acts and the Equal
Pay Act. Its statutory duties are to work towards eliminating discrimination and
to promote equality of opportunity. The Commission advises people of their
rights under the Acts and may give financial or other assistance to help
individuals to conduct a case before a court or tribunal. It also has power to
conduct investigations and to issue notices requiring discriminatory practices
to stop. In addition, it keeps legislation under review and may submit proposals
for amending it to the ministers concerned. The Commission’s information
centre is a national source of material on all aspects of equality.
People have been coming to settle in Britain for centuries from many parts of the
world. Some came to avoid political or religious persecution, others to find a
better way of life or an escape from poverty.
The Irish have long made homes in Britain. Many Jewish refugees started a
new life in the country towards the end of the nineteenth century and in the
1930s, and after 1945 large numbers of other European refugees settled in
Britain. The large communities from the West Indies and South Asian
sub-continent date principally from the 1950s and 1960s. There are also
sizeable groups from the United States and Canada, as well as Australians,
Chinese and various European communities such as Greek and Turkish
Cypriots, Italians and Spaniards. More recently Ugandan Asians and people
from Latin America, Indo-China and Sri Lanka have sought refuge in Britain.
In 1985—87, according to the results of a sample survey, the non-white
population of Great Britain was about 2-4 million (some 4-5 per cent of the total
population), of whom about 43 per cent were born in Britain; one in three was
aged under 16 and about one in six aged 45 or over. Although members of the
non-white population are disproportionately concentrated in the areas of
greatest deprivation in the inner cities, where the disadvantages they share with
the poorer sections of the indigenous community are compounded by racial
discrimination, progress has undoubtedly been made over the last 20 years in
several areas of life. Many individuals have achieved distinction in their careers
and in public life and the proportion of ethnic minority workers in professional
and managericd jobs has increased. There are at present three black Members of
Parliament and one Asian Member of Parliament and the number of ethnic
minority councillors in local government is growing. Increasingly, black and
Asian people are achieving distinction in law, medicine and teaching, while
black sportsmen and women play a prominent role in athletics, boxing, football
LAND AND PEOPLE
31
Race Relations
Act
Commission for
Racial Equality
and cricket, and black performers have made a considerable impact in pop
music and jazz. The growth of commercial enterprise has been significant,
particularly among Asians, and there are numerous examples of self-help in
ethnic minority communities.
The principal means of combating disadvantage is through the economic,
environmental, educational and health programmes of central government and
local authorities, as well as through special programmes which channel extra
resources into projects to benefit ethnic minorities specifically. The latter
provide, for example, specialist teachers for those groups of children who need
English language tuition, business support services and measures to revive local
economies and improve the environment in inner city areas. Cultural and
recreational schemes are funded, including community and social centres for
different ethnic minorities, and the health and personal social services make
special provision for certain groups. In early 1989 the Government announced
plans to increase support for the local enterprise agencies established in 1985 to
encourage the growth of black businesses in inner city areas; it also intends to
enlarge and redirect its practical help to increase equal opportunities for
members of ethnic minority groups through training; this would include,
among other measures, greater provision for unemployed people who need
training in English as a second language.
The welfare of ethnic minorities and good relations between minorities and
the local community are promoted by community relations councils and other
voluntary bodies. In recognition of the tensions that can arise between the police
and ethnic minorities, consultation between the police and the community has
been made a statutory requirement, liaison work is undertaken in schools and
police training in race relations has received particular attention. Campaigns
are being run by the police to encourage the recruitment of officers from the
ethnic minority communities and racially discriminatory behaviour by officers
has been made an offence under the police discipline code.
Policies for promoting equality of opportunity in a multiracial society in which
all citizens receive equal respect are pursued against a background of legislation
against discrimination. The Race Relations Act 1976 makes discrimination
unlawful on grounds of colour, race, nationality or ethnic or national origin in
the provision of goods, facilities and services, in employment, training and
related matters, in education, in housing and in advertising. It strengthened
legislation passed in 1968 which, in turn, widened the scope of the first race
relations legislation, enacted in 1965. It also strengthened the criminal law on
incitement to racial hatred, which was further reinforced by the Public Order Act
1986.
The 1976 Act brought the law against racial discrimination into line with that
against sex discrimination (see p 30), and gave complainants direct access to
civil courts and, in the case of employment complaints, to industrial tribunals.
The Commission for Racial Equality was established by the Race Relations Act
1976 with statutory duties to work towards eliminating discrimination and to
promote equality of opportunity and good relations between people of different
racial groups. It has power to investigate unlawful discriminatory practices and
to issue non-discrimination notices, requiring that such practices should cease.
It has an important educational role and has issued a code of practice in
employment and, in March 1989, a draft code of practice on rented housing. It is
also the principal source of advice for the general public about the Race
Relations Act and has discretion to assist individuals with their complaints. The
Commission can also undertake or fund research.
The Commission supports the work of the 100 or so community relations
32
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Leisure
Trends
Holidays
councils, which are autonomous voluntary bodies set up in most areas with a
significant ethnic minority population to promote equality of opportunity and
good relations at the local level. It makes grants towards the salaries of the
community relations officers employed by the councils, most of whom also
receive funds from their local authorities, and gives grants to ethnic minority
self-help groups and to other projects run by or for the benefit of the minority
communities.
Most people have considerably more free time, more ways in which to spend it
and higher real incomes than previous generations. Agreed hours of full-time
work are usually from 35 to 40 hours a week, although many people actually
work somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime. A large majority of
employees work a five-day week.
The most common leisure activities are home based, or social, such as visiting
or entertaining relatives or friends. Television viewing is by far the most popular
leisure pastime, and nearly all households have a television set, with 90 per cent
in 1987 having a colour set. Over 51 per cent of households have two or more
television sets and average viewing time for the population aged four and over is
25 hours a week. Growing numbers are using video recorders to watch
programmes at times other than their transmission; the proportion of
households with a video recorder rose from 24 per cent in 1984 to 46 per cent in
1987. Other popular pursuits include: listening to music, reading, do-it-yourself
home improvements, gardening, and going out for a meal or for a drink. About
half the households in Britain have a pet, the most common being dogs (of
which there are thought to be 6-8 million in Britain) and cats, the number of
which has gradually risen to about 6 million.
Many people give up free time to work for voluntary organisations, of which
there are over 250,000 in England and Wales. It is estimated that about
one-quarter of the population is involved in some way in voluntary work in
Britain.
Sports and other pastimes have grown in popularity, reflected by increasing
membership of the main organisations concerned with outdoor activities,
although for some sports, such as greyhound racing, the number of spectators
has been declining. Walking and swimming are the two most popular sporting
activities, being almost equally undertaken by men and women. Snooker/
billiards/pool and darts are the next most popular sports among men. Keep-fit,
yoga, squash and cycling are among the sports where participation has been
increasing in recent years.
Holiday entitlements have increased for most full-time employees, and by the
end of 1988, nearly all manual workers had a basic holiday entitlement of four
weeks or more and nearly one-quarter five weeks or more. In 1988, 61 per cent of
the adult population took at least one long holiday of four or more nights away
from home. The number of long holidays taken by British residents was 53-8
million in 1988 (compared with 43-8 million in 1977), of which 33-5 million
were taken in Britain. The most popular destinations for summer holidays are
the West Country and southern England. In addition, some 35 million shorter
holidays were taken in Britain in 1988. British residents also took 20-3 million
holidays overseas in 1988, of which 64 per cent involved ‘package’ arrange¬
ments. The most popular destinations were Spain, France and Greece, and 81
per cent of all holidays abroad in 1988 were taken in Europe. An increasing
number of people take more than one holiday each year, many choosing an
activity holiday (such as walking, climbing or pot-holing) for their second or
third break; the proportion of adults taking two or more holidays a year
increased from 15 per cent in 1971 to 24 per cent in 1988.
Government
The British constitution, unlike that of most other countries, is not contained in
any single document. Formed partly by statute, partly by common law and partly
by convention, it can be altered by Act of Parliament, or by general agreement to
create, vary or abolish a convention. The constitution thus adapts readily to
changing political conditions and ideas.
The organs of government are clearly distinguishable, although their func¬
tions often intermingle and overlap. The legislature, Parliament, is the supreme
authority. The executive consists of: (1) the Government—Cabinet and other
ministers who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy;
(2) government departments, which are responsible for national administration;
(3) local authorities, which administer and manage many local services; and
(4) public corporations responsible for operating particular nationalised indus¬
tries or, for example, a social or cultural service, subject to ministerial control in
varying degrees. The judiciary determines common law and interprets statutes,
and is independent of both legislature and executive.
The Monarchy
The British people look to the Queen not only as their head of State, but also as
the symbol of their nation’s unity. The monarchy is the most ancient secular
institution in Britain. During the last thousand years its continuity has only
once been broken (by the establishment of a republic which lasted from 1649 to
1660) and, despite interruptions in the direct line of succession, the hereditary
principle upon which it was founded has always been preserved. The royal title
in Britain is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms and Territories
Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’. The form of the royal
title is varied for those other member states of the Commonwealth of which the
Queen is head of State,1 to suit the particular circumstances of each. Other
member states are republics or have their own monarchies.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom. In the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the
other member nations of the Commonwealth of which the Queen is head of
State, her representative is the Governor-General, appointed by her on the
advice of the ministers of the country concerned and completely independent of
the British Government.
In the British dependencies the Queen is usually represented by governors,
who are responsible to the British Government for the good government of the
countries concerned.
The title to the Crown derives partly from statute and partly from common law
rules of descent. Lineal Protestant descendants of a granddaughter of James I of
England and VI of Scotland (Princess Sophia, the Electress of Hanover) are alone
eligible to succeed, and although succession is not bound to continue in its
1 The other Commonwealth countries of which the Queen is head of State are: Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Canada, Grenada, Jamaica, Mauritius, New
Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu.
The Royal Family
From the reign of Queen Victoria to August 1989
QUEEN VICTORIA 1819-1901
[. Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Prince Consort)
x v n >
§ m ° T3 H
Pi&?Iss
SSixSSQ^itiS^alg^Qo
^4jCCwCuUs24j«-5'oj'C
- o c -r
c ZXfc.O
S'S-g'-E-g'
£ fc
■ u m
£ m
a>
v I
l||§s^
o 9 O -T- 'qt ^2 .
xiE^O
3 O-
i-C-i®
fflH Lri
o Sen
-illl
-311
£z-°
3.-<t ® §
_OS 3 c
S-:
s*6!
, l'S25 £-
S|x^i
ill-lit!
Sii
V rr
S<oaa
c
B< m n ^
« &
S cn "b ^ «
’“is-Ie
u ^ ^ o
1 ^1
3 0^3
— R i S 3 c .
a e Is
* n _ c
iipi
■s^il»
!2gP
Q £ — p
a s
_38
§x - J
M-° C o
z b«
w -s
w c a
hlsll
4|^i
8 u
1 §
l-'g’SS.Sc#
6 gpi E S
Official Birthday Celebration:
GOVERNMENT
35
Acts of
Government
present line, it can be altered only by common consent of the member nations of
the Commonwealth of which the Queen is Sovereign.
The sons of the Sovereign have precedence over the daughters in succeeding
to the throne. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant, and the
powers of the Crown are vested in her as though she were a king. While the
consort of a king takes her husband’s rank and style, the constitution does not
give any special rank or privileges to the husband of a Queen-Regnant, although
in practice he fills an important role in the life of the nation, as does the Duke of
Edinburgh.
The Sovereign succeeds to the throne as soon as his or her predecessor dies
and there is no interregnum. He or she is at once proclaimed at an Accession
Council to which all members of the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal (see p 38), the Lord Mayor and Aldermen and other
leading citizens of the City of London are also invited.
The Sovereign’s coronation follows the accession after a convenient interval. It
is a ceremony which has remained essentially the same for over a thousand
years, even if details have often been modified to conform to the customs of the
time. It takes place at Westminster Abbey in London in the presence of
representatives of the Houses of Parliament and of all the great public interests
of Britain, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other Common¬
wealth nations, and of representatives of other countries.
The Queen personifies the State. In law, she is head of the executive, an integral
part of the legislature, head of the judiciary, the commander-in-chief of all armed
forces of the Crown and the ‘supreme governor’ of the established Church of
England. As a result of a long process of evolution, during which the monarchy’s
absolute power has been progressively reduced, the Queen acts on the advice of
her ministers, which she cannot ignore. Britain is governed by Her Majesty’s
Government in the name of the Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of a trend during the past hundred years
towards assigning powers directly to ministers, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen. These include
summoning, proroguing (discontinuing until the next session without disso¬
lution) and dissolving Parliament; giving Royal Assent to Bills passed by
Parliament; appointing many important office holders, including government
ministers, judges, officers in the armed forces, governors, diplomats, bishops
and some other senior clergy of the Church of England; conferring peerages,
knighthoods and other honours1; and remitting all or part of the penalty
imposed on a person convicted of a crime. An important function is appointing
the Prime Minister and by convention the Queen invites the leader of the
political party which commands a majority in the House of Commons to form a
government. In international affairs the Queen, as head of State, has the power
to declare war and make peace, to recognise foreign states and governments, to
conclude treaties and to annex or cede territory.
With rare exceptions (as when appointing the Prime Minister), those acts
involving the use of ‘royal prerogative’ powers are nowadays performed by
government ministers who are responsible to Parliament and can be questioned
about a particular policy. It is not necessary to have Parliament’s authority to
exercise these powers, although Parliament has the power to restrict or abolish a
prerogative right.
1 Although most honours are conferred by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister, a few
are conferred on her personal selection—the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the
Order of Merit and the Royal Victorian Order.
36
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceremonial and
Royal Visits
Royal Income
and
Expenditure
Ministerial responsibility in no way detracts from the importance of the
Queen’s role in the smooth working of government. She holds meetings of the
Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other officials in Britain and
overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs
numerous state papers; she must be informed and consulted on every aspect of
national life; and she must show complete impartiality.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made for a regent to be appointed to perform them should the Queen be
totally incapacitated. The regent would be the Queen’s eldest son, the Prince of
Wales, then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event of the
Queen’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, there is provision for appointing
Counsellors of State (the Duke of Edinburgh, the four adults next in line of
succession, and the Queen Mother) to whom the Queen may delegate certain
royal functions. However, Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the Queen’s express instructions), or create peers.
Ceremonial has always been associated with British kings and queens, and, in
spite of the change in the outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, many
traditional customs and ceremonies are retained. Royal marriages and royal
funerals are marked by public ceremony, and the Sovereign’s birthday is
officially celebrated in June by Trooping the Colour on Horse Guards Parade.
State banquets take place when a foreign monarch or head of State visits
Britain; investitures are held at Buckingham Palace and the Palace of Holyrood-
house in Scotland to bestow honours; and royal processions add significance to
such occasions as a State opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives from
Buckingham Palace to Westminster. Each year the Queen and other members of
the royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom. Their presence at
scientific, artistic, industrial and charitable events of national and local import¬
ance encourages nationwide interest and publicity. The Queen pays State visits
to foreign governments, accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh. She also
undertakes lengthy tours in the other countries of the Commonwealth. Other
members of the royal family pay official visits overseas, occasionally representing
the Queen, and often in connection with an organisation or a cause with which
they are associated.
About 85 per cent of the expenditure arising from the royal family’s official
duties is met by public departments. This includes the costs of the royal yacht,
the Queen’s Flight, travel by train and the upkeep of the royal palaces. The
Queen’s public expenditure on staff and expenses incurred in carrying out
official duties as head of State is financed from the Civil List, approved by
Parliament. (In 1989 this was £4-6 million.) Her private expenditure as
Sovereign is met from the Privy Purse, which is supplied mainly from the
revenues of the Duchy of Lancaster1; and her personal expenditure as a private
individual from her own personal resources. There are annual allowances
approved by Parliament to other members of the royal family, though not to the
Prince of Wales, who as Duke of Cornwall is entitled to the net revenue of the
estate of the Duchy of Cornwall. (He voluntarily surrenders a quarter of
this revenue to the Exchequer.) The Queen pays into the Exchequer a sum
equivalent to that provided by Parliament for certain members of the royal
family.
1 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the
reigning Sovereign: it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately
administered by the Chancellor of the Duchy.
GOVERNMENT
37
The Functions
of Parliament
The Meeting of
Parliament
Parliament
Parliament is the supreme legislative authority. Its three elements, the Queen,
the House of Lords and the elected House of Commons, are outwardly separate,
are constituted on different principles, and meet together only on occasions of
symbolic significance such as the State opening of Parliament, when the
Commons are summoned by the Queen to the House of Lords. When Parliament
legislates, however, the concurrence of each of its component parts is normally
required.
Parliament can legislate for Britain as a whole, for any of the constituent parts
of the country separately, or for any combination of them. It can also legislate for
the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, which are Crown dependencies and not
part of Britain, having subordinate legislatures which make laws on island
affairs.1
Free from any legal restraints imposed by a written constitution. Parliament is
able to legislate as it pleases: generally to make, unmake, or alter any law; to
legalise past illegalities and make void and punishable what was lawful when
done and thus reverse the decisions of the ordinary courts; and to destroy
established conventions or turn a convention into binding law. It can prolong its
own life beyond the normal period without consulting the electorate.
In practice, however, Parliament does not assert its supremacy in this way. Its
members bear in mind the common law and have tended to act in accordance
with precedent and tradition. The validity of an Act of Parliament which has
been duly passed, promulgated and published cannot be disputed in the law
courts, but no Parliament would be likely to pass an Act which it knew would
receive no public support. The House of Commons is directly responsible to the
electorate, and in this century the House of Lords has recognised the priority of
the elected chamber. The system of party government helps to ensure that
Parliament legislates with its responsibility to the electorate in mind.
As a member of the European Community, Britain recognises the various
types of Community legislation and wider policies, and sends 81 elected
members to the European Parliament.
The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws, (2) to provide, by voting
taxation, the means of carrying on the work of government, (3) to scrutinise
government policy and administration, particularly proposals for expenditure,
and (4) to debate the major political issues of the day. In discharging these
functions Parliament helps to bring the relevant facts and issues before the
electorate. By custom. Parliament is also informed before the ratification of all
important international treaties and agreements, the making of treaties being a
royal prerogative exercised on the advice of the Government and not subject to
parliamentary approval.
A Parliament has a maximum duration of five years, but is often dissolved and a
general election held before the end of this term. The maximum life has been
prolonged by legislation in rare circumstances such as the two world wars.
Dissolution and writs for a general election are ordered by the Queen on the
advice of the Prime Minister.
The life of a Parliament is divided into sessions. Each usually lasts for one
year—beginning and ending most often in October or November and inter¬
spersed with ‘adjournments’ at night, at weekends, at Christmas, Easter and the
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and the
Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) consist of the Queen, the Privy Council and the local assemblies. It
is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the Privy Council member primarily concerned with island
affairs, to scrutinise each legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
38
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The House of
Lords
late (English) Spring Bank Holiday and during a long summer recess starting in
late July or early August. The average number of ‘sitting’ days in a session is
about 170 in the House of Commons and about 165 in the House of Lords. At the
start of each session the Queen’s speech to Parliament outlines the Govern¬
ment’s broad policies and proposed legislative programme. Each session is
terminated by prorogation. Parliament then ‘stands prorogued’ for about a week
until the new session opens. Prorogation terminates nearly all parliamentary
business: in particular, Bills which have not been enacted by the end of the
session are lost.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Spiritual and the Lords Temporal. The
Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of
London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21 next most senior diocesan
bishops of the Church of England. The Lords Temporal consist of (1) all
hereditary peers and peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the
United Kingdom, (2) life peers created to assist the House in its judicial duties
(Lords of Appeal or ‘law lords’),1 and (3) all other life peers. Hereditary peerages
carry a right to sit in the House (subject to certain disqualifications), provided
the holder establishes his or her claim and is 21 years of age or over, but anyone
succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession, disclaim that
peerage for his or her lifetime. Disclaimants lose their right to sit in the House
but gain the right to vote and to offer themselves as candidates at parliamentary
elections.
Peerages, both hereditary and life, are conferred by the Sovereign on the
advice of the Prime Minister. They are usually granted in recognition of service
in politics or other walks of life or because one of the political parties wishes to
have the recipient in the House of Lords. The House provides a place in
Parliament for men and women whose advice is useful, but who do not wish to
be involved in party politics.
In mid-1989 there were 1,187 members of the House of Lords, including the
two archbishops and 24 bishops. The Lords Temporal consisted of 763
hereditary peers who had succeeded to their titles, 21 hereditary peers who have
had their titles conferred on them (including the Prince of Wales), and 377 life
peers, of whom 21 were ‘law lords’. Of the total, 92 peers were not in receipt of a
writ of summons and some 153 peers were on leave of absence from the House.2
Irish peerages do not entitle their holders to membership of the House of Lords,
but some peers of Ireland are entitled to sit in the House of Lords as holders of an
English, Scottish, Great Britain or United Kingdom peerage.
Not all peers with a right to sit in the House of Lords attend the sittings. Peers
who attend the House (the average daily attendance is some 330) receive no
salary for their parliamentary work, but can recover expenses incurred in
attending the House (for which there are maximum daily rates) and certain
travelling expenses. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 51.)
The House is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who takes his place on the
woolsack3 as ex-officio Speaker of the House. In his absence his place may be
taken by a deputy speaker, a deputy chairman or, if neither is present, by a
speaker chosen by the Lords present. The first of the deputy speakers is the Lord
1 The House of Lords is the final court of appeal for civil cases in Britain and for criminal cases in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
2 Some hereditary peers do not establish their claim to succeed and so do not receive a writ of
summons entitling them to sit in the House. Lords may apply for leave of absence for the
duration, or for the remainder, of a Parliament.
3 The woolsack is a seat in the form of a large cushion stuffed with wool from severed
Commonwealth countries; it is a relic from the medieval period, when wool was the chief source of
the country's wealth.
GOVERNMENT
39
The House of
Commons
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
Chairman of Committees, who is appointed at the beginning of each session and
takes the chair in all committees, unless the House decides otherwise. The
Chairman and the Principal Deputy Chairman of Committees are Lords, but
receive salaries as officers of the House.
The permanent officers of the House include the Clerk of the Parliaments, who
is responsible for the records of proceedings and for the promulgation of Acts of
Parliament; he is the accounting officer for money voted to the House, and is in
charge of the administrative staff of the House, known as the Parliament Office.
The Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who is also Serjeant-at-Arms in
attendance upon the Lord Chancellor, is responsible for security, accommoda¬
tion and services in the House of Lords’ part of the Palace of Westminster. The
Yeoman Usher is Deputy Seijeant-at-Arms and assists Black Rod in his duties.
The House of Commons is elected by universal adult suffrage and consists of 650
Members of Parliament (MPs). At present there are 42 women, one Asian and
three black MPs. Of the 650 seats, 523 are for England, 38 for Wales, 72 for
Scotland, and 17 for Northern Ireland.
General elections are held after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new one
summoned by the Queen. When an MP dies or resigns1 or is given a peerage, a
by-election takes place. Members are paid an annual salary of £24,107 (from
January 1989) and an office costs allowance of up to £24,903. There are also a
number of other allowances, including travel allowances, a supplement for
London members and, for provincial members, subsistence allowances and
allowances for second homes. (For ministers’ salaries, see p 51.)
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, elected by MPs to
preside over the House. Other officers are the Chairman of Ways and Means and
two deputy chairmen, who act as Deputy Speakers, elected by the House on the
nomination of the Government. They, like the Speaker, neither speak nor vote
other than in their official capacity. Overall responsibility for the staffing,
budget and administration of the House rests with the House of Commons
Commission, a statutory body chaired by the Speaker.
Permanent officers (who are not MPs) include the Clerk of the House of
Commons, who is the principal adviser to the Speaker of the House on its
privileges and procedures; his department has responsibilities relating to the
conduct of the business of the House and its many committees. The Clerk is also
accounting officer for the House. The Seijeant-at-Arms, who waits upon the
Speaker, carries out certain orders of the House, is the official housekeeper of
the Commons’ part of the building, and is responsible for its security. Other
officers serve the House in the Library, the Department of the Official Report
(Hansard), the Administration Department and the Refreshment Department.
For electoral purposes Britain is divided into constituencies, each of which
returns one member to the House of Commons. To ensure equitable representa¬
tion four permanent Parliamentary Boundary Commissions, one each for
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, make periodic reviews of
constituencies and recommend any adjustment of seats that may seem
necessary in the light of population movements or other changes.
Elections are by secret ballot. British citizens, together with citizens of other
Commonwealth countries and citizens of the Irish Republic resident in Britain,
may vote provided they are aged 18 or over, registered in the annual register of
1 An MP who wishes to resign from the House can do so only by using the technical device of
applying for an office under the Crown (Crown Steward or Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds, or
Steward of the Manor of Northstead), ancient offices which disqualify the holder from
membership of the House but which carry no salary and have no responsibilities.
40
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Political
Party System
electors for the constituency and not subject to any disqualification. People not
entitled to vote include members of the House of Lords, patients detained under
mental health legislation, sentenced prisoners and people convicted within the
previous five years of corrupt or illegal election practices. Service voters (mem¬
bers of the armed forces and their spouses. Crown servants and staff of the
British Council employed overseas, together with their wives or husbands if
accompanying them) may be registered for an address in a constituency where
they would live but for their service. The Representation of the People Act 1989
extends the right to vote for British citizens living abroad by increasing from 5 to
20 years the period during which they may apply to be registered to vote.
Each elector may cast one vote, normally in person at a polling station. Anyone
who is entitled to an absent vote may vote by post or by proxy, but postal ballot
papers cannot be sent to addresses outside Britain. Service voters, overseas
electors, electors who are physically incapacitated or unable to vote in person
because of the nature of their work may vote by post (unless they are abroad at
the time of the election) or by proxy for an indefinite period. Under the 1989 Act,
any elector whose circumstances on polling day are such that he or she cannot
reasonably be expected to vote in person at his or her allotted polling station, for
example, an elector away on holiday, may apply for an absent vote.
Voting is not compulsory; 74-6 per cent of a total electorate of 43-6 million
people voted in the general election in June 1987. The candidate who polls the
most votes in a constituency is elected.
British citizens and citizens of other Commonwealth countries, together with
citizens of the Irish Republic, may stand and be elected as MPs provided they are
aged 21 or over and are not subject to any disqualification. Those disqualified
include undischarged bankrupts; people sentenced to more than one year’s
imprisonment; clergy of the Church of England, Church of Scotland, Church of
Ireland and Roman Catholic Church; peers; and holders of certain offices listed
in the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975. The latter include holders
of judicial office, civil servants, some local government officers, members of the
regular armed forces, or the police service, some members of public corporations
and government commissions, and in addition British members of the legisla¬
ture of any country or territory outside the Commonwealth. A candidate’s
nomination for election must be signed by two electors as proposer and
seconder, and by eight other electors registered in the constituency. He or she
does not require any party backing. A candidate must also deposit £500, which
is forfeited if his or her votes do not exceed 5 per cent of those validly cast.
The maximum sum a candidate may spend on a general election campaign is
£3,648 plus 3-1 pence for each elector in a borough constituency or 4 -1 pence for
each elector in a county constituency. A candidate may post an election address
to each elector in the constituency, free of charge. All election expenses, apart
from the candidate’s personal expenses, are subject to the statutory limit. A
review of candidates’ election expenses was announced in June 1989.
The party system, existing in one form or another since the eighteenth century,
is an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system relies heavily upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying policies before the electorate for approval. The parties are
not registered or formally recognised in law, but in practice most candidates in
elections, and almost all winning candidates, belong to one of the main parties.
For the last 150 years a predominantly two-party system has operated, and
since 1945 either the Conservative Party, which can trace its origins to the
eighteenth century, or the Labour Party, which emerged in the last decade of the
nineteenth century, has held power. A new party—the Social and Liberal
GOVERNMENT
41
Democrats—was formed in 1988 when members of the former Liberal Party
(which could trace its origins to the eighteenth century) merged with members
of the Social Democratic Party, which was itself formed in 1981. A separate
Social Democratic Party (SDP) continues to exist, being formed of those SDP
members who opposed the merger. Other parties include two nationalist parties,
Plaid Cymru (founded in Wales in 1925) and the Scottish National Party
(founded in 1934). In Northern Ireland there are a number of parties; the largest
of those represented in the House of Commons is the Ulster Unionist Party,
which was formed in the early part of this century, and the Democratic Unionist
Party, founded in 1971 by a group which broke away from the Ulster Unionists.
Since 1945 seven general elections have been won by the Conservative Party
and six by the Labour Party and the great majority of members of the House of
Commons have represented either one or other of these two parties. The
percentages of votes cast for the main political parties in the last general election
of June 1987 and the resulting distribution of seats in the House of Commons
are given in Table 4.
Table 4: Percentages of Votes Cast, and Members Elected, in the 1987 General
Election
Party
% of votes
cast
Party
Members
elected
Conservative 42-3
Labour 30-8
Liberal—Social
Democratic Alliance3 22-6
Others 4-3
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Social Democratic
Scottish National
Plaid Cymru
(Welsh Nationalist)
Ulster Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Democratic Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Social Democratic and
Labour (Northern Ireland)
Ulster Popular Unionist
(Northern Ireland)
Sinn Fein (Northern Ireland)'
Speaker
Total
375
229
17
5
3
9
3
3
1
1
 lc
650
aThe former Liberal and Social Democratic Parties (see above) entered into an electoral alliance in 1981 and
contested the general elections of 1983 and 1987 with a joint programme.
b The member of Sinn Fein (the political wing of the Provisional IRA) has not taken his seat.
cThe Speaker's candidacy was as ‘Mr Speaker seeking re-election'. (He was, before his election as Speaker, a
Conservative MP.)
Note: On 1 September 1989 the state of the parties (excluding the Speaker and his three deputies) was as follows:
Conservative 373, Labour 227, Social and Liberal Democrats 19, Social Democratic 3, Scottish National 4, Plaid
Cymru (Welsh Nationalist) 3, Ulster Unionist 9, Democratic Unionist 3, Social Democratic and Labour 3, Ulster
Popular Unionist 1, Sinn Fein 1.
The party which wins most seats (although not necessarily the most votes) at a
general election, or which has the support of a majority of members in the House
of Commons, usually forms the Government. By tradition, the leader of the
majority party is asked by the Sovereign to form a government; and about 100 of
42
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parliamentary
Procedure
its members in the House of Commons and the House of Lords receive
ministerial appointments (including appointment to the Cabinet—see p 51) on
the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes the official
Opposition, with its own leader and ‘shadow cabinet'.
Leaders of the Government and Opposition sit on the front benches of the
Commons with their supporters (the back-benchers) sitting behind them.
Similar arrangements for the parties also apply to the House of Lords; however.
Lords who do not wish to be associated with any political party may sit on the
‘cross-benches’. The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests largely
on the relationship between the Government and the opposition parties.
Depending on the relative voting strengths of the parties in the House of
Commons, the Opposition might seek to overthrow the Government by securing
its defeat on a ‘matter of confidence’. In general, however, its aims are to
contribute to the formulation of policy and legislation by constructive criticism;
to oppose government proposals it considers objectionable; to secure con¬
cessions on government Bills; and to increase public support and enhance its
chances of electoral success.
The detailed arrangements of government business are settled, under the
direction of the Prime Minister and the Leaders of the two Houses, by the
Government Chief Whips in consultation with the Opposition Chief Whips. The
Chief Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to when the
question of finding time for debating some particular issue is discussed. The
Leaders of the two Houses are primarily responsible for the direction of business
and for providing facilities for the Houses to debate matters about which they
are concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party), whose duties include keeping members
informed of forthcoming parliamentary business, maintaining the party’s
voting strength by ensuring members attend important debates, and conveying
to the party leadership the opinions of back-bench members. The importance a
party attaches to a vote on a particular issue is indicated to the MPs by the
underlining (once, twice or three times) on the notice sent to them each week by
the Whips; failure to comply with a ‘three-line whip’ (the most important) is
usually seen as rebellion against the party’s policy. Party discipline tends to be
less strong in the Lords than in the Commons, since Lords have less hope of
high office and no need of party support in elections.
The Government Chief Whip in the Commons is Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury. Of the other Government Whips, three (one of whom is Deputy
Chief Whip) are officers of the Royal Household, five hold titular posts as Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury and five are Assistant Whips. Salaries are also
paid to the Opposition Chief Whips in both Houses and to two of the Opposition
Assistant Whips in the Commons. The Government Whips in the Lords hold
offices in the Royal Household and act as government spokesmen.
Annual assistance from public funds helps opposition parties cany out their
parliamentary work at Westminster. It is limited to parties which had at least
two members elected at the previous general election or one member elected and
a minimum of 150,000 votes cast. The amount is £2,550 for every seat won plus
£5-10 for every 200 votes.
Parliamentary procedure is based on custom and precedent, and only partly
formulated in standing orders governing details of practice in each House. The
system of debate is much the same in the two Houses: the subject originates in
the form of a motion (a proposal made by a member in order to elicit a decision
from the House). When a motion has been moved, the Speaker proposes the
GOVERNMENT
43
Legislative
Proceedings
question as the subject of debate. At the end of each debate the question may be
agreed to without voting, or decided by a vote on a simple majority. The main
difference between the two Houses is that in the Lords the office of Speaker
carries with it no authority to check or curtail debate, such matters being
decided by the general sense of the House, whereas in the Commons the Speaker
has full authority to give effect, promptly and decisively, to the rules and orders
of the House. The Speaker of the Commons must guard against abuse of
procedure or infringement of minority rights, has discretion to allow or disallow
a closure motion (to end discussion so that the matter may be put to the vote),
and has powers to check irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save time in
other respects. In cases of grave disorder the House can be adjourned or the
sitting suspended by the Speaker, while members who have offended against the
rules of behaviour of the House may be ordered to leave or be suspended for a
period of days. Voting in the Commons is under the direction of the Speaker,
whose duty it is to pronounce the final result. In the event of a tied vote the
Speaker gives the casting vote, but only in accordance with established conven¬
tions which preclude an expression of opinion on the merits of the question.
The voting procedure in the House of Lords is similar to that in the Commons,
except that the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no casting, vote.
The Commons has a public register of MPs’ financial interests. Members with
a relevant pecuniary interest in a matter before the House, direct or indirect,
must declare it when taking part in a debate, though to act as a disqualification
from voting the interest must be direct, immediate and personal. In any other
proceedings of the House or in transactions with other members or with
ministers or civil servants, MPs must also disclose any relevant financial interest
or benefit. There is no register of financial interests in the Lords, but Lords
speaking in a debate in which they have a direct interest are expected to declare
it.
Proceedings of both Houses are public, except on extremely rare occasions; the
minutes (in the Commons called Votes and Proceedings and in the Lords,
Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches (The Official Report of Parliamentary
Debates, Hansard) are published daily. The records of the Lords from 1497 and
of the Commons from 1547, together with the parliamentary and political
papers of certain past members of both Houses, are available to the public on
application to the House of Lords Record Office. Sound transmissions of
Commons proceedings in recorded extract form, or occasionally live, may be
broadcast on television and radio, subject to the discretion of the broadcasting
authorities. A parliamentary sound archive has been established. In June 1989
the House of Commons voted in favour of televising its proceedings for an
eight-month experimental period, beginning with the State opening of Parlia¬
ment in November 1989. The proceedings of the House of Lords have been
televised (on a selective basis) since 1985.
The law undergoes constant reform in the courts as established principles are
interpreted, clarified or reapplied to meet new circumstances, but substantial
changes are the responsibility of Parliament and the Government through the
normal legislative process.
A draft law takes the form of a parliamentary Bill. Most Bills are public Bills
involving measures relating to public policy, but there are also private Bills,
which deal solely with matters of individual, corporate or local interest. Hybrid
Bills are public Bills which may in certain respects affect private rights, and
their passage through Parliament is governed by a special procedure which
allows those affected to make representations. Public Bills can be introduced, in
either House, by a government minister or by a ‘private’ member. Most public
Bills that become law are in practice sponsored by the Government.
44
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Before a government Bill is finally drafted, there is normally considerable
consultation with professional bodies, voluntary organisations and other agen¬
cies interested in the subject matter, such as major interest and pressure groups
which aim to promote a specific cause. Proposals for legislative changes are
sometimes set out in government ‘White Papers’, which may be debated in
Parliament before a Bill is introduced. From time to time consultative docu¬
ments, sometimes called ‘Green Papers’, set out for public discussion govern¬
ment proposals which are still taking shape.
Bills must be passed by both Houses. As a rule government Bills likely to raise
political controversy go through the Commons before being discussed in the
Lords, while those of a technical but non-political nature often pass through the
Lords first. (Consolidation Bills are always introduced in the House of Lords.) A
Bill with a mainly financial purpose is nearly always introduced in the Com¬
mons, and a Bill involving taxation must be based on resolutions agreed by that
House, often after debate, before it can be introduced. If the main object of a Bill
is to create a public charge, it can be proceeded with in the Commons only if
introduced by a minister or, if brought from the Lords, taken up by a minister,
an arrangement which gives the Government considerable control over financial
legislation.
At the beginning of each session private members of the Commons ballot for
precedence in introducing a Bill on one of the Fridays specially allocated; the
first 20 are successful. After the ballot a private member may also present a Bill
after question time (see p 47), or seek to introduce a Bill under the ‘ten minute
rule’, which allows two speeches, one in favour of and one against the measure,
after which the House decides whether to allow the Bill to be brought in. Private
members’ Bills do not often proceed very far, but a few become law each session.
If one secures a second reading, the Government usually introduces any
necessary money resolution. Private members’ Bills may be introduced in the
House of Lords at any time, but the time that can be given to them in the
Commons is limited.
The process of passing a public Bill is similar in both Houses. The Bill receives
a formal first reading on introduction, is printed, and after a while (between one
day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) is given a second
reading after a debate on its general principles and merits. In the Commons a
non-controversial Bill may be referred to a second reading committee for its
second reading debate. After a second reading in the Commons, a Bill is usually
referred for detailed examination to a standing committee (see p 45). If the
House so decides, the Bill may be referred to the whole House sitting in
committee. The committee stage is followed by the report stage, during which
further amendments may be considered. At the third reading a Bill is reviewed in
its final form and may again be debated. The House may vote to limit the time
devoted to examining a Bill by passing a government timetable motion, com¬
monly referred to as a ‘guillotine’. After the third reading a Commons Bill is sent
to the Lords. In the Lords, after the second reading, a Bill is considered by a
committee of the whole House unless the House takes the rare decision to refer it
to a Public Bill Committee. It is then considered on report and read a third time;
at all these stages amendments may be made. A Bill which starts in the Lords
and is passed by that House is then sent to the Commons for all the stages there.
Amendments made by the second House generally must be agreed by the first, or
a compromise reached, before a Bill can become law.
Most government Bills introduced and passed in the Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty. However, if a Lords Bill were unacceptable to the
Commons it would generally not become law. The Lords, on the other hand, do
not in general prevent a Bill insisted upon by the Commons from finally
becoming law, though they will frequently amend and return it for further
GOVERNMENT
45
Delegated
Legislation
Parliamentary
Committees
Committees of
the Whole House
Standing
Committees
consideration by the Commons. In practice, the Lords pass without amendment
Bills authorising taxation or national expenditure. A Bill that deals only with
taxation or expenditure must become law within one month of being sent to the
Lords, whether or not they agree to it, unless the Commons directs otherwise. If
no agreement is reached between the two Houses on a non-financial Commons
Bill the Lords can in practice delay the Bill for at least 13 months. At the end of
this time it may, in accordance with the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, be
submitted to the Queen for Royal Assent, provided it has been passed a second
time by the Commons. There is one important exception: a Bill to lengthen the
life of a Parliament would require the full assent of both Houses in the normal
way.
The limits to the power of the Lords, contained in the Parliament Acts, are
based on the belief that the principal legislative function of the non-elected
House nowadays is to act as a chamber of revision, complementing but not
rivalling the elected House.
When a Bill has passed through all its parliamentary stages, it is sent to the
Queen for Royal Assent, after which it is part of the law of the land and known as
an Act of Parliament. The Royal Assent has not been refused since 1707.
Private Bills, promoted by people or organisations outside Parliament (often
local authorities) to give them special powers not granted by the general law,
go through substantially the same procedure as public Bills, but most of the
work is done in committee, where procedures follow a semi-judicial pattern:
the promoter must prove the need for the powers or privileges sought and
the objections of opposing interests are heard. Both sides may be legally
represented.
In order to relieve pressure on parliamentary time, some legislation gives
ministers and other authorities the power to regulate administrative details by
making ‘delegated legislation’. To minimise the risk that powers thus conferred
on the executive might supersede or weaken parliamentary government, they are
normally delegated to authorities directly responsible to Parliament. Moreover,
the Acts of Parliament by which particular powers are delegated often provide for
some measure of parliamentary control over legislation made in exercise of these
powers, by reserving to Parliament the right to affirm or annul it. Certain Acts
also require direct consultation with organisations affected before rules and
orders can be made.
A joint committee of both Houses reports on the technical propriety of these
‘statutory instruments’. In order to save time on the floor of the House, the
Commons also uses standing committees to consider the merits of instruments,
with any decisions reserved to the House.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee (of the whole House) to consider
Bills in detail after their second reading. A committee of the whole House is
presided over by the Chairman of Ways and Means in the House of Commons,
and by the Chairman of Committees in the House of Lords, or a deputy
chairman.
House of Commons standing committees include those which examine public
Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the second reading and
report stages: two Scottish standing committees; the Scottish Grand Com¬
mittee: the Welsh Grand Committee; and the Northern Ireland standing commit¬
tee. Ordinary standing committees have no distinctive names, being referred to
simply as Standing Committee A, B, C, and so on; and the membership is
separately appointed to consider each specific Bill. Each committee has between
16 and 50 members, with a party balance reflecting as far as possible that in the
46
Select
Committees
Joint
Committees
Party
Committees
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
House as a whole. The Scottish Grand Committee, which comprises all 72
Scottish members (and may be convened in Edinburgh), considers the princi¬
ples of Scottish Bills referred to it at second reading stage, and Scottish
estimates and other matters concerning Scotland only which may be referred to
it. The Welsh Grand Committee, with all 38 Welsh members and up to five
others, considers Bills referred to it at second reading stage, and matters
concerning Wales only. There is also provision for a Northern Ireland committee
to debate matters relating specifically to Northern Ireland. The Lords’ equivalent
to a standing committee, a Public Bill Committee, is rarely used.
Unlike standing committees, which proceed by way of formal debate, select
committees are appointed, normally for the duration of a Parliament, to examine
subjects by taking written and oral evidence and, after private deliberation,
presenting a report of their conclusions and recommendations. Select commit¬
tees may be appointed to help Parliament with the control of the executive by
examining aspects of public policy and administration, or to undertake respon¬
sibilities in connection with the internal operations and procedures of Parlia¬
ment. In the former category come the 13 committees established by the House
of Commons to examine the expenditure, administration and policy of the main
government departments and related bodies. The Foreign Affairs Committee, for
example, ‘shadows’ the work of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, and
there are select committees on Defence and Home Affairs. The committees are
constituted on a party basis, in approximate proportion to party strength in the
House. Other regular Commons committees include those on European Legisla¬
tion, Public Accounts, Members' Interests, the Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration, and House of Commons Services. The Committee of Selection
and the Standing Orders Committee have duties relating to private Bills, and the
Committee of Selection also chooses members to serve on standing and select
committees. A Liaison Committee considers general matters relating to select
committees. On rare occasions a parliamentary Bill is examined by a specially
appointed select committee, a procedure additional to the usual legislative
process—this occurs, for example, every few years for the Armed Forces Bill.
In their scrutiny of government policies, the committees question ministers,
senior civil servants and interested bodies and individuals. Through hearings
and published reports, they bring before Parliament and the public a body of fact
and informed opinion on many important issues, and build up considerable
expertise in their subjects of inquiry.
In the House of Lords, besides the Appeal and Appellate Committees in which
the bulk of the House’s judicial work is transacted, there are two major select
committees, with several sub-committees, on the European Communities and
on Science and Technology. There are also select committees on House of Lords’
Offices, Hybrid Instruments, Leave of Absence and Lords’ Expenses, Personal
Bills, Private Bill Standing Orders, Privileges, Procedure, Selection and Broad¬
casting.
Joint committees are appointed in each session to deal with Consolidation Bills
and delegated legislation. The two Houses may also agree to set up joint select
committees on other subjects.
In addition to the official committees of the two Houses there are several
unofficial party organisations or committees. The Conservative and Unionist
Members’ Committee (the 1922 Committee) consists of the back-bench
membership of the party in the House of Commons. When the Conservative
Party is in office, ministers attend its meetings by invitation and not by right,
but when the party is in opposition, the whole membership of the party may
attend meetings and the leader appoints a consultative committee which acts as
GOVERNMENT
47
Other Forms of
Parliamentary
Control
the party’s ‘shadow cabinet’. The Parliamentary Labour Party is a corporate body
comprising all members of the party in both Houses; when the Labour Party is in
office a liaison committee acts as a channel of communication between the
Government and its back-benchers in both Houses; when the party is in
opposition the Parliamentary Labour Party is organised under the direction of
an elected Parliamentary Committee which acts as the ‘shadow cabinet’.
The effectiveness of parliamentary control of the Government is a subject of
continuing discussion, both inside and outside Parliament. Control is exercised
finally by the ability of the House of Commons to force the Government to resign
by passing a resolution of‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal for legislation
which the Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a
‘matter of confidence’ or, ultimately, by refusing to vote the money required for
the public service. In addition to the system of close scrutiny by select commit¬
tees, the House of Commons offers a number of opportunities for a searching
examination of government policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s
own back-benchers.
These include;
1. Question time, when for an hour on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, ministers answer MPs’ questions. The Prime Minister’s question
time takes place on Tuesday and Thursday. Parliamentary questions are one
means of eliciting information about the Government’s intentions, as well as a
way of airing, and possibly securing redress of, grievances brought to MPs’
notice by constituents. MPs may also put questions to ministers for written
answers, which are published in Hansard, the official report.
2. The right of MPs to use motions for the adjournment of the House to open
discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern. There is a
half-hour adjournment period at the end of the business of the day, while
immediately before the adjournment for each recess (Christmas, Easter,
spring and summer) a full day is spent discussing matters raised by private
members. Moreover, an MP wishing to discuss a ‘specific and important
matter that should have urgent consideration’ may, at the end of question
time, ask leave to move the adjournment of the House. If the Speaker accepts
the terms of the motion, the MP asks the House for leave for the motion to be
put forward. Leave can be given unanimously, or it can be given if 40 or more
MPs support the motion or if fewer than 40 but more than ten support it and
the House (on a vote) is in favour. Once leave has been given, the matter is
debated for three hours, usually on the next day.
3. The 20 Opposition days each session, when the Opposition can choose
subjects for debate. Of these days, 17 are at the disposal of the Leader of the
Opposition and three at the disposal of the second largest opposition party.
4. Debates on the occasion of the passage, three times a year, of Consolidated
Fund or Appropriation Bills, when members can exercise their traditional
right of ‘raising grievances’ on matters for which any minister is responsible,
after voting the necessary supplies (money) for the Crown.
5. Debates on three days in each session on details of proposed government
expenditure recommended for consideration by the Liaison Committee (see
p 46).
Procedural opportunities for criticism of the Government also arise during the
debate on the Queen’s speech at the beginning of a session, during debates or
motions of censure for which the Government gives up part of its own time, and
during debates on the Government’s legislative proposals.
Parliamen tary
Commissioner
for
Administra tion
Parliamentary
Privilege
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Opportunities for criticism and examination of government policy are pro¬
vided in the House of Lords at daily question time, during debates on general
motions, in ‘unstarred’ questions (which can be debated) at the end of the day’s
business and during debates on specific legislative proposals.
The main responsibilities of Parliament, and more particularly of the House of
Commons, in managing the revenue of the State and payments for the public
service, are to authorise the taxes and duties to be levied and the various objects
of expenditure and the sum to be spent on each. It also has to satisfy itself that
the sums granted are spent only for the purposes which Parliament intended. No
payment out of the central government’s public funds can be made and no
taxation, charges or loans authorised, except by Act of Parliament, although
interim payments can be made, within limits, from the Contingencies Fund.
Scrutiny of public expenditure is carried out by House of Commons select
committees (see p 46).
To keep the two Houses informed of European Community developments, and
to enable them to scrutinise and debate Community policies and proposals,
there is a select committee in each House (see p 46), and ministers make regular
statements about Community business.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the ‘Parliamentary
Ombudsman) investigates, independently, complaints of maladministration
when asked to do so by MPs on behalf of members of the public. Powers of
investigation extend to administrative actions by central government depart¬
ments and certain executive and non-departmental bodies but not to policy
decisions (which can be questioned in Parliament) nor to matters affecting
relations with other countries. Complaints by British citizens arising from
dealings with British diplomatic posts overseas are open to investigation in
some circumstances. The Commissioner has access to departmental papers and
reports the findings to the MP who presented the complaint. The Commissioner
is required to report annually to Parliament. In addition, he or she publishes
details of selected investigations at quarterly intervals and may submit other
reports where necessary. A Commons select committee has responsibility for
overseeing the Commissioner’s work.
Each House of Parliament has certain rights and immunities to protect it from
obstruction in carrying out its duties. The rights apply collectively to each House
and individually to each member.
For the Commons the Speaker formally claims ‘their ancient and undoubted
rights and privileges’ at the beginning of each Parliament. These include
freedom of speech; freedom from arrest in civil actions; exemption from serving
on juries, or being compelled to attend as witnesses; and the right of access to
the Crown, a collective privilege of the House. Further privileges include the
rights of the House to control its own proceedings (so that it is able, for instance,
to exclude ‘strangers’ if it wishes); to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for
membership and to declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and to punish for
breach of its privileges and for contempt.
The privileges of the House of Lords are broadly similar to those of the House
of Commons.
The Privy Council
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was the
chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet govern¬
ment developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent. Many
powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner committee of the Council,
GOVERNMENT
49
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Composition
Prime Minister
and much of its work was handed over to newly created government depart¬
ments, some of which were originally committees of the Privy Council.
Nowadays the main function of the Privy Council is to advise the Queen to
approve Orders in Council (those made under prerogative powers, such as
Orders approving the grant of royal charters of incorporation; and those made
under statutory powers). Members of the Privy Council attending meetings at
which Orders are made do not thereby become personally responsible for the
policy upon which the Orders are based; this rests with the minister responsible
for the subject matter of the Order in question, whether or not he or she was
present at the meeting.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclamations,
some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament). The Council’s own statutory responsi¬
bilities, which are independent of the powers of the Sovereign in Council,
include powers of supervision over the registering bodies for the medical and
allied professions.
Apart from Cabinet ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn
in on first assuming office, membership of the Council (retained for life except
for very occasional removals) is accorded by the Sovereign on the recommenda¬
tion of the Prime Minister to eminent people in Britain and independent
monarchical countries of the Commonwealth. There are about 390 Privy
Counsellors. A full Council is summoned only on the death of the Sovereign or
when the Sovereign announces his or her intention to marry.
There are a number of advisory Privy Council committees, whose meetings differ
from those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot consti¬
tutionally be present. These may be prerogative committees, such as those
dealing with legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man and with applications for charters of incorporation;
or they may be provided for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge and the Scottish universities.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal for the
courts of British dependencies, courts of independent members of the Common¬
wealth which have not discontinued the appeal, courts of the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man, and certain other courts, some professional and disciplinary
committees and ecclesiastical sources.
Administrative work is carried out in the Privy Council Office under the Lord
President of the Council, a Cabinet minister.
Her Majesty’s Government
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers responsible for the adminis¬
tration of national affairs. The Prime Minister is appointed by the Queen, and all
other ministers are appointed by the Queen on the recommendation of the Prime
Minister. The majority of ministers are members of the Commons, although the
Government is also fully represented by ministers in the Lords. The Lord
Chancellor is always a member of the House of Lords.
The composition of governments can vary both in the number of ministers and
in the titles of some offices. New ministerial offices may be created, others may
be abolished, and functions may be transferred from one minister to another.
The Prime Minister is also, by tradition, First Lord of the Treasury and Minister
for the Civil Service. The head of the Government became known as the Prime
Departmental
Ministers
Non-
Departmental
Ministers
Lord Chancellor
and Law Officers
Ministers of
State
Junior Ministers
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Minister during the eighteenth century. The Prime Minister’s unique position of
authority derives from majority support in the House of Commons and from the
power to choose ministers and to obtain their resignation or dismissal indi¬
vidually. By modern convention, the Prime Minister always sits in the House of
Commons.
The Prime Minister informs the Queen at regular meetings of the general
business of the Government, presides over the Cabinet, and is responsible for
the allocation of functions among ministers.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include recommending to the
Queen a number of appointments. These include: Church of England
archbishops, bishops and deans and some 200 other clergy in Crown ‘livings’;
high judicial offices, such as the Lord Chief Justice, Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
and the Lords Justices of Appeal; Privy Counsellors, Lord-Lieutenants and
certain civil appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner to the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower, and
some university posts; and appointments to various public boards and institu¬
tions, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), as well as various
royal and statutory commissions. Recommendations are likewise made for the
award of many civil honours and distinctions and of Civil List pensions (to
people who have achieved eminence in science and the arts and are in some
financial need). The Prime Minister also selects the trustees of certain national
museums and institutions.
The Prime Minister’s Office at 10 Downing Street (the official residence in
central London) has a staff of civil servants who attend to the day-to-day
discharge of the Prime Minister’s numerous responsibilities. The Prime Minister
may also appoint special advisers to the Office from time to time to assist in the
formation of policies.
Ministers in charge of government departments, who are usually in the Cabinet,
are known as ‘Secretary of State’ or ‘Minister’, or may have a special title, as in
the case of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The holders of various traditional offices, namely the Lord President of the
Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Lord Privy Seal, the
Paymaster General and, from time to time, Ministers without Portfolio, may have
few or no departmental duties and are thus available to perform any special
duties the Prime Minister may wish to give them.
The Lord Chancellor holds a special position, being a minister with departmen¬
tal functions and also head of the judiciary. The four Law Officers of the Crown
are: for England and Wales, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General; and
for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland.
Ministers of State usually work with ministers in charge of departments with
responsibility for specific functions, and are sometimes given titles which reflect
these particular functions. More than one may work in a department. A Minister
of State may be given a seat in the Cabinet and be paid accordingly.
Junior ministers (generally Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State or, where
the senior minister is not a Secretary of State, simply Parliamentary Secretaries)
share in parliamentary and departmental duties. They may also be given
responsibility, directly under the departmental minister, for specific aspects of
the department’s work. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury and other
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury are in a different category as Government
Whips (see p 42).
GOVERNMENT
51
Ministerial
Salaries
The Cabinet
Cabinet
Meetings
The salaries of ministers in the House of Commons range from £36,367 a year
(from January 1989) for junior ministers to £52,627 for Cabinet ministers. In
the House of Lords salaries range from £30,647 for junior ministers to £41,997
for Cabinet ministers. The Prime Minister receives £64,257 and the Lord
Chancellor (from October 1989) £91,500.1
Ministers in the Commons, including the Prime Minister, receive a parliamen¬
tary salary of £18,148 a year (which is included in the above figures) in
recognition of their constituency responsibilities and are entitled to claim the
other allowances which are paid to all MPs (see p 39).2
The Cabinet is composed of about 20 ministers (the number can vary) chosen by
the Prime Minister and may include departmental and non-departmental
ministers. Its origins can be traced back to the informal conferences which the
Sovereign held with leading ministers, independently of the Privy Council,
during the seventeenth century. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal from an active
role in politics in the eighteenth century and the development of organised
political parties stimulated by successive extensions of the franchise from 1832
onwards, the Cabinet assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the initiation and final determination of
policies, the supreme control of government and the co-ordination of govern¬
ment departments. The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact
that the Cabinet is a group of party representatives, depending upon majority
support in the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are confidential. Its members
are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose information about
its proceedings, although after Cabinet papers have been in existence for 30
years they may be made available for inspection in the Public Record Office at
Kew, Surrey. Diaries published by several former ministers have given the public
an insight into Cabinet procedures in recent times.
Normally the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less often when Parliament is not sitting. To
keep the amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a
great deal of work is carried on through the committee system, which involves
the referring of issues either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc
committee composed of the ministers primarily concerned. The committee then
considers the matter in detail and either disposes of it or reports upon it to the
Cabinet with recommendations for action. The present Cabinet has four
standing committees: a defence and overseas policy committee and an economic
strategy committee, both under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister; and a
home and social affairs committee and a legislation committee, both under the
chairmanship of the Lord President of the Council. Sub-committees of the
standing committees may be established. Membership and terms of reference of
all Cabinet committees are confidential.
Non-Cabinet ministers may be invited to attend meetings on matters affecting
their departments, and may be members of Cabinet committees. Where
appropriate, the Secretary of the Cabinet and other senior officials of the
Cabinet Office also attend meetings of the Cabinet and its committees.
1 These figures show the salaries to which the holders are entitled; however, the Prime Minister
has decided to draw no more than the salary payable to a Cabinet minister in the House of
Commons.
2 The Leader of the Opposition in the Commons receives a salary of £31,559 for the post, as well
as the parliamentary salary of £18,148; the Leader of the Opposition in the Lords also receives a
salary.
52
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Cabinet
Office
Ministerial
Responsibility
The Cabinet Office, headed by the Secretary of the Cabinet, under the direction
of the Prime Minister, comprises the Cabinet Secretariat, the Office of the
Minister for the Civil Service and the Historical Section.
The Cabinet Secretariat serves ministers collectively in the conduct of Cabinet
business and operates as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at the
highest level.
The Office of the Minister for the Civil Service is responsible for Civil Service
central recruitment, senior and public appointments, policies on training,
promotion and staff development, equal opportunities, occupational health and
the non-financial aspects of personnel management.
The Historical Section of the Cabinet Office is in the process of completing the
official histories of the second world war, and is responsible for preparing official
histories of certain peacetime events.
‘Ministerial responsibility’ refers both to the collective responsibility which
ministers share for government policy and actions and to ministers’ individual
responsibility to Parliament for their departments’ work.
The doctrine of collective responsibility means that the Cabinet acts unani¬
mously even when Cabinet ministers do not all agree on a subject. The policy of
departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the Government as
a whole. Once the Government’s policy on a matter has been decided, each
minister is expected to support it or, if unable to, to resign. On rare occasions,
ministers have been allowed free votes in Parliament on government policies
involving important issues of principle.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his or her depart¬
ment means that, as political head of that department, he or she is answerable
for all its acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of
administration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may
be criticised in Parliament, whether personally responsible or not. Since most
ministers are members of the House of Commons, they must answer questions
and defend themselves against criticism in person. Departmental ministers in
the House of Lords are represented in the Commons by someone qualified to
speak on their behalf, usually a junior minister.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their responsi¬
bility, although on important political matters they usually consult their
colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. A decision
by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The final responsibility of ministers is to Parliament. The knowledge that any
departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament discour¬
ages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
On assuming office ministers must resign directorships in private and public
companies, and must order their affairs so that there is no conflict between
public duties and private interests.
Government Departments
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to govern¬
ment policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation, and for
advising ministers. They may, and often do, work with and through local
authorities, statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations operat¬
ing under various degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments, although a radical change in policy may
be accompanied by some organisational change.
GOVERNMENT
53
Non-
Departmental
Public Bodies
Advisory
Bodies
The work of some departments (for instance, the Ministry of Defence) covers
Britain as a whole. Other departments (such as the Department of Employment)
cover England, Wales and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland. Others, such as
the Department of the Environment, are mainly concerned with affairs in
England. Some departments, such as the Department of Trade and Industry,
maintain a regional organisation, and some which have direct contact with the
public throughout the country (for example, the Department of Employment)
also have local offices.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in which
questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent official, and
a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament. For instance,
ministers in the Treasury are responsible for the Central Office of Information,
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, HM Customs and Excise, the Inland Revenue
and a number of small departments including the Central Statistical Office
(formerly part of the Cabinet), the Royal Mint, and the National Investment and
Loans Office. Departments generally receive their funds directly out of money
provided by Parliament and are staffed by members of the Civil Service.
A number of bodies with a role in the process of government are neither
government departments nor part of a department (in April 1988 the figure was
1,648). Known as non-departmental public bodies, but often popularly
described as ‘quangos’ (‘quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations’,
although there is no precise definition of the term), they are of three kinds:
executive bodies, advisory bodies and tribunals. Executive bodies normally
employ staff and have their own budget; they consist of public bodies which
carry out, among other duties, administrative, executive, regulatory and com¬
mercial functions. They operate typically within broad policy guidelines set by
departmental ministers but are in varying degrees independent of government
in carrying out their day-to-day responsibilities. Examples include the Arts
Council of Great Britain, the British Council, the Commonwealth Development
Corporation and the Commission for Racial Equality. Tribunals are a specialised
group of judicial bodies which are akin to courts of law. They are normally set up
under statutory powers which also govern their constitution, functions and
procedure. Tribunals often consist of laymen, but generally have a legally
qualified chairman. They tend to be less expensive, and less formal, than courts
of law. Independently of the executive, tribunals decide the rights and obliga¬
tions of private citizens towards one another or towards a government depart¬
ment or other public authority. Important examples are industrial tribunals,
rent tribunals and social security appeal tribunals. Tribunals usually consist of
an uneven number of people so that a majority decision can be reached.
Members are normally appointed by the minister concerned with the subject.
Tribunals and advisory bodies do not normally employ staff or spend money
themselves, but their expenses are paid by the government departments con¬
cerned; a note on advisory bodies is set out below.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or committees
which undertake research and collect information, mainly to give ministers
access to informed opinion before coming to a decision involving a legislative or
executive act. In some cases a minister must consult a standing committee, but
usually advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the minister.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according to
the nature of the work involved, and will usually include representatives of
varying interests and professions.
In addition to the standing advisory bodies, there are committees set up by the
Government to examine and make recommendations on specific matters. For
54
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
certain important inquiries Royal Commissions, whose members are chosen for
their wide experience and diverse knowledge, may be appointed. Royal Commis¬
sions examine written and oral evidence from government departments, in¬
terested organisations and individuals, and submit recommendations. The
Government may accept the recommendations in whole or in part, or may decide
to take no further action or to delay action. Inquiries may also be undertaken by
departmental committees.
As a result of a major review of non-departmental public bodies undertaken in
1979, and subsequent further reviews, there has been a net reduction of 519 in
the total number of bodies in all three categories up to April 1988. Scrutiny of
these bodies continues, with a view to improving performance and value for
money.
Government
Information
Services
Each of the main government departments has its own information division or
directorate, public relations branch or news department, staffed by professional
information officers responsible for communicating their department’s policies
and activities to the news media and the public (sometimes using publicity
services provided by the Central Office of Information—see p 56) and for
advising their departments on the public’s reaction to them. The presentation of
government policy is co-ordinated, at official level, by the Prime Minister’s Press
Secretary. As press adviser to the Prime Minister, the Press Secretary and other
staff in the Prime Minister’s Press Office have direct and constant contact with
the parliamentary press through regular meetings with the Lobby correspon¬
dents (a group of political correspondents who have the special privilege of
access to the Lobby of the House of Commons where they can talk privately to
government ministers and other members of the House) and other day-to-day
contacts. The Prime Minister s Press Office forms the accepted channel through
which information about parliamentary business is conveyed to the media.
Distribution of An outline of the principal functions of the main government departments is
Functions given below. Departments are arranged in alphabetical order, except for the
Scottish and Northern Ireland departments, which are grouped at the end of the
section, and the Cabinet Office, described on p 52. Further information on the
work of some departments is given in later chapters under the relevant subject
headings.
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
The work of many of the departments listed on pp 54-7 covers Britain as a
whole. Where this is not the case, the following abbreviations are used: (GB) for
functions covering England, Wales and Scotland; (E, W & NI) for those covering
England, Wales and Northern Ireland; (E & W) for those covering England and
Wales; and (E) for those concerned with England only.
Ministry of Policies for agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and food; responsibilities for
Agriculture, environmental and rural issues (E); food policies.
Fisheries and
Food
Office of
Arts and
Libraries
General promotion of arts (GB); library and information services (E with advice
to W and NI); national museums (E); public libraries and local museums (E);
British Library; national heritage.
GOVERNMENT
55
DEPARTMENT
Crown
Prosecution
Service
HM Customs
and Excise
Ministry of
Defence
Department of
Education and
Science
Department of
Employment
Department of
Energy
Department
of the
Environment
ECGD
(Export Credits
Guarantee
Department)
Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office
Office of
Gas Supply
Department of
Health
Home Office
Main areas of responsibility
An independent department specialising in the prosecution of criminal offences;
headed by the Director of Public Prosecutions, who acts under the superinten¬
dence of the Attorney General (E & W).
Collecting and accounting for revenues of Customs and Excise, including value
added tax; agency functions including controlling certain imports and exports
and compiling trade statistics.
Defence policy and control and administration of the armed services.
Policies for education (E); the Government’s relations with univer¬
sities (GB); fostering civil science in Britain and internationally.
The Employment Service, employment policy and legislation; training policy and
legislation; health and safety at work; industrial relations, wages councils, equal
opportunities; small firms and tourism; statistics on labour and industrial
matters (GB); the Careers Service (E); international representation on employ¬
ment matters.
Policies for all forms of energy, including its efficient use and the development of
new sources; the Government’s relations with the public energy industries.
Policies for planning and regional development, local government, new towns,
housing, construction, inner city matters, environmental protection, water, the
countryside, sport and recreation, conservation, historic buildings and ancient
monuments (E); and Property Services Agency (GB).
Provision of insurance for exporters against risk of not being paid for goods and
services, and access to bank finance for exports; insurance cover for new
investment overseas.
Conduct of Britain’s overseas relations.
Monitoring of British Gas as the sole public gas supplier and granting authorisa¬
tions to other suppliers of gas through pipes.
National Health Service, personal social services provided by local authorities,
and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene (E).
Administration of justice; criminal law; treatment of offenders, including
probation; the prison service; the police; crime prevention; fire and civil defence
services; licensing laws; scrutiny of local authority by-laws; control of firearms
and dangerous drugs; electoral matters (E & W). Gaming and lotteries (GB).
Regulation of broadcasting; passports, immigration and nationality; race rela¬
tions and sex discrimination. Responsibilities relating to the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man.
56
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT
Central Office
of Information
Board of Inland
Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Departments
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Department
Ordnance
Survey
Overseas
Development
Administration
Parliamentary
Counsel
Paymaster
General’s Office
Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
HM Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor’s
Department
Serious Fraud
Office
Department of
Social Security
Main areas of responsibility
Provision of publicity material and other information services on behalf of
government departments and a number of public agencies.
Administration of direct taxes; collection of National Insurance contributions.
Valuation of land and buildings (GB).
Provision of advice to the Government on English law and representation of the
Crown in appropriate domestic and international cases, both civil and criminal,
by the Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales—the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General (E & W). The Attorney General, who is also Attorney
General for Northern Ireland, superintends the Treasury Solicitor’s Department,
the Crown Prosecution Service (E & W), the Serious Fraud Office (E, W & NI) and
the Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland (NI).
Administration of the Supreme Court (Court of Appeal, High Court, Crown
Court) and the county courts (E & W), together with certain other courts and
tribunals, and all work relating to judicial and quasi-judicial appointments.
Responsibility for promoting general reforms in the civil law. (The Home Office
has important responsibilities for the criminal law.)
Official surveying and mapping, including geodetic surveys and associated
scientific work, and topographic surveys covering all of Great Britain and some
overseas countries.
Administration of financial aid and technical co-operation to developing coun¬
tries.
Drafting of government Bills (except those relating exclusively to Scotland);
advising departments on parliamentary’ procedure (E, W & NI).
Provision of banking services for government departments other than the
Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise, and the payment of public
service pensions.
Administration of the Marriage Acts and local registration of births, marriages
and deaths; population estimates and projections; compilation of health statis¬
tics; censuses (E & W). Surveys for other government departments (GB).
Provision of a common legal service for a large number of government depart¬
ments. Duties include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and drafting
subordinate legislation; providing litigation and conveyancing services; and
giving general advice on the interpretation and application of the law (E & W).
Investigating and prosecuting serious or complex fraud under the superinten¬
dence of the Attorney General (E, W & NI).
The social security system (GB).
GOVERNMENT
57
DEPARTMENT Main areas of responsibility
Her Majesty’s Provision of stationery, printing and related services to Parliament, government
Stationery departments and other public bodies; and publication and sale of government
Office documents.
Central Preparing and interpreting statistics needed for centred economic and social
Statistical policies and management; co-ordinating the statistical work of other depart-
Office ments.
Office of
Telecom¬
munications
(OFTEL)
Department of
Trade and
Industry
Department of
Transport
HM Treasury
Welsh Office
Monitoring of British Telecom, Mercury, and other public and non-public
telecommunications operators; enforcing competition legislation and represent¬
ing telecommunications consumers’ interests.
Industrial and commercial policy, promotion of enterprise and competition at
home and abroad, investor and consumer protection. Specific responsibilities
include industrial innovation policy; regional industrial policy; business de¬
velopment, management development and business/education links; interna¬
tional trade policy; commercial relations and export promotion; competition
policy; company law; insolvency; consumer protection and safety; radio regula¬
tion; intellectual property (GB).
Land, sea and air transport; sponsorship of the nationalised London Regional
Transport and British Rail; domestic and international civil aviation; interna¬
tional transport agreements; shipping and the ports industry; navigational
lights, pilotage, HM Coastguard and marine pollution; oversight of road trans¬
port (GB); motorways and trunk roads; road safety; and oversight of local
authority transport (E).
Broad economic strategy with particular responsibilities for public finance and
expenditure, including control of manpower and pay in the Civil Service.
Many aspects of Welsh affairs, including health and personal social services;
education, except for terms and conditions of service, student awards and the
University of Wales; the Welsh language and culture; local government; housing;
water and sewerage; environmental protection; sport; agriculture and fisheries;
forestry; land use, including town and country planning; countryside and
nature conservation; new towns, ancient monuments and historic buildings;
roads; tourism; a range of matters affecting the careers service and the training
activities of the Department of Employment in Wales; selective financial assist¬
ance to industry; the Urban Programme in Wales; the operation of the European
Regional Development Fund in Wales and other European Community matters;
non-departmental public bodies; civil emergencies; all financial aspects of these
matters including Welsh rate support grant; and oversight responsibilities for
economic affairs and regional planning in Wales.
SCOTLAND Scotland has its own system of law and wide administrative autonomy. The
Secretary of State for Scotland, a Cabinet minister, has responsibility in
Scotland (with some exceptions) for both formulating and carrying out policy
relating to agriculture and fisheries, education, law and order, local government
and environmental services, social work, health, housing, roads and certain
aspects of shipping and road transport services.
58
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Secretary of State also has a major role in the planning and development
of the Scottish economy, and important functions relating to industrial develop¬
ment, with responsibility for financial assistance to industry, for the Scottish
Development Agency, the Highlands and Islands Development Board and the
Scottish Tourist Board and for the training activities of the Department of
Employment in Scotland and the careers service. The Secretary of State plays a
full part in determining energy policy, particularly in relation to responsibility
for the electricity supply industry in Scotland. He is also responsible for
government interest in a range of other functions from fire services to sport and
for overseeing many non-departmental public bodies.
The distinctive features and the different conditions and needs of Scotland
and its people are reflected in separate Scottish legislation on many domestic
matters or else in special provisions applying to Scotland alone, inserted in Acts
which otherwise apply to Britain generally.
The Secretary of State discharges his responsibilities principally through the
Scottish Office’s five departments, supported by Central Services (see below) and
four smaller departments—the Department of the Registers of Scotland, the
Scottish Record Office, the General Register Office for Scotland and the Scottish
Courts Administration.
British government departments with significant Scottish responsibilities
have offices in Scotland with delegated powers and work closely with the
Scottish Office. The British headquarters of several government departments
are located in Scotland.
An outline of the main functions of the Scottish departments is given
below.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Promotion of the agricultural and fishing industries.
Agriculture and
Fisheries for
Scotland
Scottish Housing; building control; water supplies and sewerage; environmental protec-
Development tion and the countryside; land-use planning; general policy relating to local
Department government organisation; ancient monuments and historic buildings; roads;
certain transport functions.
Scottish Education (excluding universities); student awards; libraries; museums and
Education galleries; sport and recreation; the arts; social work services.
Department
Scottish Home Central administration of law and order (including police service, criminal
and Health justice, legal aid and penal institutions); the National Health Service; fire, home
Department defence and civil emergency services.
Industry Industrial and regional economic development matters; energy; tourism; urban
Department regeneration; new towns.
for Scotland
Central Services to the five Scottish departments. These include the Office of the
Services Solicitor to the Secretary of State, the Scottish Information Office, and Finance
Divisions.
GOVERNMENT
59
DEPARTMENT Functions
Lord Advocate’s Provision of legal advice to the Government on issues affecting Scotland and the
Department and principal representation of the Crown for litigation in Scotland by the Law
Crown Office Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General
for Scotland); control of all prosecution in Scotland.
Scottish Courts Organisation, administration and staffing of the courts and court offices;
Administration jurisdiction and procedure of civil courts; enforcement of judgments; and
programme of Scottish Law Commission.
Other General Register Office for Scotland; Scottish Record Office; Department of the
Administrative Registers of Scotland.
Departments
NORTHERN Between 1921 and 1972 Northern Ireland had its own Parliament and Govern-
IRELAND ment, subordinate to the Parliament at Westminster, but in 1972, following the
resignation of the Northern Ireland Government, the British Government
assumed direct responsibility for functions previously exercised by the Northern
Ireland Government. Attempts have been made by successive governments to
find a means of restoring devolved government to Northern Ireland on a basis
that would command widespread acceptance throughout the community. The
most recent attempt failed in June 1986, when the Northern Ireland Assembly,
elected in 1982, was dissolved after it ceased to discharge its responsibilities of
making proposals for the resumption of devolved government and of monitoring
the work of the Northern Ireland departments. The Government expressed the
hope that a new Assembly would be established which would contribute to the
better government and administration of Northern Ireland.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is the Cabinet minister responsible
for Northern Ireland. Through the Northern Ireland Office he has direct
responsibility for constitutional developments, law and order and security, and
electoral matters. The work of the Northern Ireland departments, whose func¬
tions are listed below, is also subject to the direction and control of the Secretary
of State.
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department of Development of agricultural, forestry and fishing industries; administration of
Agriculture for agricultural grant schemes; advisory service to farmers; agricultural research,
Northern Ireland education and training.
Department
of Economic
Development for
Northern Ireland
Development of industry and commerce, as well as the administration of
government policy in relation to tourism, energy and minerals; administration
of an employment service and labour training schemes and assistance to
industrial development, through the Industrial Development Board for Northern
Ireland.
Department
of Education for
Northern Ireland
Central policy, co-ordination, legislation, oversight, and financial control of the
five education and library boards and education as a whole from nursery to adult
and continuing education, youth services, sport and recreation, cultural activi¬
ties and community services and facilities including the improvement of
community relations.
60
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DEPARTMENT Functions
Department
of the
Environment for
Northern Ireland
Housing (policy, programmes and finance); planning (regional strategy, develop¬
ment plans, development control and comprehensive development); construc¬
tion and maintenance of roads, transport and traffic management, and motor
taxation; water and sewerage; environmental protection; ordnance survey;
collection of rates; harbours; historic monuments and buildings; maintenance
of public records; and certain controls over local government.
Department of
Finance and
Personnel
Control of public expenditure; liaison with HM Treasury and the Northern
Ireland Office on financial matters, economic and social planning and research;
Ulster Savings; charities; valuation and Lands Service; formulating, co¬
ordinating and monitoring policies for equal opportunities and personnel
management; and general management and control of the Northern Ireland Civil
Service.
Department of Health and personal social services; social security; social legislation; and the
Health and Office of the Registrar-General.
Social Services for
Northern Ireland
The Civil Service
The Civil Service is concerned with the conduct of the whole range of govern¬
ment activities as they affect the community, ranging from policy formulation to
carrying out the day-to-day duties that public administration demands.
Civil servants are servants of the Crown. (For all practical purposes the Crown
in this context means and is represented by the Government of the day.) They
are responsible to the minister in whose department they work for carrying out
government policies. Ministers alone are answerable to Parliament for their
policies and the actions of their staff (though civil servants may give evidence to
parliamentary select committees on their minister’s behalf). In the determina¬
tion of policy the civil servant has no constitutional responsibility or role distinct
from that of the minister. A change of minister, for whatever reason, does not
involve a change of staff. (Ministers sometimes appoint special advisers from
outside the Civil Service; the advisers are normally paid from public funds, but
their appointments come to an end when the Government’s term of office
finishes, or when the Minister to whom the special adviser is appointed leaves
the Government or moves to another appointment.)
Including part-time staff (two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent
to one full-time), in July 1989 there were around 567,200 civil servants (nearly
half of them women), roughly half of whom were engaged in the provision of
public services, such as paying sickness benefits and pensions, collecting taxes
and contributions, running employment services, staffing prisons, and provid¬
ing services to industry and agriculture. Around a quarter were employed in the
Ministry of Defence. The rest were divided between: central administrative and
policy duties; service-wide support services, such as accommodation, printing
and information; and largely financially self-supporting services, for instance,
those provided by the Department for National Savings and the Royal Mint. The
number of black and Asian people now employed in the Civil Service is
proportionate to their representation in Britain’s population as a whole.
The total number includes about 68,200 ‘industrial’ civil servants, mainly
manual workers in government industrial establishments.
GOVERNMENT
61
Central
Management
and
Structure
Four-fifths of civil servants work outside Greater London. The number of civil
servants has fallen from 732,300 in April 1979 to 567,200 in July 1989,
reflecting the Government’s policy of controlling the cost and size of the Civil
Service and of improving its efficiency. Staffing targets were discontinued in
April 1988 but there remains a need to continue to take a close interest in
staffing. The primary consideration when employing further staff will be
whether it is consistent with the limits set on running costs.
Within the Civil Service, reforms of all aspects of the management of govern¬
ment departments are being implemented to ensure improved management
performance, in particular through the greater accountability of individual
managers based on clear objectives and responsibilities. These reforms include
an experimental performance-related pay scheme, and other means to encour¬
age and reward improved performance.
A major new initiative for improving management was launched in February
1988, when the Government announced plans to set up, to the greatest extent
practicable, discrete units or agencies to perform the executive functions of
government. Under these plans, each agency is to be managed by a chief
executive responsible for day-to-day operations within a framework of policy
objectives and resources set by the minister responsible. The agencies will
generally be set up within the Civil Service, their staff will remain civil servants
and the normal rules of accountability will continue to apply. The first such
agency—the Vehicle Inspectorate in the Department of Transport—was estab¬
lished in mid-1988 and by July 1989, eight agencies had been set up. A further
30 areas of government, covering around 200,000, or nearly a third of the Civil
Service, have been announced as candidates for executive agency status.
Savings are also being sought by subjecting services in government depart¬
ments to competitive tendering and by contracting out such services whenever
commensurate with sound management and good value for money. By April
1988 savings of £40 million net a year had been achieved.
Northern Ireland has its own Civil Service and Civil Service Commission,
modelled on their counterparts in Great Britain.
Responsibility for central co-ordination and management of the Civil Service is
divided between the Treasury and the Cabinet Office (Office of the Minister for
the Civil Service). In addition to its other functions, the Treasury is responsible
for the structure of the Civil Service and the classification of posts. It is also
responsible for recruitment policy and for controlling manpower, pay, pensions
and allowances. The Office of the Minister for the Civil Service, which is part of
the Cabinet Office and under the control of the Prime Minister, as Minister for
the Civil Service, is responsible for the organisation, non-financial aspects of
personnel management and overall efficiency of the Service. The function of
official Head of the Home Civil Service is combined with that of Secretary to the
Cabinet. At the senior levels of the Home Civil Service there is an open structure
of unified grades which, with some exceptions, covers all posts whatever the
nature of their duties. Grades 1, 2 and 3 replace the former grade titles of
Permanent Secretary, Deputy Secretary and Under-Secretary while Grades 4,5,
6 and 7 cover the senior levels of most occupational groups and classes down to
Principal, Principal Scientific Officer, Principal Professional and Technology
Officer and equivalent levels.
Below this the structure of the non-industrial Civil Service is based on a
system of categories and occupational groups and classes, which are the basic
groupings of staff for the purposes of recruitment, pay and personnel manage¬
ment. These include the General Category (covering the Administration, Eco¬
nomist, Statistician, Information Officer and Librarian groups), the Science
Category, the Professional and Technology Category (including architects.
62
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Diplomatic
Service
Recruitment
and Training
surveyors, electrical and mechanical engineers, graphics officers and marine
services staff), and the Training Category (covering Instructional Officers) and
the Legal, Police, Secretarial, Research Officer, Social Security, and Museums
Categories. These ten categories account for some 75 per cent of non-industrial
staff. Work requiring specialist skill is always done by qualified individuals.
Personnel management policies encourage the deployment of staff so that
talent can be used to the best advantage, and, with higher posts open to people
of outstanding ability (whatever their specialist background or original method
of entry into the Service), ensure that people with the necessary qualities can
gain suitably wide experience to fit them for posts at the highest levels. The
exchange of staff between the Civil Service and industry is also encouraged.
The Diplomatic Service, a separate service of some 4,700 or so people, provides
the majority of the staff for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at British
diplomatic missions and consular posts abroad. Its functions include advising
on policy, negotiating with overseas governments and conducting business in
international organisations; promoting British exports and trade generally,
administering aid, presenting British ideas, policies and objectives to the people
of overseas countries; administering the remaining dependent territories; and
protecting British interests abroad and British nationals overseas.
The Service has its own grade structure, linked for salary purposes with that
of the Home Civil Service, and conditions of work are in many ways comparable,
while taking into account the special demands of the Service, particularly of
postings overseas. Members of the Home Civil Service and the armed forces, and
individuals from the private sector, may also serve in the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office and at overseas posts on loan or attachment.
Recruitment of staff to the middle and higher levels of the Home Civil Service and
the Diplomatic Service is the responsibility of the Civil Service Commission,
which, in conjunction with departments, ensures staff are selected solely on
merit through fair and open competition. The selection of junior staff, such as
those engaged in clerical and manual work, is undertaken by the departments.
For the Administration Group, the central part of the Home and Diplomatic
Civil Services, entry is at three levels relating broadly to the academic achieve¬
ments of: a second class honours degree, or better; GCE Advanced level; and
GCSE grades A, B or C. The selection procedure for the highest of these levels
(the Administration Trainee entry) comprises qualifying tests, followed by tests
and interviews at the Civil Service Selection Board and an interview by the Final
Selection Board. For the next level (the Executive Officer entry) selection involves
qualifying tests followed by an interview. For the lower clerical level (the
Administrative Officer/Assistant entry) selection is normally by interview of
those holding the prescribed educational qualifications.
Entry to the professional and technical grades usually requires appropriate
qualifications, and selection is on the basis of past record and by interview.
Most government departments employ full-time training officers and tutors to
help identify staff training needs and organise training by the most appropriate
methods (for example, formal courses or self-instruction). The Civil Service
College provides training most efficiently undertaken centrally. Use is also made
of external institutions.
Civil servants under the age of 18 may continue their education by attending
courses, usually for one day a week (‘day release’ schemes). Adult staff may be
entitled to financial assistance to undertake, mainly in their own time, studies
leading to recognised educational or professional qualifications in approved
subjects. There are also opportunities for civil servants to obtain fellowships for
research in areas of interest both to themselves and to their departments.
GOVERNMENT
63
Promotion and
Terms of
Service
Political and
Private
Activities
Security
Departments are responsible for promotion at all grade levels. Normally promo¬
tion is from grade to grade, but there can be accelerated promotion for staff who
show exceptional promise. Promotion or appointment to Grades 1 and 2 and all
transfers between departments at these levels are approved by the Prime
Minister, who is advised by the official head of the Home Civil Service.
Terms of service for civil servants are generally subject to consultation
between senior officials (the Official Side of the National Whitley Council) and
representatives of the employees (the Trade Union Side of the National Whitley
Council). For industrial civil servants, the consultation mechanism is the Joint
Co-ordinating Committee of government industrial establishments.
Civil servants are required to discharge loyally the duties assigned to them by the
Government of the day of whatever political persuasion. It is essential that
ministers and the public should have confidence that the personal views of civil
servants do not influence the discharge of their official duties, given the role of
the Civil Service in serving successive governments of different political com¬
plexions. The aim of the rules which govern political activities by civil servants is
to allow them the greatest possible freedom to participate in public affairs
consistent with their rights and duties as citizens without infringing these
fundamental principles. The rules are therefore more concerned with political
activities liable to give public expression to political views than with privately
held beliefs and opinions.
The Civil Service is divided into three groups for the purposes of deciding the
extent to which individuals may take part in political activities. The ‘politically
free’ group, consisting of industrial staff and non-office grades, are free to
engage in any political activity including adoption as a candidate for the British
or the European Parliament (although they would have to resign from the
Service if elected). The ‘politically restricted’ group, which comprises Principal
and equivalent grades and above as well as Administration Trainees, are
debarred from national political activities but may apply for permission to take
part in local political activities. The ‘intermediate’ group, which comprises all
civil servants not in either of the other two groups, may apply for permission to
take part in national or local political activity, apart from candidature for the
British or the European Parliament.
Where required, permission is granted to the maximum extent consistent
with the reputation of the Civil Service for political impartiality and the
avoidance of any conflict with official duties. (It is granted subject to a code of
discretion requiring moderation and the avoidance of embarrassment to minis¬
ters. )
Generally, there are no restrictions on the private activities of civil servants,
provided that these do not bring discredit on the Civil Service, and that there is
no possibility of conflict with official duties. For instance, a civil servant is
required to seek permission before taking part in any outside activity which
involves the use of official experience, or before accepting a directorship in any
company holding a contract with his or her department.
As a general rule the political views of civil servants are not a matter of official
concern. However, no one whose loyalty is in doubt may be employed on work
vital to the security of the State. For this reason certain posts are not open to
those who are known to be members of communist or fascist organisations or of
subversive groups, or associated with them in such a way as to raise legitimate
doubts about their reliability, or to anyone whose reliability may be in doubt for
any other reason.
Each department is responsible for its own internal security, advised as
necessary by the Security Service. The Security Commission, if requested to do
64
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
so by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition,
may investigate and report on breaches of security in the public service and
advise on changes in security procedure.
Local Government
A wide range of public services is provided by democratically elected local
authorities throughout Britain. The gradual expansion of local services, particu¬
larly in the period between the late 1940s and mid-1970s, has inevitably led to a
steady rise in local government expenditure and in its support from central
funds. In recent years central government has sought to check this growth as
part of a general policy of reducing public expenditure. A number of measures
have been introduced, aimed at increasing the accountability of local govern¬
ment. These include the holding back of central government grant from
authorities spending above government targets, and the establishment in
England and Wales of the independent Audit Commission to audit accounts and
ensure economical use of resources. The Government has legislated to promote
greater competition in the provision of some local authority services. In Scotland
there is an independent Commission for Local Authority Accounts and similar
action has been taken to control local authority expenditure. Moreover, since
staff costs form such a significant part of public expenditure, local authorities
have been urged to reduce staff levels. Local authorities in England, Wales and
Scotland are required to publish quarterly staffing levels for particular services.
The specific powers and duties of local authorities are conferred on them by
Parliament, or by measures made under its authority. The actual adminis¬
tration, and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are the responsi¬
bility of the local authority. In the case of certain services, however, ministers
have powers to secure a measure of national uniformity in the standard of a
sendee provided, to safeguard public health, or to protect the rights of individual
citizens. For some services the minister concerned has wide powers of supervi¬
sion; for others there are strictly limited powers.
The main links between local authorities and the central government are: in
England, the Department of the Environment, although other departments are
concerned with various local government functions (for example, the Depart¬
ments of Education and Science and of Social Security, and the Home Office); in
Scotland, the Scottish Office; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern
Ireland, the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
England and Wales (outside Greater London) are divided into 53 counties,
within which there are 369 districts. All the districts and 47 of the counties—the
‘non-metropolitan’ counties—have independent, locally elected councils with
separate functions. County authorities provide the large-scale local government
services, while the district authorities are responsible for the more local ones
(see p 65).
In Greater London—an area of about 1,580 sq km (610 sq miles) and a
population of some 6-8 million—the local government authorities are the
councils of 32 London boroughs and the Corporation of the City of London,
while in the six metropolitan counties there are 36 district councils.
Until April 1986 Greater London and the metropolitan counties had their own
councils, but these were abolished by the Local Government Act 1985, which
was designed to create a more effective, economical and accountable system by
removing a tier of local government. As a result, many of the functions previously
carried out by the Greater London Council and the metropolitan county councils
have been transferred to the London borough and metropolitan district coun¬
cils. However, a number of services (waste regulation and disposal in certain
GOVERNMENT
65
Election of
Councils
areas; the police and fire services, including civil defence, and public transport
in all metropolitan counties; and the fire service, including civil defence, in
London) which require a statutory authority over areas wider than the boroughs
and districts are now run by joint authorities composed of elected councillors
nominated by the borough or district councils. At present, education in inner
London is the responsibility of a single body, the Inner London Education
Authority (ILEA). However, in order to achieve a more cost-effective and respon¬
sive education service for the area, the Government introduced legislation in
1988 to abolish the ILEA and transfer its responsibilities to individual inner
London borough councils from April 1990. As a direct result of the abolition of
the Greater London Council and the metropolitan county councils, it is expected
that some 7,000 posts will eventually be shed, producing an estimated saving of
about £100 million a year. Special residuary bodies have been appointed to take
responsibility for certain residual county council and Greater London Council
matters. These include compensation, unassigned legal rights and liabilities,
and the disposal of surplus property. The residuary bodies are required to
prepare proposals to wind up their affairs as soon as practicable.
Within rural districts in England, parish councils or meetings are focuses for
local opinion as bodies with limited powers of local interest. In Wales community
councils have similar functions.
On the mainland of Scotland local government is on a two-tier basis: nine
regions are divided into 53 districts, each area having its own elected council.
There are three virtually all-purpose authorities for Orkney, Shetland and the
Western Isles. Provision is also made for local community councils, although
these are not local authorities.
The areas and electoral arrangements of local authorities are kept under
review by the Local Government Boundary Commissions for England, Wales and
Scotland.
In Northern Ireland 26 district councils are responsible for local environmen¬
tal and certain other services. Statutory bodies, such as the Northern Ireland
Housing Executive and area boards, are responsible to central government
departments for the administration of major services such as housing, educa¬
tion and libraries, and health and personal social services. Regional services
such as roads, water and sewerage, and planning, are the responsibility of
central government, through the Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland.
Local authority councils consist of a number of elected unpaid councillors
presided over by a chairman. Councillors can claim a flat-rate attendance
allowance or a financial loss allowance for performing council business; they are
also entitled to travelling and subsistence allowances. Parish and community
councillors cannot claim expenses for duties within their own areas.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland each council annually elects a
chairman and vice-chairman. Some districts have the ceremonial title of
borough, or city, both granted by royal authority (in Northern Ireland, by the
Secretary of State). In boroughs and cities the chairman is normally known as
the Mayor (in the City of London and certain other large cities, he or she is
known as the Lord Mayor). In Scotland the chairman of the district council of
each of the four cities is called the Lord Provost. No specific title is laid down for
the chairmen of other councils, but some are known as conveners, while others
continue to use the old title of ‘provost’.
Councillors are elected for four years. All county councils, London borough
councils, and about two-thirds of non-metropolitan district councils are elected
in their entirety every four years. In the remaining districts (including all
66
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Functions and
Services
metropolitan districts) one-third of the councillors are elected in each of the
three years between county council elections.
In Scotland local elections are held every two years, alternately for districts and
for regions and islands authorities, so that all types of authority are elected for
four years at a time.
Anyone is entitled to vote at a local government election in Great Britain
provided he or she is aged 18 years or over, is a British citizen, other
Commonwealth citizen, or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is not subject to any
legal incapacity and is registered as a local government elector for the area for
which the election is held. To qualify for registration a person must be resident
in the council area on the qualifying date. In Northern Ireland there are slightly
different requirements.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative of
one of the national political parties, or of some local interest, or as an
independent. Candidates must be British citizens, other Commonwealth
citizens or citizens of the Irish Republic, and aged 21 or over. In addition, they
must be registered as local electors in the area of the local authority to which
they seek election; or have resided in or occupied (as owner or tenant) land or
other premises in that area during the whole of the 12 months preceding the day
on which they are nominated as candidates or, in that 12 months, have had
their principal or only place of work there. No one may be elected to a council of
which he or she is an employee, and there are some other disqualifications.
Under the Elected Authorities (Northern Ireland) Act 1989, all candidates
for district council elections are required to make a declaration against
terrorism.
Local authority areas are generally divided into electoral areas for local council
elections. Administrative counties in England and Wales are divided into
electoral divisions. Districts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are divided
into electoral ‘wards’, returning one councillor or more. In Scotland the electoral
areas in the regions and islands areas are called electoral divisions, each
returning a single member; the districts are divided into wards, similarly
returning a single member. For parish or community council elections in
England and Wales, each parish or community, or ward of a parish or commun¬
ity, forms an electoral area which returns one member or more.
The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that
for parliamentary elections. In Northern Ireland local government elections are
held on the basis of proportional representation and electoral wards are grouped
into district electoral areas.
Local authorities’ functions are far-reaching. Some are primarily duties, others
purely permissive.
Broadly speaking, functions in England and Wales are divided between county
and district councils on the basis that county councils are responsible for
matters requiring planning and administration over wide areas or requiring the
support of substantial resources, while district councils as a whole administer
functions of more local significance.
English county councils are generally responsible for strategic planning,
transport planning, highways, traffic regulation, education, consumer protec¬
tion, refuse disposal, police, the fire service, libraries and the personal social
services. District councils are responsible, for instance, for environmental
health, housing, decisions on most planning applications, and refuse collection.
They may also provide off-street car parks subject to the consent of the county
council. Powers to carry out some functions—such as the provision of museums,
art galleries and parks—are available at both levels; arrangements depend on
local agreement.
GOVERNMENT
67
Internal
Organisation of
Local Authorities
Public
Access
In the metropolitan counties the district councils are responsible for the full
range of services (apart from the police, the fire service and public transport and,
in some areas, waste regulation and disposal). In Greater London the boroughs
and the City Corporation are responsible for similar functions but London’s
metropolitan police force is directly responsible to the Home Secretary. Respon¬
sibility for public transport lies with London Regional Transport and in inner
London, education is at present administered by the Inner London Education
Authority (ILEA—see p 65).
In Wales the division of functions between county and district councils is
much the same as that between county and district councils in non¬
metropolitan areas of England.
Local authorities in England and Wales may arrange for any of their functions
to be carried out on their behalf by another local authority, other than func¬
tions relating to education, police, the personal social services and national
parks.
In Scotland the regional and district authorities discharge local government
functions in a way broadly similar to that of authorities in England and Wales.
Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles, because of their isolation from the
mainland, have single, virtually all-purpose authorities.
In Northern Ireland local environmental and certain other services, such as
leisure and the arts, are administered by the district councils. Responsibility for
planning, roads, water supply and sewerage services is exercised in each district
through a divisional office of the Department of the Environment for Northern
Ireland. Area boards, responsible to central departments, administer locally
education, public libraries and the health and personal social services. The
Northern Ireland Housing Executive, responsible to the Department of the
Environment, administers housing.
Local authorities have considerable freedom to make arrangements for carrying
out their duties. They may co-operate or share among themselves the discharge
of their functions. Most use a committee system, whereby policy and principle
are decided in full council, while the detailed administration of the various
services is the responsibility of committees composed of selected members of the
council and, where the authority chooses, ‘persons of experience’. A council may
delegate to a committee or officer any of its functions except those in connection
with raising loans, levying rates (see p 69) or making financial demands on
other local authorities liable to contribute; these are legally reserved to the
council as a whole. Some councils have policy advisory or co-ordinating commit¬
tees which originate policy for implementation by the full council. The powers
and duties of local authority committees (which may be advisory or executive)
are usually laid down in formal standing orders. Parish and community councils
in England and Wales are often able to do their work in full session, although
they appoint committees from time to time as necessary.
Legislative proposals before Parliament are designed to strengthen the demo¬
cratic functioning of local authorities. These include requiring council commit¬
tees to reflect the political composition of the council, generally removing voting
powers from co-opted members of decision-making committees and prohibiting
the most senior officers from being members of other local authorities or
undertaking public political activity.
The public (including the press) are admitted to council, committee and
sub-committee meetings, and have a right of access to agendas, reports and
minutes of meetings and certain background papers. Local authorities may
exclude the public from meetings and withhold these papers only in limited
circumstances specified by legislation.
68
Officers and
Employees
Local
Authority
Finance
Current
Expenditure
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Over 2 million people are employed by local authorities in Great Britain. These
include administrative, professional and technical staff, teachers, firemen,
those engaged on law and order services, and manual workers. Nearly half of all
local government workers are employed in the education service.
Although a few appointments must be made by all the authorities responsible
for the functions concerned, councils are individually responsible within nation¬
al policy requirements for determining the size, composition and deployment of
their workforces. In Northern Ireland each council must by law appoint a clerk of
the council as its chief officer.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or chief
officers; administrative, professional, clerical and technical staff; and manual
workers. Senior staff appointments are usually made on the recommendation of
the committee or committees particularly concerned; most junior appointments
are made by heads of departments, who are also responsible for engaging
manual workers.
Pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are generally a matter for
each council, although there are scales recommended by national negotiating
machinery set up by the local authorities themselves.
Authorities differ in the degree to which they employ their own permanent
staff to carry out certain functions or use private firms under contract. The
Government’s policy of promoting value for money is encouraging the use of
private firms where there are resultant economies, and legislation now requires
authorities to open up further services to competition from the private sector.
The Local Government Act 1988 requires authorities either to contract out or to
expose to competition the following services: refuse collection, street cleaning,
school and general catering, vehicle maintenance, ground maintenance and
building cleaning, the current cost of which is some £3,000 million a year.
In 1988—89 expenditure by local authorities in Britain was some £42,500
million, one-quarter of general government expenditure. Current expenditure
amounted to nearly £39,000 million, and capital expenditure, net of capital
receipts, to about £3,500 million. Education accounts for about 40 per cent of
the total. Most of the remainder is spent on health and social security, law and
order, and the environment.
The system of local authority finance in Scotland changed in April 1989.
Similar changes are due to take place in England and Wales from April 1990 (see
P 70).
Local authority current expenditure in England and Wales is financed by a
combination of central government grants and, until March 1990, rates (a tax
based on property values). A few services, such as the police and the Urban
Programme for inner city areas, receive specific central government grants
towards their cost. However, most central government support for current
spending is provided through the rate support grant. This has two elements:
domestic rate relief grant, which is paid to rating authorities as a direct subsidy
to domestic rates, and block grant. Block grant is a general grant designed to
compensate for variations in the needs which local authorities have to provide
for and for differences in the resources they may be able to raise in local rates.
Each local authority’s grant is, therefore, calculated to be sufficient for it to
provide a common level of service without inefficiency while at the same time
charging the same rate poundage. This system requires an assessment of each
authority’s need to provide services which takes account of the large number of
factors and characteristics of an authority’s area and population.
Within this system, local authorities are free to decide their overall level of
spending and their priorities between particular services. In 1989—90, unlike
GOVERNMENT
69
Capital
Expenditure
Rates
previous years, the amount of block grant an authority will receive is fixed and
will not vary with its reported expenditure. The Government does, however, have
a power, subject to parliamentary approval, to fix upper limits on the fates of
selected authorities whose spending it considers to be excessive.
From April 1990, local authorities’ spending in England and Wales will be
financed from the community charge, the national non-domestic rate pool and
central government grant. Government grant will take the form of specific grant
(see p 68) and revenue support grant, which will be distributed so that local
authorities with differing needs and local resources (that is, income from the
community charge and business rate) can provide a standard level of service
while levying the national community charge.
In Scotland central government pays revenue support grant to local author¬
ities. This has three elements: specific grant (see p 68), needs grant and
standard grant. Needs grant represents the first call on the total amount of grant
available after deduction of specific grant. It is distributed so as to compensate
for differences in the assessed cost per adult of providing a reasonable standard
of service. The remainder is distributed as standard grant and paid as a common
amount per adult to all authorities. The same type of system will apply in
England and Wales from April 1990.
In Northern Ireland district councils receive central government grants com¬
prising specific grants, which assist with the financing of certain functions (for
example, the acquisition of open space and the provision of clean air) and
certain capital projects (for example, leisure centres), and a general grant, which
is paid by the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. The general
grant compensates councils for loss of rate income arising from statutory
derating of premises; it also contains a resources element which brings the
rating resources of poorer councils up to a standard level determined by the
Department.
Local government capital expenditure is financed primarily by borrowed money
which is supplemented by capital grants and other income, especially receipts
from property sales. Every year each local authority receives from the Govern¬
ment a capital expenditure allocation for each of the main blocks of services for
which it is responsible. An authority may in any year borrow amounts of money
broadly equal to the total of the allocations it has received. Allocations may be
supplemented by a proportion of the capital receipts generated by the authority.
With other minor additions, this constitutes a ceiling on the total of most types
of capital expenditure which the authority may undertake in that year. Author¬
ities have almost complete discretion, within their legal powers, to spend
according to locally determined priorities.
In England and Wales (until 31 March 1990) and in Northern Ireland, occupiers
of land and property (with certain exceptions, see below) pay rates to meet part of
the cost of local services. Each occupier’s payment is calculated annually by the
rating authority by multiplying the rateable value of a property (broadly equiva¬
lent to its annual rental value) by the rate poundage—an amount per £ of
rateable value fixed by the authority according to its projected financial needs.
Rateable values have been assessed periodically, the last occasion being in 1973.
Government grants reduce domestic rates below the levels paid by business
concerns. Help with the payment of domestic rates is available to people on low
incomes, while rating relief is available in certain circumstances on premises
adapted for the use of people with disabilities. Agricultural land and buildings
(apart from living accommodation and farm shops) and places of religious
worship are exempted from rates. Charities pay half the full rate on premises
occupied for charitable purposes and may be given further relief by rating
New
Arrangemen ts
Loans
Control of
Finance
Local
Government
Complaints
System
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
authorities, which can also reduce or remit the rates for a wide range of
non-profit-making bodies. In England and Wales rating authorities have the
discretion to levy a rate on property unoccupied for more than three months. For
non-domestic property this is limited to 50 per cent of the full rate, with
complete exemption for empty warehouses and factories. In enterprise zones,
which have been set up in certain areas to foster industrial and commercial
regeneration, commercial and industrial properties are exempt from paying
rates for ten years.
In Northern Ireland all industrial premises are fully derated, as are commercial
premises in enterprise zones. Certain other properties, such as freight transport
and recreational premises, are partially derated.
The main features of the new arrangements for local authority finance in Great
Britain, which are designed to strengthen local democratic accountability, are
the replacement of domestic rates by a community charge set by each authority
and payable by every resident adult; a grant system compensating for differences
in local authorities’ needs and providing additional help byway of a fixed sum for
each adult; and (in England and Wales) a uniform national business rate, the
proceeds of which are to be distributed to local authorities in proportion to the
number of adults. (In Scotland, however, local authorities continue to set
non-domestic rates with annual increases limited to the rate of inflation.) The
new system was introduced in Scotland in April 1989. It will be introduced in
England and Wales in April 1990 to coincide with a revaluation of non-domestic
properties. The Government will also introduce a new system of control on
capital finance in England and Wales in April 1990.
Local authorities are allowed to borrow money long term to finance new capital
expenditure and also to refinance loans raised for capital finance, thus enabling
flexible debt management. Authorities are not permitted to borrow long term to
finance revenue expenditure but they may borrow money short term in anticipa¬
tion of revenues receivable. In Northern Ireland long-term borrowing by district
councils is subject to central approval; in Scotland central approval is given to
capital expenditure, not to loans.
Most long-term borrowing by authorities is from the Public Works Loan Board
(or, in Northern Ireland, the Consolidated Fund). The Board draws its funds
from the Government’s National Loans Fund and thus allows authorities to
enjoy interest rates lower than any institution except the Government. Author¬
ities may also borrow from the capital market using means specified in
legislation. All loan charges are secured against the revenues of the authority
and represent a first charge on those revenues.
Local councils normally have a finance committee to keep their financial policy
under constant review. They must have their annual accounts audited by
independent auditors appointed by the Audit Commission in England and
Wales, or by the Commission for Local Authority Accounts in Scotland. In
Northern Ireland this role is exercised by a local government audit section
appointed by the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
A complaints system for local government in England and Wales involves
independent statutory Commissions for Local Administration comprising local
commissioners (local government Ombudsmen). The English Commission has
three local commissioners and the Welsh, one. In Scotland the statute provides
for a single commissioner. All commissioners are responsible in their particular
area for investigating citizens’ allegations of injustice resulting from mal¬
administration by local authorities.
THE RESTORATION OF YORK MINSTER
The vaulted timber roof of the
south transept has been
completely replaced,
reproducing the original
pattern of 68 carved bosses,
following a serious fire in 1984.
Specialised techniques were
developed to restore the stained
glass of the Rose Window.
‘The man on the moon’
is one of severed new
designs by children for
the decorative bosses.
WORLD HERITAGE SITES
Beaumaris Castle,
one of the castles of
Edward I, in
Gwynedd, Wales.
The Causeway Coast in
County Antrim,
Northern Ireland, with
the ruins of Dunluce
Castle.
The Temple of Piety reflected in Moon
Ponds at Studley Royal Gardens in
Yorkshire, created in the eighteenth
century.
Gannets skim the waters
round the island of St Kilda,
Scotland.
EDUCATION
The curriculum at
Kingshurst City
Technology College in
Solihull, Birmingham,
offers a broad-based
secondary education, with
an emphasis on science,
technology and business.
The latest
educational
technology helps
deaf children not
only to hear their
teacher, but also to
monitor their own
speech.
GOVERNMENT
71
Fire Prevention
In Northern Ireland a Commissioner for Complaints deals with complaints
alleging injustices suffered as a result of maladministration by district councils
and certain other public bodies.
Fire Services
Every part of Britain is covered by a local authority fire service, which is subject
to some general oversight by central government. Other than in Northern
Ireland, where the fire service is financed wholly from central government funds,
the cost is shared between local authorities and central government, the latter
contributing through the rate support grant.
Each of the 64 fire authorities must by law make provision for fire-fighting,
and maintain a brigade of sufficient strength to meet all normal requirements.
(In some parts of Scotland combined authorities provide fire cover.) Other
authorities also maintain fire brigades, for instance, the Army and Royal Air
Force Departments of the Ministry of Defence; the Civil Aviation Authority at
airports; and some large industrial and commercial concerns. These work in
co-operation with the local authority fire services.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland have central
responsibility in England and Wales and in Scotland respectively. Central
government is concerned mainly with ensuring the operational efficiency of
brigades. Ministers have statutory powers to prescribe standards and general
requirements on administrative and operational matters of service-wide signifi¬
cance. These include appointments and promotions, the provision of a central
training institution, pensions and disciplinary matters. Their approval is also
required for reductions in the fire-fighting establishments of fire brigades. Each
minister is advised by a Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, comprising the
respective home departments, local authorities, fire service representative
organisations and certain specialist advisers. In the home departments in¬
spectorates of fire services advise on operational and technical matters. Most fire
brigades include part-time personnel who provide fire cover in less densely
populated areas in return for a retaining fee and call-out and attendance fees.
Fire authorities also employ people for duties in controls, communications, and
mobilising and staff duties. There are about 40,450 full-time and 18,500
part-time operational members of fire brigades in Britain.
The standardisation of some equipment is encouraged to assist compatibility
when a fire is attended by more than one brigade. The principal types of
fire-fighting appliances bought by fire authorities are based upon specifications
approved by the Secretaries of State and issued in the form of advice by the
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. The specifications aim to describe the
minimum standards required while allowing some freedom of design.
Each fire authority must appoint a Chief Fire Officer (Firemaster in Scotland)
who exercises day-to-day control from brigade headquarters. Divisional officers
in charge of the geographical areas into which most brigade regions are divided
are responsible for mobilising forces. Constant communication is maintained
between divisional and brigade headquarters and if additional resources are
required to deal with an incident, neighbouring divisions, or a neighbouring fire
brigade, are asked to provide assistance.
Fire authorities are concerned in some way with fire precautions in most
buildings used by the public and have major responsibility for enforcing
legislation concerning fire precautions. They must also make efficient arrange¬
ments for giving advice on fire prevention, restricting the spread of fires, and
means of escape. Courses in fire prevention are held at the Fire Service College
for fire brigade officers. In addition to their enforcement and advisory duties.
72
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research
Special
Services
Fire Losses
Fire Casualties
brigades are also involved in education and publicity to promote fire safety,
particularly in the home; the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health
Department also promote fire safety in the home. Central government is advised
on prevention by the Joint Fire Prevention Committee of the Central Fire
Brigades Advisory Councils, representing the fire service and central and local
authorities.
Research into health hazards to fire-fighters, fire prevention, fire-brigade
organisation and fire-fighting equipment is conducted by the Home Office with
the help of the fire services under the auspices of the Joint Committee on
Fire Research of the Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. Individual re¬
search projects are undertaken by the Home Office Scientific Research and
Development Branch or, under contract to the Home Office, by other govern¬
ment agencies, notably the Fire Research Station, which is part of the Building
Research Establishment of the Department of the Environment, or by private
consultants. The Fire Research Station is the principal organisation studying
and investigating technical aspects of fire.
Fire authorities have discretion to use their brigades and equipment in a variety
of non-fire emergencies. These are known as ‘special services’ and include rail,
road and aircraft accidents, collapse of buildings, flooding of premises, leakage
of harmful gas or liquids (including chemicals) and the rescue of people or
animals from dangerous situations. Fire authorities are entitled to levy a charge
for such services.
The direct cost of damage to buildings and goods destroyed by fires in Great
Britain in 1988 amounted to an estimated £646 million. (Consequential losses
from the interruption of business are not included in this total.) Most fires
involving heavy losses occur when the premises are unattended; and fires are
more likely to start in storage areas than in production departments. Industries
which suffer most severely include engineering and electrical firms; textiles;
food, drink and tobacco warehousing; chemical and allied industries; paper,
printing and publishing firms; and retailing.
About 930 people, particularly the elderly and young children, die in fires eveiy
year (most of them at home) and about a further 12,500 suffer injury. Among the
chief causes of fatal fires are ignition of upholstery, bedding and clothing by
smokers’ materials and by heaters. From 1 March 1989 government regulations
concerning the use of new, safer foam in the upholstery of domestic furniture
were introduced.
Administration
Overseas Relations
Since 1945 Britain has progressively, and largely peacefully, dismantled its
Empire. Yet it retains global interests, including continuing responsibilities for
14 dependent territories, and for 6 million British citizens who live overseas. A
worldwide trading nation, Britain imports over one-third of its food and over
one-half of its raw material requirements. Exports account for over a quarter of
gross national product (GNP). London is a major world financial centre and
Britain’s overseas investments are the second largest in the world, fast catching
up with Japan’s.
Britain’s overseas relations have been shaped by its history as a major trading
and maritime power. The maintenance of peace and promotion of global stability
and prosperity remain primary objectives of Britain’s overseas policy today.
In a world in which economic interdependence is growing, assisted by modern
communications, and in which global problems require a co-ordinated
approach, Britain regards multilateral co-operation as a key element in its
diplomatic effort. As well as maintaining diplomatic relations with 165 coun¬
tries, it is a member of some 120 international organisations, including the
United Nations and other, more specialised, geographical or functional bodies.
Britain’s membership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation reflects its
judgment that the multilateral approach is the best safeguard of the country’s
security interests. It is also a member of the European Community, which it
regards as the organisation best able to safeguard its economic interests in a
more prosperous and united Europe. Increasingly, Britain co-ordinates its
foreign policy with the other Community countries through the mechanism of
European political co-operation.
Britain has close links with many developing countries, notably within the
Commonwealth, which evolved out of the former British Empire and which links
49 independent countries in a representative cross-section of the international
community. Commonwealth members have a language in common and close
professional, academic and commercial ties. In all, Britain provides development
assistance to over 120 independent countries as well as to its dependencies.
Britain also has strong links with the United States, including a common
language and similar political and cultural traditions.
Britain considers that the maintenance of international order, governed by
respect for a generally accepted system of law, is vital if international co¬
operation is to be effective. As a permanent member of the United Nations
Security Council, it makes support for the United Nations a central feature of its
foreign policy.
The general conduct of overseas relations is the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, supported by four Ministers of
State, acting through the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) and over 200
British diplomatic posts overseas. The latter comprise embassies and high
commissions in about 130 countries,1 together with subordinate consulates-
general and consulates, and missions at ten international organisations. These
posts, like the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, are staffed by members of the
1 A few embassies are accredited to more than one country; for example, the embassy at Dakar in
Senegal is also accredited to Mauritania, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and Cape Verde.
74
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British
Council
Diplomatic Service and locally engaged people. Excluding supporting adminis¬
trative and communications services, 30 per cent of front-line diplomatic staff
and senior locally engaged staff are involved in commercial work such as export
promotion and the protection of British commercial interests, 24 per cent in
consular/entry clearance services, 18 per cent in political and economic work, 9
per cent in information and 8 per cent in other work.
Other departments which have a primary concern with overseas relations
include the Ministry of Defence, the Department of Trade and Industry, the
Treasury and the Overseas Development Administration (ODA, which is part of
the FCO); but the involvement of most has increased with the growing depend¬
ence of domestic economic policy on international decisions and with Britain’s
membership of the European Community.
Where questions of overseas policy involve matters within the responsibility of
other departments, the FCO formulates policy in consultation with the depart¬
ments concerned. The balance of responsibilities is a matter of constant
adjustment, and the department with the predominant functional interest, even
though it may be primarily domestic, takes the lead. This is particularly so in
policy concerning the European Community and international monetary mat¬
ters. In the case of policy towards the Community, the FCO exercises its
co-ordinating role at official level through the machinery of the Cabinet Office.
Other bodies whose work has an overseas dimension include the British
Overseas Trade Board and the ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee Department),
which provide export services for industry; the Crown Agents for Oversea
Governments and Administrations, which helps to arrange purchases from
British aid funds and appointments under technical co-operation programmes
(as well as providing mainly purchasing and management services to overseas
governments and institutions); and the British Council.
The British Council, an independent non-political organisation, promotes
Britain abroad and is the principal agent for British cultural relations overseas.
Represented in more than 80 countries, it provides a network of contacts
between government departments, universities and professional, business and
arts organisations in Britain and around the world.
The Council has five main activities: it helps people to study, train or make
professional contacts in Britain and enables British specialists to teach, advise
or establish joint projects abroad; teaches English and promotes its use;
provides library and information services; promotes British education, science
and technology; and makes British arts and literature more widely known.
It employs qualified staff to teach English in its language centres, to run its
libraries and to manage its own businesses. It also matches the needs and
demands of countries overseas with the skills and services available from
organisations in Britain and, where possible, uses its own operations to
stimulate activity and expenditure by others.
The Council’s expenditure in 1989-90 is estimated at £312 million. As well as
providing its own programmes funded by government grant (£88 million) and
Council earnings (£72 million), it also manages government programmes,
principally in training and education, on behalf of the ODA (£137 million) and
the FCO (£15 million).
Business sponsorship is making an increasing contribution to the Council’s
work over £T8 million in 1988—89. A further £30-8 million was contributed
directly by commercial sponsors towards events with which the Council was
involved.
In 1988—89 the Council brought 35,000 overseas students, trainees and
professional visitors to Britain, and taught English to 62,000 students in its
teaching centres overseas. The Council’s 116 overseas libraries had a mem-
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
75
bership of 440,000, issued 7-8 million books, periodicals, films and tapes, and
handled 880,000 enquiries for information about Britain. In addition to film
and video stocks, many libraries have software demonstration equipment and
on-line access to British databases. The Council also supported over 1,000
events in the visual arts, film and television, drama, dance and music, ranging
from the classical to the contemporary.
The European Community
Membership of the European Community
Britain is a fully committed member of the European Community, an associa¬
tion of 12 democratic nations which originated in the need for countries in
Western Europe to co-operate in the reconstruction of their ruined economies at
the end of the second world war and in their desire to use this economic
co-operation to promote peace and freedom. In 1952 Belgium, France, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands estab¬
lished the European Coal and Steel Community to include their coal and steel
resources within a common market. This was followed by the Treaties of Rome,
signed in March 1957, setting up the European Economic Community and the
European Atomic Energy Community. The separate institutions established by
the three Community treaties were merged in 1967. Britain became a member in
1973, together with Denmark and the Irish Republic; Greece followed in 1981
and Portugal and Spain in 1986.
The Community’s aim, as set out in the Treaty of Rome and confirmed in the
Single European Act of 1986, is to lay the foundations for a closer union between
the peoples of Europe on the basis of a common internal market, the gradual
approximation of member states’ economic policies and a framework of common
76
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Community
Institutions
law. The Community has abolished internal tariffs and some other trade
barriers, established a common external customs tariff and made provision for
freer movement of labour, capital and services. Member states have agreed to
establish a genuinely free internal market by 1992. The Community also
negotiates on behalf of its member states in international trade negotiations.
Overseas countries having special links with the Community are accorded
preferential treatment in aid and the development of trade. The Community
accounts for about a fifth of world trade, and half of Britain’s trade is with the
other 11 member states.
Britain plays a constructive part in the development of the Community, which
it regards as a means of strengthening democracy and reinforcing stability in
Europe, and of increasing the collective strength of member states in trade,
security and international relations.
Under the treaties major policy decisions are taken by the Council of Ministers,
on which member states are represented by foreign or other ministers as
appropriate to the subject under discussion. The Presidency of the Council
changes at six-monthly intervals, Britain having assumed it for the third time
from July to December 1986. Most Council decisions are taken on the basis of a
proposal made by the European Commission; some may be decided by majority
or qualified majority, with votes weighted according to provisions set out in the
treaties. In other cases the Council proceeds on the basis of unanimity. The
Single European Act provides for improved decision-taking through more use of
qualified majority voting, particularly on internal market measures.
Heads of Government meet twice a year as the European Council, which takes
important decisions and discusses Community policies and world affairs gener¬
ally.
The European Commission puts forward policy proposals, executes decisions
taken by the Council of Ministers and ensures that Community rules are
correctly observed. It is composed of 17 Commissioners (two from Britain),
nominated by member governments and appointed by common agreement, and
is pledged to act independently of national or sectional interests.
The European Parliament, directly elected by the people in member states at
five-yearly intervals, has 518 members, 81 of whom come from Britain. Members
sit in groups according to party affiliation and not nationality. The most recent
election took place in June 1989.
The Parliament is consulted on a wide range of issues before the Council takes
final decisions. The Commission can be removed from office as a whole by a
two-thirds majority of all members of the Parliament in a vote of censure. The
Parliament can also reject in its entirety the draft annual budget as presented by
the Commission and approved by the Council. Members may also put questions
to the Council of Ministers and the Commission.
The Parliament’s legislative powers were increased by the 1986 Single Euro¬
pean Act. On certain categories of proposed legislation (notably that related to
the single European market, free movement of workers and working conditions)
the Parliament may give an opinion not just on a Commission proposal but
—in a second reading—on the position taken by the Council of Ministers on
the proposal. The aim is to enable the Parliament to propose amendments at a
second stage before the Council adopts the proposal as Community law. The
Commission reconsiders its proposal in the light of the Parliament’s amend¬
ments and the Council then reaches a final decision. If the Parliament rejects the
Council s position, unanimity by the Council is required. If the Parliament
proposes amendments, the Council votes by qualified majority where the
Commission has endorsed them and unanimously where the Commission has
been unable to do so.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
77
Finance
New applications for membership of the Community must receive the assent
of an absolute majority of the Parliament, as must the conclusion of agreements
with third countries establishing an association involving reciprocal agree¬
ments.
The European Court of Justice, consisting of 13 judges, interprets and
adjudicates on the meaning of the treaties and of any measures taken by the
Council of Ministers and the Commission; it also hears complaints and appeals
brought by or against Community institutions, member states or individuals
and gives preliminary rulings on cases referred to it by courts in the member
states. It represents the final authority on all aspects of Community law. The
Single European Act provided for a Court of First Instance to be set up to relieve
the Court of Justice of a substantial part of its workload and to enable the
handing down of rulings to be speeded up. The new Court, which became
operational in September 1989, will have 12 members and its jurisdiction
will cover disputes between officials of the Community and their employers,
certain actions against Community institutions in relation to Community
competition rules and some cases under the European Coal and Steel Com¬
munity Treaty.
The European Court of Auditors examines all Community revenue and
expenditure to see that it has been legally received and spent, and to ensure
sound financial management. It draws up an annual report and may submit
observations on specific questions as the Community institutions request.
Community policies are implemented by regulations, which are legally bind¬
ing and directly applicable in all member countries; directives, which are
binding (as to the result to be achieved) on the member states to which they are
addressed but allow national authorities to decide on means of implementation;
decisions, which are binding on those to whom they are addressed (for example,
member states, firms or individuals); and recommendations and opinions,
which have no binding force. The Council of Ministers can also indicate a
general policy direction through resolutions.
In addition to, and separately from, the institutions operating within the
Community framework established by treaty, the member states have set up
machinery under which they consult each other before taking up final positions
on important questions of foreign policy. Known as political co-operation, these
consultations include regular meetings of foreign ministers, monthly meetings
of senior officials, and contacts at working level among those concerned with
particular questions. In addition, the 12 foreign ministries are linked by a
secure communications system and a small secretariat assists the Presidency.
The Community is financed by a system of levies on agricultural imports,
customs duties and contributions from member states based on value added tax
(VAT) levied on a harmonised base and gross national product (GNP). These are
known as ‘own resources’. In 1988 member states agreed that in future the
ceiling on own resources available to the Community should be set at 1-2 per
cent of Community GNP. Because existing measures to control spending on the
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) had been shown to be ineffective, member
states also accepted legally binding measures to control spending and discour¬
age surplus production, including a ceiling to limit overall agricultural spending
(see p 80).
Without adjustment Britain’s contributions would be much higher than its
receipts from Community policies, because the CAP absorbs about two-thirds of
Community expenditure and Britain’s agricultural sector is relatively small. In
1984, after a series of annual budgetary refunds, it was agreed that Britain
should receive an annual rebate of 66 per cent of the gap between its shares of
VAT payments and of Community spending.
78
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Internal Policies In Britain's view, completion of a single, unified market of 320 million people bv
The Sin (fit* 1 , . r r J
The Single
Market
Monetary
Policy
Transport
Industry
*    iiiiunjii pcujjie uy
removing the remaining major barriers to the free movement of goods, services
and capital is the most effective means of improving European competitiveness
in world markets, so generating wealth and prosperity for its citizens. The Single
European Act commits member states to the objective of establishing a genuine
single market by the 1992 target date. Since the Commission submitted its
White Paper ‘Completing the Internal Market’ to the Milan European Council in
June 1985, some 275 single-market measures have been agreed; areas in which
important measures have recently been taken include, for example, the liber¬
alisation of capital movements, the mutual recognition of professional qualifica¬
tions and the opening up of public procurement markets. Nevertheless, a great
deal remains to be done. Britain’s priorities are the simplification and eventual
lifting of customs and other frontier restrictions on the free movement of goods,
the removal of technical barriers to trade and the freeing of markets in services
especially financial services and transport.
Since 1988 the Government has sought to bring home to British businesses
the importance of 1992 and to encourage companies to plan ahead to meet the
challenge it represents. The Government supports the declarations made by the
European Council in June and December 1988 to the effect that the Commun¬
ity, in completing the single market, should not erect trade barriers against
other countries and should abide by its international trading obligations,
particularly under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The European Monetary System was established in 1979 to promote monetary
stability in Europe. It consists of an exchange rate mechanism, the European
Currency Unit (ECU based on a ‘basket’ of national currencies, including
sterling, the value of which is recalculated daily), which is used within the
Community for budgetary and other purposes, and enlarged Community short-
and medium-term credit facilities.
Britain has participated in the system from the outset, although not in the
exchange rate mechanism, and has deposited 20 per cent of its gold and dollar
currency reserves with the European Monetary Co-operation Fund in exchange
for ECUs. The Government believes that conditions are not yet right for British
participation in the exchange rate mechanism. In June 1989 the European
Council agreed on a package of proposals designed to promote closer monetary
co-operation. J
In 1988 Britain received 12 -4 per cent of lending within the Community by the
European Investment Bank, which was set up in 1958 to provide finance on a
non-profit-making basis for investment to develop the Community’s less-
favoured regions, modernise industry, and help projects of common interest to
two or more member states.
Britain favours the establishment of a deregulated transport system within the
Community, and fully supported the 1988 Regulation which will abolish all
quota restrrctions on the movement of road haulage between Community
member states from 1 January 1993. In 1988 new measures to increase
competition in civil aviation came into effect. Britain’s links with other member
states will be improved with the completion of the Channel Tunnel rail link
scheduled for 1993.
The Community s industrial research and development programmes are de¬
signed to promote the competitiveness of European industry in world markets.
The £1,000 million ESPRIT programme supports research and development in
mrcroelectronics, information processing and application of information tech¬
nology. The RACE programme, involving funding of £360 million, aims to
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
79
establish a strong Community manufacturing industry in broadband com¬
munications and to accelerate the emergence of a competitive market for
telecommunications equipment and services while working towards European
common standards. The £325 million BRITE/EURAM programme was adopted
by the Community in March 1989 and combines research and development
programmes in industrial technologies and advanced materials.
EUREKA is an initiative established in 1985 by the member states of the
Community, the six members of the European Free Trade Association, Turkey
and the Commission, to encourage projects in high technology products,
processes and services. The initiative complements Community programmes
and is concerned with the commercial exploitation of research and development
and with removing barriers to commercial success.
The Community is pledged to abolish state aid to the steel industry and return
to a free market. To this end, production quotas for the different categories of
steel are being phased out between 1988 and 1990. In 1987 the Council
approved the RESIDER programme, aimed at assisting the development of new
economic activities in regions affected by the restructuring of the steel industry.
The Community’s policy on shipbuilding is that state aid to the industry should
help it to adapt to prevailing market conditions.
Employment Britain believes that the Community has an important role to play in tackling
unemployment. In 1986, under Britain’s Presidency, an action programme for
employment growth was agreed, with the aim of promoting new businesses,
improving the working of the labour market, providing better training and
offering more help for the long-term unemployed. It was based on proposals put
forward by Britain, the Irish Republic and Italy.
In 1987 a programme was adopted, to run from 1988 to 1992, aimed at
ensuring that all young people who wish to can receive one or more years’
vocational training after leaving school. In 1988 the Social Affairs Council
approved the second phase of the Community in Education and Training for
Technology (COMETT) programme, allocating 200 million ECUs (about £130
million) over a five-year period beginning in 1990. Much of the aid which Britain
receives from the Community’s Social Fund (see p 80) goes towards training and
retraining programmes for the young or unemployed.
The Government believes that deregulation and competition within the
internal market will create jobs, especially in small businesses.
The Environment Environmental pollution does not always respect national boundaries and
international co-operation is often necessary to deal with it. The Community has
been active in this area for some 15 years and its role has been given explicit legal
recognition in the Single European Act. Community instruments are concerned
with such issues as water and air pollution, the disposal of wastes, noise and the
protection of wild birds.
In 1988 Britain and its Community partners agreed to reduce emissions of
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide from existing large combustion plants (such
as power stations, refineries and other industrial plants) and to set stringent
emissions standards for new plants. Sulphur dioxide emissions are to be
reduced by 60 per cent from 1980 levels by 2003, and nitrogen oxide emissions
are to be reduced by 30 per cent of 1980 levels by 1998. This commitment will
require the retrofitting of flue gas desulphurisation equipment to some 12,000
megawatts of electricity generating capacity at a capital cost of around £1,900
million, representing a doubling of the programme previously announced by the
Central Electricity Generating Board. The Board is already committed to
retrofitting all 12 of its major coal-fired power stations with low-nitrogen oxide
burners at a capital cost of around £180 million.
80
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture
Fisheries
Also in 1988, Britain, with other countries in Eastern and Western Europe
and North America, signed the Nitrogen Oxide Protocol to the Long-Range
Transboundary Air Pollution Convention. The Protocol commits the signatories
to holding national nitrogen oxide emissions in 1994 at their 1987 levels and to
setting levels from 1996 onwards on the basis of scientifically established critical
loads—that is, what each local environment is able to tolerate. This commitment
would enable the Community to set better focused standards and make better
use of resources in combating pollution. Britain is now participating in work
within the UN’s Economic Commission for Europe to establish the basis of this
system.
Britain is also concerned about pollution from vehicle exhausts, and, follow¬
ing a British initiative, the Council of Ministers adopted a directive in March
1985 providing for the introduction of unleaded petrol throughout the Com¬
munity not later than 1989. Between 1987 and 1989, Britain and its Commun¬
ity partners agreed a set of directives on car exhaust emissions. These, which
will come into effect between 1989 and 1992, will add around £1,500 million a
year to British motoring costs. Nitrogen oxide, carbon monoxide and hydrocar¬
bon emissions from each new car will be drastically reduced. All new cars will
need catalytic converters to meet these standards.
In 1987 the Community signed the Montreal Protocol to the Vienna Conven¬
tion for Protection of the Ozone Layer. In March 1989 the Community called for
the current level of production and consumption of chlorofluorocarbons control¬
led by the Montreal Protocol to be reduced by 85 per cent as soon as possible,
with a view to their being eliminated towards the end of the century. This call
was endorsed in May 1989 by the parties to the Protocol at a meeting held in
Helsinki to prepare for the review of the Protocol in 1990.
In 1987 Britain, six other Community member states, Norway and Sweden
agreed to phase out the dumping of harmful wastes in the North Sea by the end
of 1989 and marine incineration by 1994. The Community has banned the
import of harp and hooded seal pup skins and products; in June 1989 it agreed
to ban imports of ivory from the African elephant.
Decisions on the level of Community support prices for agriculture are taken
annually on the basis of proposals presented by the European Commission. Over
many years these support prices were not adjusted sufficiently to take account of
technical progress in agriculture, which caused a continued increase in produc¬
tion without a matching increase in consumption. The growing market imba¬
lance led to the creation of unwanted food surpluses, which placed an increasing
burden on the Community budget. To combat this, measures have been taken to
reform the CAP, beginning in 1984 with the introduction of milk quotas. In
1988 member states agreed a guideline limit on overall agricultural spending
and introduced stabilisation mechanisms (‘stabilisers’) for the main agricultural
commodities, under which automatic cuts are made in the Community-
guaranteed price for a commodity if agreed production levels are exceeded. In the
1988—89 marketing year, stabilisers triggered price cuts in a number of sectors,
including cereals, oilseeds, sheepmeat and olive oil. To complement these
arrangements and to discourage overproduction, member states agreed a
set-aside scheme to take some agricultural land out of production.
Britain has a particular interest in the control of Community fishing since a
sizeable proportion of the total catch taken in the area bounded by member
states’ 200-mile limits is in British waters. It therefore took an active role in
negotiations on an agreement reached in 1983 on a new Community fisheries
policy; this covers access to coastal waters, conservation of fish stocks, the
allocation of catch quotas among member states within each year’s total
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
81
Other Policies
Political
Co-operation
East—West
Relations
The Middle
East
allowable catch, enforcement of these rules and financial aid to promote the
adaptation and development of the Community’s fishing fleet.
The European Social Fund assists areas of high unemployment by providing
grants towards schemes of training, job creation and geographical mobility of
workers. The European Regional Development Fund provides grants for indus¬
trial and infrastructure projects in the less-developed or industrially declining
regions of the Community with the aim of reducing existing imbalances or
preventing the creation of new ones. In 1988 Britain was allocated some £390
million from the Regional Development Fund and £405 million from the Social
Fund. Britain has also welcomed programmes designed to encourage young
people to study and live abroad, such as ERASMUS and Youth for Europe.
The aim of European political co-operation on foreign policy issues is to
maximise the influence of the Twelve in international affairs.
The six original Community members first decided to co-operate on foreign
policy matters outside the framework of the Treaty of Rome in 1970 and it was
then decided to establish separate arrangements to cover such co-operation.
Successive political agreements and declarations have extended the scope of the
process. Since Britain’s accession in 1973, it has played a leading role in
developing European political co-operation; as the result of a British initiative,
the Single European Act places the basic commitments on a treaty basis for the
first time.
Britain considers that the 12 member states should ensure that a coherent
Western European voice is heard in the management of East—West relations.
The Twelve have welcomed the treaty between the United States and the Soviet
Union on the removal of intermediate-range nuclear forces (see p 90). They have
also stressed the need for the Soviet Union to address human rights issues
seriously and to honour commitments made in the 1975 Helsinki Final Act (see
p 89). The Twelve have welcomed the conclusions of the Vienna Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe as providing the opportunity to achieve
greater security through a stable and secure balance of military forces at lower
levels, and the building of confidence through greater openness.
In 1980 the European Council’s Venice Declaration stated that a lasting solution
to the problem of the Middle East required the mutual acceptance of two basic
principles—the right of all countries in the area, including Israel, to secure
existence within guaranteed borders and the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. The Twelve support the proposal for an international peace
conference on the Middle East. They welcomed the Palestine National Council’s
recognition of the state of Israel and renunciation of terrorism in November
1988 and the opening of talks between the United States and the Palestine
Liberation Organisation in December 1988. Member states have repeatedly
called on Israel to withdraw from territory occupied in 1967 and are opposed to
Israeli measures aimed at altering the legal, geographical and demographic
structure of this territory. Member states are also urging Israel to administer its
occupation in accordance with international law and human rights standards.
The Community has a development programme for the occupied territories and
has adopted measures to allow direct exports of agricultural and industrial
products from them to the Community market.
The Twelve have also consistently emphasised the importance of the complete
withdrawal of foreign forces from Lebanon, except for those whose presence is
requested by the Lebanese Government, and of the obligation on all parties to
co-operate with the UN Interim Force in Lebanon. Member states have welcomed
Central
America
Afghanistan
South Africa
Terrorism
and Crime
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the ceasefire in the conflict between Iraq and Iran, and support the United
Nations Secretary-General’s efforts to achieve a peace settlement. In February
1989 the Twelve condemned Iran’s incitement to murder the British novelist
Salman Rushdie and suspended high-level official visits to Iran.
The Twelve firmly believe that the problems of Central America must be solved by
political and not military means and that such solutions must come from within
the region. They have therefore consistently supported the efforts of the
Contadora Group (Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela) to negotiate a
comprehensive and verifiable peace agreement, and have welcomed the Central
American Accord signed in Guatemala in 1987 by the presidents of Costa Rica,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua designed to establish a
durable and lasting peace in Central America. The Community has a co¬
operation agreement with the five Central American countries and Panama,
providing for closer economic and aid links with the region, and it holds annual
meetings at ministerial level with the Central American and Contadora states to
discuss these and other regional issues.
Having consistently deplored the Soviet Union’s occupation of Afghanistan since
1980, member states welcomed the Soviet troop withdrawal completed in
February 1989. They now wish to see an overall political settlement to the crisis
and the installation of a representative government by a genuine act of
self-determination. Britain too welcomed the Soviet withdrawal and is now
working for the establishment of representative government in Afghanistan and
for the return of the estimated 5 million refugees abroad (mainly in camps in
Pakistan).
The Twelve have repeatedly called for a peaceful end to the system of apartheid.
At the request of the European Council the then Foreign and Commonwealth
Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, visited Southern Africa in July 1986 in an attempt
to build on the work of the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group, to help
create conditions in which genuine dialogue could begin in South Africa and to
explain the Twelve’s policy to South Africa’s neighbours. In September 1986 the
Twelve called on the South African Government to take the necessary steps to
facilitate national dialogue and undertook to work towards a programme of
political action designed to promote this. They also emphasised the importance
of strengthened and more effective co-ordination of positive measures to assist
victims of apartheid and adopted a new package of restrictive measures consist¬
ing of bans on new investments and on the import of gold coins, iron and steel
from South Africa. A voluntary code of conduct for Community companies with
subsidiaries in South Africa, adopted in 1977, aims at improving conditions for
black employees and removing racial segregation at work (see also p 85).
The Twelve have called repeatedly for Namibia’s independence and welcomed
the protocol signed by Angola, Cuba and South Africa in December 1988, which
opened the way to implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibian
independence.
Because of the threat posed by international and other terrorism, member states
have sought to act jointly against it. They have agreed not to export arms or
other military equipment to countries clearly implicated in supporting terrorist
activity and to take steps to prevent such material being diverted for terrorist
purposes; in 1986, for instance, they agreed measures against both Libya and
Syria following evidence of their involvement in terrorist activity. It is European
Community policy that there should be no concessions made under duress to
terrorists or their sponsors; that there should be solidarity between member
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
83
Trade
Aid
states in their efforts to prevent terrorism and to bring the guilty to justice; and
that terrorist attacks against any member state should be met with a concerted
response. Among the measures agreed by ministers responsible for countering
terrorism are the establishment of a secure communications link between police
forces and arrangements for regular assessments and analyses of terrorist
threats to member states.
Regular meetings of ministers responsible for criminal justice take place to
discuss common measures directed at terrorists, drug traffickers and other
criminals. The British Government believes that with the introduction of the
single market in 1992 some frontier controls will need to be retained to ensure
that such people do not enjoy unlimited freedom to move around from one
member state to others.
Under the Treaty of Rome, the European Commission is given explicit powers to
act on behalf of the Community vis-a-vis third countries on matters within
Community competence such as the common commercial policy. The Commis¬
sion accordingly negotiates on behalf of the Community in major international
trade negotiations. The Community plays a major role in seeking to preserve the
world open trading system on which member states depend for future growth
and jobs, and in defending the interests of its members against protectionist
measures. One of the Community’s priorities is the successful conclusion of the
Uruguay Round of trade negotiations launched in 1986 under the auspices of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The negotiations seek to
strengthen GATT rules and disciplines; to liberalise trade in services and
investment; to improve protection of intellectual property; to improve market
areas and negotiate multilateral tariff reductions; and to establish a fair and
market-oriented system for agricultural trade. The Community is also looking to
increase its co-operation with the European Free Trade Association and reduce
trade barriers.
The Community has association and co-operation agreements with all coun¬
tries with a Mediterranean coastline (except Albania and Libya) and with
Jordan; these give preferential access to Community markets. Non-preferential
co-operation agreements have also been made with individual countries in
South Asia and Latin America as well as with China, the Association of South
East Asian Nations, the Andean Pact and the Central American states. Trade
relations with the developing countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific
are governed by the third Lome Convention (see below). Trade or trade and
economic co-operation agreements are in place with Hungary and Czecho¬
slovakia and negotiations are in progress with Poland and Bulgaria. The
Community has established official relations with the Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance (Comecon) and has signed a trade and economic co¬
operation agreement with the Gulf Co-operation Council.
The Community’s Generalised Scheme of Preferences is designed to help
developing countries by granting tariff-free access to the Community market for
most of their industrial goods and varying degrees of preferential access for their
agricultural produce (mainly processed) and textiles. The scheme concentrates
benefits on the poorer producers and countries. Certain categories of exports
from the more competitive producers are excluded.
The third Lome Convention, which governs aid, trade and co-operation between
the Community and 66 developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the
Pacific (ACP), was signed in December 1984 and runs from 1985 to 1990. Half
the ACP countries are members of the Commonwealth. The Convention provides
for aid totalling over £5,000 million and a further £770 million in the form of
loans from the European Investment Bank; it also covers industrial and
84
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
agricultural co-operation, a scheme designed to help stabilise the commodity
export earnings of the ACP countries and assistance for ACP mineral producers
whose production and income suffer from temporary disruptions beyond their
control. In addition, it offers duty-free access to the Community for ACP exports
of all industrial and most agricultural goods, including special arrangements for
sugar, bananas and beef. Emphasis is being placed on food production and on
measures to prevent desertification. All British dependent territories (with the
exception of Bermuda, Gibraltar and Hong Kong), together with the overseas
territories of other Community members, are formally associated with the
Community under provisions parallel to those of the Lome Convention and with
similar aid and trade benefits. Negotiations for the fourth Convention began in
October 1988 and Britain is pressing for further improvements to the Lome
trade regime and the consideration of ways to help the ACP states to make the
best use of existing opportunities. Britain also wants to see further improve¬
ments in the effectiveness of Community aid provided under Lome in order to
maximise the benefit for ACP recipients.
In 1987 the Council of Ministers approved a Community programme worth
around £70 million to aid highly indebted low-income countries in sub-Saharan
Africa undertaking significant structural adjustment efforts.
Britain played a leading part in the Community’s adoption of an aid pro¬
gramme for developing countries in Asia and Latin America not covered by the
Lome Convention or having any other special relationship with the Community.
This has grown steadily since 1976 and was worth some £173 million in 1988.
Priority is given to rural development and agricultural production in the poorest
countries, most of which are in Asia.
Co-operation and association agreements with individual countries and
regional groupings also include provision for development aid. In 1987, for
instance, new five-year financial protocols were agreed with most of the Com¬
munity’s Mediterranean partners; these will provide for £430 million of Com¬
munity aid and £706 million in loans from the European Investment Bank.
The Community’s food aid programme is designed to be an effective instru¬
ment of development policy rather than a short-term expedient for the disposal
of unwanted food surpluses. In 1988 it spent some £380 million on food aid, of
which Britain’s share was £75 million, much of which went to Africa.
The Commonwealth
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 49 independent states with a
combined population of some 1,300 million, nearly a quarter of the world total.
Commonwealth members are a representative cross-section of nations at all
stages of social and economic development. They include some of the richest and
poorest members of the world community and also some of the largest and
smallest. Their peoples are drawn from practically all the world’s main races,
from all continents and from many faiths. Britain participates fully in all
Commonwealth activities and values it as a means of consulting and co¬
operating with peoples of widely different cultures and perspectives, thereby
increasing international understanding, stability and peace, and contributing
to more balanced global economic development.
The members are Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Britain, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica, The
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Nauru, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Pakistan,1 Papua New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
1 Pakistan rejoined the Commonwealth on 1 October 1989, having left it in 1972 because of the
intended recognition of Bangladesh by Britain and other countries.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
85
Consultation
and the Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri
Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Nauru and Tuvalu are special
members, entitled to take part in all Commonwealth meetings and activities,
with the exception of Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings. The
Queen is recognised as head of the Commonwealth; she is also head of State in
17 of these countries.
The origin of the Commonwealth lies in the gradual granting of self-
government to the older-established British colonies (later known as the Domin¬
ions) in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa,1 where European
settlement had occurred on a large scale. Their fully independent status in
relation to Britain was legally formulated in the Statute of Westminster of 1931.
The modern Commonwealth, comprising republics and national monarchies as
well as monarchies under the Queen, became possible when it was agreed in
1949 that India, on becoming a republic, could continue to be a member. Since
then, almost all of Britain’s former dependent territories have attained their
independence and have voluntarily joined the Commonwealth.2
As a member of the Commonwealth, Britain participates in a system of mutual
consultation and co-operation which benefits member countries and contri¬
butes to international understanding. Consultation takes place through diplo¬
matic representatives known as high commissioners, meetings of heads of
Government, specialised conferences of other ministers and officials, expert
groups, and discussions at international conferences and the United Nations.
Trade and cultural exhibitions and conferences of professional and unofficial
medical, cultural, educational and economic organisations are other ways in
which frequent contacts are made.
Heads of Government usually meet every two years. Proceedings are held in
private, facilitating a frank and informal exchange of views. No votes are taken,
decisions being reached by consensus. These meetings allow prime ministers
and presidents to discuss international issues and decide on collective
initiatives. Common views on matters of major international concern are
formulated and reflected in the communiques issued at the end of the meetings.
Occasionally, separate declarations are made on particular issues. These have
included the 1971 Declaration of Commonwealth Principles; the 1977 Gleneagles
Statement, which commits member governments to take every practical step to
discourage sporting contacts with South Africa; and the 1985 Commonwealth
Accord on Southern Africa, which provides for measures designed to impress on
South Africa the urgency of dismantling the apartheid system. The 1987
Okanagan Statement and Programme of Action on Southern Africa committed
member states to increased support for the front-line states, including a special
technical assistance programme for Mozambique. The 1987 Vancouver Declara¬
tion on World Trade condemned protectionism and supported trade liber¬
alisation through the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations
(see p 83).
Following the failure in 1986 of Commonwealth and other attempts to
encourage the evolution of a political dialogue leading to the establishment of a
non-racial and representative government in South Africa, a summit of seven
Commonwealth leaders, meeting in London in August 1986, agreed on the need
for further measures against South Africa. Britain, while believing that manda¬
tory economic sanctions would not succeed in promoting peaceful change,
agreed to accept voluntary bans on new investment in, and the promotion of
1 South Africa ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth in 1961.
2 Fiji’s membership lapsed in 1987.
86
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The
Commonwealth
Secretariat
Technical
Co-operation
tourism to. South Africa, as well as to implement European Community
decisions to ban the import of iron and steel (see p 82).
With many small states among its members the Commonwealth has expressed
concern about their security and development. At Nassau in 1985 Common¬
wealth leaders called for action which would reduce the vulnerability of small
states while not diminishing their status as independent, sovereign and equal
members of the world community. British policy is to co-operate with other
member states in order to increase the security of small nations by encouraging
regional co-operation and by providing economic aid and technical assistance.
Finance ministers meet annually to discuss world economic problems, and in
recent years have paid particular attention to the problems of development and
the establishment of a fairer international economic order. Other meetings
include those of agriculture, education, health and law ministers which take
place every two or three years. Ministers of industry, labour and employment,
trade and women’s affairs also meet.
The Commonwealth Secretariat, established in London in 1965 and financed by
member states, is the main agency for multilateral communication between
them. It is headed by a Secretary-General appointed by heads of Government and
responsible to member states collectively.
The Secretariat promotes consultation, disseminates information on matters
of common concern, and organises meetings and conferences, including those
of heads of Government and of ministers. It co-ordinates many Commonwealth
activities related to international economic, social and political affairs, includ¬
ing education, food production and rural development, the role of women in
development, human rights, youth programmes, management development,
science and technology, law and health. The Secretariat also administers the
Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation.
Because of its neutral position the Secretariat has been able to make its good
offices available in cases of dispute, and has carried out, on request, special
assignments requiring demonstrable impartiality.
Britain contributes almost a third of the income of the Commonwealth Fund for
Technical Co-operation, established within the Secretariat to provide technical
assistance for economic and social development in Commonwealth developing
countries. The Fund provides experts to undertake advisory assignments or fill
specific posts and uses consultancy firms to make studies for governments. Its
fellowships and training programme is of particular help in raising levels of
technical, industrial, managerial and other skills, and makes wide use of
training facilities within developing member countries for the benefit of other
developing countries. It has a special programme to help countries develop their
exports, another on food production and rural development and a technical
assistance group to give advice in key areas. An industrial development unit
investigates the feasibility of establishing new industries in developing coun¬
tries and helps to prepare and initiate agreed projects.
Expenditure by Britain on bilateral technical co-operation with Common¬
wealth developing countries in 1988 was £181 million, the greater part being
spent on financing staff for service with Commonwealth governments and in
financing training places in Britain for people from Commonwealth countries.
In 1988 the British aid programme financed the study in Britain of 8,225
students from other Commonwealth countries. Other assistance includes send¬
ing volunteers to serve overseas, consultancy services, the supply of training and
research equipment, and the provision of advice by British scientific and
technical institutions. (About 68 per cent of Britain’s gross bilateral aid in 1988
went to Commonwealth countries, including Britain’s remaining
dependencies—see p 87.)
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
87
Commonwealth The Commonwealth Foundation was established in 1966 and reconstituted as
Organisations an international organisation in 1983. Financed by member governments, it
promotes closer co-operation among professional and other non-governmental
organisations within the Commonwealth. It has assisted over 30 Common¬
wealth professional associations, and has helped in the creation and growth of
many national ones; it has also supported 16 multidisciplinary professional
centres. It promotes understanding of work carried out by non-governmental
organisations and is encouraging the strengthening of information links
through the establishment of Commonwealth liaison units in each Common¬
wealth country.
The Commonwealth Institute in London promotes the Commonwealth, its
countries and its peoples to the British public. Funded mainly by the British
Government, it has three main galleries of permanent exhibitions and a
changing programme of temporary exhibitions, conferences and performances.
Its education service runs an extensive programme of teaching about the
Commonwealth in schools around Britain. The Institute is open to the public
every day without charge. The Commonwealth Trust is a centre for study and
discussion, its library in London housing one of the largest collections on the
Commonwealth. The Trust has branches in many countries.
In keeping with the fact that the Commonwealth is an association of peoples
as well as governments, many unofficial organisations, professional bodies and
voluntary societies provide machinery for co-operation. Professional bodies
include associations of architects, doctors, educators, engineers, journalists,
lawyers, librarians, magistrates, museum curators, nurses, pharmacists, plan¬
ners, surveyors and veterinary surgeons. Other organisations include the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, which organises an annual confer¬
ence of parliamentarians, the Commonwealth Press Union, the Association of
Commonwealth Universities, the Commonwealth Games Federation and the
English Speaking Union of the Commonwealth.
DEPENDENCIES There are 14 remaining British dependent territories: Anguilla; Bermuda;
British Antarctic Territory; British Indian Ocean Territory; British Virgin
Islands; Cayman Islands; Falkland Islands; Gibraltar; Hong Kong; Montserrat;
Pitcairn, Ducie, Henderson and Oeno; St Helena and St Helena Dependencies
(Ascension, Tristan da Cunha); South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands;
and the Turks and Caicos Islands. They have a combined population of nearly 6
million, of whom 5-7 million live in Hong Kong. Few are rich in natural
resources, and some are scattered groups of islands. There are no permanent
inhabitants in the British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory or
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Most dependencies have
considerable self-government with their own legislature and civil service. Britain
is generally responsible, through a Governor, for defence, internal security and
foreign affairs.
It is Britain’s policy to give independence to those dependencies that want it
and where it is practicable to do so, and not to force it on those which do not or
where it is not practicable. In the case of the Falkland Islands, which is the
subject of a territorial claim by Argentina, the inhabitants wish to retain the link
with Britain. The Government is committed to the defence of the Islanders’ right
to live under a government of their own choosing. The Islanders’ right of
self-determination is stated in the 1985 Falkland Islands Constitution.
Argentina and Chile have claims to territory which overlaps part of the British
Antarctic Territory. Claims to territorial sovereignty in the Antarctic, however,
are suspended by the provisions of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty.
Gibraltar is the subject of a territorial claim by Spain, which imposed border
restrictions in the 1960s. After the return of democracy to Spain, Britain and
88
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
East—West
Relations
Spain reached agreement on the method for handling their differences over
Gibraltar and Spanish restrictions were lifted in 1985. Britain wishes to see the
development of practical co-operation between Gibraltar and Spain to the benefit
of both peoples and remains committed to honouring the wishes of the people of
Gibraltar as to their future.
In 1984 an agreement was signed between Britain and the People’s Republic of
China on the future of Hong Kong. Under the agreement, which was ratified by
the two Governments in 1985, Britain will continue to be responsible for the
administration of Hong Kong until 30 June 1997, when the territory will be
restored to China. The Chinese Government will then establish a Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, which will enjoy a high degree of autonomy,
except in foreign and defence affairs. It will be vested with executive, legislative
and independent judicial powers and its government will be composed of local
inhabitants. The laws currently in force in Hong Kong will remain basically
unchanged, as will its present social and economic systems and its way of life.
Private property rights and other rights and freedoms will be protected by law.
These arrangements will remain in place for at least 50 years after 1997. In
accordance with the agreement, China is responsible for the drafting of a Basic
Law which will reflect the provisions of the agreement and be a constitutional
charter for Hong Kong after 1997. In the light of events in Peking in June 1989,
which gave rise to grave concern in Hong Kong about the future, Britain has
made clear to China that it is for the Chinese Government to ensure that the
final version of the Basic Law is in a form which commands confidence in Hong
Kong.
International Peace and Security
Britain is concerned to protect its territorial integrity and political indepen¬
dence, as well as the interests of its dependencies and of its allies, and pursues
these objectives through a national security policy in which deterrence and
defence are coupled with efforts to remove or alleviate the causes of international
tension and achieve balanced and verifiable international arms control and
disarmament.
British defence policy is based on the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO),1 which member countries regard as their guarantee of security and
freedom. It pursues a strategy of deterrence, designed to convince any potential
aggressor that the use of force, or the threat of it, carries risks far outweighing
any likely advantage. At the same time NATO countries seek through interna¬
tional negotiations to reach arms control agreements which will enhance their
security at lower levels of forces.
Britain’s defence resources are concentrated on key NATO tasks. However, the
Government’s defence policy is also designed to promote, whenever possible,
British and more general Western interests outside the NATO area. In addition,
Britain demonstrates its worldwide interests by periodic military deployments
and exercises overseas; by supporting United Nations and other peacekeeping
efforts; and by providing military assistance and training to a number of friendly
countries.
Britain seeks improvements in East—West relations based on a broader under¬
standing and on the recognition that East and West have a common interest in
peace and security at a lower level of weapons. The Government believes that
1 NATO's 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Turkey and the United States. France, Iceland (which has no military forces) and Spain do
not participate in NATO's integrated military structure.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
89
CSCE
both sides should avoid policies which risk provoking confrontation and should
aim instead for mutual accommodation and co-operation while exercising
restraint in the conduct of international relations both in Europe and in the rest
of the world. This is explicitly recognised in the 1975 Helsinki Final Act of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), which states that
European security has to be considered in the broader context of world security.
Britain is committed to doing everything possible to reduce the risks of war
and to avoid misunderstanding. The Government is following a policy of
increased contacts at all levels with the Soviet Union and its allies. The Prime
Minister, for instance, visited Moscow in 1987 for talks with Soviet leaders and
the Soviet President, Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, made an official visit to Britain in
April 1989. Such contacts between East and West, it is hoped, will enable the
recent improvement in East-West relations—as instanced by the 1987 In¬
termediate Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty between the United States and the Soviet
Union (see p 90), the final withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan in
February 1989 and the improved human rights provisions of the CSCE agree¬
ment in January 1989—to be maintained and reinforced.
Britain believes that full implementation by all participants of the provisions of
the 1975 Helsinki Final Act would lead to increased stability in Europe and
improved co-operation between the 35 European and North American signatory
states. While not a legally binding document, the Final Act established a large
number of important political commitments and a code of behaviour for what
the participants hope will in time become a more normal and open relationship
between both governments and peoples in East and West. To this end it contains
undertakings about security, respect for human rights, and co-operation in
economic, humanitarian and other matters. Meetings to review the application
of the Final Act took place in Belgrade (1977—78), Madrid (1980—83) and Vienna
(1987—89). The Madrid Conference also set up in Stockholm in 1984 a Confer¬
ence on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in
Europe, as well as other subsidiary meetings on CSCE questions, including
human rights (Ottawa, 1985), cultural issues (Budapest, 1985) and human
contacts (Berne, 1986).
As a result of initiatives by Britain and other Western countries aimed at
improving the implementation of the Final Act, participating states agreed in
Vienna in January 1989 to undertake new commitments, in particular in the
fields of human rights (for example, on freedom of religion) and human contacts
(for example, on freedom of movement). Subsidiary meetings on information
(London, 1989), the environment (Sofia, 1989), the Mediterranean (Palma,
1990) , economic co-operation (Bonn, 1990) and cultural heritage (Cracow,
1991) are being held before the next follow-up conference in Helsinki in 1992.
Three annual conferences on the Human Dimension are also taking place (in
Paris in 1989, Copenhagen in 1990 and Moscow in 1991) to review the
implementation of commitments on all aspects of human rights, humanitarian
contacts and related topics.
At the Stockholm conference in 1986, the 35 CSCE participating states signed
an agreement (the Stockholm Document) on confidence-building measures,
designed to bring about a greater degree of openness and predictability in
military activities. The agreement included advance notification and observa¬
tion of planned military manoeuvres above specified thresholds and detailed
information on their purpose, size, composition and dates, as well as intrusive
provisions for verification in the form of on-site challenge inspections. The
Stockholm Document provisions have been used: between 1987 and May 1989,
observers from CSCE countries attended 32 NATO and Warsaw Pact exercises,
while 18 on-site inspections took place.
90
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Berlin
Arms Control
and
Disarmament
Nuclear
Weapons
Following a British initiative in 1986, informal talks between NATO and the
Warsaw Pact led to an agreement in January 1989 to establish within the
framework of the Vienna CSCE Conference new sets of negotiations, which
opened in Vienna in March 1989. In the first, which involves all CSCE countries,
Britain and its NATO allies are seeking to expand the confidence-building
measures agreed in the 1986 Stockholm Document, particularly in the areas of
openness and verification.
The second supercedes the Mutual Balanced Forces Reduction (MBFR) nego¬
tiations, which took place in Vienna between 1973 and 1989, and involves the
23 members of NATO and the Warsaw Pact: it aims to establish a stable and
secure balance of conventional forces and equipment in Europe at lower levels,
and to eliminate disparities and the capability for launching surprise attack and
large-scale offensive action (see p 92).
Together with France, the United States and the Soviet Union, Britain is a
signatory to the 1971 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, which reaffirms the
four countries’ rights and responsibilities there, and provides for greatly
improved travel and communications facilities between West Berlin and the
Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic and East Berlin,
and for the maintenance and development of the ties between West Berlin and
the Federal Republic.
Britain is committed to the search for significant, balanced and verifiable
measures of arms control and disarmament, leading to increased security at
lower levels of forces, and has played a prominent part in multilateral disarma¬
ment negotiations. Britain participates in the Conference on Disarmament at
Geneva, in the new negotiations in Vienna on conventional armed forces in
Europe and on confidence- and security-building measures; it also takes an
active part in other disarmament deliberations under the auspices of the United
Nations.
Following the INF Treaty, Britain wants further progress in arms control. The
priorities, as set by NATO, are 50 per cent reductions in United States and Soviet
strategic nuclear weapons, a global ban on chemical weapons, and the elimina¬
tion of conventional imbalances in Europe.
Britain strongly supports the negotiations between the United States and the
Soviet Union on nuclear and space arms, which began in Geneva in 1985. It fully
shares the agreed objective of working out effective agreements aimed at
preventing an arms race in space and terminating it on earth, at limiting and
reducing nuclear arms and at strengthening strategic stability. The British
Government expressed satisfaction at the outcome of the recent summits
between the Soviet Union and the United States and believes that the series of
discussions between the leaders of both countries has been positive.
In December 1987 the British Government welcomed the signature in
Washington by the United States and the Soviet Union of the INF Treaty, under
which both countries are eliminating all their ground-launched intermediate-
range nuclear missiles throughout the world over a three-year period. Under the
Treaty, which came into effect in June 1988 and is the first arms control
agreement designed to eliminate a whole class of nuclear weapons, missiles
capable of carrying some 1,700 Soviet and 400 US warheads are being destroyed.
Britain also supports the efforts of the superpowers to work towards a treaty
aimed at reducing strategic offensive arms by 50 per cent. However, Britain
believes that after the conclusion of such an agreement further reductions in
shorter-range nuclear weapons should only take place in conjunction with an
agreement establishing a balance of conventional forces and armaments and the
global elimination of chemical weapons.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
91
Chemical
and Biological
Weapons
Britain’s nuclear deterrent is the minimum necessary for credible deterrence
and is very small in comparison with Soviet nuclear forces. It will continue to be
a minimum force even after the replacement of the submarine-launched Polaris
with a modernised system known as Trident. In Britain’s view, the priority is
therefore for reductions in the arsenals of the two superpowers. If a treaty were
concluded reducing US and Soviet strategic missiles by 50 per cent. Trident
would still represent a smaller proportion of the remaining Soviet strategic
warheads than Polaris did in 1970. None the less, Britain has made it clear that,
if the US and Soviet strategic arsenals were to be substantially reduced (50 per
cent would not be sufficient) and there had been no significant changes in Soviet
defensive capability, it would review the position and consider how best it could
contribute to arms control in the light of the reduced threat.
Britain has played a leading part in strengthening the regime of non¬
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It is a party to the most widely supported arms
control agreement, the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty, which is designed both to
stop the spread of nuclear weapons by providing an assurance through interna¬
tional safeguards that nuclear facilities of non-nuclear-weapon states will not be
used for making such weapons, and to protect the right of all countries to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Britain was the first nuclear-weapon state
to conclude an agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency, which
administers the safeguards. Britain reaffirmed its full support for the Treaty at a
review conference in 1985, and has been active in strengthening it by seeking
the widest possible adherence. It has also undertaken not to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states which are parties to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty or other internationally binding commitments not to manu¬
facture or acquire nuclear explosive devices, except in the case of an attack on
Britain, its dependent territories, its armed forces or its allies by such a state in
association or alliance with a nuclear-weapon state. Britain believes that
limiting the security assurances to these states provides further support for
nuclear non-proliferation.
Since for the foreseeable future Britain’s security will depend on deterrence
based in part on the possession of nuclear weapons, there will be a continuing
requirement to conduct underground nuclear tests to ensure that Britain’s
nuclear weapons remain effective and up to date. Britain hopes that the 1974
Threshold Test Ban Treaty and the 1976 Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty,
which were negotiated by the United States and the Soviet Union and set ceilings
for individual and group nuclear tests, will be ratified by the two countries soon.
A comprehensive test ban, however, remains a long term goal, and progress
towards this is dependent on a step-by-step approach which takes account of
technical advances on verification as well as progress elsewhere in arms control
and the attitude of other states.
The British Government thinks that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-
free zones in certain parts of the world could contribute to regional security, to
non-proliferation and to disarmament in general, provided that nuclear
weapons do not already feature in the security of the region involved, that all
states concerned are prepared to participate on the basis of agreements freely
entered into and in keeping with internationally recognised principles, and that
the balance of security is maintained.
Britain is actively working towards a comprehensive and effectively verifiable
worldwide ban on chemical weapons, having abandoned its own chemical
warfare capability in the late 1950s. The negotiations for such a treaty take place
at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, where Britain has presented a
number of substantive papers, particularly on aspects of compliance, verifica¬
tion and confidence building. Britain has also submitted proposals to improve
92
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Conventional
Weapons
procedures, which operate under the authority of the United Nations Secretary
General, to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons. At an
international conference on chemical weapons in Paris in January 1989, Britain
joined nearly 150 countries in reaffirming the prohibition against their use
contained in the 1925 Geneva Protocol and in calling for early agreement on a
global ban on chemical weapons.
Biological weapons are already prohibited under a 1972 Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction. A review conference in
1986 reaffirmed the value of the Convention and adopted a number of voluntary
confidence-building measures involving exchanges of information aimed at
strengthening the authority of the Convention. A further review conference is to
be held, probably in 1991.
Conventional weapons are by far the largest component of national armouries.
In Vienna Britain has since March 1989 been participating with its NATO allies
in new negotiations with the Warsaw Pact on conventional arms reductions,
which are being held within the CSCE framework. Unlike the earlier MBFR
talks, which initially involved only the countries situated in Central Europe or
those that had forces deployed there, the new negotiations involve all 23 NATO
and Warsaw Pact states in an area from the Atlantic to the Urals.
NATO proposals at the talks include an overall limit to the number of tanks (to
20,000 each side), artillery (16,800 each side) and armoured troop carriers
(28,000 each side); individual country limits of these weapons to 30 per cent of
the overall ceiling; limits in the number of these weapons (3,200 tanks, 1,700
artillery and 6,000 armoured troop carriers) that each country could deploy
abroad; and strict verification and monitoring. The scope of these proposals was
expanded at the end of May 1989 to include reductions by each side to equal
ceilings of helicopters and land-based combat aircraft in the Atlantic-to-the-
Urals area, amounting to 15 per cent below the current NATO level. NATO is also
proposing a 20 per cent cut in United States combat forces stationed in Europe
and a consequent ceiling of about 275,000 United States and 275,000 Soviet
troops. This would require the Soviet Union to reduce its forces in eastern
Europe by some 325,000.
At the United Nations Britain submitted memoranda setting out its arms
control priorities at three Special Sessions of the General Assembly on disarma¬
ment in 1978, 1982 and 1988. At the 1978 Special Session Britain proposed the
adoption of measures that would increase the flow of objective information on
military matters, including an international system for the standardised report¬
ing of military expenditure which has since been adopted by the United Nations.
Britain also contributes to the UN Disarmament Commission, a deliberative
body considering issues such as naval armaments and the reduction of military
budgets which are not on the agenda of the Conference on Disarmament.
Britain and the United Nations
Support for the United Nations and the purposes and principles of its Charter
has been a cornerstone of British policy since 1945. Britain sees a strong and
effective United Nations as a means of pursuing and achieving many of its
foreign policy objectives such as the peaceful resolution of disputes, disarma¬
ment and arms control, the protection of human rights and the promotion of the
rule of law. It believes that all member states have a responsibility to ensure that
the organisation s efforts are devoted to the furtherance of the principles
enshrined in the Charter, and has suggested reforms to make it more effective.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
93
Keeping the
Peace
Human Rights
The maintenance of international peace and security was the primary purpose
envisaged for the United Nations at the time of its establishment. Britain
believes that it is appropriate for the United Nations, as the only forum in which
almost the whole international community is represented, to seek to resolve
disputes which threaten peace and stability, whether on a regional or world
scale. As a permanent member of the Security Council, Britain plays an active
part in the Council’s work and has sought to develop and improve its role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Britain has also encouraged financial and
administrative reform aimed at rationalising the work of the Organisation.
Britain strongly supports the United Nations’ peacekeeping role, is the major
contributor to the UN Force in Cyprus and has provided logistic support to the
UN Interim Force in Lebanon. In March 1989 Britain sent an Army signals unit
to Namibia, where it is providing communications for the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group monitoring the implementation of the UN plan for
independence.
Britain has consistently supported the efforts of the United Nations to promote
human rights throughout the world through the establishment of inter¬
nationally accepted standards. The UN Charter itself includes among the
purposes of the United Nations the achievement of international co-operation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental free¬
doms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. Britain
believes that this and the subsequent practice of the United Nations has
established human rights as a legitimate matter for international concern and
that the UN Charter imposes on member governments an obligation to co¬
operate with appropriate UN bodies in the pursuit of policies which promote
human rights.
Fundamental human rights provisions are set out in the Universal Declara¬
tion of Human Rights proclaimed by the General Assembly in 1948, and in the
two International Covenants (one on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
the other on Civil and Political Rights) which impose legal obligations on those
who ratify them and which came into force in 1976. Britain played a large part in
their drafting and ratified the two Covenants in 1976. It also accepted the
optional Article 41 of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognising the
competence of the Human Rights Committee established under this Covenant to
receive and consider state complaints. (It is not party to the Optional Protocol to
the Covenant, which recognises the right of individuals to submit communica¬
tions to the Committee; Britain recognises the right of individual petition under
the European Convention on Human Rights.) Britain is also a party to other
international instruments, including conventions on the elimination of racial
discrimination and of discrimination against women, prevention of genocide,
the abolition of slavery, the status of refugees and stateless persons, the political
rights of women, and consent to marriage. In December 1988 Britain ratified the
UN Convention against Torture, which was adopted with British support by the
General Assembly in 1984.
The adoption of conventions and covenants in itself is insufficient to secure
the protection of human rights. It is up to states themselves to do that. Britain
constantly urges states to adhere to those standards which have been agreed
internationally as the basis of that protection. Britain has also supported the
establishment of additional mechanisms such as the appointment of Special
Rapporteurs or Representatives of the UN Commission on Human Rights to
investigate human rights abuses in specific countries or globally.
Britain plays a leading part in the discussion of human rights in the various
multilateral forums provided by the United Nations. In 1987 it was re-elected to
the UN Commission on Human Rights for a further three-year term, and the
94
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British delegation will continue to build on the initiatives taken there. There are
British experts on the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, on the Human Rights Committee (which monitors the
implementation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights by the parties to it) and on the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination established under the Convention on the Elimina¬
tion of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
Economic and The UN Charter states that ‘the promotion of the economic and social advance-
Social Affairs ment of all peoples’ is one of the principal aims of the United Nations, and an
estimated 90 per cent of the organisation’s efforts, in terms of resources and
personnel, is now employed to this end. With the growing concern over
problems of development, the main emphasis has become increasingly the pro¬
vision of direct assistance for member states. The UN system is now the largest
single source of technical assistance for developing countries, as well as provid¬
ing considerable emergency and relief aid, assistance for refugees and help in
combating the problems associated with drug production, trafficking and
abuse. (The provision of capital assistance has been generally confined to the
World Bank group and regional development banks, whose operations are
usually considered separately from those of the rest of the UN system.)
Successive British governments have affirmed their support for the functional
and developmental work of the United Nations. Britain is the sixth largest
contributor to the UN’s regular budget, providing some £20 million, nearly 5 per
cent of the total, in 1988. In addition, it contributed some £17 million to the
World Health Organisation, £826,000 to the International Labour Organisation
and £8-5 million to the Food and Agriculture Organisation. Britain provides
considerable contributions to the UN’s voluntary funds, donating £24-5 million
in 1988 for the UN Development Programme, £22 million for the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees, £5-25 million for the UN Relief and Works Agency
for Palestinian Refugees, £10-3 million for the UN Children’s Fund, £5-25
million for the UN Population Fund, and about £2-4 million for the World Food
Programme. Britain is also a major donor to the UN Fund for Drug Abuse
Control.
In the deliberations of the governing bodies of the various agencies and
programmes, Britain encourages the deployment of the resources towards the
poorest countries and the poorest communities in the developing world. It also
seeks to promote the most efficient use of UN development resources and
improvements in the co-ordination, control and effectiveness of the system, in
order to avoid unnecessary duplication by the various agencies.
In December 1985 Britain withdrew from the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). The decision followed a period
of notice of withdrawal during which Britain worked within UNESCO to secure
its reform. Although Britain supports the ideals and objectives contained in
UNESCO’s constitution, it had major doubts about the effectiveness with which
the Organisation was pursuing them. Aid amounting to £6-4 million, represent¬
ing funds saved from the withdrawal, has been allocated to a number of
educational, scientific and cultural programmes in developing countries in the
financial year 1988—89.
Other International Organisations
Britain is a member of many other international organisations, including those
concerned with the management of the world economy. It is a founder member
of the International Monetary Fund, established in 1945 (along with the World
Bank) to regulate the international financial system and to provide a source of
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
95
credit for member countries facing balance-of-payments problems, and has
welcomed the creation by the Fund of facilities to provide special assistance to
developing countries experiencing financial or trading difficulties. The British
Government strongly supports the objectives of the current Uruguay Round of
negotiations conducted under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade; launched in 1986, they are designed to liberalise world trade further
and promote its growth, especially for developing countries, and are focusing on
a number of specific areas such as agriculture and services.
Britain is also a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), an instrument for intergovernmental co-operation among
24 industrialised countries. The basic objectives of the OECD are to promote the
economic growth of its members, to help less developed countries within and
outside its own membership and to encourage worldwide trade expansion.
Other organisations to which Britain belongs or extends support are more
restricted in their operations and include the regional development banks in
Africa, the Americas and Asia and specialist technical, agricultural and medical
institutions.
Britain is a founder member of the Council of Europe, which celebrated its
fortieth anniversary in 1989. The Council (which has 23 members) provides a
unique framework for co-operation in the fields of culture, education, sport,
social questions, legal affairs, health, crime and drug prevention, local and
regional authorities, youth affairs and the improvement of the environment. The
Council aims to work for greater European unity, to improve the conditions of
life, to develop human values and to uphold the principles of parliamentary
democracy and human rights. Membership is open to any European parliamen¬
tary democracy which accepts the principles of the rule of law and the enjoyment
by all persons within its jurisdiction of human rights and fundamental free¬
doms. The Council was responsible for the adoption in 1950 of the European
Convention on Human Rights, which Britain was the first to ratify in 1951. In
1986 Britain renewed its acceptance for a further five years of the optional
articles of the Convention which recognise both the right of individual petition
and the compulsory jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights.
Development Co-operation
The basic objective of Britain’s aid programme is the promotion of sustainable,
non-inflationary economic and social progress and the alleviation of poverty in
developing countries. Britain’s ability to support development overseas is
dependent on the state of its own economy, and, alongside development
objectives, due weight is given to political, commercial and industrial considera¬
tions in the deployment of aid resources.
Official aid is only one aspect of Britain’s support for overseas development.
Private investment is also important and benefited from the abolition of
exchange controls in 1979. Britain is one of the world’s largest overseas
investors: in 1987 estimated net outward direct investment by British com¬
panies in developing countries amounted to £1,150 million out of a total of
£18,725 million. Such investment is important not only because of the money
provided but because of the transfer of skills, management expertise and the
development of indigenous resources which accompany it. Trade, too, is vital,
developing countries providing nearly 12 per cent of British imports in 1988.
Aid is also provided by voluntary agencies, which concentrate their activities
in^the poorest countries. Some of their activities receive substantial support
from the official aid programme.
In order to assist the poorest and most heavily indebted countries in sub-
Saharan Africa who pursue economic reform policies, Britain proposed in 1987
96
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official and
Other Flows
Bilateral Aid
international action to cut interest rates to well below market levels, to convert
aid loans into grants and to allow for more generous rescheduling of debt. These
proposals, and subsequent variations by other countries, were welcomed at the
1988 Economic Summit at Toronto, where action was agreed to put them into
effect.
Britain’s aid represents part of a wider Western effort to help developing
countries. In 1988 total net official development assistance disbursed by the 18
countries belonging to the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee
amounted to $47,600 million. Arab countries provided $2,300 million and
countries belonging to the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (the Soviet
bloc countries) an estimated $5,000 million.
In 1988 total official flows1 of aid amounted to some £1,660 million net, of which
£1,485 million represented official development assistance and £175 million
other official flows. Of the former, bilateral aid accounted for £803 million,
including technical co-operation funds of £361 million; some £682 million was
provided through multilateral agencies. Repayments of capital came to £94
million; another £23 million of capital repayments and £1 million of interest
were cancelled. Payments of interest came to £77 million.
Aid performance is commonly measured as a proportion of gross national
product (GNP), particularly with reference to the two UN targets for resource
transfers to developing countries: these state that net official development
assistance should equal 0-7 per cent of GNP and that combined private and
official flows should equal 1 per cent of GNP. Britain accepts the first of these in
principle but is not committed to a timetable for reaching it. Successive
governments have made it clear that progress must depend on Britain’s
economic situation and upon other calls on its resources. In 1988 net official
development assistance amounted to £1,485 million, 0-32 per cent of GNP, close
to the overall 0-35 per cent for donor countries belonging to the OECD’s
Development Assistance Committee. Total net financial flows from Britain to
developing countries amounted to £1,651 million, 0-36 per cent of GNP.
Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its responsibilities
towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis remains on the Com¬
monwealth, which includes among its members some of the world’s poorest
countries. In 1988, about £1,000 million of gross public expenditure on
overseas aid was disbursed bilaterally. Some £562 million (68 per cent of that
directly allocated to countries) went to the Commonwealth, including £41
million to Britain’s remaining dependencies, which are a first charge on the aid
programme. Aid was disbursed regionally as follows: Africa £422 million, Asia
£285 million, the Americas and the Caribbean £79 million, Pacific (Oceania)
£36 million, Europe £13 million and the Middle East £13 million. (A further
£161 million was not allocable by continent.)
The country receiving the largest amount (£101 million) was India. Other
major recipients included Bangladesh, Kenya, Malawi, Zambia, Tanzania,
Mozambique, Pakistan, Sudan and Ghana. In line with the policy of concentrat¬
ing aid on the poorest countries, 78 per cent of total gross bilateral aid was
provided to those with an average annual income per head in 1987 of less than
$700.
Total official flows' is an international reporting concept. Its main component—official develop¬
ment assistance—is defined as official flows for development purposes with a grant (concessional)
element of 25 per cent or more. The main British reporting concept is ‘public expenditure on
overseas aid , which differs from total official flows by excluding certain British flows which
benefit developing countries but are not considered developmental, and by recording some
contributions to multilateral agencies at a different time. All concepts can be measured before
(gross) or after (net) deducting capital repayments.
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
97
Gross bilateral financial aid in 1988 totalled £587 million. Aid for individual
projects totalled £337 million, the principal sectors supported being agriculture,
fisheries and forestry (£65 million), manufacturing (£24 million), energy (£61
million), mining (£16 million), transport and communications (£69 million) and
social and community services (£27 million). Non-project aid totalled £203
million, of which £124 million was for import financing, £17 million for food
aid, £35 million for debt relief, £9 million for budgetary support and £18 million
for disaster relief. About 69 per cent of the ODA's financial aid in 1988 was
provided in grants. Since 1975, development aid to the poorest countries has
been on grant terms. In 1984 these terms were extended to the majority of
recipients of British financial aid, and simplified loan terms were introduced for
those countries still not qualifying for grants. Britain has more than fulfilled the
1978 resolution of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on
easing the terms of financial aid. Britain has concluded agreements to remove
the burden of past aid loans worth over £1,000 million from 22 of the poorest
countries.
Financial aid is normally tied to the purchase of goods, equipment and
services from Britain (60 per cent in 1988), although there may be a substantial
element for local costs and foreign content in contracts financed from tied aid in
appropriate cases. Commitments can be untied, if the recipient agrees, to the
extent that goods can be purchased either from the poorest developing countries
or from Britain.
Britain’s aid programme aims to promote development by providing essential
economic infrastructure in areas such as communications and power supplies;
by improving human resources through education, health services or housing;
and by raising incomes directly through improvement of agricultural and
industrial productivity. Most aid projects also tiy to help local organisations to
take increasing responsibility for future development through training in the
country concerned or in Britain. Projects currently being supported by Britain
include a £30 million allocation to finance the supply of British equipment,
material and spare parts for industry in Bangladesh; a grant of £18 million to
finance a rural and family project in Orissa in eastern India; and projects worth
£7 million in Nepal to deal with deforestation, deprivation of forest products and
associated environmental damage. As well as assisting India in forestiy projects
in the Western Ghats and in the adoption of alternative strategies to the use of
chlorofluorocarbons (a major factor in the depletion of the ozone layer), Britain
is co-operating with Brazil to solve environmental problems, including schemes
to manage and conserve the Amazon rainforest (the largest rainforest in the
world). Britain is also helping Sierra Leone, Cameroon and Zaire in schemes to
repair and maintain road bridges, by providing engineers, light vehicles and
small-scale plant equipment. British projects in countries in southern Africa
include £29 million for the rehabilitation of the Limpopo railway linking
Zimbabwe to Maputo in Mozambique.
Under the Aid and Trade Provision, which is designed to match the mixed
credit practices of other donors by providing aid in combination with export
credits to support sound investment projects which offer commercial opportuni¬
ties to British exporters, expenditure amounted to £56 million in 1988. In 1985
the Government introduced a new soft-loan facility under the Provision in order
to respond to the preferences of certain developing countries and to counter the
practices of competitors. Increased funds are being made available to enable
British companies to win business annually with the Provision. As a matter of
general policy, however, the Government would like to see a reduction in the use
of tied-aid financing by all exporting nations in the interests of more open
competition and freer trade.
98
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Disaster Relief
and Food Aid
Technical
Co-operation
The Commonwealth Development Corporation is empowered to invest in
Commonwealth countries which have achieved independence since 1948, in the
remaining British dependencies and, with ministerial approval, in other de¬
veloping countries. Its aim is to assist in the development of these countries’
economies. By the end of 1988, the Corporation had invested £764 million out of
a total commitment of nearly £1,100 million. Of this total, £466-6 million was in
Africa, £313-7 million in Asia, £185-5 million in the Caribbean and Latin
America, and £128-6 million in the Pacific Islands. Commitments approved in
1988 were over £147-8 million, of which 32 per cent was allocated to projects in
agriculture, fisheries and forestry.
Britain responds to disasters throughout the world by providing food, medical
equipment, blankets, shelters and clothing, power generators, boats, bridges
and other vital supplies. In 1988 British emergency aid was sent to the Soviet
Union to help deal with the consequences of the Armenian earthquake, to the
Caribbean and Central America following hurricanes Gilbert and Joan, and to
Bangladesh in the aftermath of a cyclone. In September 1989 Britain provided
about £1 million for emergency relief to the Caribbean islands devastated by
Hurricane Hugo. In sub-Saharan and southern Africa, Britain continued its
contribution to disaster relief and food aid to help combat drought and famine.
In addition to its multilateral aid contributions to UN agencies and the
European Community (see p 99), Britain gave £92-5 million in bilateral disaster
relief between 1984 and 1988. Furthermore, bilateral and multilateral food aid
by Britain amounted to £93 million.
Many African countries suffering from famine are also victims of a plague of
locusts; in response Britain has pledged more than £7-5 million for locust and
pest control in Africa since the beginning of 1987. A number of computer-based
systems which accurately pinpoint locust breeding areas are being offered to
control centres in Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco.
Britain also helps refugees and people displaced by famine, political upheaval,
civil war and invasion. Since 1980, for instance, about £60 million has been
contributed to assist Afghan refugees.
Technical co-operation, the transfer of specialised knowledge and skills from
country to country, complements financial aid, expertise often being essential to
the success of a programme of financial aid or investment. Expenditure on it has
increased in recent years and was £411 million, 41 per cent of gross bilateral aid,
in 1988. This included £74 million for the provision of expert personnel,
including volunteers, £101 million for students and trainees in Britain and
overseas, £42 million for the British Council’s education and training pro¬
grammes, £49 million for consultancy services, £34 million for research services
and projects, and £24 million for the provision of equipment and supplies.
At the end of 1988 there were 3,055 people financed by Britain (other than
volunteers) working in developing countries, of whom 1,337 were engaged in
education, 546 in agriculture and related areas, and 282 in health services. In
addition, there were nearly 2,000 volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise
qualified, working in developing countries, about half in education. Recruit¬
ment, training and placing overseas is undertaken by voluntary bodies, the four
main agencies being the Catholic Institute for International Relations, Interna¬
tional Voluntary Service, United Nations Association International Service and
Voluntary Service Overseas; the bulk of their costs are met by the British
Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Some 14,103 were financed in 1988 under regional programmes of
technical co-operation, by awards under the Commonwealth Scholarship and
OVERSEAS RELATIONS
99
Aid Management
Multilateral
Aid
Voluntary
Agencies
Fellowship Plan, and under British Council schemes. Since 1986 several more
schemes for students to study in Britain have been introduced, covering
students from Commonwealth developing countries, Hong Kong and China, and
black South Africans.
To support development overseas, the Government maintains a specialist
scientific organisation, the Overseas Development Natural Resources Institute
(formed in 1987 as the result of a merger between the Tropical Development and
Research Institute and the Land Resources Development Centre), and provides
support for many others, including overseas units/divisions of the government-
financed Transport and Road Research Laboratory, the Building Research
Establishment, the British Geological Survey, the Overseas Surveys Directorate
of the Ordnance Survey, and of Hydraulics Research Ltd. These organisations
provide specialist information, advice and experts for service overseas, and
undertake field and laboratory research investigations.
To ensure the most effective use of aid resources, the objectives and content of
country aid programmes are determined through a systematic programming
exercise which takes account of the circumstances of the recipient country, its
development priorities, the activities of other donors, and what Britain can offer
by way of expertise, goods and services. In addition, individual projects are
carefully appraised before approval, monitored during progress against quantifi¬
able targets and assessed in a project completion report, while a programme of
special evaluation studies, often undertaken by independent evaluators,
examines in more detail the achievements of particular activities and of special
issues. The Overseas Development Administration also supports international
studies of aid effectiveness.
Britain is a major subscriber to the World Bank group of institutions—the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation and the
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency. The resources of the IDA, which
provides interest-free loans to developing countries unable to service loans on
conventional terms, are replenished at roughly three-year intervals. The British
commitment to its Eighth Replenishment (July 1987 to June 1990) is £524
million towards a total of $12,400 million. The Ninth Replenishment (July 1990
to June 1993) is currently being negotiated. Britain contributes to the resources
of the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the
Caribbean Development Bank and the African Development Bank. Its contribu¬
tion to the United Nations Development Programme for 1988 was £24-5 million,
and it is the largest source of expertise and the second largest of fellowships and
equipment provided under the Programme. There is also a major British
contribution to other UN agencies and programmes, including the World Health
Organisation’s special programme for the prevention and control of AIDS.
Almost half of British multilateral aid is now channelled through the European
Community’s aid programme. Britain’s commitment to the sixth European
Development Fund established by the third Lome Convention, covering the
period from 1986 to 1990, is over £840 million at present exchange rates.
Voluntary agencies play an important and distinctive role in developing coun¬
tries in such areas as agriculture, health and nutrition, education projects, and
emergency relief operations.
There are more than 200 agencies, including church and missionary
societies; among the best known are Oxfam, Christian Aid, the Save the
Children Fund, and the Catholic Fund for Overseas Development. The funds are
raised largely through regular donations and collections, legacies and trading
100
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
activities and, particularly in response to specific emergencies, through appeals
in the media. The Government co-operates with the agencies in various ways,
especially in immediate post-disaster relief and rehabilitation operations and
through its Joint Funding Scheme. Under this scheme it meets half the cost of
selected development projects undertaken by the agencies and aimed at helping
the poorest people. Such projects include community health, non-formal educa¬
tion, agricultural training, water supply and projects concerned with the
preservation of the environment and sustainable use of natural resources such
as tropical forests. The Scheme’s budget has increased by just over 300 per cent
since 1984, from £3-7 million in 1984-85 to £16 million in 1989-90.
Voluntary agencies’ work on behalf of refugees overseas also receives official
support.
Defence
Military
Balance
in Europe
NATO’s
Strategy
The primary objectives of Britain’s defence policy are to ensure the country’s
security, to preserve peace with freedom, and to enable it to pursue its legitimate
interests both within Britain and overseas. Britain’s policy is based on mem¬
bership of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), a defensive alliance
whose collective strength provides each of its members1 with far greater security
than any could achieve alone.
Britain is fully committed to NATO and its strategy of deterrence. Over 95 per
cent of the defence budget goes, directly or indirectly, towards carrying out
Britain’s main defence roles in NATO, to which the vast majority of its armed
forces are committed. In recent years the structure and balance of these forces
have been improved to increase their combat effectiveness and so enhance
Britain’s contribution to NATO. As a result of these improvements Britain also
has the flexibility to respond quickly and effectively to challenges to its interests
outside the NATO area.
The main threat to Western security is posed by the nuclear, chemical and
conventional forces of the Warsaw Pact. Britain plays a full part in the Alliance’s
efforts, complementary to its defence preparations, to negotiate balanced and
verifiable arms control agreements and to reduce tension so as to achieve a more
just and lasting peace in Europe.
Despite progress in East—West relations the Warsaw Pact’s long-standing superi¬
ority over NATO in nuclear, conventional and chemical forces remains substan¬
tial. This imbalance over NATO in the European area includes a 3:1 dominance
in tanks and artillery, 2:1 in combat aircraft, 5:1 in armoured infantry fighting
vehicles and 1 -3:1 in personnel. In addition, the Soviet Union’s strategic nuclear
forces are being replaced by new or modernised systems, and its large, modern
and well-equipped navy is being improved with a continuing construction
programme of offensive systems (particularly submarines, cruisers, aircraft
carriers and naval aircraft). The Soviet Union also has the world’s largest, most
comprehensive and advanced chemical weapons capability. Even after the
proposed Soviet and Warsaw Pact unilateral reductions of conventional forces in
Eastern Europe announced in December 1988 (which include Soviet cuts of
500,000 personnel, 10,000 tanks, 8,500 artillery and 800 combat aircraft), the
Warsaw Pact will continue to enjoy a considerable numerical superiority in the
European theatre (2-4:1 in tanks and artillery and 1-8:1 in combat aircraft, for
example).
NATO’s security policy is based on deterrence and defence. Its aims are to
prevent war or, should aggression occur, to respond at the right level to make the
aggressor quickly cease his attack and withdraw. This strategy, called ‘flexible
response’, is based on three key principles: a determination to act jointly and to
defend the Treaty area against all forms of aggression: a recognisable capability
1 NATO’s 16 member countries are Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Turkey and the United States. France, Iceland (which has no military forces) and Spain do
not participate in NATO’s integrated military structure.
102
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain’s
NATO
Contribution
to respond effectively at all levels of aggression, and to escalate, if necessary, in
order to convince the Warsaw Pact of NATO’s resolve; and a flexibility which
prevents the Soviet Union from predicting with confidence NATO’s specific
response to aggression, but which would leave it in no doubt of the grave risk it
would run in resorting to the use or the threat of force against the Alliance.
These principles in turn are built on a combination of political will and military
capacity. The latter comprises adequate conventional forces deployed well
forward to deter any Soviet non-nuclear attack; theatre nuclear forces to
enhance deterrence by providing a link between conventional and strategic
nuclear forces, and deterring the use of similar weapons by the other side; and
strategic nuclear forces to provide the ultimate deterrent by having the ability to
inflict unacceptable damage against a potential enemy, even after suffering a
pre-emptive first strike.
The NATO members are determined to sustain the efforts required to ensure
the continued credibility and effectiveness of the Alliance’s conventional and
nuclear forces. Britain is fully involved in these efforts and has a continuing
programme of modernisation of its defences, including the updating of its own
strategic nuclear weapons.
The NATO allies have acknowledged that Western interests outside the NATO
area may be threatened and recognise the need, in the last resort, for those
members with the means to do so to take action in consultation with their allies.
At the same time, the NATO allies recognise the right of other countries to
self-determination and, as far as possible, to defend themselves. In the Govern¬
ment’s view, these principles can best be satisfied through the provision of
military assistance, including training courses in Britain, the loan of Service
personnel and the sale of defence equipment. Britain’s commitment to these
principles is also demonstrated by periodic deployments, exercises and the
maintenance of a capability to intervene militarily in the last resort.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is concentrated in areas where it can best help to
maintain Alliance security, principally NATO’s strategic nuclear deterrent and
the defence of the Central Region of Europe, the Eastern Atlantic and English
Channel, and the British ‘home’ base and its immediate approaches.
Britain’s strategic forces, equipped with improved Polaris missiles (to be
replaced by a Trident force in the mid-1990s), represent an essential European
element in NATO's deterrent strategy, by providing a second and independent
centre of decision-making within the Alliance and an important insurance
against any Warsaw Pact misconception that the United States would not be
prepared to use its nuclear forces in Europe’s defence. Britain has also
committed its other nuclear systems to NATO.
Britain’s decision to update its strategic deterrent has led to calls from some
groups within the country for unilateral nuclear disarmament, both on the
grounds of cost and as an example to others. While the Government understands
the widespread concern regarding nuclear war, it believes that the best way of
preventing nuclear or conventional war between East and West is firm support
for NATO’s policy of nuclear deterrence and efforts to relax East-West tensions,
including the pursuit of arms control, which have helped to maintain peace in
Europe for 40 years. The Government believes that unilateral nuclear disarma¬
ment by Britain would weaken NATO’s ability to deter aggression in the face of
the continuing Soviet nuclear and conventional threat without significantly
altering the views on arms control of other states which possess, or may think of
acquiring, nuclear weapons.
Virtually all of the Royal Navy, the largest navy among the European NATO
partners, is earmarked for assignment to the Alliance and permanent contribu¬
tions are made to NATO’s two standing naval forces, in the Atlantic and the
DEFENCE
103
Europe and
the Alliance
Outside the
NATO Area
Channel, and to its Mediterranean force when activated. The British Army of the
Rhine (BAOR) and Royal Air Force (RAF) Germany are stationed in the Federal
Republic of Germany. BAOR’s combat element consists of three divisions (with
supporting artillery). Two divisions consist of three armoured brigades and the
other division consists of two armoured brigades and an infantry brigade.
Additionally, a reinforcing division comprising one regular and two Territorial
Army brigades is located in Britain. On mobilisation, BAOR’s peacetime
strength of around 55,000 would be almost trebled by rapid reinforcement from
Britain. Nearly all the RAF’s combat and support aircraft are assigned to NATO.
RAF Germany’s 15 squadrons (two of helicopters) are equipped for strike/attack,
reconnaissance, close support, air defence and air transport roles, while RAF
Strike Command, which is based in Britain, provides forces for these and for the
maritime patrol and anti-submarine warfare roles.
Britain also provides important elements of NATO’s specialist reinforcement
forces, including shipping and commando units forming the bulk of a Royal
Marine/UK—Netherlands amphibious force, ground and air units for the Allied
Command Europe Mobile Force, and several squadrons for NATO’s Strategic Air
Reserve.
Forces from all three Services are stationed at Gibraltar, which, positioned at
the western entry to the Mediterranean, is an important base for NATO.
Britain’s contribution to NATO is part of the wider effort which the European
allies make to the defence of the West, including the protection of their common
interests outside the NATO area. There is no substitute for the United States’
nuclear guarantee nor for North American forces stationed in Europe in
peacetime; but, of NATO’s ready forces in Europe, the European allies provide
about 90 per cent of manpower, 80 per cent of artillery and combat aircraft, 70
per cent of tanks and 65 per cent of fighting ships in European and Atlantic
waters. They also provide around 7 million men and women on active and
reserve duties and provide 900 military facilities for United States forces and
essential support requirements such as communications and trans¬
port.
Britain and its European allies recognise the value of co-operation and
collaboration by playing a full part in the Independent European Programme
Group, a body committed to promoting intra-European arms collaboration, and
in the Conference of National Armaments Directors, the forum for defence
equipment collaboration across the Atlantic. They also work together in the
Eurogroup, formed following a British initiative in 1968, to improve the
effectiveness of their contributions to the Alliance and to achieve better use of
available resources through closer co-ordination. In addition, the Western
European Union (WEU), which was created by the modified Brussels Treaty of
1954, was reactivated in 1984 to provide further impetus towards European
defence and security co-operation. The Brussels Treaty1 also commits Britain to
maintaining ground and air forces on the European mainland. The WEU helped
co-ordinate contributions by member countries in mine clearance operations in
the Gulf during the Iran—Iraq war; in 1987 it also published a statement setting
out how members intended to contribute to NATO’s future security and provide
a basis for the development of the WEU as a forum for Western Europe’s defence
effort in support of the Alliance.
Britain maintains and improves its ability to operate outside the NATO area to
protect its interests without diminishing its central commitment to the Alliance.
1 In 1988 the seven original members—Belgium, Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany,
France, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands—were joined by Portugal and Spain.
104
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
THE ARMED
FORCES
Personnel
It has an airborne brigade which can be deployed to trouble spots should the
need arise. British garrisons are maintained in Belize, Brunei, Cyprus, the
Falkland Islands and Hong Kong. Britain also provides the largest national troop
contingent to the United Nations Force in Cyprus as well as giving support for
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. In addition, it contributes a
headquarters detachment to the Multinational Force and Observers in Sinai,
and a unit providing communications for a multinational UN force which is
supervising the process of transition to independence in Namibia. A Royal Navy
force of destroyers and frigates is deployed in the Arabian Sea region, to provide
assistance to British-registered merchant ships if needed. Considerable effort is
devoted to the provision of military assistance and training to a large number of
friendly countries outside the NATO area (to Mozambique and Zimbabwe, for
example), and Britain deploys its forces on visits and exercises in important
areas.
Within Britain, the armed forces’ main operational commitment is in support of
the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) in the fight against terrorism in Northern
Ireland. The Army provides ten major regular units and nine battalions of the
Ulster Defence Regiment. The Royal Navy, which carries out patrols to prevent
arms smuggling, and the RAF also make substantial contributions, and the
Royal Marines continue to support Army and Navy operations. Following a
review of the deployment of the security forces within Northern Ireland, an
additional brigade headquarters was established in 1988, covering the border
areas. The other two brigades will continue to be responsible for supporting the
RUC in other areas of high threat in the rest of Northern Ireland.
At the beginning of 1989 the total strength of the armed forces, all volunteers,
was 312,700: 64,700 in the Royal Navy and the Royal Marines, 156,000 in the
Army and 92,000 in the Royal Air Force. The Ministry of Defence employed about
145,000 civilians (based in the United Kingdom) at the same date.
The 16,000 female personnel in the nursing and women’s services (3,400 in
the Royal Navy, 6,400 in the Army and 6,300 in the Royal Air Force) are integral
parts of the armed forces; they serve alongside servicemen in Britain and
overseas, mainly in support roles.
Engagements for non-commissioned ranks range from 3 to 22 years, with a
wide choice of length and terms of service. Subject to a minimum period of
service (varying from three to nine years, excluding training), entrants may leave
at any time, at 18 months’ notice (12 months for certain engagements).
Discharge may also be granted on compassionate grounds, by purchase, or on
grounds of conscience. Commissions, either by promotion from the ranks or by
direct entry based on educational and other qualifications, are granted for short,
medium and long terms. All three Services have schemes for school, university
and college sponsorships.
Non-commissioned personnel receive basic training supplemented by further
and specialist training throughout their careers. Study for educational quali¬
fications is encouraged and Service trade and technical training, highly valued
by industry, leads to nationally recognised qualifications for large numbers of
Service personnel.
Commissioned ranks receive initial training at the Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth; the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst; or the Royal Air
Force College, Cranwell. This is followed by specialist training, often including
degree courses at university or Service establishments. Higher training for
officers is provided by the Royal Naval College, Greenwich; the Army Staff College
at Camberley, and the Royal Air Force Staff College at Bracknell. Selected senior
officers and civilian officials from Britain and other countries attend the Joint
DEFENCE
105
Reserve Forces
COMBAT
FORCES
Strategic
Nuclear Forces
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Services Defence College, Greenwich, and the Royal College of Defence Studies,
London, which provide the wider background necessary for those destined to fill
higher appointments.
Operational training includes Joint-Service and inter-allied exercises. Train¬
ing is provided for the armed forces of allied, Commonwealth and other
countries.
Reserve and auxiliary forces are an integral part of the armed forces. In addition
to supplementing the regular forces on mobilisation with trained personnel able
immediately to take their places either as formed units or as individual
reinforcements, they form an important link between the Services and the civil
community. Some members of these forces have a reserve liability following a
period of regular service (regular reserve); others are volunteers who train in
their spare time. Volunteer reserve forces include the Territorial Army, whose
role is to reinforce the ground forces committed to NATO and to help maintain a
secure home base in the United Kingdom; its strength has been increased by 25
per cent during the 1980s. Set up in 1985, a Home Defence Force, linked to the
Territorial Army and with a planned strength of about 5,000 by 1990, would on
mobilisation assist in guarding important civilian and military installations.
Other volunteer forces include the Royal Naval Reserve, the Royal Marines
Reserve, the Royal Naval Auxiliary Service, the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the
Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. All have been expanded substantially in
recent years or are planned to increase in strength in the near future. The Ulster
Defence Regiment (see p 104) is also a reserve force. At the end of March 1989
regular reserves totalled 240,400, and volunteer reserves and auxiliary forces
90,400. Cadet forces, which make a significant contribution to recruitment to
the regular forces, totalled 139,200.
The Royal Navy’s Polaris force comprises four nuclear submarines, each of which
can remain on underwater patrol for long periods and is capable of carrying 16
nuclear-armed Polaris missiles. The missile system, now incorporating improve¬
ments designed to penetrate anti-ballistic missile defences, will maintain
the force’s effectiveness until it is replaced in the mid-1990s by a Trident nuclear
submarine force which will extend Britain’s nuclear deterrent into the twenty-
first century. The Trident programme, which will cost an estimated £9,089
million (at 1988-89 prices), is expected to account on average for less than 3 per
cent of the defence budget (and less than 6 per cent of the equipment budget)
during its procurement period. It is also estimated that more than 60 per cent of
the money for the project will be spent in Britain. The first two Trident
submarines are being built.
Britain’s naval forces, while capable of operating throughout the world when
required, are concentrated in the Eastern Atlantic and in the Channel, where
they constitute the majority of forces immediately available to NATO. They
include three Invincible-class anti-submarine warfare carriers, carrying Sea
King anti-submarine and airborne early warning helicopters, Sea Harrier
aircraft, and Sea Dart defence missile systems; 16 nuclear-powered attack
submarines (with another two under construction or on order) equipped with
torpedoes and Sub-Harpoon anti-ship missiles; 11 diesel electric-powered sub¬
marines, which will be replaced by the more powerful Upholder class (the first of
which is near to completion); and about 50 destroyers and frigates for air
defence, anti-submarine and general purpose duties. Most of these have
weapon-carrying helicopters (principally the Lynx), and armaments installed
include the Exocet surface-to-surface, Sea Wolf point air defence, Sea Dart area
air defence and Sea Skua anti-ship missile systems, and the Ikara anti-
106
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Army Combat
Forces
submarine guided weapons system. There is also an amphibious capability
comprising two assault ships. Fearless and Intrepid, supporting vessels and the
Royal Marines. Other ships include about 40 mine counter-measures vessels
(among these are 13 of the new Hunt class and 12 of the River class), and
offshore patrol vessels for protecting fishing interests and oil and gas installa¬
tions.
In coming years Britain’s contribution to NATO’s maritime defence will be
based increasingly on an enhanced anti-submarine warfare element made up
principally of nuclear-powered attack submarines and advanced diesel-electric
conventional submarines, of which four have been ordered, one being under
construction; the Type 23 frigate (the first of seven ordered); and Nimrod
maritime patrol aircraft, equipped with Searchwater radar and armed with
Harpoon anti-ship missiles and Sting Ray anti-submarine torpedoes. In addi¬
tion, the surface fleet is being strengthened by 14 multi-role Type 22 frigates—
12 are already in service and the last two are on order—and a new type of
minehunter, the first of which entered service in 1989. New or improved
weapons will include the Harpoon missile for the last four Type 22 and for the
new Type 23 frigates, the Sea Eagle anti-ship missile, the Goalkeeper close-in
weapon system, and the Spearfish torpedo for submarines. The vertically
launched Sea Wolf point-defence and the Sea Dart surface-to-air missiles are also
being developed or improved, while a lightweight version of the Sea Wolf is to be
developed. The Type 23 frigate will be able to carry the EH 101 helicopter when
that enters service in the mid-1990s.
Most of the Army’s combat forces, consisting of BAOR and the forces stationed in
Britain, have primary roles in support of NATO. Others are stationed overseas in
support of treaty commitments.
There are three armoured divisions in BAOR, equipped with Chieftain or
Challenger tanks. The Chieftains are being replaced with the more advanced
Challengers, which will equip 7 out of the 12 regiments in BAOR. In addition,
improvements to the automotive and fire control systems of both tanks are being
carried out, and they are being equipped with a new 120-mm gun and
thermal imaging sights to enhance night and poor visibility performance. The
battlefield mobility of the infantry is being significantly improved with the
continuing introduction of Warrior and Saxon armoured personnel carriers; the
former is fitted with a 30-mm cannon providing support for the infantry. The
introduction into service of the SA80 family of small arms and of the manport-
able, light anti-tank weapon, LAW80, has further augmented the infantry’s
firepower.
Major improvements to the Army’s air defences are planned for the 1990s to
counter the Warsaw Pact air threat. These include the formation of a third air
defence regiment equipped with the Starstreak high velocity missile, a new air
defence command and control system, and continuing improvements to the
Rapier system. The increased emphasis now being placed on mobile operations
led to the decision to convert a brigade to the air-mobile role during 1988, with
additional Lynx helicopters. Major improvements are being made to the Lynx
helicopter and its TOW missiles to maintain the helicopter’s anti-tank capability
through the 1990s. The multiple-launch rocket system, capable of delivering a
variety of munitions over extended ranges, is planned to enter service during the
early 1990s. Tactical nuclear support is provided by the Lance missile and
dual-capable artillery. The complexity of the modern battlefield dictates the need
for sophisticated command, control and communications systems, which is
being met by the PTARMIGAN secure communications, the WAVELL com¬
puterised battlefield information and the BATES artillery targeting systems,
among others.
DEFENCE
107
Royal Air
Force General
Purpose Forces
Organisation
and
Management
Tornado F3 and Phantom aircraft, together with Rapier and Bloodhound
surface-to-air missiles and Oerlikon guns directed by Skyguard radar, provide
Britain’s air defence, assisted by Shackleton airborne early warning aircraft and
the ground radars of the United Kingdom Air Defence Ground Environment
system. In addition, 72 Hawk trainer aircraft have been equipped with air-to-air
missiles and cannon for local air defence. The strike/attack fleet has been wholly
re-equipped with the Tornado GR1, which will, in due course, also replace some
Jaguars in the reconnaissance role. Close air support for ground troops is
provided by the Harrier GR3, which is being replaced by the Harrier GR5.
Nimrod maritime aircraft form part of Britain’s anti-submarine warfare capa¬
bility, and also undertake long-range surveillance operations against surface
ships, offshore surveillance and fishery protection. Improved Buccaneers,
armed with Sea Eagle and Martel missiles, are employed in an anti-ship role.
Victor, TriStar and VC 10 aircraft are used as tankers for in-flight refuelling.
Tactical transport is provided by VC 10 and Hercules aircraft, medium and light
support being given by Chinook, Puma and Wessex helicopters. Sea King and
Wessex helicopters perform search and rescue duties around the British Isles.
Weapons in service include Skyflash, Sparrow, Sidewinder, Martel and Sea Eagle
missiles, and guided and cluster bombs.
The Royal Air Force’s comprehensive re-equipment programme is continuing.
Improvements to Britain’s air defences include the introduction of the Tornado
F3, which is replacing the Phantom FG1; and the modernisation of the radar
and command, control and communications systems for the United Kingdom
Air Defence Ground Environment.
From the early 1990s airborne early warning will be provided by Boeing E-3
aircraft. The air-to-air refuelling capacity has been increased by the entry into
service of converted VC 10s and TriStars in the tanker role. The Tornado GR1
and the new Harrier GR5 are enhancing the offensive power of the Royal Air
Force. All strike/attack and offensive support aircraft will be installed with
advanced electronic warfare equipment to increase their ability to survive, and
the Tornado GR1, already equipped with the British JP233 airfield attack
weapon, will have the ALARM anti-radiation missile. Advanced air-to-air mis¬
siles are also being developed. The Government has also announced its intention
to purchase the EH 101 helicopter to modernise the RAF’s support helicopter
fleet in the 1990s, and to proceed with the full development of the European
Fighter Aircraft with the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy and Spain.
Finance and Management
The defence budget for 1989—90 is over £20,100 million. Britain remains one of
the highest contributors to NATO, with over £360 per capita spent on defence in
1988; 4-3 per cent of gross domestic product was devoted to defence expendi¬
ture, a proportion only exceeded in NATO by the United States and Greece.
Improvements in defence output continue to be sought through measures
designed to achieve greater value for money and efficiency. The objective is to
maximise the proportion of defence resources devoted to front-line tasks by
rationalising support tasks and making better use of personnel. Increased
competition in the purchase of equipment has improved both quality and value
for money, and the more effective use of personnel means that 41 per cent of
Britain’s defence expenditure can be devoted to equipment.
Within the Ministry of Defence an integrated military/civilian Defence Staff is
responsible for defence policy and strategy, operational requirements and
commitments; it reports to the Chief of Defence Staff and the Permanent
108
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and
Development
Strategic
Defence
Initiative
Under-Secretary through a Vice-Chief of Defence Staff. An Office of Management
and Budget reporting to the Permanent Under-Secretaiy is concerned with
budgetary control and resource management. Each Service Chief of Staff reports
through the Chief of Defence Staff to the Secretary of State on matters related to
the fighting effectiveness, management, efficiency and morale of his Service.
The management of the three Services is exercised through executive commit¬
tees of the Service Boards, which are chaired by their respective Chiefs of Staff
and act in accordance with centrally determined policy objectives and budgets.
The Procurement Executive deals with the purchase of equipment, including
equipment collaboration with allies and friendly nations.
A management information system enables top management to scrutinise
the activities, costs and efficiency of all areas of the Ministry. Increased aware¬
ness of the need to manage resources cost-effectively has been promoted, and a
budgetary system has been implemented which will ensure that managers are
held accountable for the resources allocated.
Defence Procurement
Responsibility for providing the armed forces with the equipment they need lies
with the Ministry of Defence’s Procurement Executive. About 41 per cent of the
defence budget will be spent on equipment in 1989-90, making the Ministry
British industry’s largest customer. The Procurement Executive works with the
Service users and industry to obtain the best long-term value over a project’s life,
from concept formulation (drawing on the research programme) through de¬
velopment and production to in-Service support.
Throughout the process, the Procurement Executive makes use of a commer¬
cial approach to the defence market to get the best value for money. The key¬
stone to this policy is to award contracts by competition wherever possible,
and to ensure that all contracts place companies under the maximum incen¬
tive to perform efficiently. Thus the aim is to use the resources of industry as
effectively as possible, and also to promote competitiveness in British defence
manufacturers.
Research is undertaken by the Ministry’s research establishments, which have a
very wide technological capability, and under contract in industry and the
universities. Around £428 million is expected to be spent on defence research
and £1,920 million on development in 1989-90. Nearly all design and develop¬
ment of defence equipment is carried out by industry. The Ministry is seeking to
involve industry in the research programme and to promote civil applications.
As part of the Government’s policy of improving the strength of Britain’s science
base, the Ministry, together with the research councils, makes joint grants to
academic institutions in areas of research relevant to defence. The Government
announced in March 1989 that four of the Ministry’s non-nuclear research and
development establishments are to be combined into a single executive agency in
order to obtain better value for money.
Britain and other allies are participating in the United States’ Strategic Defence
Initiative (SDI), which was set up in 1983 to determine the feasibility of
establishing an effective defence against ballistic missile attack. In 1985 Britain
and the United States signed a Memorandum of Understanding to promote
British participation, and an SDI Participation Office was formed in the Ministry
of Defence to work in close concert with British firms and institutions. British
participation in the SDI programme, valued at $65 million by 1989, is intended
to enhance Britain’s research in areas of high technology relevant to both
defence and civil programmes.
DEFENCE
109
Alliance
Co-operation
Production
Defence Sales
International co-operation has been a feature of armaments procurement for
over 20 years, and Britain was one of its pioneers in programmes such as the
Anglo-French Jaguar aircraft and Lynx/Puma/Gazelle helicopter package; the
FH70 towed howitzer developed jointly with the Federal Republic of Germany
and Italy; and the highly successful Tornado aircraft developed and produced
with the same two partners. Britain also worked with the United States on the
Harrier GR5 programme.
In recent years there has been a growing recognition that more, and more
systematic, collaboration will be necessary for the future if Britain and its
Alliance partners are to eliminate wasteful duplication of effort and make better
use of limited resources. Britain is playing an active role in the promotion of this
co-operation in forums such as NATO, the Conference of National Armaments
Directors, and the Independent European Programme Group.
Major new programmes under way as part of this process include the EH 101
helicopter (with Italy), the new European Fighter Aircraft (with the Federal
Republic of Germany, Italy and Spain), the multiple-launch rocket system (with
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy and the United States) and the
third generation anti-tank guided weapon (with France and the Federal Republic
of Germany).
In accordance with its plans to introduce private capital into the company, the
Government sold Royal Ordnance pic to British Aerospace pic in April 1987. The
same principles were behind the Government’s decision to introduce from 1987
commercial management to two of the Royal Dockyards, at Devonport and
Rosyth, which carry out most of the refitting and repair of Royal Navy ships.
Sales of British defence equipment enable allies and friendly governments to
take advantage of Britain’s extensive research and development programmes to
improve their own defence. The Defence Export Services Organisation of the
Ministry of Defence provides a wide range of assistance to industry in promoting
equipment and negotiating contracts with overseas customers. This includes
collecting market information, demonstrating equipment, providing expert
military advice, training and support, staging exhibitions and negotiating with
overseas governments. The Ministry of Defence owns International Military
Services Ltd, a commercial company, which secures and discharges export
contracts for British defence equipment and associated services.
Britain is one of the West’s top three defence exporters, and new contracts
signed in 1988 amounted to some £3,500 million. Export orders for defence
equipment continue to maintain more than 100,000 jobs.
Civil Defence
Civil defence arrangements are based on the extended and adapted use of the
peacetime resources of government departments, local authorities, emergency
services and nationalised industries, supplemented by the efforts of voluntary
organisations and individual volunteers. Civil defence regulations introduced in
1983 require local authorities to make and keep up to date plans for a range of
essential functions in the event of war; to arrange training and exercises for civil
defence staff and volunteers; and to provide suitable emergency centres for
direction of civil defence in wartime. Following legislation in 1986, local
authorities may use their civil defence resources in responding to peacetime
emergencies.
Expenditure on civil defence has been growing steadily and was about £105
million in 1988—89. This is being used to improve the quality and readiness of
central and local government planning; increase training opportunities
110
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
arranged by the Home Office on staff college lines at the Civil Defence College,
Easingwold; help local authorities to plan for better community involvement in
civil defence; and improve the emergency system for decentralised government
control and communications. Improvements are also being made in the com¬
munications, equipment and administrative facilities of the United King¬
dom Warning and Monitoring Organisation. This includes the civilian Royal
Observer Corps, which is organised to provide public warning of an attack, of
the location and strength of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level
of radioactive fall-out.
Recent
Measures
Justice and the Law
The Law
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, England and Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland all have their own legal systems and law courts. There is
substantial similarity on many points, but considerable differences remain in
law, organisation and practice. In Northern Ireland procedure closely resembles
that of England and Wales, but there are often differences in enacted law.
However, a large volume of modern legislation applies throughout the United
Kingdom and there is a common distinction between criminal law, concerned
with wrongful acts harmful to the community, and civil law, concerned with
individuals’ rights, duties and obligations towards one another.
The main sources of law are legislation, common law and European Commun¬
ity law. Legislation consists of Acts of Parliament, Orders (rules and regulations
made by ministers under the authority of an Act of Parliament) and by-laws
made by local government or other authorities exercising powers conferred by
Parliament. Common law, the ancient law of the land deduced from custom and
interpreted in court cases by judges, has never been precisely defined or codified
but forms the basis of the law except when superseded by legislation. European
Community law is confined mainly to economic and social matters; in certain
circumstances it takes precedence over domestic law. It is normally applied by
the domestic courts, but the most authoritative rulings are given by the
Community’s European Court of Justice.
Certain changes to United Kingdom law have been enacted as a result of
rulings of the European Court of Human Rights in particular cases where the
domestic law was in breach of the Council of Europe’s Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, to which the United
Kingdom is a party.
Criminal Justice
The Government’s strategy for dealing with crime is to sustain the rule of law by
preventing crime where possible; to detect culprits when crimes are committed;
to convict the guilty and acquit the innocent; to deal firmly, adequately and
sensibly with those found guilty; and to provide more effective support for the
victims of crime. It is also concerned with ensuring that public confidence in the
criminal justice system and a proper balance between the rights of the citizen
and the needs of the community as a whole are maintained.
With continuing concern in Britain, as in many other countries, over rising
crime rates, public expenditure on the criminal justice system has increased
from about £2,000 million in 1979-80 to an estimated £6,000 million in
1988-89, an increase in real terms of about 50 per cent. Recent increases have
been made to cover, in particular, greater police manpower, the probation
service and extra spending on prison building. More than two-thirds of total
expenditure is initially incurred by local government authorities (with the help
of central government grants), mainly on the police service.
A number of measures to strengthen the criminal justice system have been
taken. The Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 provides for the pre-trial freezing
of suspected drug traffickers’ assets, backed up on conviction by immediate
confiscation of the full value of the proceeds from trafficking activities (or that
112
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Criminal
Law
Crime Statistics
which is realisable); similar provisions are included in the Criminal Justice
(Scotland) Act 1987. Under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 a court may also make
a confiscation order against the proceeds arising from offences such as robbery,
fraud, blackmail and insider dealing in shares. The Public Order Act 1986
codifies the common law offences of riot, unlawful assembly and affray; en¬
hances the powers of the police to control public processions and assemblies
likely to result in serious disorder or disruption; strengthens the law against
incitement to racial hatred; and provides additional powers to combat football
hooliganism. Under the Criminal Justice Act 1987 a Serious Fraud Office with
wide powers to investigate and prosecute serious or complex fraud in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland was established in 1988.
The Criminal Justice Act 1988 introduced, among other things, tougher
controls on the carrying of knives and other offensive weapons in England and
Wales and put the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme on a statutory
footing. Legislation was also passed in 1988 imposing tighter controls on the
registration and possession of licensed firearms and shotguns; it also banned
the private ownership of a number of lethal weapons such as high-powered
self-loading rifles and burst-fire weapons.
The criminal law, like the law generally, is interpreted by the courts, but changes
in the law are matters for Parliament. In practice most legislation affecting
criminal law is government-sponsored, but there is usually consultation be¬
tween government departments and the legal profession, the police, the proba¬
tion service (in Scotland, the social work agencies) and voluntary bodies.
Differences in the legal systems, police recording practices and statistical
classifications in the countries of the United Kingdom make it impracticable to
analyse in detail trends in crime for the country as a whole. Nevertheless, it is
clear that, as in Western Europe generally, there has been a substantial increase
in crime since the early 1950s. However, official statistics cover only crime
recorded by the police and may thus be affected by changes in the proportion of
crimes which are undiscovered or unreported. The level of police manning and
deployment of the force may also affect recording.
Table 5 shows the rate of notifiable offences recorded by the police in England
and Wales in 1986, 1987 and 1988.
Table 5: Notifiable Offences Recorded by the Police in England and Wales
1986, 1987 and 1988 (Thousands)
Offence group
1986
1987
1988
Violence against the person
Sexual offences
Burglary
Robbery
Theft and handling stolen goods
Fraud and forgery
Criminal damage
Other
125-5
22-7
931-6
30-0
2,003-9
133-4
583-6
16-7
141-0
25-2
900-1
32-6
2,052-0
133-0
589-0
19-3
158-2
26-5
817-8
31-4
1,931-3
133-9
593-9
22-7
Total
3,847-4 3,892-2 3,715-7
Source: Home Office.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
113
Crime
Prevention
Compensation
The number of such offences in 1988 was 3-7 million,1 of which 35 per cent
were cleared up. Clear-up rates for certain very serious offences were much
higher—over 90 per cent for homicide and 75 per cent for violence against the
person and for sexual offences. The Scottish police recorded 469,986 crimes, of
which 34 per cent were cleared up.
Some 94 per cent of crime is against property, much of this being relatively small
scale. This reinforces the need, in the Government’s view, to encourage the
development of crime prevention schemes.
The national crime prevention programme is overseen by the Ministerial
Group on Crime Prevention and seeks to give effect to the Government’s aim of
making crime prevention an integral part of the thinking and activity of all
organisations and individuals. National publicity campaigns, such as the Crack
Crime campaign launched in 1988, are a regular feature of the Government’s
programmes. The Home Office’s Crime Prevention Unit helps local agencies to
design and implement preventive measures and to assess the results.
Other government departments are brought together with the Home Office in
a ministerial group to deal with crime prevention strategies. The Department of
the Environment’s Priority Estates Project and Estate Action Programme are
designed to encourage improvements in the design, layout and management of
housing estates. The gas and electricity boards have speeded up their pro¬
gramme of replacing domestic prepayment gas and electricity meters by cashless
or ‘token’ meters, so removing a prime target for burglaries.
Local crime prevention panels—each assisted by the police crime prevention
department—identify crime problems and try to tackle them through publicity,
marking goods and equipment and fund raising to buy security devices. The
panels have been closely involved with the setting up of some 74,000 neighbour¬
hood watch schemes. In 1988 an independent national crime prevention
organisation. Crime Concern, was launched to encourage local initiatives such
as crime prevention panels and neighbourhood watch schemes, and to stimulate
business participation in crime prevention.
In 1986 five local projects were set up with government support to see how
crime and the fear of crime could be reduced through co-ordinated action by
local government, private businesses, the police and voluntary agencies. As part
of the Government’s Safer Cities projects, this successful model is being adapted
for use in 20 inner city areas.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme provides compensation to victims
of violent crimes (including violence within the family), to people hurt while
trying to arrest offenders and prevent offences and to those bereaved as a result
of violence. Compensation is assessed on the basis of common law damages and
usually takes the form of a lump-sum payment. In 1987-88 nearly 27,500 cases
were resolved by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board and over £52
million was paid in compensation. Under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 the
Scheme will be established on a statutory basis; this means that victims of
violent crime will be entitled to compensation as of right. A court in England and
Wales may also order a convicted offender to pay compensation to his or her
victim; any payment received does not prejudice a victim’s entitlement to apply
to the Board.
In Northern Ireland there is separate, statutory provision in certain circum¬
stances for compensation from public funds for criminal injuries, and for
malicious damage to property, including the resulting losses of profits.
Excluding ‘other criminal damage’ valued at £20 and under.
114
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Measures to
Combat
Terrorism
There has been a rapid growth in the number of locally run victim support
schemes which offer practical help to the victims of crime on a voluntary basis.
The Government provides financial assistance, both to local schemes and to a
national association.
Legislation to protect the public against terrorism has given the authorities
certain exceptional powers for dealing with and preventing terrorist activities,
while taking account of the need to achieve a proper balance between the safety
of the public and the rights of the individual. While acknowledging that the
special powers make inroads into civil liberties, the Government believes that
they should continue in force as long as a substantial terrorist threat remains.
Nobody can be imprisoned for political beliefs; all prisoners, except those
awaiting trial, have been found guilty in court of criminal offences. The
legislation is reviewed annually by an independent person whose reports are
presented to Parliament.
The Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Acts 1978 and 1987 give the
security forces in Northern Ireland special powers to search, question and arrest
suspected terrorists; allow the Secretary of State to proscribe terrorist organisa¬
tions; and provide for certain serious offences to be tried by a judge sitting alone
without a jury to obviate the dangers of intimidation of jurors. The 1987 Act
makes provision for statutory time limits to be imposed on the time an accused
person may be held in custody awaiting trial, although these powers so far have
not been invoked. The maximum period for which the police can hold a
suspected terrorist on their own authority has been reduced from 72 to 48
hours. Statements obtained by the use or threat of violence are inadmissible in
court. Renewable each year, the Emergency Provisions Acts expire in 1992.
The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1989 (first intro¬
duced in 1974), which is applicable throughout the United Kingdom, provides
for the exclusion from Great Britain, Northern Ireland or the United Kingdom of
people connected with terrorism related to Northern Ireland affairs and for the
proscription of terrorist organisations in Great Britain. It also gives the police
powers to arrest people suspected of being involved in terrorism (whether
international or relating to Northern Ireland) without warrant and hold them for
48 hours and, with the approval of the Secretary of State, for up to a further five
days. It is a criminal offence to handle, give or receive funds for use in the
furtherance of, or in connection with, terrorism. Police are able to apply for a
court order to freeze a suspect’s assets once he or she has been charged and
funds can be confiscated if a person is convicted. The 1989 Act has no expiry
date but is renewable annually in whole or in part by Parliament.
The security forces in Northern Ireland are responsible for enforcing the law
and are accountable to it. If they break it, their members are liable to prosecu¬
tion through the courts, and in a number of cases prosecution has led to
conviction. An independent commission deals with complaints made against
police officers (see p 116).
The Criminal Jurisdiction Act 1975 makes it possible to tiy in Northern
Ireland a person accused of certain offences committed in the Irish Republic. It
also enables evidence to be obtained in Northern Ireland for the trial of offences
in the Irish Republic. Reciprocal legislation is in force in the Irish Republic.
One of the aims of the Anglo-Irish Agreement signed in November 1985 is to
improve security co-operation in combating terrorism.
Britain attaches importance to international action to combat terrorism and
plays an active part in the work of various bodies, including that of a group of
European Community ministers (known as ‘Trevi’), which facilitates the con¬
fidential exchange of information and intelligence about terrorism affecting
member countries. Britain believes that there should be no concessions to
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
115
THE POLICE
SERVICE
Forces
Police
Authorities and
Chief
Constables
terrorist demands and that international co-operation should take place on
tracking down and arresting terrorists and on impeding the movement of
international terrorists from one country to another.
In enforcing the law, police action rests mainly upon common consent, for there
is only a small number of officers in relation to the population (roughly one
officer to every 400 or so people). Officers in Great Britain do not normally carry
firearms (their only weapon is a truncheon) and there are strict limits to police
powers. Because of the emergency situation in Northern Ireland, the police there
are armed.
The powers of the police in England and Wales have been modernised and
clarified by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, which at the same time
has enhanced safeguards for the citizen. The Act does not generally extend to
Scotland or Northern Ireland, where separate legislation applies. A draft Police
and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order was approved by Parliament in
July 1989; under the Order a number of major reforms are being made to the
criminal law (as distinct from the emergency legislation, see p 114) to bring it
broadly into line with that adopted in England and Wales by the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act.
The interception of communications on behalf of the police is regulated by the
Interception of Communications Act 1985, which sets out the grounds on which
certain Secretaries of State are empowered to authorise interception of postal
and telephone services. So far as the police are concerned, these are the
prevention and detection of serious crime, and, in some instances, the protec¬
tion of national security. The other ground for interception is the safeguarding
of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom. Interception outside the
procedures established by the Act is a criminal offence.
Each of Britain’s 52 police forces is responsible for law enforcement in its area,
but there is constant co-operation between them.
Outside London most counties (regions in Scotland) have their own police
forces, though in the interests of efficiency several have combined forces. The
policing of London is in the hands of the Metropolitan Police Force, with
headquarters at New Scotland Yard, and the City of London force. The strength
of the regular police in Britain at the end of 1988 was over 146,500 (including
over 14,800 policewomen); of these nearly 28,000 belonged to the Metropolitan
Police Force, 6,800 to the Strathclyde Police Force in Scotland, and almost 8,200
to the Royal Ulster Constabulary. It is recognised that the composition of the
police forces should reflect the make-up of a multiracial society and efforts are
being made to encourage more members of the ethnic minorities to join them.
Police forces are maintained by police authorities. In England and Wales these
are committees of local county councillors and magistrates, and in Scotland the
regional and islands councils. The police authority for London’s Metropolitan
Police Force is the Home Secretary. In Northern Ireland the police authority is
appointed by the Secretary of State.
The police authority’s functions, some subject to ministerial approval, include
appointing the chief constable, deputy chief constable and assistant chief
constables; fixing the maximum permitted strength of the force; and providing
buildings and equipment. In the Metropolitan Police area the commissioner of
police and his immediate subordinates are appointed on the recommendation of
the Home Secretary. The police authorities are financed by central and local
government.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police forces
and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below assistant
116
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Central
Authorities
Status and
Duties
chief constable. They are generally answerable to the police authorities on
matters of efficiency, and must submit a report every year.
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland approve the appointment of chief, deputy and assistant chief constables,
and may require a police authority to retire a chief constable in the interests of
efficiency, call for a report from a chief constable on matters relating to local
policing or institute a local inquiry. They can make regulations covering such
matters as police ranks; qualifications for appointment, promotion and retire¬
ment; discipline; hours of duty, leave, pay and allowances; and uniform. Some of
these regulations are first negotiable within the Police Negotiating Board for the
United Kingdom, which has an independent chairman and representatives of
the police authorities, police staff associations and the home departments.
Matters of a non-negotiable kind and general questions are discussed by the
Police Advisory Boards.
All police forces (except the Metropolitan Police) are subject to statutory
inspection by inspectors of constabulary reporting to the appropriate Secretary
of State. Inspectors maintain close touch with the forces they inspect and have
advisory functions. Under separate arrangements, the Inspectorate of Consta¬
bulary also undertakes inspections of selected parts of the Metropolitan Police
(for which the Home Secretary is directly responsible).
A British police officer is subject to the law and may be sued or prosecuted for
any wrongful act committed in carrying out duties. Police discipline codes are
designed to prevent any abuse of the considerable powers enjoyed by a police
officer, to ensure the impartiality of the service in its dealings with the public
and to maintain public confidence. Statutory procedures, including an indepen¬
dent element, govern the way in which complaints from the public against the
police are handled. The independent Police Complaints Authority has powers to
supervise the investigation of any serious complaint against a police officer in
England and Wales. In Scotland complaints against police officers involving
allegations of any form of criminal conduct are investigated by independent
public prosecutors.
In Northern Ireland the Independent Commission for Police Complaints is
required to supervise any case involving death or serious injury and has the
power to supervise the formal investigation of any other complaint if it so
wishes; in certain circumstances the Secretary of State may direct the Commis¬
sion to supervise the investigation of matters that are not the subject of a formal
complaint.
Police work ranges from the protection of people and property, road or street
patrolling (the trend is increasingly away from the car patrol and back to
community policing on foot) and traffic control to crime prevention, criminal
investigation and arresting offenders. In urban areas, particularly, police
officers have to deal with social problems and may bring in other social agencies
and expert help.
Most forces have community liaison departments to co-ordinate their efforts
to produce good relations with the community. The Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984 requires arrangements to be made for obtaining the views of
people in the area about the policing of it and for obtaining their co-operation
with the police in preventing crime. Almost all areas have police/community
consultative groups which enable people to discuss issues of concern with the
police in a constructive spirit. Particular efforts are made to develop relations
with young people, through greater contact with schools, for example. Emphasis
is also placed on relations with ethnic minorities; racially discriminatory
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
117
Common
Services
Powers of
Arrest
Detention,
Treatment and
Questioning
behaviour by police officers is an offence under the Police Discipline Code, and
training in community relations is available to officers.
To release as many uniformed police officers as possible for operational duties,
police authorities employ over 42,100 full-time civilians in England and Wales
and over 3,500 in Scotland. The number of civilian support staff has been
growing as forces secure economies by replacing police officers with civilians
where posts do not require police powers and training. Traffic wardens (of whom
there are over 4,650 in England and Wales and about 530 in Scotland) carry out
specified duties concerned with traffic and parking. Wardens are under the
control of the chief constable.
Each force has an attachment of volunteer special constables who perform
police duties in their spare time, without pay, acting mainly as auxiliaries to the
regular force. In Northern Ireland there is a 4,600-strong part-time and full-time
paid reserve.
Members of the police service may not belong to a trade union nor may they
withdraw their labour in furtherance of a trade dispute. All ranks, however, have
their own staff associations to represent their interests.
There are a number of common services provided by central government and by
arrangements between forces. In England and Wales the most important of these
cover forensic science, telecommunications and the central and provincial
criminal records available to all forces. In Scotland the main common services
cover centralised police training, the Scottish Crime Squad and the Scottish
Criminal Record Office. Certain special services such as liaison with the
International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol) are provided for other
British forces by the Metropolitan Police. The National Drugs Intelligence Unit
assists police forces and the Customs service throughout Britain. The services of
the Fraud Squad, run jointly by the Metropolitan Police and City of London
Police to investigate company frauds, are available in England and Wales.
In all areas of police work the use of scientific aids is widespread. A national
police computer helps to rationalise records and speed up the dissemination of
information.
In England and Wales arrests may be made with or without a warrant issued by a
magistrate. The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 provides a general
conditional power to arrest a person reasonably suspected of any offence but this
power can only be used in order to ensure that a person can be brought before a
court (for example, because of failure to give a satisfactory address for service of a
summons or in order to prevent injury to persons or property). The Act
categorises certain offences as ‘arrestable’ or ‘serious arrestable’ and provides a
full power of arrest without warrant in respect of them for the protection of the
public.
A code of practice on detention, treatment and questioning is one of five codes
which the Home Secretary has issued under the 1984 Act. Failure to comply with
the provisions of these codes can render a police officer liable to disciplinary
proceedings.
An arrested person has a statutory right to consult a solicitor and to ask the
police to notify a named person likely to take an interest in his or her welfare
about the arrest. Where a person has been arrested in connection with a serious
arrestable offence, but has not yet been charged, the police may delay for up to
36 hours the exercise of these rights in the interests of the investigation if
certain criteria are met. The police must caution a person whom there are
grounds to suspect of an offence before any questions are put for the purpose of
obtaining evidence. Questions relating to an offence may normally not be put to
118
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Charging
a person after he or she has been charged with that offence or informed that he
or she may be prosecuted for it.
The detention scheme in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act provides for a
person to be detained only if, and for as long as, necessary for a purpose specified
by law up to a maximum of 96 hours before charge. A person can only be
detained beyond 36 hours if a warrant is obtained from a magistrates’ court.
Reviews must be made of a person’s detention (whether before or after charge)
at regular intervals—six hours after initial detention and thereafter every nine
hours as a maximum—to check whether the criteria for detention are still
satisfied. If they are not, the person must be released immediately.
The Police and Criminal Evidence Act provides for the tape recording of
interviews with suspected offenders at police stations. Already underway in
some police authority areas, this practice will eventually be extended to the
whole of England and Wales by the early 1990s. A code of practice governing
these tape recordings has been approved by Parliament and published.
As a practical means of developing public confidence in the treatment of
people detained by the police, the Government is encouraging the establishment
of schemes in England and Wales whereby lay visitors make random checks on
the treatment of persons detained in police stations and the conditions in which
they are held. Lay visitor schemes have been established in the majority of
Greater London boroughs and more are being set up in other parts of the
country. The schemes have helped improve relations between the police and the
local community, particularly in inner city areas.
A person who thinks that the grounds for detention are unlawful1 may apply
to the High Court for a writ of habeas corpus against the person who detained
him or her, requiring that person to appear before the court to justify the
detention. An application for this writ is normally made by the person detained
or by someone acting on his or her behalf. Similar procedures apply in Northern
Ireland.
As soon as there is sufficient evidence to charge a person, the police must decide
on an appropriate method of dealing with him or her. As an alternative to
charging immediately, they can, for example, decide to defer charging, to
caution, or to take no further action and release the person with or without bail.
Where an immediate charge is appropriate the person may continue to be held in
custody if the name or address furnished is considered suspect, if there are
grounds for believing that detention is necessary for his or her own protection or
to prevent harm to people or property, or if there is a risk that the person would
otherwise fail to appear in court or could interfere with the administration of
justice. When no such considerations apply, the person must be released with or
without bail, depending on the circumstances of the case. Where a person is
detained after charge, there is provision in the Act for him or her to be brought
before a magistrates’ court quickly. This will usually be no later than the
following day.
Under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 there is provision for statutory
time limits on the period from arrest to the beginning of trial in England and
Wales: time limits are in force in most English counties and throughout Wales
and are to be phased in elsewhere with the aim of their being in force throughout
England by the end of 1990. The limits are 56 days from first appearance before
magistrates to summary trial or 70 days to committal for trial in the Crown
Court. The limit is 112 days from committal to taking of the plea in the case of
Detention is lawful in pursuance of criminal justice, for contempt of court or of either House of
Parliament and when expressly authorised by Parliament. It is also sometimes lawful in the case
of the mentally disordered.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
119
Grant of Bail
by the Court
Scotland
CRIMINAL
COURTS
Prosecution
the Crown Court. When a time limit expires the defendant is entitled to bail
unless the court extends the limit; it can only do this if satisfied that there is a
good and sufficient reason and that the prosecution has acted expeditiously.
It is a basic principle of the British criminal justice system that accused people
should not be remanded in custody except where strictly necessary. Under the
Bail Act 1976, which applies to England and Wales, the court decides whether a
defendant should be released on bail pending trial. Unconditional bail may only
be withheld in certain specified circumstances, for instance, if the court has
substantial grounds for believing that the accused person would abscond,
commit an offence, interfere with witnesses, or otherwise obstruct the course of
justice if released on bail. A court may also impose conditions before granting
bail. If bail is refused, the defendant may apply to a High Court judge or to the
Crown Court for bail, and application can be made to the Crown Court for
conditions imposed by a magistrates’ court to be varied. The majority of people
remanded by magistrates are given bail. There are 265 places in 16 bail hostels
for people awaiting trial in England and Wales and 500 new places will be
available by 1991. In addition there are some 83 probation/bail hostels financed
by the Government and local authorities.
In Scotland the police may detain and question a suspected person for a period
of up to six hours. Thereafter the person must either be released or charged. An
arrest must be accompanied by a criminal charge. Once a person has been
charged only voluntary statements will normally be allowed in evidence at the
trial. The court will reject statements unless satisfied that they have been fairly
obtained. The tape recording of interviews with suspected persons is being
implemented over a period of two years which began in 1988. Anyone arrested
must be brought before a court with the least possible delay (generally not later
than the first day after being taken into custody), or—in less serious cases—
liberated by the police, often on a written undertaking to attend court on a
specified date. Where a prosecution on indictment is intended (that is, where an
accusation of a more serious offence is to be made), the accused is brought
before the sheriff to be committed, either for further examination or until
liberated in due course of law. A judicial examination may take place. A
maximum of eight days may elapse between commitment for further examina¬
tion and commitment until liberated in due course of law. The latter—which is
also described as ‘full committal’—is commitment for trial. No evidence needs to
be presented to the sheriff for such commitment. Anyone accused of a crime,
except murder or treason, is entitled to apply for release on bail. Even in cases of
murder or treason, bail may be granted at the discretion of the Lord Advocate or
a quorum of the High Court. Money bail has been virtually abolished and the
courts, or the Lord Advocate, may release an accused person on conditions.
Breach of any of the conditions without reasonable excuse is a separate
offence. There is a right of appeal to the High Court by the accused person
against the refusal of bail, or by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by
either party against the conditions imposed. The writ of habeas corpus does not
apply in Scotland, but if a person is to be prosecuted on indictment and has been
kept in custody pending trial, the trial must begin within 110 days of the date of
full committal. The trial of a person charged with a summary offence and held in
custody must begin within 40 days of the date of first appearance in court.
In England and Wales the initial decision to begin criminal proceedings normally
lies with the police. Once the police have brought a criminal charge, the papers
are passed to the Crown Prosecution Service, which decides whether to prose¬
cute. In Scotland public prosecutors (procurators fiscal) decide whether to bring
120
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England and
Wales
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Serious
Fraud
Office
proceedings. In Northern Ireland there is a Director of Public Prosecutions. In
England and Wales (and exceptionally in Scotland) a private person may
institute criminal proceedings. Police may issue cautions, and in Scotland the
procurator fiscal may warn instead of prosecuting.
The Crown Prosecution Service prosecutes criminal offences in magistrates’
courts and the Crown Court. The Service, headed by the Director of Public
Prosecutions, is divided into 31 areas, each headed by a locally based Chief
Crown Prosecutor appointed by the Director. The Service provides lawyers to
prosecute cases in the magistrates’ courts and briefs barristers to appear in the
Crown Court. Although the decision to prosecute is generally delegated to the
Chief Crown Prosecutors, some cases are dealt with by the headquarters of the
Service; these include cases of national importance, exceptional difficulty or
great public concern and those which require that suggestions of local influence
be avoided. Such cases might include terrorist offences, breaches of the Official
Secrets Act, large-scale conspiracies to import drugs and the prosecution of
police officers.
Discharging his duties through the Crown Office, the Lord Advocate is responsi¬
ble for prosecutions in the High Court of Justiciary, sheriff courts and district
courts. There is no general right of private prosecution; with a few minor
exceptions crimes and offences may be prosecuted only by the Lord Advocate or
his deputies or by the procurators fiscal, who are the Lord Advocate’s local
officials. The permanent adviser to the Lord Advocate on prosecution matters is
the Crown Agent, who is head of the procurator fiscal service and is assisted in
the Crown Office by a staff of legally qualified civil servants, all of whom have had
experience as depute procurators fiscal. Prosecutions in the High Court are
prepared hy procurators fiscal and Crown Office officials and prosecuted by the
Lord Advocate, the Solicitor General for Scotland (the Lord Advocate’s
ministerial deputy) and advocates depute, who are collectively known as Crown
Counsel. Crimes tried before the sheriff and district courts are prepared and
prosecuted by procurators fiscal. The police and other law enforcement agencies
investigate crimes and offences and report to the procurator fiscal, who decides
whether to prosecute, subject to the directions of Crown Counsel.
Under the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1987 a procurator fiscal may make
a conditional offer of fixed penalty to an alleged offender in respect of certain
minor offences as an alternative to prosecution: the offender is not obliged to
accept an offer but if he or she does so the prosecution loses the right to
prosecute.
The Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland, who is responsible to
the Attorney General, prosecutes all offences tried on indictment, and may do so
in summary cases of a serious nature. Other summary offences are prosecuted
by the police.
The Serious Fraud Office—a government department—investigates and prose¬
cutes the most serious and complex cases of fraud in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. Investigations are conducted by teams of lawyers and police
officers, each headed by a case controller who decides whether or not to
prosecute, although this decision may, if necessary, be taken by a more senior
lawyer. If proceedings are instituted, the case controller and the case secretary
prepare the case for trial and instruct counsel for the prosecution. The Office has
computer-aided equipment for the presentation of evidence in a graphic form to
make it more comprehensible to jurors.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
121
Courts in
England and
Wales
Appeals
Criminal offences may be grouped into three categories. Offences triable only on
indictment—the very serious offences such as murder, manslaughter, rape and
robbery—are tried only by the Crown Court presided over by a judge sitting with
a jury. Summary offences—the least serious offences and the vast majority of
criminal cases—are tried by unpaid lay magistrates sitting without a jury. A
third category of offences (such as theft, burglary or malicious wounding) are
known as ‘either way’ offences and can be tried either by magistrates or by the
Crown Court, depending on the circumstances of each case and the wishes of
the defendant.
In addition to dealing with summary offences and the ‘either way’ offences
which are entrusted to them, the magistrates’ courts commit cases to the Crown
Court either for trial or for sentence. Committals for trial are either of offences
triable only on indictment or of ‘either way’ offences which it has been
determined will be tried in the Crown Court. Committals for sentence occur
when the defendant in an ‘either way’ case has been tried summarily but the
court has decided to commit him or her to the Crown Court for sentence.
Magistrates must as a rule sit in open court, to which the public and the
media are admitted. A court normally consists of three lay magistrates—known
as justices of the peace—advised on points of law and procedure by a legally
qualified clerk or a qualified assistant. Magistrates are appointed by the Lord
Chancellor, except in Lancashire, Greater Manchester and Merseyside, where
appointments are made by the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. There are
nearly 28,000 lay magistrates.
There are 63 full-time, legally qualified stipendiary magistrates who may sit
alone and usually preside in courts in urban areas where the workload is heavy.
Cases involving people under 17 are heard in juvenile courts. These are
specially constituted magistrates’ courts which either sit apart from other courts
or are held at a different time. Only limited categories of people may be present
and media reports must not identify any juvenile appearing either as a defen¬
dant or a witness. Where a young person under 17 is charged jointly with
someone of 17 or over, the case is heard in an ordinary magistrates’ court or the
Crown Court. If the young person is found guilty, the court may transfer the case
to a juvenile court for sentence unless satisfied that it is undesirable to do so.
The Crown Court deals with trials of the more serious cases, the sentencing of
offenders committed for sentence by magistrates’ courts, and appeals from
magistrates’ courts. It sits at about 90 centres and is presided over by High
Court judges, full-time ‘circuit judges’ and part-time recorders. All contested
trials take place before a jury. Magistrates sit with a circuit judge or recorder to
deal with appeals and committals for sentence.
In cases of serious or complex fraud full committal proceedings in magistrates’
courts may be bypassed at the discretion of the prosecution, but there is a
special procedure under which the accused is able to apply to the Crown Court to
be discharged on the ground that there is no case to answer.
A person convicted by a magistrates’ court may appeal to the Crown Court
against the sentence imposed if he or she has pleaded guilty; or against the
conviction or sentence imposed if he or she has pleaded not guilty. Where the
appeal is on a point of procedure or of law, either the prosecutor or the defendant
may appeal from the magistrates' court to the High Court (see p 136). Appeals
from the Crown Court, either against conviction or against sentence, are made
to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division). The House of Lords is the final appeal
court for all cases, from either the High Court or the Court of Appeal. Before a
case can go to the Lords, the court hearing the previous appeal must certify that
it involves a point of law of general public importance and either that court or the
122
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
Lords must grant leave for the appeal to be heard. The nine Lords of Appeal in
Ordinary are the judges who deal with Lords appeals.
The Attorney General may seek the opinion of the Court of Appeal on a point of
law which has arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is acquitted;
the court has power to refer the point to the House of Lords if necessary. The
acquittal in the original case is not affected, nor is the identity of the acquitted
person revealed without his or her consent. Under the Criminal Justice Act
1988, the Attorney General may refer a case to the Court of Appeal if he considers
that a sentence passed by the Crown Court is over-lenient; if the Court agrees, it
may increase the sentence within the statutory maximum laid down by Parlia¬
ment for the offence.
The High Court of Justiciary, which sits in Edinburgh and other major towns
and cities, tries the most serious crimes: it has exclusive jurisdiction in cases
involving murder, treason and rape. The sheriff court is concerned with less
serious offences and the district court with minor offences. Criminal cases are
heard either under solemn procedure, when proceedings are taken on indict¬
ment and the judge sits with a jury of 15 members, or under summary
procedure, when the judge sits without a jury. All cases in the High Court and
the more serious ones in sheriff courts are tried by a judge and jury. Summary
procedure is used in the less serious cases in the sheriff courts, and in all cases
in the district courts. District courts are the administrative responsibility of the
district and the islands local government authorities; the judges are lay justices
of the peace and the local authorities may appoint up to one-quarter of their
elected members to be ex o/ificio justices. In Glasgow there are four stipendiary
magistrates who are full-time salaried lawyers and have equivalent criminal
jurisdiction to a sheriff sitting under summary procedure. Children under 16
who have committed an offence are normally dealt with by children’s hearings
(see p 132).
All appeals are dealt with by the High Court. In both solemn and summary
procedure, an appeal may be brought by the accused against conviction, or
sentence, or both. The Court may authorise a retrial if it sets aside a conviction.
There is no further appeal to the House of Lords. In summary proceedings the
prosecutor may appeal on a point of law against acquittal or sentence. The Lord
Advocate may seek the opinion of the High Court on a point of law which has
arisen in a case where a person tried on indictment is acquitted. The acquittal in
the original case is not affected.
The structure of Northern Ireland courts is broadly similar to that in England
and Wales. Cases involving minor summary offences are heard by magistrates’
courts presided over by a full-time, legally qualified resident magistrate. Young
offenders under 17 and young people under 17 who need care, protection and
control are dealt with by juvenile courts consisting of the resident magistrate
and two lay members (at least one of whom must be a woman) specially qualified
to deal with juveniles. Appeals from magistrates’ courts are heard by the county
court; an appeal on a point of law alone can be heard by the Northern Ireland
Court of Appeal.
The Crown Court deals with criminal trials on indictment. It is served by High
Court and county court judges. Proceedings are heard before a single judge, and
all contested cases, other than those involving offences specified under emergen¬
cy legislation, take place before a jury. Appeals from the Crown Court against
conviction or sentence are heard by the Northern Ireland Court of Appeal.
Procedures for a further appeal to the House of Lords are similar to those in
England and Wales.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
123
Trial
The Jury
Criminal trials in the United Kingdom are a contest between the prosecution
and the defence. Since the law presumes the innocence of an accused person
until guilt has been proved, the prosecution is not granted any advantage,
apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant (in Scotland called an accused)
has the right to employ a legal adviser and may be granted legal aid from public
funds. If remanded in custody, the person may be visited by a legal adviser to
ensure a properly prepared defence. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the
prosecution usually tells the defence about relevant documents which it is not
proposed to put in evidence and discloses them if asked to do so. The
prosecution should also inform the defence of witnesses whose evidence may
help the accused and whom the prosecution does not propose to call. The
defence or prosecution may suggest that the defendant’s mental state renders
him or her unfit to be tried. If the jury (or in Scotland, the judge) decides that
this is so, the defendant is admitted to a specified hospital.
Criminal trials are normally in open court and rules of evidence (concerned
with the proof of facts) are rigorously applied. If evidence is improperly admitted,
a conviction can be quashed on appeal. During the trial the defendant has the
right to hear and cross-examine witnesses for the prosecution, normally
through a lawyer; to call his or her own witnesses who, if they will not attend
voluntarily, may be legally compelled to attend; and to address the court in
person or through a lawyer, the defence having the right to the last speech at the
trial. The defendant cannot be questioned without consenting to be sworn as a
witness in his or her own defence. When he or she does testify, cross-
examination about character or other conduct may be made only in exceptional
circumstances; generally the prosecution may not introduce such evidence.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the Criminal Justice Act 1987
provides that in complex fraud cases the judge may order a preparatory open
Crown Court hearing to be held at which he or she can hear and settle points of
law and define the issues to be put to the jury.
Injury trials the judge decides questions of law, sums up the evidence for the
jury and instructs it on the relevant law, and discharges the accused or passes
sentence. In England and Wales the jury is responsible for deciding whether a
defendant is ‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’, the latter verdict resulting in acquittal; if the
jury cannot reach a unanimous verdict, the judge may direct it to bring in a
majority verdict provided that, in the normal jury of 12 people, there are not
more than two dissenters.
In Scotland the jury’s verdict may be ‘guilty’, ‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’; the
accused is acquitted if one of the last two verdicts is given. The jury consists of
15 people and its verdict may be reached by simple majority. As a general rule no
one may be convicted without corroborating evidence.
If the jury acquits the defendant, the prosecution has no right of appeal and
the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. The defendant,
however, has a right of appeal to the appropriate court if found guilty.
A jury is completely independent of the judiciary. Any attempt to interfere with
a jury once it is sworn in is punishable under the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
The right of the defence to challenge up to three potential members of a jury
without giving any reason has been abolished in England and Wales; both
parties may, however, challenge potential jurors by giving reasons if they believe
that an individual juror is likely to be biased.
People between the ages of 18 and 65 (70 in England and Wales) whose names
appear on the electoral register, with certain exceptions, are liable for jury
service and their names are chosen at random. Ineligible persons includejudges,
priests, people who have within the previous ten years been members of the legal
profession, the Lord Chancellor’s Department or the police, prison and proba-
124
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Coroners’
Courts
TREATMENT
OF
OFFENDERS
Sentencing
Custody
tion services, and certain sufferers from mental illness. Persons disqualified
from jury service include those who have, within the previous ten years, served
any part of a sentence of imprisonment, youth custody or detention, or been
subject to a community service order, or, within the previous five years, been
placed on probation. Anyone who has been sentenced to five or more years’
imprisonment is disqualified for life.
Coroners investigate violent and unnatural deaths or sudden deaths where the
cause is unknown. Deaths may be reported to the local coroner (who is either
medically or legally qualified, or both) by doctors, the police, the registrar,
various public authorities or members of the public. If the death is sudden and
the cause unknown, the coroner need not hold an inquest if, after a post-mortem
examination has been made, he or she is satisfied that the death was due to
natural causes. Where there is reason to believe that the deceased died a violent
or unnatural death or died in prison or in other specified circumstances, the
coroner must hold an inquest and it is the duty of the coroner’s court to
establish how, when and where the deceased died. A coroner may sit alone, or in
certain circumstances, with a jury.
In Scotland the local procurator fiscal inquires privately into all sudden and
suspicious deaths and may report the findings to the Crown Office. In a minority
of cases a fatal accident inquiry may be held before the sheriff. For certain
categories (such as deaths in custody) a fatal accident inquiry is mandatory. In
addition, the Lord Advocate has discretion to instruct an inquiry in the public
interest in cases where the circumstances give rise to public concern.
The sentence passed on an offender is entirely a matter for the courts, subject to
the maximum penalty enacted by Parliament for each offence. The Government
ensures that the courts have available an adequate range of sentences to suit the
circumstances of each case and that they are well informed about the purpose
and nature of each available sentence. The Court of Appeal (see p 122) issues
guidance to the lower courts on sentencing issues when points of principle have
arisen on individual cases which are the subject of appeal.
The Government believes that custody should be a sanction of last resort used
only when the gravity of the offence means that there is a positive justification
for a custodial sentence, or where the public needs to be protected from a
dangerous offender. The Court of Appeal has stated that sentencers in England
and Wales should examine each case in which custody is necessary to ensure
that the term imposed is as short as possible, consistent with the courts' duty to
protect the interests of the public and to punish and deter the criminal. A
magistrates’ court in England and Wales cannot impose a term of more than six
months’ imprisonment for each offence tried summarily, but may impose
consecutive sentences subject to an overall maximum of 12 months’ imprison¬
ment. If an offence carries a higher maximum penalty, it may commit the
defendant for sentence at the Crown Court which, as with its other cases, may
impose—within the permitted statutory maximum—any other custodial penal¬
ty. In all three legal systems there is a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment
for murder; this is also the maximum penalty for a number of serious offences
such as robbery, rape, arson and manslaughter.
The death penalty has been repealed for almost all offences. It remains on the
statute book for the offences of treason, piracy with violence and some other
treasonable and mutinous offences; it has, however, not been used for any of
these offences since 1946.
In trials on indictment in Scotland the High Court may impose a sentence of
imprisonment for any term up to life, and the sheriff court any term up to three
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
125
Non-custodial
Treatment
Fines
Probation
years but may send any person to the High Court for sentence if the court
considers its powers are insufficient. In summary cases, the sheriff may
normally impose up to three months’ imprisonment or six months’ for some
repeated offences, although his powers are extended by statute in some excep¬
tional cases. In the district court the maximum term of imprisonment is 60
days.
In Northern Ireland the position is generally the same as for England and
Wales. A magistrates’ court, however, cannot commit an offender for sentencing
at the Crown Court if it has tried the case, but there are circumstances where
the court can impose imprisonment of more than six months; a term of up to 12
months, for instance, can be imposed when a magistrates’ court deals summari¬
ly with an indictable offence or imposes consecutive terms of imprisonment for
two or more offences.
Since successive British Governments have believed that non-custodial treat¬
ment should be used by the courts wherever possible, there has been an
expansion in the range of such penalties; these include fines, probation,
supervision, community service, suspended prison sentences and absolute or
conditional discharge. In 1988 the Government issued a consultative document
on punishment within the community suggesting that courts in England and
Wales should be able to impose a new supervision and restriction order (instead
of a prison sentence) on an offender which could include compensation to the
victim, community service, residence at a hostel or other appointed place,
prescribed activities at a day centre or elsewhere, curfew or house arrest, or
tracking an offender’s whereabouts.
The most common sentence is a fine, which is imposed in more than 80 per cent
of cases. There is no limit to the fine (unless set by statute) which may be
imposed on indictment; on summary conviction the maximum limit, except in
certain exceptional circumstances, is £2,000 in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, and in Scotland £2,000 in the sheriff court and £1,000 in the district
court.
At present in the United Kingdom the number of offenders subject to supervi¬
sion in the community considerably exceeds the number in custody. The
purpose of probation is to protect society by the rehabilitation of the offender,
who continues to live a normal life in the community while subject to the
supervision of a probation officer. Before placing an offender on probation,
which may last from six months to three years, the court must explain the order
in ordinary language, ensuring that the offender consents to the requirements
of the order and understands that a failure to comply with them will make him or
her liable to a penalty or to being dealt with for the original offence. In England
and Wales such an order can be made only for offenders aged 17 years or more. In
Scotland the minimum age is 16 years and in Northern Ireland 10 years. About
17 per cent of orders in England and Wales contain a variety of additional
requirements concerning place of residence, attendance at day centres or
treatment for mental illness.
The probation service provides and maintains day centres and hostels
together with schemes and programmes designed to meet the needs of a broad
range of offenders. In England and Wales it also administers supervision orders,
the community service scheme and parole. In addition, social work services are
provided in custodial establishments.
In England and Wales the cost of the probation service is shared between
central and local government and it is administered locally by probation
committees of magistrates and members co-opted from the local community. In
126
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Community
Service
Suspended
Sentences
Compensation
and
Reparation
Other Measures
Scotland probation services are integrated with local authority social work
departments, and in Northern Ireland the service is administered by a probation
board, whose membership is representative of the community and which is
funded by central government.
Offenders aged 16 or over (17 in Northern Ireland) convicted of imprisonable
offences may, with their consent, be given community service orders. The court
may order between 40 and 240 hours’ unpaid service (the maximum in England
and Wales is 120 hours for 16-year-olds) to be completed within 12 months.
(This does not apply in Northern Ireland.) Examples of work done include
decorating the houses of old or disabled people and building adventure play¬
grounds. The number of community service orders made in England and Wales
increased from 28,040 in 1981 to 31,300 in 1988 and in Scotland from 1,083 in
1981 to 3,287 in 1987. In Northern Ireland the number fell from 811 in 1987 to
709 in 1988.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland a court is free to pass a suspended
sentence of not more than two years. (A draft Treatment of Offenders [Northern
Ireland] Order will allow sentences for serious offences to be suspended for up to
five years.) The sentence is not served unless the offender is convicted of a
further offence punishable with imprisonment; in that event the suspended
sentence normally takes effect and another sentence may be imposed for the new
offence. In England and Wales an offender receiving a suspended sentence of
more than six months may be placed under the supervision of a probation officer
for all or part of the period: courts also have the power, when passing a sentence
of between three months' and two years’ imprisonment, to order that part
should be served and the rest held in suspense.
The courts may order an offender to pay compensation for personal injury, loss
or damage resulting from an offence. The Government favours the courts
making full use of their compensation powers. Under the Criminal Justice Act
1988 courts in England and Wales are required to give reasons for not awarding
compensation to a victim who has suffered loss, injury or damage. Experimental
schemes have been undertaken to enable offenders to make direct reparation to
their victims, either by paying financial compensation or by undertaking some
service for them.
Courts may order the confiscation of proceeds gained by a criminal from drug
trafficking and this principle has been extended to offences such as robbery,
fraud, blackmail and insider dealing in shares. In certain circumstances courts
may also order forfeiture of property involved in the commission of crime; this
does not apply in Northern Ireland.
The court in England and Wales may discharge a person absolutely or con¬
ditionally if it believes that punishment should not be inflicted and a probation
order is not appropriate. If he or she is conditionally discharged, the offender
remains liable to punishment for the offence if convicted of another offence
within a period specified by the court (not more than three years). The Crown
Court may ‘bind over' an offender by requiring him or her to keep the peace
and/or be of good behaviour; if this requirement is not complied with, the
offender may be brought before the court and dealt with for the original offence.
Alternatively the ‘binding over’ may take the form of a recognition that a sum of
money will be forfeit if conditions stated by the court are not complied with.
In Scotland the same effects of conditional discharge and binding over are
achieved by a system of deferral of sentence until a given future date to enable
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
127
Prisons
Remission of
Sentence
Northern
Ireland
the accused person to be of good behaviour in the interim and to meet other
conditions stipulated by the court.
Police cautions are used particularly for young offenders; the caution is a form
of warning and no court action is taken.
The Government aims to provide a humane and efficient prison service. The
average inmate population in 1988 in England and Wales was nearly 50,000.
The figure for Scotland was 5,190 in 1988. In Northern Ireland the daily average
inmate population reached a peak of almost 3,000 in 1978 but fell to 1,822 in
1989.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are known as
‘local prisons’: all are closed. Other prisons, open or closed, receive prisoners on
transfer from local prisons. (Open prisons do not have physical barriers to
prevent escape.) In England, Scotland and Wales sentenced prisoners are
classified into groups for security purposes. There are separate prisons for
women.
There are no open prisons in Northern Ireland, where the majority of offenders
are serving sentences for terrorist offences.
People awaiting trial in local prisons or in remand centres are entitled to
privileges not granted to convicted prisoners. Those under 21 awaiting trial are,
where possible, separated from convicted prisoners. The Government is seeking
to foster greater private sector involvement in the prison system of England and
Wales. Prison building is supervised by a Board which includes a strong private
sector element. The Board has invited proposals from the private sector for the
design and construction of remand centres. Consideration is also being given to
private sector involvement in the management of remand centres and in
prisoner escorting. Following the publication of a consultative document in
1988 and a study by management consultants, further research into costings is
being carried out before a final decision is taken.
Many of the prisons in England and Wales were built in the nineteenth
century and require major repairs. In order to cut down on overcrowding and
ensure that all prisoners are housed in decent conditions, a major programme of
renovation is in progress which will reduce substantially the number of cells
without access to night sanitation. Eight new prisons have been opened since
1985, seven are under construction and one will open shortly. In addition, five
more are planned to start on site in 1989 and eight others are at various stages
of planning and design. By the mid-1990s some 25,000 new places will be added
to the system. In Northern Ireland there is no overcrowding in the six prison
establishments, five of which have been built since 1970; two new prisons—one
for women—opened in 1986.
Most prisoners in Great Britain are eligible for remission of one-third of their
sentence. Prisoners serving a sentence of 12 months or less are entitled to half
remission. Remission may be forfeited for serious misconduct. There is no
remission for prisoners detained for certain civil proceedings or for those serving
sentences of unspecified length (for example, mentally disturbed offenders,
whose release depends upon improvement in their mental condition).
In Northern Ireland prisoners serving a sentence of more than five days are
eligible for remission of half their sentence. A prisoner serving a sentence of
more than 12 months who is released from prison with remission is liable to be
ordered to serve the remainder of this sentence if convicted of fresh imprisonable
offences during this period. Under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary
Provisions) Act 1989 the rate of remission for those convicted of terrorist-type
offences and serving sentences of five years or more has been reduced to
128
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parole and
Life Licence
Repatriation
Independent
Oversight
of the
Prison System
one-third; any released prisoners convicted of another such offence before the
expiry of the original sentence must serve the remainder of that sentence before
serving any term for the second offence. Both these provisions apply to offences
committed on or after 16 March 1989.
In England and Wales prisoners serving determinate sentences of more than 12
months become eligible for consideration for release on parole licence when they
have served one-third of the sentence, or six months, whichever expires the
later. (In Scotland they only qualify after 12 months.)
The first stage in England and Wales is consideration by a local review
committee attached to each prison and this is followed by scrutiny by Home
Office officials, who refer the more difficult and complex cases to the Parole
Board, which makes recommendations for release on parole; Home Office
Ministers take the final decision on whether to accept the recommendation. The
less serious cases are dealt with by the Home Office without reference to the
Board. A similar procedure operates in Scotland, where there is a separate Parole
Board. About three-quarters of prisoners serving sentences of less than two
years receive parole. However, for those serving sentences of over five years for
violence, arson, sexual offences or drug trafficking parole is granted only in
exceptional circumstances, or otherwise for a few months at the end of the
sentence.
The parole licence remains in force until the date on which the prisoner would
otherwise have been released from prison. It prescribes the conditions, includ¬
ing the maintenance of contact with a supervising officer, with which the
offender must comply. In 1988 a total of 827 parolees in England and Wales had
their licences revoked and were recalled to prison: this was equivalent to 6-5 per
cent of the number granted parole in that year; virtually none in Scotland were
recalled to prison. Parole is not available in Northern Ireland, which has more
generous remission terms.
The release of prisoners serving life sentences is at the discretion of the Home
Secretary or in Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland, subject to a
favourable recommendation by the Parole Board or the Parole Board for Scotland
and after consultation with the judiciary. The Secretaries of State are not,
however, bound to accept such a recommendation for release, nor are they
bound by the views of the judiciary. People serving life sentences for the murder
of police and prison officers, terrorist murders, murder by firearms in the course
of robbery and the sexual or sadistic murder of children are normally detained
for at least 20 years. At the end of 1988 there were about 2,600 life sentence
prisoners detained in prisons in England and Wales, of whom about 140 had
been detained for 15 years or more. On release, life sentence prisoners remain on
licence for the rest of their lives and are subject to recall should their behaviour
suggest that they might again be a danger to the public.
In Northern Ireland the Secretary of State reviews life sentence cases on the
recommendation of an internal review body in such a way as to reflect their
gravity and to take account of Northern Ireland’s special circumstances.
Sentenced prisoners who are nationals of countries which have ratified the
Council of Europe Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons may apply
to be returned to their own country to serve the rest of their sentence there.
Each establishment has appointed to it a Board of Visitors (Visiting Committees
in Scotland), who act as independent observers on behalf of the Secretary of
State. They are unpaid volunteers drawn from the local community. Two
members of the board must be magistrates. Their principal duty is to satisfy
themselves as to the state of the prison premises, the administration of the
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
129
Prison
Industries,
Physical
Education
and Education
Medical and
Psychological
Services
Privileges
and
Discipline
prison, and the treatment of prisoners. They have the right of access at any time
to any part of the establishment, and to any inmate, and may interview an
inmate out of sight and hearing of any prison official if they so wish. They are
required to make an annual report to the Secretary of State about the state of the
prison and its administration, and can at any time bring any matter to his
attention.
Prison industries aim to give inmates work experience which will assist them
when released and to secure a return which will reduce the cost of the prison
system. The main industries are clothing and textile manufacture, engineering,
woodwork, laundering, farming and horticulture. Most production caters for
internal needs and for other public services. A few prisoners are employed
outside prison. Small payments are made for work: in some prisons, schemes
provide an opportunity for higher earnings on the basis of output and skill.
Education is financed by the prison service and staffed by local education
authorities. In every establishment the education officer is assisted by a team of
teachers. Full-time education of 15 hours a week is compulsory for young
offenders below school leaving age. For older offenders it is voluntary. Some
prisoners study for public examinations (including those of the Open Universi¬
ty). Within the resources available there is an adult education curriculum.
Library facilities provided through the local public library authority are available
in all establishments. Voluntary training courses are taught by civilian instruc¬
tion officers. Physical education is voluntary for adult offenders but compulsory
for young offenders. Some 50 per cent of prisons have purpose-built physical
education facilities, while all but two of the remainder use gymnasia converted
from other buildings.
Education is offered on a voluntary basis to all prisoners and young offenders
in Northern Ireland, the courses taught ranging from basic education to primary
degrees and postgraduate research. Students are also prepared for examina¬
tions set by national bodies such as the Royal Society of Arts, the City and Guilds
of London Institute and the Open University. Vocational training courses
meeting the requirements of local and national training agencies are also
provided. At any one time around 55 per cent of the prison population are
en§aSed in some form of education and training. A comprehensive library
service, available in each establishment, is linked to a province-wide inter-
library loan service.
The prison medical service has a general responsibility for the physical and
mental health of all those in custody. Each establishment has accommodation
for sick people, and patients can also be transferred to National Health Service
hospitals. Psychiatric care is available.
The work of psychologists includes evaluating treatment programmes, study¬
ing management practices, contributing to the management and treatment
programmes of individuals and groups, taking part in advisory and training
work with staff, and making assessments for treatment or allocation purposes.
Prisoners may write and receive letters and be visited by relatives and friends,
and those in open establishments may make telephone calls. Privileges include a
personal radio, books, periodicals and newspapers, and the opportunity to make
purchases from the canteen with money earned in prison. Depending on
facilities prisoners may be granted the further privileges of dining and recrea¬
tion in association, and watching television.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, or by the Boards
of Visitors (Visiting Committees in Scotland), who have power to order forfeiture
of remission.
130
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Welfare
Religion and
Spiritual
Care
Preparation
for Release
Aftercare
Children in
Trouble
England and
Wales
Prison officers play a leading role in dealing with welfare matters and are
supported in this by probation staff (in Scotland, social workers), who use their
own professional skills to help individual prisoners understand more about the
nature of their offending behaviour.
Anglican, Roman Catholic and Methodist Chaplains share in a ministry to
prisoners, providing opportunities for worship and spiritual counselling. They
are supported by visiting ministers of other denominations and faiths as
required. In a multi-faith and multicultural society particular attention is given
to the needs of those of other major world faiths and ethnic minorities.
Many medium- and long-term prisoners in the later parts of their sentences may
now be granted home leave for periods of between two and five days. The purpose
of home leave is to help restore self-confidence by placing trust in a prisoner
under conditions of complete freedom and to help the prisoner to readjust to life
outside prison by giving the opportunity to maintain links with family and
friends, and, where leave is taken near the end of the sentence, to contact
prospective employers and make firm plans for release.
The Pre-Release Employment Scheme (PRES) provides an opportunity for a
number of selected long-term prisoners to spend their last six months before
release in one of eight hostels, which are attached to prisons, to help them
re-adapt to society. Hostellers work in the outside community and return to the
hostel each evening. Frequent weekend leaves allow hostellers to renew ties with
their families. In Northern Ireland arrangements exist for prisoners serving fixed
sentences to have short periods of leave near the end of their sentences and at
Christmas; life-sentence prisoners are given a nine-month pre-release pro¬
gramme which includes employment outside the prison.
The probation service (in Scotland, the local authority social work departments)
provides professional social work support to offenders following their release,
the object of which is to help them to re-establish themselves in the community
and to become law-abiding citizens. Most young offenders under the age of 22,
adult offenders released on parole and those released on licence from a life
sentence receive a period of compulsory supervision from the probation service.
The National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders (NACRO)
and the Apex Trust (and their counterparts in Scotland) organise employment
training—financed by the Government—for ex-offenders. Other assistance by
voluntary bodies such as NACRO includes hostels and accommodation, also
with government help. The Northern Ireland Association for the Care and
Resettlement of Offenders, also a voluntary group, is mainly concerned with
assisting petty criminals and alcoholics towards rehabilitation and social
awareness.
In England and Wales it is not possible to bring criminal proceedings against
children below the age of 10 years. Children between the ages of 10 and 17
charged with committing a criminal offence may be brought before a court,
usually a juvenile court. A local authority may bring a child of any age under the
age of 17 to a juvenile court in a procedure known as care proceedings if, for
example, it suspects that he or she is in moral danger or beyond the control of
his or her parents. Under both care and criminal proceedings a court may make
a care order or a supervision order or, if the parents consent, an order requiring
them to exercise proper care or control over the child. Before an order may be
made in care proceedings or a care order made in criminal proceedings, it must
be shown that the child is in need of care or control which he or she is unlikely to
receive unless the order is made.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
131
Scotland
Under a care order a local authority becomes responsible for deciding where
the child should be accommodated. It may allow him or her to remain at home
under supervision or place him or her with foster parents or in a voluntary or
community home. For children too severely disturbed or disruptive to be treated
in local authority homes, there are two special Youth Treatment Centres run by
the Department of Health. The authority must review each care order every six
months and consider whether an application should be made to the court to end
it; the order normally expires when the child reaches 18 or 19. When a child who
is already under a care order as a result of an offence commits a further offence
(for which an adult could be punished by imprisonment) a court may attach a
charge and control condition to the order. This suspends for up to six months
the local authority’s discretion to place the child in his or her own home, but
does not oblige the authority to place the child in a community home. The local
authority may, for example, place the child with foster parents.
When implemented, the Children Act 1989 will reform both the grounds for
and effects of care supervision orders in care proceedings and will abolish the
use of care orders in criminal proceedings.
Under a supervision order (which may remain in force for not more than three
years) a child normally lives at home under the supervision of a social worker or a
probation officer, though the court may require him or her to live with a
specified person. The court has power to require that the child comply with
directions given by his or her supervisor or, in criminal proceedings, with
requirements made by the court itself. By either of these means, the supervision
order can be used to provide for a programme of ‘intermediate treatment’,
consisting of participation, under a supervisor, in a variety of constructive and
remedial activities through a short residential course or, more usually, attend¬
ance at a day or evening centre.
In criminal proceedings, the courts may order payment of compensation, or
impose a fine or grant a conditional or absolute discharge. Payment of fines,
compensation or costs incurred by juvenile offenders is normally the responsibil¬
ity of their parents or guardians. Offenders, both boys and girls, may be ordered
to spend a total of up to 24 hours of their Saturday leisure time (up to three
hours on any one occasion) at an attendance centre. The centres, which provide
physical education and instruction in practical subjects, are for those found
guilty of offences for which older people could be sent to prison. Offenders aged
16 may be ordered to perform up to 120 hours of community service.
Boys aged between 14 and 16, for whom a non-custodial sentence would not
be appropriate, may be sent to a young offender institution; for those aged 14
the period is between three weeks and four months and for those aged 15 or 16
the maximum is 12 months. Girls aged 14 may not be so detained and there is
no provision for custodial sentences of four months or less for girls aged 15 or
16. In the case of a very serious crime, detention in a place approved by the Home
Secretary may be ordered and must be ordered in the case of homicide.
In Scotland the age of criminal responsibility is eight years but prosecution of
children under the age of 16 years in court is rare and can take place only as
instructed by the Lord Advocate; court proceedings normally take place only
where the offence is of a serious nature, or where a child is prosecuted together
with an adult. Instead, children under 16 (or in certain circumstances those
aged between 16 and 18 if subject to a supervision requirement) who have
committed an offence or are considered to be in need of care and protection may
be brought before a children’s hearing. The hearing, which consists of three lay
people drawn from a panel for each region or islands area, determines in an
informal setting whether compulsory measures of care are required and, if so,
the form they should take. An official ‘reporter’ decides whether a child should
132
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
Young Adult
Offenders
The Civil Law
come before a hearing. If the grounds for referral are not accepted by the child or
parents, or if for any reason the child is not capable of understanding the
explanation of the grounds, the case goes to ihe sheriff for proof. If he finds the
grounds established, the sheriff remits the case to the reporter to arrange a
hearing. The sheriff also decides appeals against any decision of a children's
hearing.
Children between the ages of 10 and 13 and young persons between the ages of
14 and 16 who are charged with a criminal offence will normally be brought
before a juvenile court. If found guilty of an offence punishable in the case of an
adult by imprisonment, the court may order the child or young person to be
placed in the care of a fit person; to be placed under supervision (if a child); to be
placed on probation; to attend a day attendance centre; to be sent to a training
school; or to be committed to custody in a remand home. Other options include a
conditional or absolute discharge, a fine, costs, damages or payment of com¬
pensation. Parents or guardians may be required to ensure the person’s good
behaviour. If the court decides that care, protection or control are necessary, or
if the child or young person has consistently failed to attend school, it may place
the individual in a training school, commit him or her to the care of a fit person,
order the parent or guardian to exercise proper care or guardianship or make a
supervision order.
Offenders aged 17 to 20 years (16 to 21 years in Scotland) form a separate
category from juvenile and adult offenders. In England and Wales the penalties
for young adults are fines and compensation, attendance centre orders and
probation orders; offenders may also be sentenced to up to 240 hours of
community service. As in the case of juvenile offenders, a custodial sentence may
be imposed only when no other measure would be appropriate. The custodial
sentence for offenders of this age is detention in a young offenders’ institution.
Detainees are eligible for parole on the same basis as adults and all are
supervised after release.
The Government is developing intensive probation programmes for young
adult offenders including the establishment of 30 new day centres in England
and Wales.
In Scotland young offenders aged under 21 sentenced to detention serve their
sentences in a young offenders’ institution. Remission of part of the sentence for
good conduct, release on parole, and supervision after release are available. In
Northern Ireland offenders aged between 17 and 21 sentenced to less than three
years are sent to a young offenders’ centre.
Civil Justice
The main sub-divisions of the civil law of England, Wales and Northern Ireland
are: family law, the law of property, the law of contract and the law of torts
(covering injuries suffered by one person at the hands of another irrespective of
any contract between them and including concepts such as negligence, defama¬
tion and trespass). Other branches of the civil law include constitutional and
administrative (particularly concerned with the use of executive power), indust¬
rial, maritime and ecclesiastical law. Scottish civil law has its own, often
analogous, branches.
A review body was set up in 1985 to consider improving the machinery of civil
justice in England and Wales. Its report was published in June 1988 and it
recommended reforms designed to reduce delays in the handling of cases,
ensure the best use of court resources and reduce the cost of litigation. The
Government is planning to introduce legislation at an early opportunity.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
133
CIVIL COURTS
England and
Wales
Appeals
Scotland
The limited civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial
proceedings for custody and maintenance orders, adoption orders, guar¬
dianship orders and family protection orders. The courts also have jurisdiction
regarding nuisances under the public health legislation and the recovery of
rates. Committees of magistrates license public houses, betting shops and
clubs.
The jurisdiction of the 274 county courts covers actions founded upon
contract and tort (with minor exceptions); trust and mortgage cases; and
actions for the recovery of land. Cases involving claims exceeding set limits may
be tried in the county court by consent of the parties, or in certain circumstances
on transfer from the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include hire purchase, landlord
and tenant, and adoption cases. Divorce cases are determined in those courts
designated as divorce county courts, and outside London bankruptcies are dealt
with in certain county courts. The courts also deal with complaints of race and
sex discrimination. Where small claims are concerned (especially those involving
consumers), there are special arbitration facilities and simplified procedures.
Each county court has one or more circuit judges assigned to it by the Lord
Chancellor, and the regular sittings of the court are mostly taken by them. The
judge normally sits alone, although on request the court may, exceptionally,
order a trial with a jury.
The High Court of Justice is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s
Bench Division and the Family Division. Its jurisdiction is both original and
appellate and covers civil and some criminal cases. The Family Division is
concerned with all jurisdiction affecting the family, including that relating to
adoption and guardianship. The Chancery Division deals with the interpreta¬
tion of wills and the administration of estates. Maritime and commercial law is
the responsibility of admiralty and commercial courts of the Queen’s Bench
Division. A consultative paper examining the issues involved in setting up a
unified jurisdiction in family and domestic matters—a single ‘family court’—was
published in mid-1986.
Each of the 80 or so judges of the High Court is attached to one division on
appointment but may be transferred to any other division while in office.
Outside London (where the High Court sits at the Royal Courts of Justice)
sittings are held at 26 county court centres. For the hearing of cases at first
instance. High Court judges sit alone. Appeals in civil matters from lower courts
are heard by courts of two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of the
appropriate division, nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial, adoption and guardianship proceedings heard by
magistrates’ courts go to a divisional court of the F'amily Division of the High
Court. Appeals against decisions of the licensing committees of magistrates are
heard by the Crown Court. Appeals from the High Court and county courts are
heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division), consisting of the Master of the Rolls
and 27 Lords Justices of Appeal, and may go on to the House of Lords, the final
court of appeal in civil and criminal cases.
The judges in the House of Lords are the nine Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and
sometimes even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearings of appeals (which
normally take place in a committee room and not in the legislative chamber), but
peers who hold or have held high judicial office may also sit. The president of the
House in its judicial capacity is the Lord Chancellor.
The main civil courts are the Court of Session and the sheriff court. The sheriff
court deals with most civil litigation and is not limited by the value of the case.
134
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
Civil
Proceedings
Appeals may be made to the sheriff principal or directly to the Court of Session,
except where the value of the case is under £1,500, when appeal must first be
made to the sheriff principal, who may sanction an appeal to the Court of
Session on a point of law.
The Court of Session sits only in Edinburgh, and in general has jurisdiction to
deal with all kinds of action. The main exception is an action exclusive to the
sheriff court, where the value claimed is less than £1,500. It is divided into two
parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House, mainly an
appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions of equal status, each
consisting of four judges—the first division being presided over by the Lord
President and the second division by the Lord Justice Clerk. Appeals to the Inner
House may be made from the Outer House and from the sheriff court. From the
Inner House an appeal may go to the House of Lords. The judges of the Court of
Session are the same as those of the High Court of Justiciary.
The Scottish Land Court deals exclusively with matters concerning agricul¬
ture. Its chairman has the status and tenure of a judge of the Court of Session
and its other members are lay specialists in agriculture.
Minor civil cases in Northern Ireland are dealt with in county courts, though
magistrates’ courts also deal with certain classes of civil case. The superior civil
law court is the High Court of Justice, from which an appeal may be made to the
Court of Appeal. These two courts, together with the Crown Court, comprise the
Supreme Court of Judicature of Northern Ireland and their practice and
procedure are similar to those in England and Wales. The House of Lords is the
final civil appeal court.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved person.
Actions in the High Court are usually begun by a writ of summons served on the
defendant by the plaintiff, stating the nature of the claim. A defendant intending
to contest the claim informs the court. If the case is set down for trial,
documents (pleadings) setting out the scope of the dispute are filed with the
court; the pleadings are also served on the parties. County court proceedings are
initiated by a summons served on the defendant by the court; subsequent
procedure is simpler than in the High Court.
A decree of divorce must be pronounced in open court, but a procedure for
most undefended cases dispenses with the need to give evidence in court and
permits written evidence to be considered by the registrar.
Civil proceedings, as a private matter, can usually be abandoned or ended by
compromise at any time. Actions brought to court are usually tried without a
jury, except in defamation, false imprisonment, or malicious prosecution cases,
when either party may, except in certain special circumstances, insist on trial by
jury, or a fraud case, when the defendant may claim this right. The jury decides
questions of fact and damages awarded to the injured party; majority verdicts
may be accepted.
An action in a magistrates’ court is begun by a complaint on which the court
may serve the defendant with a summons. This contains details of the complaint
and the date on which it will be heard. Parties and witnesses give their evidence
at the court hearing. Domestic proceedings are normally heard by not more than
three lay justices including, where practicable, a woman; members of the public
are not allowed to be present. The court may order provision for custody, access
and supervision of children, as well as maintenance payments for spouses and
children. The law is being changed to speed up civil proceedings in magistrates’
courts by allowing written statements, expert opinions and hearsay evidence to
be accepted in court without the presence of the witness unless the evidence is
disputed and the disputing party requests the presence of the witness.
LONDON’S INNER CITY
The Isle of Dogs
site, part of the
docklands
redevelopment
project.
Revellers and
onlookers take to
the streets in
Soho to greet the
Chinese New Year.
MUSEUMS
A taste of film-
making on the
Western set at the
new Museum of
the Moving Image.
The Victorian Gothic
splendour of the Natural
History Museum is the
setting for a wide variety of
exhibits, from prehistoric
remains to modern audio¬
visual displays.
A watermill at the Weald and Downland
Open Air Museum in Sussex, which
specialises in reconstructions of
vernacular buildings in their original
materials.
The printer’s shop at Blist’s Hill, in
the Ironbridge Gorge Museum in
Shropshire, preserves the
technology of a bygone age.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
The Thames Bubbler comes
to the rescue when river
monitoring stations give
early warning of low oxygen
levels. It can blow up to
24,000m3 of oxygen a day
into the river, ensuring that
the water can sustain the
fish life that has begun to
return to the Thames.
The long-eared bat
[plecotiis aritus) is one of
Britain’s many protected
species.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
135
Restrictive
Practices Court
Administrative
Tribunals
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Most are for sums of money and may be enforced, in cases of default, by seizure
of the debtor’s goods or by a court order requiring an employer to make periodic
payments to the court by deduction from the debtor’s wages. Other judgments
can take the form of an injunction restraining someone from performing an
unlawful act. Refusal to obey a judgment may result in imprisonment for
contempt of court. Arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a
warrant.
Normally the court orders the costs of an action to be paid by the party losing
it, but, in the case of family law maintenance proceedings, a magistrates’ court
can order either party to pay the whole or part of the other’s costs.
In Scotland proceedings in the Court of Session or ordinary actions in the
sheriff court are initiated by serving the defender with a summons (an initial
writ in the sheriff court). In Court of Session actions the next step is the
publication of the action in the court lists. A defender who intends to contest the
action must inform the court; if he or she does not appear, the court grants a
decree in absence in favour of the pursuer. In ordinary actions in the sheriff
court the defender is simply required to give a written notice of intention to
defend within a certain number of days after service of the initial writ, and this
is followed by a formal appearance in court by the parties to the dispute or their
solicitors.
In summary causes (involving small sums) in the sheriff court the procedure
is less formal. The statement of claim is incorporated in the summons. The
procedure is designed to enable most actions to be carried through without the
parties involved having to appear in court. Normally they (or their representa¬
tives) need appear only when an action is defended. A new small claims
procedure was introduced in November 1988.
Proceedings in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England and Wales.
County court proceedings are commenced by a civil bill served on the defendant;
there are no pleadings in the county court. Judgments of civil courts are
enforceable through a centralised procedure administered by the Enforcement
of Judgments Office.
The Restrictive Practices Court is a specialised United Kingdom court which
deals with monopolies and restrictive trade practices. It comprises five judges
and up to ten other people with expertise in industry, commerce or public life.
Administrative tribunals exercise judicial functions separate from the courts.
Generally, they are set up under statutory powers which govern their constitu¬
tion, functions and procedure. They tend to be more accessible, less formal and
less expensive than the courts. They have expert knowledge in their particular
jurisdictions.
A number of important tribunals decide disputes between private citizens—
for example, industrial tribunals have a major part to play in employment
disputes. Some (such as those concerned with social security) resolve claims by
private citizens against public authorities. A further group (including tax
tribunals) decide disputed claims by public authorities against private citizens,
while others decide issues and disputes which do not directly affect financial
rights or liabilities (such as the right to enter or visit the United Kingdom).
Tribunal members are normally appointed by the minister concerned with the
subject, but other authorities have the power of appointment in some cases. For
example, the Lord Chancellor (and, in Scotland, the Lord President of the Court
of Session) makes most appointments where a lawyer chairman or member is
required.
In many tribunal jurisdictions, a two-tier system operates with an initial right
136
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GOVERNMENT
RESPONSI¬
BILITIES
England and
Wales
of appeal to a lower tribunal and a final right of appeal, usually on a point of law,
to a higher tribunal. Appeals from some of the higher tribunals on a point of law
only may be made to the High Court in England and Wales, to the Court of
Session in Scotland, and to the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland. There are a
few exceptions including, for example, immigration appeals, where there is no
right of appeal directly from the Immigration Appeals Tribunal to the courts.
The Council on Tribunals (an independent body established in 1958) exer¬
cises general supervision over many tribunals, advising on draft legislation and
rules of procedure, monitoring their activities and reporting on particular
matters. A Scottish Committee of the Council exercises the same function in
Scotland. The Council has a similar responsibility with regard to public
inquiries.
Administration of the Law
Responsibility for the administration of justice rests with the Lord Chancellor,
the Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Northern
Ireland. Also concerned is the Prime Minister, who recommends the highest
judicial appointments to the Crown.
The United Kingdom judiciary is independent and its adjudications are not
subject to ministerial direction or control.
The Lord Chancellor is the head of the judiciary (and sits as a judge in the House
of Lords); he is concerned with court procedure and is responsible for the
administration of all courts other than magistrates’ and coroners’ courts, and
for a number of administrative tribunals. He recommends all other judicial
appointments to the court and appoints magistrates. He has general responsi¬
bility for the legal aid and advice schemes and for the administration of civil law
reform.
The Home Secretary is concerned with the criminal law, the police service,
prisons, and the probation and after-care service; and has general supervision
over magistrates’ courts, together with some specific responsibilities (such as
approving the appointment of justices’ clerks). He appoints to each prison
establishment a Board of Visitors representing the local community, who need
to satisfy themselves as to the state of prison premises, administration and
treatment of inmates. They are required to report to the Home Secretary any
abuse or matter of concern which comes to their attention. Boards have
disciplinaiy powers in relation to serious breaches of discipline and hear
applications or complaints from inmates. The Home Secretary is advised by the
Parole Board on the release of prisoners on licence.
Responsibility for the treatment of offenders under the age of 17 is shared
between the Home Office and the Department of Health. The Home Secretary is
also responsible for advising the Queen on the exercise of the royal prerogative of
mercy to pardon a person convicted of a crime or to remit all or part of a penalty
imposed by a court.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General are the Government’s princip¬
al advisers on English law, and represent the Crown in appropriate domestic
and international cases. They are senior barristers, elected members of the
House of Commons and hold ministerial posts. The Attorney General is also
Attorney General for Northern Ireland. As well as exercising various civil law
functions, the Attorney General has final responsibility for enforcing the
criminal law. The Solicitor General is, in effect, the deputy of the Attorney
General. As head of the Crown Prosecution Service, the Director of Public
Prosecutions is subject to the Attorney General’s superintendence.
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
137
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
THE
PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
The Legal
Profession
The Secretary of State for Scotland recommends the appointment of all judges
other than the most senior ones, appoints the staff of the High Court of
Justiciary and the Court of Session, and is responsible for the composition,
staffing and organisation of the sheriff courts. District courts are staffed and
administered by the district and islands local authorities. The Secretary of State
is also responsible for the criminal law of Scotland, crime prevention, the police,
the penal system and legal aid; he is advised on parole matters by the Parole
Board for Scotland. The Secretary of State is also responsible for legal aid in
Scotland.
The Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland are the chief legal
advisers to the Government on Scottish questions and the principal representa¬
tives of the Crown for the purposes of litigation in Scotland. Both are govern¬
ment ministers. The Lord Advocate is closely concerned with questions of legal
policy and administration and is also responsible for the Scottish parliamentary
draftsmen. He has overall responsibility for the prosecution of crime in Scotland
and, although he holds a ministerial post, he must exercise an independent
discretion in carrying out this responsibility.
The administration of all courts is the responsibility of the Lord Chancellor,
while the Northern Ireland Office, under the Secretary of State, deals with the
police and the penal system. The Lord Chancellor has general responsibility for
the legal aid and advice scheme in Northern Ireland.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts since the Crown is the
historic source of all judicial power. The Queen, acting on the advice of
ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary.
Full-time judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor, who is
head of the judiciary, speaker of the House of Lords and a Cabinet minister. With
the exception of lay magistrates, judges are normally appointed from practising
barristers, advocates (in Scotland), or solicitors (see below). Lay magistrates in
England and Wales need no legal qualifications but on appointment undergo
basic training to give them sufficient knowledge of the law, including the rules of
evidence, and to enable them to understand the nature and purpose of
sentencing. The Scottish district court justices of the peace likewise need no
legal qualifications, but they too must take part in training. In Northern Ireland
members of a lay panel who serve in juvenile courts undertake training courses;
resident magistrates are drawn from practising solicitors or barristers.
In certain circumstances (for instance, in cases of misconduct or proven
incapacity) judges of the inferior courts may be removed from their positions
but, in order to safeguard the independence of the judiciary from the executive,
superior judges in England and Wales and Northern Ireland (other than the Lord
Chancellor, who changes with the Government) are subject to removal only by
the Queen on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament; in Scotland
there is no statutory provision for removing judges of the Court of Session or
High Court of Justiciaiy from office and special legislation would probably be
needed to secure a dismissal.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Barristers are known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and
collectively and individually as ‘counsel’. Solicitors undertake legal business for
individual and corporate clients, while barristers advise on legal problems
submitted through solicitors and present cases in the higher courts; certain
functions are common to both, for example, presentation of cases in the lower
138
LEGAL AID,
ADVICE AND
ASSISTANCE
Legal Advice
and Assistance
Aid in Civil
Proceedings
Aid in Criminal
Proceedings
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
courts. Although people are free to conduct their own cases, most people prefer
to be legally represented in the more serious cases.
The Government has published a White Paper setting out fresh ways of
providing legal services in England and Wales to meet clients’ needs. Under the
proposals solicitors will be able to acquire new rights of audience in the higher
courts; building societies and banks will be able to offer conveyancing services
under a scheme providing important new safeguards to clients; and people
wanting to take legal action will be able to negotiate a form of ‘no win, no fee’
agreement with their legal advisers. Similar proposals for Northern Ireland have
also been published. Proposals for reform in Scotland have been published by
the Secretary of State. Among the suggestions are the extension of solicitors’
rights of audience to the supreme courts, the formation of partnerships by
advocates and the ending of solicitors’ exclusive rights in conveyancing transac¬
tions.
The professional organisations for barristers are: the General Council of the
Bar (in England and Wales), the Faculty of Advocates (in Scotland), and the
General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland and the Executive Council of the
Inn of Court of Northern Ireland. For solicitors they are: the Law Society of
England and Wales, the Law Society of Scotland and the Law Society of Northern
Ireland.
A person in need of legal advice or legal representation in court may qualify for
help with the costs out of public funds, either free or with a contribution
according to his or her means. Civil legal aid schemes are administered by the
Legal Aid Board, the Scottish Legal Aid Board and the Law Society of Northern
Ireland.
People whose income and savings are within certain limits are entitled to help
from a solicitor on any legal matter (with the exception of wills and conveyanc¬
ing) as it affects the applicant’s particular circumstances. Such help includes
advice on the relevant law, writing letters on the client’s behalf, and taking the
opinion of a barrister or advocate. In England and Wales it may be extended to
cover representation in civil proceedings in the magistrates’ court, Mental
Review Tribunal hearings and certain disciplinary proceedings before prisons'
Boards of Visitors.
The scheme provides for initial work to be done up to a specified cost limit.
Legal aid, which covers representation before the court, may be available for
most civil proceedings to those who satisfy the financial eligibility conditions.
An applicant for legal aid must also show not only that he or she has reasonable
grounds for taking or defending proceedings but also that it is reasonable in all
the circumstances of the case that he or she should receive, or continue to
receive, legal aid. If legal aid is granted the case is conducted in the normal way,
except that in England and Wales no money passes between the client and the
solicitor; all payments are made through the legal aid fund.
In certain limited circumstances the successful unassisted opponent of a
legally aided party may recover his or her costs in the case from the legal aid
fund. Where the assisted person recovers or preserves money or property in the
proceedings the legal aid fund may have a first charge on that money or property
to recover the sums it has expended on the assisted person’s behalf.
In criminal proceedings in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made by
the court concerned if it appears to be in the interests of justice and if a
defendant qualifies for financial help. An order must be made (subject to means)
when a person is committed for trial on a murder charge or where the prosecutor
JUSTICE AND THE LAW
139
appeals or applies for leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal (Criminal
Division) to the House of Lords. No person who is unrepresented can be given a
custodial sentence for the first time unless given the opportunity to apply for
legal aid.
The Legal Aid Board makes arrangements for duty solicitors to be present at
magistrates' courts to provide initial advice and representation to unrepre¬
sented defendants, and also for them to be available, on a 24-hour basis, to give
advice and assistance to suspects at police stations. The services of a duty
solicitor are free.
In Scotland there is a duty solicitor scheme for accused people in custody in
sheriff and district court cases. An ‘interests of justice’ and ‘means' test applies
only in summary cases, where decisions on applications for legal aid are taken by
the Scottish Legal Aid Board. In Northern Ireland a duty solicitor scheme has
been introduced at the principal magistrates’ court in Belfast. Legal aid for
criminal cases in Scotland and Northern Ireland is free; the assisted person is
not required to make any contributions towards the cost of his or her legal
representation.
Law Centres In a number of urban areas law centres provide free legal advice and represen¬
tation. Financed from various sources, often including local government author¬
ities, they usually employ full-time salaried lawyers and many have community
workers. Much of their time is devoted to housing, employment, social security
and immigration problems. Free advice is also available in Citizens Advice
Bureaux, consumer and housing advice centres and in specialist advice centres
run by various voluntary' organisations.
LAW REFORM While amendment of statute law is a matter for Parliament, in England and
Wales the duty of keeping the law under review lies with the Law Commission, a
permanent body reporting to the Lord Chancellor and consisting of a High Court
judge and four other members who are required to be practising or academic
lawyers. The Law Commission scrutinises the law with a view to its systematic
development and reform, and in particular its simplification and modernisa¬
tion. The Lord Chancellor also occasionally refers specific topics to the Law
Reform Committee, nominating as members experts in the particular field of law
involved; in criminal law matters the Home Secretary acts similarly with the
Criminal Law Revision Committee.
Law reform in Scotland is the responsibility of the Scottish Law Commission,
which reports to the Lord Advocate. Its constitution and functions are similar to
those of the Law Commission for England and Wales.
In Northern Ireland the Law Reform Advisory Committee, which reports to the
Secretary of State, reviews certain aspects of the civil law and makes recom¬
mendations for reform.
I® Social Welfare
p
The British social welfare system comprises the National Health Service, the
personal social services and social security. The National Health Service provides
a comprehensive range of medical services which are available to all residents,
irrespective of means. Local authority personal social services and voluntary
organisations provide help and advice to the most vulnerable members of the
community. These include elderly people, disabled people and children in need
of care. The social security system is designed to secure a basic standard of
living for people in financial need by providing income during periods of
inability to earn (including periods of unemployment), help for families and
assistance with costs arising from disablement.
Central government is directly responsible for the National Health Service,
administered by a range of health authorities and boards throughout Britain
acting as its agents, and for the social security system. It has an indirect
responsibility for the personal social services administered by local authorities.
Joint finance and planning between health and local authorities aims to prevent
overlapping of services and to encourage the development of community
services.
Planned spending on social welfare in 1989—90 is: health over £25,000 million
and personal social services over £4,800 million (together representing some 15
per cent of general government expenditure): and social security benefits some
£51,000 million (31 per cent).
Expenditure on the health service has increased substantially in real terms
since 1980, and current spending is planned to grow further over the next two
years. More patients are now being treated than ever before. Spending on social
security is rising because of increased numbers of beneficiaries, especially
retirement pensioners, the long-term sick and disabled, and the unemployed,
and the value of retirement and most other long-term benefits has been
increased in real terms since 1980. Major reforms to the social security system
have been introduced under the Social Security Act 1986; these are designed to
provide a clearer, simpler system more capable of meeting genuine need (see
p 164). Spending on the personal social services is determined by local
authorities, and while constraints are placed by central government on the total
expenditure of individual local authorities, spending has risen substantially in
real terms since the late 1970s, thus reflecting the priority given to this sector.
National Health Service
The National Health Service (NHS) is based upon the principle that there should
be a comprehensive range of publicly provided services designed to help the
individual stay healthy and to provide effective and appropriate treatment and
care where necessary while making the best use of available resources. All
taxpayers, employers and employees contribute to its cost so that those
members of the community who do not require health care help to pay for those
who do. Some forms of treatment, such as hospital care, are provided free;
others (see p 143) may be charged for.
Growth in real spending on the health service is being used to meet the needs
of increasing numbers of elderly people; to take full advantage of advances in
142
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ADMINIS¬
TRATION
medical technology and to remedy shortfalls in such areas as renal services; to
provide more appropriate types of care, often in the community rather than in
hospital, for priority groups such as the elderly, the mentally ill and people with
mental handicaps; to combat the growing health problems arising from alcohol
and drug misuse; and to remedy disparities in provision between the regions of
Britain.
The Government emphasises the importance of preventive health services,
and the responsibility of individuals for their own health. While great progress
has been made in eliminating infectious diseases such as poliomyelitis and
tuberculosis, there has been less success in controlling the major causes of early
death and disability—heart disease, cancer and stroke. Most recently the threat
of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, see p 152) has proved a
serious problem for public health services. Because of the close link between
such diseases and individual life-styles or social habits, emphasis is placed on
helping people to adopt healthier ways of living through education and other
policies. A £3-8 million campaign was launched in 1987 to inform the public of
the main risks of heart disease.
The Government stresses the need for a partnership between the public and
private health sectors and for improving efficiency in order to secure the best
value for money and the maximum patient care. In order to secure more effective
management of resources in the National Health Service, general managers
drawn from inside and outside the Service have been appointed at regional,
district and unit levels. Further measures have included improving the
accountability of health authorities for the way in which they plan and manage
their resources, increasing the proportion of total staff who provide direct
patient care, such as doctors and nurses, and introducing a range of
programmes to provide existing services at lower cost. Considerable savings—
£110 million in 1988—have been generated through the policy of putting
hospital cleaning, catering and laundry services out to competitive tender.
Economies are also made in prescribing by restricting the use of expensive
branded products in favour of cheaper but equally effective generic equivalents.
Following a wide-ranging internal review of the NHS, the Government issued a
White Paper, Working for Patients, in January 1989 setting out proposals to
improve the quality and efficiency of health services, extend patient choice and
enhance the Service’s response to its consumers. The proposed reforms would
be introduced on a phased basis. The Government remains firmly committed to
the principle that health care should continue to be available to all, regardless of
income, and be financed mainly out of general taxation.
The health ministers (the Secretary of State for Health in England and the
Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are respon¬
sible for all aspects of the health services in their respective countries. The
health departments (the Department of Health in England, the Scottish Home
and Health Department, the Welsh Office and the Department of Health and
Social Services in Northern Ireland) are responsible for national strategic
planning. District health authorities in England and Wales and health boards in
Scotland are responsible for planning and operational control of all health
services in their areas. England, because of its greater size and population, has a
tier of regional authorities responsible for regional planning, resource alloca¬
tion, major capital building work and certain specialised hospital services best
administered on a regional basis. The authorities and boards co-operate closely
with local authorities responsible for social work, environmental health,
education and other services. Family practitioner committees (health boards in
Scotland), at present accountable to the Secretary of State, arrange for the
provision of services by doctors, dentists, pharmacists and opticians. Commun-
SOCIAL WELFARE
143
Health Service
Commissioners
Finance
ity health councils represent local opinion on the health services provided. (In
Scotland this function is exercised by local health councils.) The Government
has proposed that family practitioner committees should have greater responsi¬
bility for planning services and ensuring value for money; like other health
authorities, they should be reduced in size and become more business-like; and
they should have general managers and become directly accountable to the
regional health authorities rather than to the Secretary of State.
In Northern Ireland health and social services boards are responsible for all
health and personal social services in their areas. The representation of public
opinion on these services is provided for by district committees.
There are three Health Service Commissioner posts (for England, Scotland and
Wales) for dealing with complaints from members of the public about the health
service. All three posts are held by the Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration (Ombudsman). The jurisdiction of the Health Service Commis¬
sioner covers the failure of a health authority or family practitioner committee to
carry out its statutory duties, a failure in a service provided, or maladministra¬
tion causing injustice or hardship, but not actions taken solely in the exercise of
clinical judgment or the actions of family practitioners, for which separate
complaints procedures exist. The Commissioner reports annually to ministers,
who lay the reports before Parliament and may make other reports when
necessary. In Northern Ireland the Commissioner for Complaints has a similar
role.
About 81 per cent of the cost of the health service in Great Britain is paid for
through general taxation; the rest is met from the National Health Service
contribution paid with the National Insurance contribution and from the
charges towards the cost of certain items such as drugs prescribed by a family
doctor, and dental treatment. Health authorities may raise funds from voluntary
sources. Certain hospitals increase their revenue by taking private patients who
pay the full cost of their accommodation and treatment.
The charges for medical prescriptions do not apply to children under 16 years
(or students under 19 and still in full-time education), expectant mothers and
women who have had a baby in the last 12 months, women aged 60 and over and
men aged 65 and over, patients suffering from certain specified medical
conditions, war and armed forces disablement pensioners (for treatment of their
disability), people in receipt of income support or family credit (see pp 169, 171)
and families with low incomes. Around 75 per cent of prescription items are
supplied free of charge.
The Health and Medicines Act 1988 introduced charges for dented examina¬
tions and a system of proportional charges for all types of dental treatment.
However, women who are pregnant or who have had a baby in the last year,
anyone under the age of 18 (or 19 if in full-time education), and people receiving
income support or family credit, continue to be exempt from charges. The same
legislation introduced charges for sight tests, but these remain free to children,
those on low incomes, and certain other priority groups, while grants for the
repair and replacement of spectacles are made for certain disadvantaged groups.
Hospital medical staffs are salaried and may be employed full time or part
time. Hospital doctors may accept private patients. Family practitioners
(doctors, dentists, opticians and pharmacists) are self-employed contractors.
Family doctors (also known as general practitioners) are paid by a system of fees
and allowances designed to reflect responsibilities, workload and practice
expenses. Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a
prescribed scale of fees. Pharmacists dispensing on their own premises are
reimbursed for the cost of the items supplied together with professional fees.
144
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PRIMARY
HEALTH
CARE
Family
Practitioner
Services
Health Visitors,
District
Nurses and
Midwives
Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the
general ophthalmic service receive approved fees for each sight test made.
The Health and Medicines Act 1988 clarifies the powers of health authorities
to act in a more commercial manner in selling facilities and services for non-NHS
use to the public and outside organisations, while maintaining safeguards in
relation to patient care.
Primary health care is offered by doctors, dentists, opticians and pharmacists
working within the Service as independent practitioners, and by health visitors,
district nurses and midwives employed by the health authorities. A wide range
of other services is also available, including the school health service and the
chiropody service. The remedial professions of physiotherapy, occupational
therapy and speech therapy are making an increasingly important contribution
to primary care.
There have been substantial increases in primary health care staff in recent
years; for example, in England and Wales between 1977 and 1987, the number
of family doctors increased by 20 per cent (to 26,500) while the average patient
list size fell by 13 per cent (to 2,000).
Special funds have been earmarked by the Government for improving the
quality of primary health care in inner city areas. Additionally, efforts have been
made to improve health services for black and ethnic minority groups. These
include new health projects in Britain’s Chinese communities, and increased
central funding for health information material to be produced in many different
minority languages.
The first comprehensive review of primary health care services has recently
been completed. Following a period of consultation, the Government issued a
White Paper, Promoting Better Health, in late 1987 setting out plans for
improvement. These are to make the services more responsive to the needs and
wishes of the consumer and to raise the quality and quantity of the services
available; to promote health and prevent illness; and to improve value for money.
The family practitioner sendees are those given to patients by doctors, dentists,
opticians and pharmacists of their own choice. Family doctors provide the first
diagnosis in the case of illness and either prescribe a suitable course of
treatment or refer a patient to the more specialised services and hospital
consultants. Only ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthalmic opticians
may test sight; patients requiring treatment for a defect in sight or an eye
disease are dealt with through the Hospital Eye Service. Spectacles are supplied
by registered ophthalmic and dispensing opticians but unregistered opticians
may also sell spectacles to adults under carefully prescribed conditions.
Children, those on low incomes and people requiring complex lenses are
provided with vouchers which may be exchanged for low-priced spectacles or put
towards the cost of higher-priced frames.
Health visitors are responsible for the preventive care and health education of all
families, particularly those with young children. They work closely with general
practitioners, district nurses and other professions. District nurses give skilled
nursing care to people at home or elsewhere outside hospital; they also play an
important role in preventive care and health education. Although almost all
babies are born in hospital, some antenatal care and most postnatal care is
given in the community by midwives and general practitioners, who also care for
women having their babies at home. All midwives are responsible for educating
and supporting women and their families during the childbearing period.
SOCIAL WELFARE
145
Group Practices
and Health
Centres
HOSPITALS
AND
SPECIALIST
SERVICES
About four-fifths of family doctors in Britain work in partnerships or group
practices, often as members of primary health-care teams which also include
health visitors and district nurses and sometimes midwives, social workers and
other professional staff. About a quarter in Great Britain and over a half in
Northern Ireland work in modern and well-equipped health centres, where
medical and nursing services are provided. Health centres may also have
facilities for health education, family planning, speech therapy, chiropody,
assessment of hearing, physiotherapy and remedial exercises. Dental, pharma¬
ceutical and ophthalmic services, hospital out-patient and supporting social
work services may also be provided.
A full range of hospital services is provided by district general hospitals,
including treatment and diagnostic facilities for in-patients, day-patients and
out-patients, maternity departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric and
geriatric facilities, rehabilitation facilities, convalescent homes and all forms of
specialised treatment. There are also specialist hospitals or units for children,
people suffering from mental illness or mental handicaps, and elderly people,
and for the treatment of specific diseases; examples include the world-famous
Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, and the Brompton Heart and
Chest Hospital in London. Hospitals designated as teaching hospitals combine
treatment facilities with training medical and other students, and research
work.
Many of the hospitals in the NHS were built in the nineteenth century; some
trace their origins to much earlier charitable foundations, such as the famous
St Bartholomew’s and St Thomas’ hospitals in London. Much has been done to
improve and extend existing buildings and many new hospitals have been or are
being opened. Since 1979 in England some 300 health building schemes, each
costing £1 million or more, have been started and completed. Over 500 schemes,
worth £4,000 million in total, are at various stages of planning, design and
construction. In Scotland 60 major health building schemes, providing over
6,700 beds, have been completed since 1979. A further 31 schemes are at
various stages of development.
Recent policy in England and Wales has been to provide a well-balanced
hospital service centred around a district general hospital complemented as
necessary by smaller, locally based hospitals and facilities.
The latest development in hospital planning in England is the nucleus
hospital, designed to accommodate a comprehensive range of district general
hospital facilities and capable of being built and commissioned in self-contained
phases or as an extension to an existing hospital. Many nucleus hospitals are
being developed and those already open have proved economical to build and are
providing high-quality and cost-effective services to patients. The world’s first
low-energy nucleus hospital, which is expected to use less than half the energy of
a conventional nucleus hospital, is under construction on the Isle of Wight.
Similar hospitals are planned for Northumberland and the Forth Valley.
National Health Service hospitals provide about 370,000 beds and in England
have some 58,300 medical, dental, nursing and midwifery staff. The hospital
service is now treating more patients a year than ever before: in England
between 1978—79 and 1987—88 the number of in-patient cases treated rose by
over 1-2 million (23 per cent); the number of day case attendances by 443,000
(79 per cent); and there were 3-8 million (8 per cent) more out-patient
attendances. Newer forms of treatment and diagnosis, such as kidney dialysis,
hip replacements, laser treatment for certain eye conditions, and body
scanning, are being made more widely available.
In mid-1986 the Government launched a three-year drive to reduce hospital
waiting lists and times and by 1989 had invested £86 million in a variety of
146
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Private
Medical
Treatment
Organ
Transplants
projects, including mobile operating theatres and the purchase of equipment, to
improve waiting times for patients.
Community services such as the psychiatric nursing service, day hospitals,
and local authority day centres have expanded so that more patients remain in
the community and others are discharged sooner from hospital.
It is the Government’s policy to encourage the private sector to meet a larger
share of the nation’s health needs in the belief that this will benefit the National
Health Service by adding to the total resources devoted to health care for all
people and offering flexibility to health authorities in the delivery of services.
Some health authorities share expensive facilities and equipment with private
hospitals, and NHS patients are sometimes treated (at public expense) in the
private sector to reduce waiting lists. The scale of private practice in relation to
the NHS is, however, small. There are 10,000 beds in the independent health
care sector; approximately 3,000 beds in health service hospitals in England are
authorised for the treatment of private patients. It is estimated that about
three-quarters of those receiving acute treatment in private hospitals or hospital
pay-beds are covered by provident schemes which make provision for private
health care in return for annual subscriptions. Over 2-5 million people
subscribe to such schemes, the majority of them being involved in group
schemes, some arranged by firms on behalf of employees. Subscriptions often
cover more than one person (for example, members of a family) and the total
number of people covered by private medical insurance in Britain is estimated at
nearly 5-3 million. Private practice is also undertaken by family doctors and
dentists. Many overseas patients come to Britain for treatment in private
hospitals and clinics, and Harley Street in London is an internationally
recognised centre for medical consultancy.
There is a growing interest in alternative therapies such as homeo¬
pathy, osteopathy and acupuncture, which are mainly practised outside the
NHS.
Over the past 25 years there have been significant developments in transplant
surgery in Britain. The United Kingdom Transplant Service provides a
centralised organ matching and distribution service. At the end of 1987 about
7,600 people were living with functioning kidney transplants and during 1988
over 1,500 kidney transplants were performed. In 1983 a similar service was
initiated for corneas, about 1,500 to 2,000 being transplanted each year. Heart
transplant operations have been conducted at Papworth Hospital in Cam¬
bridgeshire since 1979 and at Harefield Hospital, West London, since 1980. A
third heart transplant centre was opened at the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle
upon Tyne in 1986 and a fourth centre was established at Wythenshawe
Hospital, Manchester, in 1988. Two further centres, in London and Sheffield,
are expected to receive funding from April 1990. In addition, a programme of
combined heart and lung transplants is in progress and in 1988 375 heart and
heart-lung transplants had been performed. The world’s first combined heart,
lungs and liver transplant operation was carried out at Papworth in early 1987.
Over 200 liver transplants were also performed in 1988. Pancreas transplants
are also carried out. A voluntary organ donor card system enables people to
indicate their willingness to become organ donors in the event of their death. A
publicity campaign to increase the number of card carriers was launched in
1988, when some 14 million donor cards were distributed to the public. The
Human Organ Transplants Act 1989 bans commercial dealings in organs
intended for transplant.
SOCIAL WELFARE
147
Blood
Transfusion
Ambulance
Services
Rehabilitation
Hospices
The blood transfusion service in England and Wales collects over 2 million
donations of blood and over 90,000 donations of plasma each year from
voluntary unpaid donors; in Scotland the figures are 285,000 and 8,000
respectively. Regional transfusion centres recruit donors and organise donor
sessions in towns and villages, factories and offices, and within the armed
forces. Donors must be aged between 18 and 65. The centres are also
responsible for blood grouping and testing, maintaining blood banks, providing
a consultancy service to hospitals, teaching in medical schools, and instructing
doctors, nurses and technicians. Central laboratories manufacture blood
products and undertake research. While the use of whole blood for transfusions
remains an important part of the Service’s work, there is increasing emphasis
on the most efficient and effective use of blood and in particular its separation
into components such as plasma for specific uses. A new blood products
laboratory at Elstree, Hertfordshire, was opened in 1987 with the aim of meeting
the needs for all blood products in England and Wales.
Where necessary on medical grounds free transport by ambulance is provided by
the health authorities. The ambulance service performs emergency work,
dealing with sudden illness, urgent maternity cases, and accidents of all kinds;
and non-urgent work, providing transport for certain categories of people
needing out-patient treatment at hospitals, clinics and day hospitals. In some
areas the service for non-urgent cases is augmented by voluntary organisations
using their own vehicles or by volunteers using their own cars. In Scotland an
air ambulance service is available in the islands and in the remoter parts of the
mainland.
Rehabilitation begins at the onset of illness or injury and continues throughout
with the aim of helping people to adjust to changes in life-style and to live as
normally as possible. It is especially important for elderly, young, disabled,
mentally ill and mentally handicapped people who need such help to resume life
in the community. Rehabilitation services are carried out in hospitals, centres
in the community and in people’s own homes through co-ordinated work by a
range of professional workers including doctors, nurses, physiotherapists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, hearing therapists, clinical psycho¬
logists, dietitians and social workers. These staff may also work closely with the
disablement resettlement service of the Department of Employment (the
Department of Economic Development in Northern Ireland), housing, education
and social services departments of local authorities, and with the voluntary
sector.
Medical services may provide free artificial limbs and eyes, hearing aids,
surgical supports, wheelchairs, and other appliances. Following assessment,
very severely physically handicapped patients may be provided with environmen¬
tal control equipment which enables them to operate devices such as alarm
bells, radio and television, a telephone, and heating appliances. Nursing aids
may be provided on loan for use in the home.
Local authorities may provide a range of facilities to help patients in the
transition from hospital to their own homes, including the provision of aids and
adaptations, domiciliary care from home helps, and professional help from
occupational therapists and social workers. Voluntary organisations also
provide valuable help in complementing the work of the statutory agencies and
in widening the range of available services.
A number of hospices provide care for the terminally ill (including children)
either directly in residential homes or through nursing and other assistance in
the patient’s own home. Control of symptoms and psychological support for
148
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Parents and
Children
Human
Fertilisation
and
Embryology
patients and their families form the central features of the modern hospice
movement, which originated in Britain and is now worldwide. Some hospices
are administered entirely by the NHS; the remainder, some of which receive
support from public funds, are run by independent charities. The Government
is encouraging greater co-operation between the voluntary sector and health
authorities in this field.
Special preventive services are provided under the health service to safeguard
the health of expectant mothers and mothers with young children. Services
include free dental treatment, dried milk and vitamins; health education, which
is available to parents before and after childbirth through talks, discussion
groups and demonstrations; and vaccination and immunisation of children
against certain infectious diseases (see p 153). Pregnant women are given
antenatal care by their family doctor and hospital clinics, and working women
have the right to visit the clinics during working hours. Some 99 per cent of
women have their babies in hospital, returning home shortly afterwards to be
attended by a midwife or health visitor and, where necessary, the family doctor.
The Government attaches great importance to improving the quality of
maternity services, and to making them more sensitive to the needs and wishes
of mothers and their families. In Wales a special two-year initiative to identify
significant causes of perinatal mortality and to stimulate improvements in
maternity and neonatal care has resulted in over 50 recommendations for action
which the NHS in Wales has been asked to implement. The perinatal mortality
rate (the number of stillbirths and deaths in the first week of life) has fallen in
recent years and in 1988 stood at 8-7 per thousand births in England and Wales,
compared with 10-4 per thousand in 1983. In Scotland the rate fell from 10-6 to
9 0 per thousand births in the same period.
A network of child health clinics run by district health authorities, and also by
some general practices, provides facilities for surveillance by doctors, dentists
and health visitors of the physical and mental health and development of
pre-school children. Information on preventive services is given and welfare
foods are distributed. About 94 per cent of babies under one year are taken to
the clinics. The school health service offers health care and advice for
schoolchildren, including medical surveillance and dental inspection and
treatment where necessary.
Child guidance and child psychiatric services provide help and advice for
children with psychological or emotional problems.
In recent years special efforts have been made to improve co-operation
between the community-based child health services and local authority social
services for children. This is particularly important in the prevention of child
abuse and for the health and welfare of children in care.
The birth of the world’s first ‘test-tube baby’ in Britain in 1978, using the
technique of in vitro fertilisation, opened up new horizons for the alleviation of
infertility and for the science of embryology, but also gave rise to unease at the
apparently uncontrolled advances of science and the new possibilities of
manipulating the early stages of human development. In view of this public
concern, a committee of inquiry was established in 1982 under Baroness
Warnock to examine the social, ethical and legal implications of developments in
this field. Reporting in 1984, the committee concluded that certain specialised
forms of infertility treatment, including artificial insemination by donor and in
vitro fertilisation, were ethically acceptable, but that surrogate motherhood (the
practice whereby one woman bears a child for another) organised by agencies
should be prohibited; that research on human embryos was acceptable, but only
up to the fourteenth day after fertilisation; and that a licensing authority should
SOCIAL WELFARE
149
Family
Planning
Abortion
Drug
Misuse
be established to regulate infertility services and research. Legislation to ban
commercial surrogacy agencies, and advertising of or for surrogacy services, was
passed in 1985, and in late 1987 the Government published a White Paper,
Human Fertilisation and Embryology: A Framework for Legislation. This
contains proposals for implementing the main recommendations of the
Warnock report, including the setting up of a licensing authority to regulate
certain infertility treatments and giving Parliament a free vote on whether to ban
human embryo research or to allow it under strict controls. The Government has
announced its intention to legislate on these issues during the present
Parliament. If implemented, these proposals would constitute one of the most
comprehensive and wide-ranging pieces of legislation on this subject in the
world.
Free family planning facilities are available through family planning clinics,
hospitals and a domiciliary service. Most family doctors provide a similar service
for women only.
The Abortion Act 1967 allows the termination of pregnancy by a registered
doctor if two registered doctors consider that its continuance would involve a
greater risk to the life of the pregnant woman (or of injury to her physical or
mental health or that of any existing children in the family) than if the
pregnancy were ended. Termination may also be allowed if two doctors consider
there is a substantial risk that if the child were born it would suffer from such
physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. Abortions are
carried out in NHS hospitals or in private premises approved for the purpose by
the Secretary of State. Over half of the legal abortions to women resident in
England and Wales in 1988 were performed in private hospitals and clinics; in
Scotland, 98 per cent of abortions take place in NHS hospitals. The Act does not
apply in Northern Ireland.
The growing misuse of dangerous drugs such as heroin and cocaine has
emerged as a serious social and health problem and the Government has made
the fight against such misuse a major priority. Its strategy comprises action to
reduce the supply of illicit drugs from abroad; to provide even more effective law
enforcement by the police and customs services; to tighten controls on drugs
produced and supplied in Britain; to increase the deterrent effects of the law; to
develop effective programmes to treat and rehabilitate misusers; and to
discourage young people from experimenting with drugs. An interdepartmental
ministerial group on the misuse of drugs was established in 1984 to oversee,
develop and review the implementation of this strategy.
As part of its prevention policy, the Government began a major publicity
campaign in 1985 to dissuade young people from drug-taking and to advise
parents, teachers and other professional staff on how to recognise and combat
the problem. In 1987 the campaign was developed to warn of the risks of
transmitting the AIDS virus (see p 152) through the sharing of injecting
equipment (see below), while a further phase of the campaign, launched in late
1988, was directed particularly towards young people in the 16—25 age group
who were occasional injectors of amphetamines and pharmaceutical drugs, and
non-users who might be tempted to experiment by injecting drugs.
Over £17-5 million has been provided for local treatment and rehabilitation
projects over a six-year period from 1983 to 1989 and an additional £9 5 million
has been made available in 1988-89 (increasing to a maximum of £15 million in
1989—90) through the health authorities in England for the further expansion
of services for drug misusers. This includes £1 million to enable services to
respond to the spread of HIV infection among drug misusers. Similar projects
150
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Solvent Misuse
are in progress in Wales, where £4-2 million has been provided for voluntary
groups and health authorities since 1985, and a separate programme is in
progress in Scotland where over £4 million has been provided for locally based
drug projects since 1985. A number of trial schemes—subject to careful
safeguards and monitoring—are in progress involving the counselling of drug
misusers and the exchange of clean for used injecting equipment, since the
sharing of equipment is one of the major ways by which the AIDS virus is spread
among drug misusers and from them to the general population. The Govern¬
ment has set up a drugs advisory service to advise district health authorities on
the development of facilities in their areas, and continues to make funds
available for local education authorities in England and Wales to appoint staff to
promote and co-ordinate preventive work in their areas, especially for anti-drug
misuse work in schools. Separate measures have been introduced in Scotland to
discourage drug misuse through publicity campaigns and action in the
education service and the community.
In September 1988 the Government announced its intention to amend the
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 to include anabolic steroids in view of their misuse in
sport and body-building.
Treatment for drug dependence is mainly provided on an out-patient basis.
Many hospitals provide specialist treatment for drug misusers, mainly in
psychiatric units, or have special drug treatment units. Some drug misusers
have a period of in-patient treatment when necessary. An increasing number of
family doctors also treat drug misusers but only certain specialist doctors are
licensed to prescribe heroin, cocaine and dipipanone (Diconal). All doctors have
a duty to notify the authorities of any patient they consider to be addicted to
certain controlled drugs, and guidelines on good medical practice in the
treatment of drug misuse have been issued to all doctors in Great Britain. The
Home Secretary has statutory powers for dealing with doctors found to have
prescribed irresponsibly.
A number of non-statutory agencies work with and complement the health
service provision; advice and rehabilitation services including residential
facilities, for example, are provided mainly by voluntary organisations. Support
in the community is provided by the probation service and local social services
departments.
Research on various aspects of drug misuse is funded by several government
departments.
The Government is advised on a wide range of matters relating to drug misuse
and connected social problems by the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs.
Action is also being taken by the Government to curb the incidence of solvent
abuse (the inhaling of vapour from glue, lighter fuel and other solvents) by young
people. Legislation passed in Scotland in 1983 added solvent misuse to the list of
grounds on which a child may be considered to need compulsory care. In 1985
legislation was passed making it an offence in England and Wales to supply such
substances to children under 18 knowing or having reason to believe they are to
be used to cause intoxication. (Such sales have been prosecuted successfully
under common law in Scotland.) Information and guidance material have been
distributed to retailers, parents, teachers and other professional workers to help
them educate young people on the dangers of the habit and dissuade them from
experimenting.
Cigarette smoking is the greatest preventable cause of illness and death in
Britain. It accounts for no fewer than 100,000 premature deaths and 30 million
lost working days each year, and costs the NHS an estimated £500 million a year
for the treatment of diseases attributable to smoking (for example, heart
Smoking
SOCIAL WELFARE
151
Alcohol
Misuse
disease, lung cancer and bronchitis). In addition, smoking by pregnant women
can cause prematurity and low birth weight in infants. Concerned at these
harmful effects, the Government is following an active health education policy
supported by voluntary agreements with the tobacco industry aimed at reducing
the level of smoking.
National publicity and media campaigns form the main thrust of official
effects to discourage smoking. The Government aims to reduce adult smoking
from a current level of 33 per cent and to halve smoking by young people. A
campaign directed at 11 to 15 year olds is expected to start in late 1989 and to
last until 1994. The Government considers it particularly important to get the
message across to teenage girls, who are twice as likely as boys to smoke. The
Government also supports the work of the voluntary organisation Action on
Smoking and Health (ASH), and supports the voluntary restriction on smoking
in trains, buses, theatres and other public places. Health authorities have
been encouraged to promote non-smoking as the normal practice on health
service premises and to give help and advice to people who want to give up
smoking.
As public attitudes have changed, so more and more commercial premises
restrict or ban smoking entirely. Many factories and offices have set aside special
rooms for smokers, who are not allowed to smoke elsewhere in such establish¬
ments. Much concern is now felt over the effects of ‘passive smoking’, especially
in the workplace, which the Government estimates causes several hundred
deaths through lung cancer every year.
Voluntary agreements between the Government and the tobacco industry
regulate the advertising and promotion of tobacco products, tobacco product
modification and sports sponsorship by the industry. A new agreement on
tobacco advertising came into effect in 1986. This provides for the use of six
different health warnings about the dangers of smoking. It also contains
measures to protect particularly vulnerable groups, such as children, young
people and young women in early childbearing years, and provides a mechanism
for monitoring implementation of the agreement. Cigarette advertising is
banned on television and radio by law. The 1986 Protection of Children
(Tobacco) Act makes the sale of any type of tobacco product to children illegal. In
1987 a new voluntary agreement on sports sponsorship came into force. This
covers levels of overall expenditure, restrictions on sponsorship of events
principally for spectators under 18 years and controls over the siting of signs at
televised events. Proposals to ban certain oral tobacco products known to be
causally linked with oral cancer have been announced.
The far-reaching effects of alcohol misuse in terms of illness, family disruption,
inefficiency at work, loss of earnings, accidents and crime are widely acknow¬
ledged. The Government considers that the reduction of such misuse requires a
range of action by central and local government, voluntary and community
bodies, the health professions, business and trade unions. Of great importance
is the need for individuals to recognise and accept responsibility for their own
health, while attempts to influence the minority who misuse alcohol must, to be
realistic, respect the freedom of the majority who use alcohol responsibly.
The Government believes that emphasis should be placed on policies to
prevent alcohol misuse and continues to seek better information about the
causes of problem drinking, to encourage healthier life-styles, and to provide
earlier identification and help for the problem drinker.
Treatment and rehabilitation include in-patient and out-patient services in
general and psychiatric hospitals and specialised alcoholism treatment units.
Primary care teams (general practitioners, nurses and social workers) and
voluntary organisations providing hostels, day centres and counselling services
152
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
AIDS
also play an important role. There is close co-operation between statutory and
voluntary organisations, and the national voluntary agency, Alcohol Concern,
which received a government grant of £680,000 in 1988—89, plays a prominent
role in prevention of misuse, training for professional and voluntary workers
and improving the network of local voluntary agencies and their collaboration
with statutory bodies. The Scottish Council on Alcohol undertakes similar work
in Scotland. Research and surveys on various aspects of alcohol misuse are
funded by several government departments.
In 1987 the Government established an interdepartmental group to review
and develop strategy for combating the misuse of alcohol. Measures taken
include legislative changes as well as steps to secure better health education and
more effective action by local services and organisations. Legislation came into
force in 1988 to strengthen the law prohibiting the sale of alcohol to people
under 18 years. At the same time, stricter controls on alcohol advertising were
introduced: people appearing in advertisements must now be seen to be over 25
years of age; immoderate drinking is not to be fostered, depicted or implied; and
alcohol is not to be advertised in the context of aggressive or anti-social
behaviour. The Independent Broadcasting Authority also introduced new
restrictions preventing the advertising of alcohol in television programmes
specifically aimed at young people.
In early 1989 the Government announced increased funding for the Health
Education Authority’s enhanced alcohol education programme. This is designed
to reduce the harm caused by the misuse of alcohol; promote sensible drinking
as part of an overall approach to the development of a healthy way of life; and
develop a climate of opinion which favours the adoption of appropriate measures
to prevent alcohol-related harm at national and local level.
Government measures to limit the spread of the disease AIDS (Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome) have included steps to maintain the safety of blood and
blood products through publicity aimed at blood donors, the screening of blood
donations and the heat treatment of blood products for haemophiliacs, and the
launch in 1986 of a major public education campaign. This involved national
press, television, radio, cinema and poster advertising, a free national telephone
advisory service and the delivery of leaflets to all households in Britain. During
1988 several new campaigns were launched, aimed at the general population, at
people travelling on business both in Britain and overseas, and at drug misusers
who risked contracting AIDS through injections of drugs by using shared
needles and syringes. By the end of March 1989 the Government had allocated
£32-5 million for this work. It believes that the campaign has had considerable
success in raising public awareness and knowledge about HIV- and AIDS-related
issues.
The Government continues to make additional funding available to health
authorities for treatment and counselling services, experimental needle ex¬
change schemes for drug misusers (see p 150) and training counsellors. A grant
of £10 million to the Haemophilia Society established a trust fund (the
Macfarlane Trust) to help haemophiliacs in Britain who have become infected
with the AIDS virus as a result of treatment with infected blood products. In
December 1988 the Government announced two new steps to monitor the
spread of HIV infection in various parts of the country. These were anonymous
and named screening tests for HIV. In early 1987 the launch of a new £14-5
million research programme was announced; this aims to develop both a vaccine
to prevent HIV infection and new anti-viral drugs to treat people already infected.
A new drug, ‘Retrovir’ (zidovudine-AZT), which can prolong the life and improve
the health of some AIDS sufferers, has been developed by a British pharma¬
ceutical company. A number of voluntary agencies receive financial support
SOCIAL WELFARE
153
Infectious
Diseases
Cancer
Screening
from the Government (some £1-8 million in 1989). Among them, the Terence
Higgins Trust, London Lighthouse and the Scottish AIDS Monitor promote
knowledge about the disease and counsel people with AIDS. Both London
Lighthouse and the Mildmay Mission Hospital provide hospice care and
community support.
Britain also plays an active role in international efforts to combat the spread of
AIDS. Following a British initiative at the European Council in London in 1986,
the European Community decided to exchange information about the spread of
the disease, its prevention and treatment, and to consider what further
co-operative measures should be taken by member states and the scope for
further co-operation in research. Britain fully supports the work of the World
Health Organisation (WHO) in leading and co-ordinating the international fight
against the disease, and has so far committed £12-25 million to WHO’s Global
Programme on AIDS, which is helping developing countries set up national
AIDS control programmes. Britain has also agreed to give £6-34 million in
support of national efforts in Africa and the Caribbean and is also giving about
£1-6 million over three years to the International Planned Parenthood Federa¬
tion for AIDS-related activities.
In January 1988 Britain and WHO organised jointly the World Summit of
Ministers of Health on Programmes for AIDS Prevention, which issued the
London Declaration stressing the need for governments to take urgent action in
the face of the global threat from AIDS, the central role of education and the need
to protect human rights.
District health authorities (health boards in Scotland) carry out programmes of
immunisation against diphtheria, measles, rubella (for women of child-bearing
age and girls only), poliomyelitis, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough. A
new combined vaccine against measles, mumps and rubella was introduced in
1988 to replace that for measles for children in the second year of life. In January
1989 the Government announced that for the current year an allocation of £7-8
million would be made for the purchase of the new vaccine. Immunisation is
voluntary. Parents are encouraged to protect their children since the benefits of
immunisation far outweigh the small risk of adverse reactions. The proportion
of children being vaccinated has been increasing since the end of 1978 following
an earlier decline.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological and
virological laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct research
and assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of communicable diseases.
Its largest establishment is the recently rebuilt Central Public Health Laboratory
at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection of
Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms. Two surveillance
centres, one in England and one in Scotland, investigate and monitor human
communicable diseases. Microbiological work in Scotland and Northern Ireland
is conducted mainly in hospital laboratories.
The cervical screening programme aims to reduce deaths from cancer of the
cervix by inviting women at risk to be screened regularly to identify and treat
conditions that might otherwise develop into cancer. All district health
authorities in England have had computerised call and recall systems since
1988, which will enable all women aged between 20 and 64 to be invited
regularly for cervical cancer screening. Similar arrangements apply in Wales and
Scotland. The Department of Health will monitor take-up rates and is
considering ways of encouraging women to be screened. A central computerised
154
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Health
Education
Healthier
Eating
ENVIRON¬
MENTAL
HEALTH
programme has been developed for Northern Ireland and will be in operation in
all health boards by the end of 1989.
The Government is setting up a nation-wide breast cancer screening service
for all women aged between 50 and 64. Each of the 14 English regional health
authorities, together with Scotland and Wales, had established their first
centres by 1988. Plans to extend the service to cover all eligible women in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland by 1990 (and in Scotland by 1991) are well
advanced.
Health education aims to raise awareness, increase information and influence
behaviour. Priority areas include heart disease, smoking, drugs and AIDS. In
England it is promoted by the Health Education Authority, an integral part of
the National Health Service with the major executive responsibility and
appropriate budget for public education in Britain about AIDS (see p 152). In
addition, in England the Health Education Authority’s functions are to advise
the Government on health education, plan and carry out national, regional or
local programmes in co-operation with health authorities and other bodies,
sponsor research and evaluation, assist the provision of training, publish and
distribute material and provide a national centre of information and advice on
health education. In Wales these functions are undertaken by the Welsh Health
Promotion Authority. Health education in Scotland is promoted by the Scottish
Health Education Group. Health education support services in Northern Ireland
are provided at present by a Health Promotion Unit; legislation is being prepared
to provide statutory backing for this body.
Almost all health authorities now have their own health education service,
which works closely with health professionals, health visitors, community
groups, local employers and others to determine the most suitable local
programmes. Increased resources in the health service are being directed
towards health education and preventive measures.
There has been a growing public awareness in recen t years of the importance of
a healthy diet. In 1984 a report on diet and cardiovascular disease produced by
the government Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy advised that a
reduction of fat in the diet could help to reduce the incidence or delay the onset
of cardiovascular disease. To help people reduce their fat intake, the Govern¬
ment plans to introduce statutory requirements for the labelling of food to
indicate fat content. Full nutritional labelling indicating the energy, protein and
carbohydrate content of food is being encouraged on a voluntary basis. Some
supermarket chains have already introduced voluntary labelling schemes. In
addition, the British Nutrition Foundation has produced practical dietary
advice based on the Committee’s report. Current studies by the Committee
include the role of dietary sugars in human disease, the relationship between
diet and cardiovascular disease, matters relating to infant and child nutrition
and revising the current recommended daily amounts of energy and nutrients.
The Scottish Health Education Group (see above) has also produced a guide to
healthier eating.
Environmental health officers employed by local authorities are responsible for
the control of air pollution and noise, food hygiene and safety, occupational
health and safety aspects of a variety of premises including offices and shops,
the investigation of unfit housing, and in some instances for refuse collection
and home safety. Doctors who specialise in community medicine and are
employed by the health authorities advise local authorities on the medical
aspects of environmental health, infectious diseases and food poisoning. They
may also co-operate with the authorities responsible for water supply and
SOCIAL WELFARE
155
Safety of Food
SAFETY OF
MEDICINES
RESEARCH
THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONS
sewerage. Environmental health officers at ports and airports carry out duties
concerned with shipping, inspection of imported foods and disease control. In
Northern Ireland district councils are responsible for noise control, collection
and disposal of refuse, clean air, and food composition, labelling and hygiene.
It is illegal to sell food unfit for human consumption or to apply any treatment,
process or additive to food which makes it injurious to health. Premises where
food or drink is prepared, handled, stored or sold must conform to certain
hygiene standards. Environmental health officers may take for analysis or for
bacteriological or other examination samples of any food on sale or in the
distribution chain. Special regulations control the safety of particular foods
such as milk, meat, ice-cream and shellfish. The Department of Health, the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Office, the Welsh Office
and the Department of Health and Social Services in Northern Ireland are the
central departments responsible for giving advice and making regulations.
In February 1989 the Government established the Committee on Microbiolo¬
gical Food Safety. Its function is to examine the increasing incidence of
food-borne illnesses, particularly from salmonella, listeria and Campylobacter,
and to recommend action where appropriate. Proposals to strengthen food
safety laws were set out in a White Paper published in July 1989. They include
tighter controls on unfit food and new enforcement measures, extended powers
to cover new technical developments and the compulsory registration of
commercial food premises.
Under the Medicines Act 1968 the health and agriculture ministers are
responsible for licensing the manufacture, marketing and importation of
medicines for human and veterinary use. The Medicines Commission advises
the ministers on policy regarding medicinal products. The Committees on
Safety of Medicines, on Dental and Surgical Materials and on the Review of
Medicines advise on the safety, quality and efficacy of medicinal products. The
Committee on Safety of Medicines also monitors adverse drug reactions. The Act
also controls the advertising, labelling, packaging, distribution, sale and supply
of medicinal products.
In 1988-89 the health departments spent about £15-7 million on health
research, in addition to expenditure by the Medical Research Council (the main
government agency for the support of biomedical and clinical research). Priority
areas include research into AIDS, primary health care, community care and
child abuse, professional staffing, public health and the acute sector. For
England and Wales the Chief Scientist of the Department of Health advises
health ministers on the scientific validity of the Department’s directly funded
research programmes. He is supported by a number of advisers from a wide
range of disciplines. In Scotland the directly funded programme is administered
by the Chief Scientist of the Scottish Home and Health Department. The
Department of Health is involved in international research and development,
and participates in the European Community’s medical and public health
research programme.
Only people whose names are on the medical or dentists’ registers may practise
as doctors or dentists in the National Health Service. University medical and
dental schools are responsible for teaching; the National Health Service provides
hospital clinical facilities for training. Full registration as a doctor requires five
or six years’ training in medical school and hospital, with an additional year’s
experience in a hospital; for a dentist, four or more years’ training at a dental
school is required. The regulating body for the medical profession is the General
Medical Council and for dentists, the General Dental Council. The main
156
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
professional associations are the British Medical Association and the British
Dental Association.
The minimum period of training required to qualify for registration as a first
level nurse in general, mental or mental handicapped nursing (and sick
children’s nursing in Scotland) is normally three years. Registration as a nurse
at second level (enrolled nurse) takes two years (in Scotland 18 months).
Midwifery training for registered general nurses takes 18 months, and for other
student midwives in England three years. Health visitors are registered general
nurses with midwifery or approved obstetric experience who have successfully
completed a one-year course in health visiting. District nurses are registered
general nurses who have successfully completed a six-month course followed by
a period of supervised practice in district nursing. The examining bodies for all
nurses, midwives and health visitors are the National Boards for Nursing,
Midwifery and Health Visiting established in England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland. The regulation and registration of these professions is the
responsibility of the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery
and Health Visiting.
Pharmacists in general practice and in hospital must be registered with the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain or the Pharmaceutical Society of
Northern Ireland. A three-year degree course approved by the Pharmaceutical
Society followed by a year’s approved training is necessary before registration.
The majority of medicines can be sold or dispensed only by, or under the
supervision of, a registered pharmacist.
The General Optical Council regulates the professions of ophthalmic optician
and dispensing optician; only registered ophthalmic opticians (or registered
medical practitioners) may test sight. Training of ophthalmic opticians takes
four years including a year of practical experience under supervision. Dispens¬
ing opticians take a two-year full-time course with a year’s practical experience
or a part-time day-release course while employed with an optician.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory scientific officers, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physiothera¬
pists and radiographers. The governing bodies are seven boards, corresponding
to the professions, under the general supervision of the Council for Professions
Supplementary to Medicine. Training lasts one to four years and only those who
are state registered may be employed in the National Health Service and some
other public services.
Dental therapists (who have undergone a two-year training course) and dental
hygienists (who have undergone a training course of about a year) may carry out
some simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist.
The member states of the European Community have special health arrange¬
ments under which Community nationals resident in a member state are entitled
to receive any immediately necessary treatment, either free or at a reduced cost,
during visits to other Community countries. There are also arrangements to
cover people who go to work or live in other Community countries. In addition,
there are reciprocal arrangements with some other countries under which
immediately necessary medical treatment is available to visitors. Visitors are
generally expected to pay if the purpose of their visit is to seek medical treat¬
ment. Visitors to or from countries with whom reciprocal arrangements have
not been made are obliged to pay for medical treatment they receive.
Personal Social Services
Responsibility for the provision of personal social services rests with the social
services authorities (local authority social services departments in England and
SOCIAL WELFARE
157
Elderly
People
Disabled
People
Wales, social work departments in Scotland and health and social services
boards in Northern Ireland). Their services are directed towards elderly people,
children and young people, families, people with mental illness or with physical
or mental handicap, young offenders and other disadvantaged people and their
carers. The major services include residential care, day care, domiciliary services
and various forms of social work. Close co-operation is maintained between local
authority social services departments and health authorities (and other
agencies).
In Scotland local authorities also undertake duties similar to those of the
separate probation and prison after-care service in England and Wales.
Much of the care given to elderly and disabled people is provided in the
community itself, by their families, self-help groups and through voluntary
agencies. The statutory sector offers the skilled care needed in particular
services. The importance of the contribution made by the voluntary organisa¬
tions is recognised especially when economies are being made in public
expenditure and the demand on the statutory services is heavy.
The demand for personal social services is expected to rise over the next few
years, owing to the increasing number of elderly people and the changing
pattern of care for people suffering from mental illness or mental handicap and
the chronically sick. (Britain expects to have 4-5 million people over 75 and 0-5
million over 90 by the year 2001.) The Government’s policy, embodied in a ‘Care
in the Community’ programme, is the transfer from hospital to care in the
community of patients who do not specifically need hospital care. It believes that
groups such as the elderly, the disabled, and mentally ill or handicapped people
can lead more normal lives in the community, given appropriate support and
facilities.
Following the recommendations of an independent review of the use of public
funds to support community care policy published in 1988, the Government has
proposed new financial arrangements which seek to ensure that priority is given
to supporting people in their own homes wherever possible. It believes that the
new arrangements would provide more appropriate services closer to individual
needs and wishes, and better value for money from public spending than do
existing arrangements.
Services for elderly people are provided by statutory and voluntary bodies to help
them to live at home whenever possible. (Only about 5 per cent of the elderly over
65 live in institutional accommodation.) These services may include advice and
help given by social workers, domestic help, the provision of meals in the home,
sitters-in, night attendants and laundry services as well as day centres,
luncheon clubs and recreational facilities. Appropriate adaptations to the home
can overcome problems of restricted mobility, and a wide range of environmental
aids is available for people with impaired hearing or vision. Dispersed alarm
systems have been developed to help elderly housebound people obtain
assistance in an emergency. In some areas good neighbour’ and friendly visiting
services are arranged by the local authority or a voluntary organisation. Many
local authorities provide free or subsidised travel to elderly people within their
areas. Social services authorities also provide residential home care for the
elderly and infirm and register and inspect homes run by voluntary organisa¬
tions or privately.
As part of their responsibility for public housing, local authorities provide
accommodation specially designed for elderly people; some of these develop¬
ments have resident wardens. Housing associations and private builders also
build this type of accommodation.
Britain has an estimated 6 million adults with one or more disabilities, of whom
around 400,000 or 7 per cent live in some kind of communal establishment.
158
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
People with
Mental
Handicaps
Mentally 111
People
Local social services authorities provide a wide range of personal social services
for disabled people to help with social rehabilitation and adjustment to
disability. They are also required to establish the number of disabled people in
their area and to publicise services, which may include counselling on personal
and social problems arising from disability; occupational, educational, social
and recreational facilities, either at day centres or elsewhere; adaptations to
homes (such as ramps for wheelchairs, and ground-floor toilets); aids to daily
living; the delivery of cooked meals; and domestic or care attendant help. In
cases of special need, help may be given with the installation of a telephone or a
television set. For severely disabled people residential accommodation or respite
care may be provided by local authorities and voluntary organisations, and
specially designed housing may be available for those able to look after
themselves. Some authorities provide free or subsidised travel for disabled
people on public transport, and they are encouraged to provide special access
facilities to public buildings. Special government regulations cover the provision
of access for disabled people in the construction of new buildings.
The Independent Living Fund was set up in June 1988 to provide financial
help to very severely disabled people who need paid domestic support if they are
to live in their own homes. The Fund, for which the Government provided
£5 million in 1988, will run for five years.
Results from the most comprehensive series of national surveys ever
undertaken among people with disabilities in Great Britain were published
between 1988 and 1989. These surveys covered adults and children both in
private households and in communal establishments, with all types of disabili¬
ties, including those caused by mental illness and mental handicap. The
Government is using this data to judge how existing social security benefits for
disabled people are targeted and whether improvements could be made in the
provision of help for those in greatest need.
The Government’s policy is to encourage the development at local level of a wide
range of health, social and other services for mentally handicapped people and
their families through mutual co-operation and collaboration between health
and local authorities and voluntary and other organisations.
Social services authorities make arrangements for a wide range of support
services for people with mental handicaps and their families. These include
short-term care, support for families in their own homes, provision for
accommodation in ordinary housing and a variety of types of day care. The
principal aims of the services are to help ensure that as far as possible people of
all ages with mental handicaps can lead full lives in their own communities and
that no person should be admitted to hospital unless it is absolutely necessary
on health grounds.
Although social services authorities are likely to play an increasingly
important role, specialised residential health provision, which may consist of
small units in the community, is appropriate for people with special needs, as is
specialist health service support for those in other settings.
A continuing priority is to transfer mentally handicapped children in
institutional care to more ordinary living arrangements.
Arrangements made by social services authorities for providing preventive and
after care for mentally ill people in the community include day centres as well as
social centres and a variety of residential care. Social workers help patients and
their families to deal with social and family problems arising from mental illness
and in certain circumstances can make an application for a mentally disordered
person’s compulsory admission to and detention in hospital. The rights of
compulsorily detained patients were extended by legislation in 1983, and a
SOCIAL WELFARE
159
Help to
Families
Child Care
Mental Health Act Commission was set up to provide better safeguards.
Corresponding legislation was introduced for Scotland in 1984, although the
Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland was first established in 1962. Similar
legislation came into force in Northern Ireland in 1986.
An important role in provision of services for both of these groups of people is
played by the many voluntary organisations concerned with mental illness and
mental handicap.
In July 1989 the Government announced a number of measures to improve
the provision of services for mentally ill people. These include requiring district
health authorities to have individually tailored health care programmes for all
patients discharged from hospital; a new specific grant to local authorities to
help them meet the social care needs of such patients; a code of practice for
compulsorily admitting and treating patients in hospital; and a review of public
funding of voluntary organisations concerned with mental health.
The Government believes in the central importance of the family to the
well-being of society and considers that stable adult relationships are necessary
to support and enhance family life. Social services authorities, through their
own social workers and other workers, give help of various kinds to families
facing special problems. This help includes services for children at risk of injury
or neglect who require care away from their own families, and support for family
carers who look after elderly and other family members in order to give them a
respite. They also help lone parents, including unmarried mothers. There are
now many refuges run by local authorities or voluntary organisations for
women, often with young children, whose home conditions have become
intolerable. The refuges provide short-term accommodation and support while
attempts are made to alleviate the women’s problems. Many authorities also
contribute to the cost of social work with families (such as marriage guidance)
carried out by voluntary organisations.
In 1983 the Family Policy Studies Centre was established with official funding
to review the impact of public policies on the family and to bring together
research findings. The Self-help and Families Project provides funding for nine
voluntary agencies to develop the capacities of groups of families to help
themselves.
A three-year initiative was launched by the Government in September 1989 to
increase voluntary sector provision in England for disadvantaged families with
children under 5. With funds of £2 million, it will enable voluntary organisations
to research and develop day care services, particularly for single parents and
families living in temporary accommodation.
Day care facilities for children under five are provided by local authorities, by
voluntary agencies and privately. In allocating places in the day nurseries and
other facilities they themselves provide, local authorities give priority to children
with special social or health needs for day care. They also register, and provide
support and advice services for, childminders, private day nurseries and
playgroups operating in their areas.
The authorities are empowered to offer advice, guidance and assistance to
families in difficulties to promote the welfare of children. The aim is to intervene
at an early stage to reduce the need to receive children into care or bring them
before a court.
The recognition, prevention and management of cases of child abuse are the
joint concern of many authorities, agencies and professions, and local review
committees provide a forum for discussion and co-ordination and draw up
policies and procedures for handling these cases. Under the provisions of the
Criminal Justice Act 1988 and in Northern Ireland the Police and Criminal
160
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989, children under the age of 14 in child
abuse cases are able to give evidence to courts through live television links, thus
sparing them the ordeal of giving evidence in open court.
Authorities must receive into their care any child under the age of 17 who has
no parent or guardian, who has been abandoned, or whose parents are unable to
provide for him or her, if they are satisfied that such intervention is in the best
interests of the child. The child remains in care until the age of 18 unless
discharged to the care of parents, other relatives or friends. The local authority
may find it necessary to assume the rights and duties of one or both parents.
The parents must be notified and if they object the matter is decided in a court of
law. When taking a decision concerning a child in care, the authorities have to
give first consideration to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the
child. Where children are in care, every effort is made to work with their families
in order, where appropriate, to enable the children to return home.
Children in England and Wales may be brought before a juvenile court if they
are neglected or ill-treated, exposed to moral danger, are beyond the control of
parents, not attending school or (if ten years or over) have committed an offence
other than homicide. At the same time it must be shown that the children need
care or control which they are unlikely to receive unless a care order or other
relevant order is made by the court. Local authorities are responsible for
undertaking inquiries through social workers and consultation with parents,
schools and the police. Children may be committed to the care of a local
authority under a care order if the court considers this appropriate. As an
alternative the court may order supervision by a social worker or a probation
officer for up to three years.
Government proposals to reform the law on child care and family services in
England and Wales are before Parliament. If implemented, the legislation would
help local authorities provide better help to children in need, including those
with disabilities; would strengthen the powers available to the courts for
protecting children from abuse or neglect; and would provide a better balance
between parents’ and children’s rights.
Increasing use is being made of intermediate treatment, especially for young
offenders. This is a community-based service which provides supervised
activities, groupwork and individual counselling; a short, residential period may
sometimes be included. A requirement to attend a programme of intermediate
treatment may be added to a supervision order by the court.
In Northern Ireland the court may send children in need or in trouble to a
training school, commit them to the care of a fit person (which includes a health
and social services board), or make a supervision order. Children in trouble may
be required to attend an attendance centre or may be committed to custody in a
remand home. There is no provision for intermediate treatment to be included
as a requirement of a supervision order in criminal cases. New child care
legislation is being prepared in Northern Ireland; where appropriate it will reflect
the changes proposed in England and Wales and will make a distinction between
the treatment of children in need of care and young offenders.
In Scotland children in trouble or in need may be brought before a children’s
hearing, which can impose a supervision requirement on a child if it thinks that
compulsory measures of care are appropriate. Under these requirements most
children are allowed to remain at home under the supervision of a social worker
but some may live with foster parents or in a residential establishment while
under supervision. Supervision requirements are reviewed at intervals of not
more than one year until terminated by a children’s hearing or by the Secretary
of State.
When appropriate, children in care are boarded out with foster parents, who
receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home is not
SOCIAL WELFARE
161
considered appropriate or cannot be found, the child may be placed in a
children’s home, voluntary home or other suitable residential accommodation.
Community homes for children in care in England and Wales comprise local
authority and some voluntary children’s homes, and include community homes
with education on the premises which provide long-term care, usually for more
difficult children. In Scotland local authorities are responsible for placing
children in their care in foster homes, in local authority or voluntary homes, or
in residential schools. In Northern Ireland there are residential homes for
children in the care of the health and social services boards; training schools
and remand homes are administered separately. Regulations concerning
registered voluntary homes and the boarding out of children in care are made by
central government.
Adoption It is generally accepted that adoption is an appropriate way to find a new family
for a very wide range of children of all age groups, including those with physical
and mental handicaps. Local authorities are required by law to provide an
adoption service, either directly or by arrangement with a voluntary organisa¬
tion. Agencies may offer prospective adoptive parents an allowance if this would
help to find a family for a child. Adoption is strictly regulated by legislation, and
adoption societies must be approved by the respective social services minister.
The Registrars-General keep confidential registers of adopted children. Adopted
people may be given details of their original birth record on reaching the age of
18, and counselling is provided to help them understand the circumstances of
their adoption.
Custodianship A person who has cared for a child for some time (for example, a foster parent,
step-parent or relative) may apply to a court for a custodianship order giving
him or her legal custody of the child. On the making of such an order the
custodian will have most of the parental rights and duties of a natural parent
and will be able to make decisions about a child’s day-to-day care and
upbringing, in the same way as a parent. Unlike an adoption order, a
custodianship order may be revoked. The custodianship provisions do not
extend to Northern Ireland.
Social Workers The effective operation of the social services largely depends on the appointment
of professionally qualified social workers trained in the methods of social work.
Training courses in social work are provided by universities, polytechnics (in
Scotland, central institutions) and colleges of further education; their length
depends upon educational qualifications and previous experience and can
extend from one to four years. The Central Council for Education and Training
in Social Work is the statutory body responsible for social work training and
offers advice to people considering entering the profession. The Council has
proposed a range of improvements to the present system of qualifying training.
Professional social workers (including those working in the NHS) are mainly
employed by the social services departments of local authorities. Others
work in the probation service, the education welfare service, or in voluntary
organisations.
A review of the role of residential care and the changes required to enable
services to respond more effectively to changing social needs was published in
March 1988. The Government is considering its response.
Voluntary Social Services
There is a long tradition in Britain of voluntary service to the community, and
the partnership between the voluntary and statutory sectors is encouraged by
the Government. It has been estimated that just over a half of all adults take part
162
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary
Organisations
in some form of voluntary work during the course of a year. Local and health
authorities plan and carry out their duties taking account of the work of
voluntary organisations, and include them in the planning process. Voluntary
provision enables these authorities to continue the trend towards local
community care rather than institutional care for the elderly, and mentally ill
and mentally handicapped people.
An Opportunities for Volunteering Scheme, together with an Unemployed
Voluntary Action Fund in Scotland and a Community Volunteering Scheme
in Northern Ireland, has provided support for almost 3,000 local voluntary pro¬
jects to enable unemployed volunteers to help disadvantaged groups in the
community. Voluntary organisations also participate in several other govern¬
ment schemes, including the Employment Training Programme and the Youth
Training Scheme.
Voluntary organisations derive their income from several sources, including
voluntary contributions, central and local government grants, earnings from
commercial activities and investments, and from fees and charges (from central
and local government) as an increasing number of services are provided by the
voluntary sector on a contractual basis. Some 500 bodies receive direct grants
from government health and social services departments; in 1987—88 these
amounted to over £37 million out of a total central government funding of £293
million to voluntary organisations. Tax changes in recent budgets have helped
the voluntary movement secure a larger flow of funds from industry and
individuals. In addition, voluntary organisations benefit not only from direct
donations from the private sector but also from gifts in kind, sponsorship,
secondments and joint promotions.
Over 65,000 voluntary organisations are registered as charities, and in
England and Wales the Charity Commission gives advice to trustees of charities,
initiating schemes to modernise their purposes or facilitate their administra¬
tion where necessary. The Commission also maintains a register of charities,
gives consent to land transactions by charities and holds investments for them.
Voluntary organisations may qualify for charitable status if they are established
for such purposes as the relief of poverty, the advancement of education or
religion or the promotion of certain other purposes of public benefit including
good community relations, the prevention of racial discrimination, protection of
health and the promotion of equal opportunity. Legislation to strengthen the
powers of the Charity Commissioners and improve the supervision and
monitoring of charities is proposed.
The Charities Aid Foundation, an independent body, aids the flow of funds to
charity from individuals, companies and grant-making trusts.
Co-ordination of government interests in the voluntary sector throughout
Britain is the responsibility of the Home Office Voluntary Services Unit.
There are thousands of voluntary organisations concerned with health and
social welfare, ranging from national bodies to small individual local groups.
‘Self-help’ groups have been the most rapidly expanding part of the voluntary
sector over the last 20 or so years—examples include bodies which provide
playgroups for pre-school children, or help their members to cope with a
particular disability. Groups representing ethnic minorities and women’s
interests have also developed significantly in recent years. Many organisations
belong to larger associations or are represented on local or national co¬
ordinating councils or committees. Some are chiefly concerned with giving
personal service, others with the formation of public opinion and exchange of
information. Some carry out both functions. They may be staffed by both
professional and voluntary workers. While a majority of voluntary organisations
are concerned with social welfare in the ways described, there is a growing
SOCIAL WELFARE
163
interest among voluntary groups in cultural and environmental issues and in
participating in schemes to promote employment.
The National Council for Voluntary Organisations is the main co-ordinating
body in England, aiming to provide central links between voluntary organisa¬
tions, official bodies and the private sector. It acts as a resource, representative
and development agency for the voluntary sector. It works to extend the
involvement of voluntary organisations in dealing with a broad range of social
issues, to protect the interests and independence of voluntary agencies, and to
provide them with a range of advice, information and other services. The
Scottish Council for Community and Voluntary Organisations, the Wales
Council for Voluntary Action and the Northern Ireland Council for Voluntary
Action perform similar functions. Councils for Voluntary Service—National
Association is another resource network, with over 200 local councils for
voluntary service throughout England encouraging the development of local
voluntary action primarily in urban areas. The rural equivalent is Action with
Rural Communities in England, representing 38 rural community councils.
The Volunteer Centre UK is a national voluntary organisation and centre for
information and research on voluntary work. There are many full-time and
part-time local volunteer bureaux which direct volunteers to opportunities for
voluntary service in both the voluntary and statutory sectors.
Specialist voluntary organisations concerned with personal and family
problems include the family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Associa¬
tion, Family Service Units and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to Relate: National Marriage
Guidance; Child Care (the National Council of Voluntary Child Care Organisa¬
tions); the National Council for One Parent Families; Child Poverty Action Group
and the Claimants’ Union, which provide advice on social security benefits; and
the Samaritans, which helps the lonely, the depressed and the suicidal.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people; this is often
channelled through national and local organisations such as Community
Service Volunteers, Scouts and Girl Guides, and the Time for God’ scheme run
by a group of churches.
Voluntary service to both sick and disabled people is given by—among
others—the British Red Cross Society, St John Ambulance, the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service and the Leagues of Hospital Friends. Societies which help
people with particular disabilities and difficulties include the Royal National
Institute for the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the Royal
Association for Disability and Rehabilitation, the Disabled Living Foundation,
the Disablement Income Group, MIND (National Association for Mental Health),
MENCAP (Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults), the
Spastics Society, Alcoholics Anonymous, Age Concern, Help the Aged and their
equivalents in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
National organisations whose work is specifically religious in inspiration in¬
clude the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Board of Social Responsi¬
bility of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s Society,
the Church of England Council for Social Aid, the Young Men’s Christian
Association, the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Catholic Marriage
Advisory Council, the Jewish Welfare Board and the Church’s Urban Fund.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service, which brings ‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and
old people, provides flats and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with family
problems, and assists in hospitals and clinics and during emergencies.
Over 1,200 Citizens Advice Bureaux give explanation and advice to people who
are in doubt about their rights or who do not know about the state or voluntary
services available. Some areas have law centres and housing advisory centres.
164
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Major
Reforms
Social Security
The general aim of the social security programme is to provide an efficient and
responsive system of financial help for people who are elderly, sick, disabled,
unemployed, widowed or bringing up children. Certain benefits provide an
income for people who have little or no earnings because they are retired,
unemployed or sick. Others provide income for widows; assistance with extra
expenses arising from disablement; compensation for injury or disease caused
at work or while in the armed forces; and help with the cost of bringing up
children. Alongside these benefits are certain income-related benefits for people
who have insufficient means of support.
Social security benefits fall into two broad categories—contributory and
non-contributory. Contributory benefits are paid from the National Insurance
Fund, which consists of contributions from employed people and their
employers, self-employed people and the Government. Non-contributory benefits
are financed from general taxation revenue. Some non-contributory benefits are
income-related (for example, income support) but others are not (for example,
child benefit and mobility allowance), and entitlement depends solely on
meeting the qualifying conditions. Appeals relating to claims for the various
benefits are decided by independent tribunals.
Expenditure on social security has nearly doubled in real terms since 1970.
Trends over the last five years have included a steady growth in the number of
retirement pensioners and the numbers receiving income-related benefits, and a
steep rise in the numbers getting disability benefits; a decline in the numbers of
families receiving child benefit (due to a fall in the birth rate), the number of
widows, and the numbers receiving unemployment benefit (because a smaller
proportion of unemployed people is entitled to unemployment benefit).
The Department of Social Security administers most of the services in Great
Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the Department of Health
and Social Services. Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners and their
dependants are the responsibility of the Department of Social Security
throughout Britain. The costs, including the costs of administration, fall on
central government. The Department of Employment acts as an agent for the
Department of Social Security in paying benefit to unemployed people and the
Inland Revenue in collecting National Insurance contributions. The housing
benefit Scheme is administered mainly by local authorities who recover most of
the cost from the Department of Social Security. Advice on social security is
given to the Government by the Social Security Advisory Committee.
As part of a major government initiative to achieve better value for money and
provide better services to the public, social security operations are to be
undertaken by executive agencies from April 1991. Each agency, which will
remain within the Civil Service, will be run by a chief executive responsible for
day-to-day operations within a framework of policy objectives set by the
Secretary of State for Social Security.
Over the 40 years since the basic structure of the social security system was
established there had been many piecemeal changes and developments, and the
system had become very complex. As spending on the system accounts for nearly
one-third of all public expenditure, and pressures for improvements and
increased expenditure were bound to continue, the Government considered that
a re-examination of the system was required. Following a series of reviews and
consultations, government proposals for a wide-ranging reform of the structure
of the system became law under the Social Security Act 1986, whose main
objectives are to make a simpler and fairer system which is effective in meeting
genuine need in a way which encourages independence. The main reforms,
SOCIAL WELFARE
165
CONTRI¬
BUTIONS
BENEFITS
Retirement
Pension
introduced from April 1988, include the modification of the State Earnings-
related Pension Scheme, which is additional to the basic state pension, and new
arrangements to encourage personal and occupational pension schemes; and
the introduction of a new range of income-related benefits, entitlement to which
is assessed using the same basic rules. These are: family credit, which has
replaced family income supplement; income support, which replaces sup¬
plementary benefit; and a restructured housing benefit scheme. The social fund
in the form of loans or grants was introduced in April 1988 to help people on low
incomes who have exceptional or emergency needs. Maternity and funeral
payments from the social fund were introduced in April 1987. Cold weather
payments from the social fund were introduced from the winter of 1988.
The demand for advice and information about the benefits available is met in
part by the Freeline Social Security Service, which handled nearly 910,000 calls
between April 1988 and March 1989. A complementary Advice Line service
provides expert advice on social security for employers and the Ethnic Freeline
Service, introduced in late 1988, provides general advice and information on
social security matters in Urdu and Punjabi.
As part of its plans to improve the management of the social security system
and the quality of its service to the public, the Department of Social Security is
embarking on the largest computerisation programme in Europe, which aims to
link all of its local and central offices and the local offices of the unemployment
benefit service into a single network.
Entitlement to National Insurance benefits such as retirement pension,
sickness and invalidity benefit, unemployment benefit, maternity allowance and
widow’s benefit is dependent upon the payment of contributions. Industrial
injuries benefits are non-contributory, but are also payable from the National
Insurance Fund. There are four classes of contributions. Class 1 contributions
are related to earnings and are paid by employees and employers. The
contribution is lower if the employer operates a ‘contracted-out’ occupational
pension scheme (see p 167). Self-employed people pay a flat rate Class 2
contribution and may have to pay a Class 4 contribution which is assessed as a
percentage of profits or gains within certain limits; they are not eligible for
unemployment and industrial injuries benefits. Voluntary Class 3 contributions
are made by people wanting to safeguard rights to some benefits.
Employees who continue working after pensionable age (60 for women and 65
for men) do not pay contributions but the employer continues to be liable. People
earning less than the lower earnings limit are not liable for contributions;
neither are their employers. Self-employed people with earnings below a set
annual amount may apply for exemption and those over pensionable age are
excused payment of contributions.
For most benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before benefit
can be paid at all, a certain number of contributions has to be paid; secondly,
the full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless contributions have been made or
credited up to a specific level over a specified period. Benefits are increased
annually, the uprating being linked to increases in retail prices. The main
benefits (payable weekly) are summarised below. The rates shown in Tables 6 to
9 are those effective from April 1989 until April 1990.
A state retirement pension is payable on retirement to women at the age of 60
and men at the age of 65. The Sex Discrimination Act 1986 protects employees
of different sexes in a particular occupation from being required to retire
compulsorily at different ages. (This, however, has not affected the payment of
state retirement pensions at different ages for men and women.) The state
166
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 6: Benefit Rates
Category
Weekly rate
from April 1989
Retirement and widow’s pensions and widowed mother’s allowance
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child
Non-contributory retirement pension for people over 80
Statutory maternity pay
Earnings threshold
Lower rate
Maternity allowance
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child benefit
One-parent benefit (for the first or only child)
Guardian’s allowance
Widow’s allowance (first 26 weeks of widowhood)
Unemployment benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child
Statutory sick pay (depending on level of earnings)
Sickness benefit
For beneficiary under pension age
Single person
Wife or other adult dependant
For beneficiary over pension age
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Child
Invalidity pension
Single person
Spouse or other adult dependant
Child
Invalidity allowance payable with retirement or invalidity
pension
Disablement benefit (100 per cent assessment)
Unemployability supplement
Single person
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child
Constant attendance allowance (normal maximum)
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
36
43-60
26-20
8-95
26-20
43-00
36-25
33-20
20-55
7- 25
5-20
8- 95
57-65
34-70
21-40
43-60
26-20
8-95
25 to 52-10
33-20
20-55
41-80
25- 10
8-95
43-60
26- 20
8-95
2-90 to 9-20
71-20
43-60
26-20
28-50
28-50
SOCIAL WELFARE
167
Table 6: Benefit Rates (continued)
£
Weekly rate
Category from April 1989
Industrial death benefit
Widow’s pension (first 26 weeks of widowhood) 57-65
Widow’s pension (higher permanent rate) 43-60
Widow’s pension (lower permanent rate) 13-08
Increase for each child 8• 95
Attendance allowance
Higher rate 34-90
Lower rate 23-30
Severe disablement allowance 26-20
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child 15-65
Child 8-95
Invalid care allowance 26-20
Spouse or person caring for claimant’s child 15-65
Child 8-95
Mobility allowance 24-40
pension scheme consists of a basic pension together with an additional
earnings-related pension. From October 1989 pensioners will be able to have
unlimited earnings without affecting their pensions. (Previously the state
pension was reduced if a pensioner earned more than £75 per week.) Those who
have put off or cancelled their retirement during the five years after minimum
pension age may earn extra pension. A non-contributory retirement pension is
payable to people over the age of 80 who meet certain residence conditions, and
who have not qualified for a contributory pension. People whose pensions do not
give them sufficient resources to live on may be entitled to income support.
Rights to basic pension are safeguarded for mothers who are away from work
looking after children or for people giving up work to care for severely disabled
relatives. Women contributors receive the same pension as men with the same
earnings provided they have paid full-rate National Insurance contributions
when working. From the year 2000 the earnings-related pension scheme will be
based on a lifetime’s earnings instead of on the best 20 years and is to be
calculated as 20 per cent rather than 25 per cent of earnings phased in over 10
years from 2000. The pensions of people retiring this century will be unaffected.
Employers are free to ‘contract-out’ their employees from the state scheme for
the additional earnings-related pension and to provide their own occupational
pension in its place, provided that the latter is at least as good as the state
additional pension. The State remains responsible for the basic pension. There
are at present around 90,000 occupational schemes, with some 11 million
members—about half the working population. As part of a programme to reform
the occupational pensions system, the Government has introduced measures to
protect against inflation the pension rights of people who change jobs before
pension age; to give workers leaving a scheme the right to a fair transfer value;
and to require pension funds and other pension schemes to provide access to
more information about their schemes. The Social Security Act 1986 gives all
employees the right to choose a personal pension rather than staying fully in the
State Earnings-related Pension Scheme or in an employer’s scheme. Such
168
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mothers and
Children
Widows
Sick and
Disabled
People
pensions will qualify for contracting out of the State Earnings-related Pension
Scheme and will enable people to choose from a wide range of schemes available
from banks, building societies and trusts.
Under the new statutory maternity pay scheme, women who leave work to have a
baby receive their maternity pay directly from their employer and have more
choice than previously about when maternity absence can start. To qualify, a
woman must have worked for the same employer for at least six months up to
and including the fifteenth week before the week her baby is expected and have
had average weekly earnings in the last eight weeks of that period which are not
less than the lower earnings limit for National Insurance contributions.
Statutory maternity pay is normally paid for 18 weeks. There are two rates:
where a woman has been working for the same employer for at least two years,
she is entitled to 90 per cent of her average weekly earnings for the first six
weeks and to the lower rate of £36-25 for the remaining 12 weeks; where a
woman has been employed for between six months and two years, she is entitled
to payments for the full 18 weeks at the lower rate.
Women unable to qualify, because, for example, they are self-employed, have
recently changed jobs or given up their job, may qualify for maternity allowance
which is payable at a flat rate for 18 weeks. To qualify for this, a woman must
have been employed or self-employed and paid standard rate National Insurance
contributions for at least 26 of the 52 weeks ending 15 weeks before the baby is
expected.
A payment of £85 from the social fund is available for each living child born or
for a stillborn child if the pregnancy lasts for at least 28 weeks or for an adopted
baby if the mother or her partner are receiving income support or family credit.
Non-contributory child benefit is the main social security benefit for children.
Tax free and normally paid to the mother, it is payable for children up to the age
of 16 and for those up to the age of 19 if they continue in full-time non-advanced
education. A sum in addition to child benefit, called one-parent benefit, is
payable to certain people, whether parents or not, bringing up one or more
children on their own. A non-contributory guardian’s allowance for an orphaned
child is payable to a person who is entitled to child benefit for that child. In
certain circumstances it can be paid on the death of only one parent.
Under new arrangements which took effect in April 1988, all eligible women
widowed after 10 April 1988 receive a tax-free lump sum payment of £1,000 on
bereavement. A widowed mother with a young family receives a widowed
mother’s allowance with an addition for each child. Widow’s pension is payable
to a widow who is 45 years or over when her husband dies or when her
entitlement to widowed mother’s allowance ends. Payment continues until the
widow remarries or begins drawing retirement pension. Widows also benefit
under the industrial injuries scheme.
A man whose wife dies when both are over pension age inherits his wife’s
pension rights just as a widow inherits her husband’s rights.
There is a large variety of benefits for people unable to work because of sickness
or disablement. Statutory sick pay with additions for a wife or other adult
dependant is payable by an employer for the first 28 weeks of an employee’s
illness. Employees not covered for statutory sick pay can claim sickness benefit
instead, as can self-employed people.
An invalidity pension with additions for a wife and children is payable when
statutory sick pay or sickness benefit ends, if the beneficiary is still incapable of
work. In the case of statutory sick pay the person must have satisfied the
contribution condition for sickness benefit. An invalidity allowance may be paid
SOCIAL WELFARE
169
U nemployment
Benefit
INCOME
SUPPORT
HOUSING
BENEFIT
with the pension to people who become sick more than five years before
minimum retirement age. An additional earnings-related pension may also be
payable. If a person qualifies for both of these, he or she is paid an amount equal
to the higher of the two. A severe disablement allowance may be payable to
people of working age who are unable to work and do not qualify for the National
Insurance invalidity pension because they have not paid sufficient contribu¬
tions.
Various benefits are payable for disablement caused by an accident at work or
a prescribed disease. Disablement benefit is usually paid after a qualifying
period of 15 weeks if, as a result of an industrial accident or a prescribed
disease, there is a loss of physical or mental faculty. (During the qualifying
period statutoiy sick pay or sickness benefit may be payable.) The degree of
disablement is assessed by an adjudicating medical authority and the amount
paid depends on the extent of the disablement and how long it is expected to
last. Disablement of 14 per cent or more attracts a weekly pension; except for
certain progressive respiratory diseases, disablement of less than 14 per cent
does not attract basic benefit. In certain circumstances disablement benefits
may be supplemented by constant attendance allowance. An additional allow¬
ance may be payable in certain cases of exceptionally severe disablement. A
reduced earnings allowance is payable in certain circumstances to people who,
as a result of disablement assessed at 1 per cent or more, are unable to carry out
their regular job or one with equivalent earnings.
A non-contributory, tax-free attendance allowance may be payable to severely
disabled people at either a higher or a lower rate depending upon the amount of
care and attention they require. It is payable from the age of two and there is no
upper age limit. A non-contributory invalid care allowance may be payable to
men and women aged between 16 and pension age who cannot go to work
because they are caring for a person receiving an attendance allowance.
Physically disabled people unable or virtually unable to walk may be entitled to
a tax-free mobility allowance to help to pay their transport costs. People aged
between 5 and 66 may claim and payment can continue up to the age of 80.
An independent organisation called Motability helps disabled drivers and
passengers wanting to use their mobility allowance to obtain a vehicle.
Unemployment benefit is payable for up to a year in any one spell of unem¬
ployment. Periods covered by unemployment or sickness benefit, maternity
allowance or some training allowances, which are eight weeks or less apart, are
linked to form one period of interruption of employment. Everyone claiming
unemployment benefit has to be available for employment, but unemployed
people wishing to do voluntary work in the community may do so in certain
circumstances without loss of entitlement to benefit. The Social Security Act
1989 aims to ensure that people seeking unemployment benefit take active steps
to find work and have good cause for rejecting any employment offered them.
Income support (see Table 7) is payable to people who are not in work, or who
work for less than 24 hours a week, and whose financial resources are below
certain levels. Income support is the difference between a person’s existing
resources and specified weekly levels consisting of a personal allowance with
additional premiums for families, lone parents, pensioners, and long-term sick
and disabled people.
The housing benefit scheme (see Table 7) offers help with the cost of rents and
local taxes—rates and the community charge—to people with low incomes,
using general assessment rules and benefit levels similar to the income support
scheme. People whose net income is no higher than certain specified levels
170
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 7: Income Support and Housing Benefit
Weekly rate
from April 1989
Personal allowances
Single person
Underage 18
Aged 18—24
Aged 25 or over
Lone parent
Underage 18
Aged 18 or over
Couple
Both under age 18
At least one aged 18 or over
Dependent children
Under age 11
Aged 11—15
Aged 16-17
Aged 18
Premiums
Family
Lone parent (income support)
Lone parent (housing benefit)
Pensioner
Single person
Couple
Pensioner (higher)
Single person
Couple
Disability
Single person
Couple
Severe disability
Single person
Couple (one disabled)
Couple (both disabled)
Disabled child
Pensioner (enhanced—for claimants aged 75—79)
Single person
Couple
Pensioner (higher increased)
Single person
Couple
20-80
27-40
34-90
20-80
34-90
41-60
54-80
11-75
17-35
20-80
27-40
6-50
3-90
8-90
11-20
17-05
13-70
19-50
13-70
19-50
26-20
26-20
52-40
6-50
(from October 1989)
13.70
20.55
16.20
23.00
SOCIAL WELFARE
171
FAMILY
CREDIT
SOCIAL
FUND
WAR
PENSIONS
AND
RELATED
SERVICES
TAXATION
Table 8: Family Credit £
Weekly rate
from April 1989
Adult Credit 33 -60
Child credit
Under age 11 7-30
Aged 11-15 12-90
Aged 16-17 16-35
Aged 18 23-30
receive housing benefit equivalent to 100 per cent of their rent and 80 per cent of
their rates.
Both income support and housing benefit schemes introduce a limit to the
amount of capital a person may have and still be entitled, and income is taken
into account net of income tax and National Insurance contributions.
Family credit (see Table 8) is payable to working families on modest incomes
with children. Family credit, which is additional to child benefit, is related to net
income, and to the number and ages of children in the family. A maximum rate,
consisting of an adult rate plus a rate for each child, is payable when the net
income does not exceed £54-80 a week. The rate is then reduced by 70 pence for
each pound by which net income exceeds this amount.
A system of discretionary payments, in the form of loans or grants is available to
people on low incomes who have special or emergency needs. There are three
types: budgeting loans to help meet important intermittent expenses, crisis
loans for help in an emergency or a disaster, and community care grants to help
people re-establish themselves or remain in the community and to ease
exceptional pressure on families. In addition, payments are made from the social
fund to help with the costs of maternity or funerals or with heating during very
cold weather. These are regulated payments, paid as an entitlement and not
subject to the same budgetary considerations as are other social fund payments.
Pensions are payable for disablement or death as a result of service in the armed
forces or by certain injuries received in the merchant navy or civil defence during
war-time., or to civilians injured by enemy action. The amount paid varies
according to the degree of disablement and rank held in service; an allowance is
paid for dependants (see Table 9).
There are a number of supplementary allowances, the main ones being for
unemployability, restricted mobility, the need for constant attendance, the
provision of extra comforts, and as maintenance for a lowered standard of
occupation. An age allowance is payable to war pensioners aged 65 or over whose
disablement is assessed at 40 per cent or more. Pensions are also paid to war
widows and other dependants.
The Department of Social Security maintains a welfare service for war
pensioners, war widows and other dependants. It works closely with ex-Service
organisations and other voluntary bodies which give financial aid and personal
support to those disabled or bereaved as a result of war.
Social security benefits, other than child, maternity, sickness, invalidity and
disablement benefit, are regarded as taxable income. Various income tax reliefs
and exemptions are allowed on account of age or liability for the support of
172
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
OTHER
BENEFITS
ARRANGE¬
MENTS
WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES
Table 9: War Pensions
Category
Weekly rate
from April 1989
Disablement benefits
Pension for a private at 100 per cent rate
Unemployability allowances
Personal allowance
Wife or other adult dependant
Addition for each child
Comforts allowance
Allowance for lowered standard of occupation (maximum)
Constant attendance allowance
(depending on attention needed)
Age allowance (depending on degree of disability)
Exceptionally severe disablement allowance
Severe disablement occupational allowance
Clothing allowance (each year)
Death benefits
Widow’s pension (private’s widow)
Childless widow under 40
Rent allowance (maximum)
Age allowance for elderly widows
Aged 65—69
Aged 70-79
Aged 80 and over
71-20
46-30
26-20
8-95
6-15 to 12-30
28-48
14-25 to 57-00
5-00 to 15-50
28-50
14- 25
61-00 to 97-00
56-65
13-08
21-55
6-10
12-20
15- 30
dependants. The following benefits are not taxable: income support (except
when paid to the unemployed and to people involved in trade disputes), family
credit, attendance allowance, mobility allowance, severe disablement allowance,
and war pensions.
Other benefits for which unemployed people and those on low incomes may be
eligible include exemption from health service charges (see p 143), grants
towards the cost of spectacles, free school meals and free legal aid. Reduced
charges are often made to the unemployed, for example, for adult education and
exhibitions, and pensioners usually enjoy concessionary transport fares.
As part of the European Community’s efforts to promote the free movement of
labour, there are regulations providing for equality of treatment and the
protection of benefit rights for employed and self-employed people who move
between member states. The regulations also cover retirement pensioners and
other beneficiaries who have been employed, or self-employed, as well as
dependants. Benefits covered include child benefit and those for sickness and
maternity, unemployment, retirement, invalidity, accidents at work and occupa¬
tional diseases.
Britain also has reciprocal social security agreements with a number of other
countries. Their scope and the benefits they cover vary, but the majority cover
most National Insurance benefits and family benefits.
Education
L
British education aims to develop fully the abilities of individuals, both young
and old, for their own benefit and that of society as a whole. Compulsoiy
schooling takes place between the ages of 5 and 16, although some provision is
made for children under 5, and many pupils remain at school beyond the
minimum leaving age. Post-school education (mainly at universities,
polytechnics and colleges of further and higher education) is organised flexibly
to provide a wide range of opportunities for academic and vocational education
and continuing study throughout life.
For many years the education service has been characterised by change, and
much of the post-1945 period has also been marked by growth: large increases
in the number of pupils, the expansion of further and higher education,1 and
increased expenditure. Although the process of change continues, recent years
have seen increasing reassessment and consolidation with a view to making the
best use of resources in the light of a substantial drop in the birth rate and
government policies to control public expenditure.
Policies The overriding objectives of the Government’s education policies are to raise
standards at all levels of ability, increase parental choice, make further and
higher education more widely accessible and more responsive to the needs of the
economy, and to achieve the best possible return from the resources invested in
the education service. In schools, levels of achievement are being raised
by improving school management, securing a broader and more balanced
curriculum for all pupils so that they can develop the qualities and skills
required for adult life and work in a technological age, encouraging schools to be
more responsive to the needs of a multi-ethnic society, reforming the public
examination system, and improving the quality of teaching through better
teacher selection, training and deployment. Parental preference as to school and
the need for increased parental involvement in school organisation receive close
consideration, while able children from less well-off homes may qualify for
financial assistance to enable them to attend certain independent schools.
Special attention is paid both to the provision of better pre-vocational education
and training in schools and colleges for the 14- to 18-year-old age-group, and to
the 40 per cent of lower-attaining pupils in the final years of compulsory
education. In response to the report of an inquiry into the education of ethnic
minority groups the Government has described its policies for encouraging
children from the ethnic minorities to achieve their full potential. An important
objective has been to extend the knowledge and use of information technology in
schools.
The Government’s principal aims for the further education sector are to
enable local education authorities and colleges to meet more fully the require-
‘The terms higher education’ and further education' are variously understood: however, under
the Education Reform Act 1988, higher education is defined as advanced courses in any
institution—broadly, those of a standard higher than General Certificate of Education (GCE)
Advanced (A) level or its equivalent—and further education as all other post-school courses.
174
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Recent Reforms
ments of students and employers through the provision of a large range of full-
and part-time courses and to increase participation in further education and
training. It is committed to maintaining a high quality, cost-effective higher
education system which helps satisfy the nation’s economic and social needs
and at the same time offers the necessary opportunities for the advancement of
knowledge and the pursuit of scholarship.
Measures to improve the quality and breadth of education and to extend
parental choice and delegated decision-making in state-maintained schools in
England and Wales are embodied in two recent Acts of Parliament. The
Education (No 2) Act 1986 makes provision for reform of the composition of
school governing bodies and reallocation of functions between school governors,
local education authorities and head teachers; appraisal of the performance of
teachers; and more effective in-service training of teachers. The Education
Reform Act, passed in July 1988, contains wide-ranging measures covering both
school and post-school education. It provides for the establishment of a National
Curriculum in schools and for regular assessments of performance. From
September 1990 secondary schools will be required to admit pupils up to the
limit of their available physical capacity if there is sufficient demand on behalf of
children eligible for admission; this policy, known as ‘more open enrolment’, will
further increase parental choice of schools. The 1988 Act gives all secondary as
well as larger primary schools responsibility for managing the major part of their
budgets, including staffing costs, in addition to the option of withdrawing from
local authority control (see pp 178 and 179). It also makes provision for the
development of city technology colleges in disadvantaged urban areas (see
p 175).
In Scotland legislation passed in 1988 requires the establishment of school
boards with the aim of increasing parental involvement in school management
(see p 178). Legislative proposals are before Parliament to enable parents in
Scotland to vote for local self-management of schools in place of control by
education authorities, and for the establishment of technology academies
outside education authority control (with a similar role to that of city technology
colleges). In Northern Ireland the Government intends to introduce reforms
broadly in line with those being implemented in England and Wales under the
Education Reform Act, and to further encourage the development of integrated
education (see p 178).
Under the Education Reform Act, changes are also being introduced in the
structure and funding of higher education to help institutions improve their
management and planning, and become more flexible and more responsive to
the economic and social needs of the country. The system of university funding
has been reformed in England, Wales and Scotland: the University Grants
Committee has been replaced by the new Universities Funding Council, with
executive powers to allocate finances to individual universities. Polytechnics and
other major higher education colleges in England have been removed from local
authority control, and incorporated as independent charitable institutions with
boards of governors, half of whose members are to be drawn from industry,
commerce and the professions. Their work is planned and financed by the
Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council, with parallel responsibilities to
those of the Universities Funding Council. Those further and higher education
colleges remaining under local authority control are taking on greater responsi¬
bility for their annual budgets and will include larger numbers of employers on
their governing bodies. The Government intends to alter the balance of public
funding of full-time undergraduate higher education between the block grant to
higher education institutions and student tuition fees, giving a new emphasis
to market forces.
EDUCATION
175
Education-
Industry
Links
The Government has announced that further education colleges in both
Scotland and Northern Ireland are to assume increased financial powers and
managerial responsibilities so as to improve their efficiency and responsiveness
to local demand; at least half the members of their governing bodies would
represent employment interests.
It is recognised that co-operation between the education system and industry is
essential to help young people acquire the skills necessary to maintain Britain’s
position as a leading industrial and trading nation. Many organisations already
work to strengthen such links, and further contacts are being encouraged.
Industrial and commercial matters are being allotted a more prominent place in
school and college curricula, and industrialists have been enabled to take a
bigger part in the management of schools, colleges and polytechnics by joining
their governing bodies. The relevance of classroom activities to working life was
central to the thinking behind the introduction of the General Certificate of
Secondary Education and the Education Reform Act 1988.
Under the Enterprise and Education Initiative, announced in 1988, the
Government aims to achieve the following objectives: that every year 10 per cent
of teachers should be given the opportunity to gain some business experience;
that all pupils should have at least two weeks of suitable work experience before
leaving school; and that every trainee teacher should have an appreciation of the
needs of employers.
City technology colleges, sponsored by industry and commerce, offer broadly
based secondary education with a strong technological and business element.
They are state-aided but independent of local education authorities. The first
one opened in Solihull (West Midlands) in 1988, and by September 1989 plans
had been announced for a further 13 colleges.
In 1988 the Government also launched the compacts scheme as part of the
Action for Cities programme (to regenerate inner city areas). Agreements are
entered into by employers, schools, colleges, providers of training and young
people, under which the latter are given priority by participating companies in
recruitment for jobs or training leading to jobs if they meet agreed standards of
performance at school. Up to 40 compacts will receive government financial
support.
In line with the concern to maintain British expertise in science, engineering
and technology, a shift in provision is occurring in post-school education from
the arts and social sciences towards these subjects and towards directly
vocational courses, while industry and higher education institutions are being
encouraged to collaborate more closely for their mutual benefit. The latter have
been invited to provide enterprise training to students under the Government’s
Enterprise in Higher Education scheme.
Almost 40 science parks have been set up by higher education institutions in
conjunction with industrial scientists and technologists to promote the use of
advanced technology. In addition, a network of regional technology centres has
been established, bringing into contact colleges, polytechnics and universities
within particular areas and linking them with local firms; the centres’ incomes
are derived from charges to companies which send their employees for training.
The Government’s LINK initiative, announced in 1986, aims to accelerate the
commercial exploitation of government-funded research and development by
bringing together industry and higher education.
The responsiveness of many courses in further education to the needs of the
economy is being increased to ensure that students are effectively prepared for
adult working life. The role played by further education institutions in providing
training and continuing education is of great importance, especially at a time of
rapid technological change. Under a new government plan to promote further
176
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Administration
Finance
education, it is proposed that everyone up to the age of 19 should receive
systematic education or training.
One of the distinctive features of the education service is the large degree to
which responsibility for provision is decentralised. Overall responsibility for all
aspects of education in England, and for the Government’s relations with and
support for universities throughout Britain, rests with the Secretary of State for
Education and Science. The Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland have responsibility in their respective countries for non¬
university education, and are consulted about education in universities.
The main concerns of the education departments (the Department of
Education and Science in England, the Welsh Office, the Scottish Education
Department, and the Department of Education for Northern Ireland) are
formulating education policies, allocating resources and influencing the other
partners in the education service (the local education authorities, governing
bodies of educational institutions, the teaching profession, the churches and
voluntary organisations). The departments are also responsible for the supply
and training of all teachers.
The provision of maintained, that is, publicly financed, school education and
most post-school education outside universities has traditionally been the
responsibility of local education authorities, which are funded by central
government and (except in Northern Ireland) by local taxes. Their role in
England and Wales, however, is being modified as a result of the Education
Reform Act 1988, and in the case of the Inner London Education Authority (a
central body providing education services for inner London boroughs) provision
has been made to abolish it in 1990 and to hand responsibility for education to
the individual inner London councils. The local education authorities employ
teachers and other staff, provide and maintain buildings, supply equipment and
materials and, in England and Wales, award grants to students proceeding to
further and higher education. Universities are self-governing institutions
receiving most of their income indirectly from central government grants. In
Scotland the central institutions, which are roughly equivalent to the English
polytechnics, and colleges of education, providing teacher training, are adminis¬
tered by independent governing bodies. In Northern Ireland colleges of
education are controlled by the Department of Education and by a voluntary
agency.
Planned spending on education and science in Britain in 1989—90 is some
£23,800 million, more than 14 per cent of the public expenditure planning total.
About 70 per cent of this expenditure will be incurred by local authorities, which
make their own expenditure decisions according to local needs and circum¬
stances. Factors affecting the deployment of resources include changes in the
number of school-age children, the removal of surplus school places, and
savings made in such areas as the provision of school meals and milk.
Local education authorities are also directly responsible for the funding of
most further education courses. The Government’s expenditure plans allow
authorities and colleges to respond to the needs of employers and students with
a wide range of full-time and part-time courses.
An education support grant scheme in England and Wales enables the
Government to support local authority expenditure on educational activities of
national priority. In 1989—90 it is intended to provide £86-6 million out of total
expenditure of £133-3 million, with nearly £94 million to be deployed on
activities relevant to the implementation of the Education Reform Act, including
local management of schools and colleges (£26 million), information technology
in schools (£22-2 million), science and technology in primary schools (£10-1
million) and the National Curriculum (£9-9 million). The balance of the
EDUCATION
177
SCHOOLS
Management
programme is also aimed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the
education service through work on the curriculum, teacher assessment, records
of achievement, education for a multi-ethnic society, information technology in
further education and other aspects of the service.
Support for the universities and other higher education institutions, and
grants to students, account for most of the direct expenditure by central
government. About 55 per cent of universities’ income comes from public funds,
the major part being recurrent grant paid by the Government to the Universities
Funding Council, which allocates the funds to individual universities and
other institutions. The independent University of Buckingham receives no assis¬
tance from public funds, although its students can apply for mandatory
grants.
The Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council, with funds from central
government, was established under the terms of the Education Reform Act to
finance advanced courses in polytechnics and colleges of higher education in
England that have become independent of local education authorities, as well as
some higher education courses in establishments remaining under local
authority control.
Advanced courses in Wales will continue to be financed by local authorities. In
Scotland all courses offered by the central institutions are funded by central
government.
Many universities, polytechnics and other higher education institutions
undertake training, research or consultancy for commercial firms, and the
Government is encouraging them to secure a larger flow of funds from these
sources. Universities are now authorised to market inventions arising from
their research work. A number of establishments have endowments or receive
grants or gifts from foundations and benefactors. Local education authorities,
through their further and higher education institutions, are empowered to sell
goods and services arising as by-products of educational activities.
Parents are required by law to see that their children receive efficient full-time
education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 16. Some 9-2
million children attend Britain’s 35,400 schools (of which 26,000 are primary or
nursery and 5,000 secondary schools in the state sector). Most pupils receive
free education financed from public funds, but a small proportion attend
schools wholly independent of direct public financial support.
Boys and girls are taught together in most primary schools, and almost 90 per
cent of pupils in maintained secondary schools in England and Wales and 60-5
per cent in Northern Ireland attend mixed schools. In Scotland nearly all
secondary schools are mixed. Most independent schools for younger children are
co-educational; the majority providing secondary education are single-sex,
although the number of mixed schools is growing.
No fees are charged to parents of children at maintained schools, and books
and equipment are free, although in Northern Ireland a small proportion of
grammar school pupils is admitted on a fee-paying basis (under planned
reforms, Northern Ireland grammar schools would have to discontinue the
practice of admitting fee-paying pupils).
Schools supported from public funds are of two main kinds in England and
Wales: county schools and voluntary schools. County schools are provided and
maintained by local education authorities wholly out of public funds. Voluntary
schools, mostly established by religious denominations, are also wholly
maintained from public funds but the governors of some types of voluntary
school contribute to capital costs. Just under one-third of the 23,472 primary
and secondary schools in England are voluntary schools, most of them Anglican
or Roman Catholic. Each publicly maintained school has a governing body
178
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nursery and
Primary
Schools
which includes governors appointed by the local education authority and
teacher and parent representatives. The Education (No 2) Act 1986 provides for
equal numbers of parent and local authority governors in most maintained
schools so that no single interest predominates. Governing bodies now have
responsibility for the main policies of their schools and for the preparation of a
statement of their schools’ curricular aims and objectives. They also have
ultimate responsibility for school discipline and a large say in the appointment
and dismissal of staff. The role of governing bodies in England and Wales has
been further enhanced by the Education Reform Act 1988, with local education
authorities delegating responsibility for the management of school budgets to all
secondary schools and primary schools with more than 200 pupils. The Act also
enables all English and Welsh secondary schools as well as primary schools with
over 300 pupils to seek to withdraw from local authority control, following a
balloting of parents, and to be directly financed by central government as
grant-maintained non-fee-paying schools.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided by
education authorities and are known as public schools (in England this term is
used for a type of independent school, see p 180). The School Boards (Scotland)
Act 1988 requires education authorities to establish school boards to play a part
in the administration and management of schools; the boards consist of elected
parent and staff members as well as co-opted members. Their aim is to provide
an opportunity for greater parental involvement and to promote closer links
between home, school and local community.
In Northern Ireland there are three main categories of grant-aided school:
controlled schools, owned and managed by the area education and library
boards and having all their expenditure met from public funds; voluntary
schools, mainly under Roman Catholic management and also maintained
largely by public funds; and voluntary grammar schools, which may be under
Roman Catholic or non-denominational management and receive grants from
the Department of Education. Since the end of 1985 all grant-aided schools have
included elected parents and teachers on their boards of governors. It is
government policy to encourage integrated education, providing for both
Protestant and Roman Catholic pupils, where there is a local desire for it; a small
number of integrated schools have been opened with assistance from charitable
trusts and there are five integrated primary and two secondary schools
grant-aided by the Department of Education. The Government plans to
introduce financial delegation in Northern Ireland, initially to secondary
schools, and this would include the power to manage teaching and non-teaching
staff numbers. In order to give parents greater freedom of choice of schools for
their children, schools would have to admit all pupils applying for admission so
long as there were places available. To assist those parents and schools with a
commitment to the co-education of Protestant and Roman Catholic children,
there would be provision for schools to opt for grant-maintained integrated
status outside local authority control after a balloting of parents; the grant-
maintained integrated schools would be directly financed by central govern¬
ment.
In England, Wales and Scotland parents have a statutory right to express a
preference for a particular school for their children, and have an effective
channel of appeal at local level (there are plans to extend this to Northern
Ireland). Schools also have to publish basic information about themselves and
their public examination results.
Although there is no statutory requirement to provide education for the
under-fives, successive governments have expanded nursery education. Current
expenditure plans allow for the maintenance of existing levels of provision or a
EDUCATION
179
Secondary
Schools
Independent
Schools
small increase, mainly by converting surplus primary school accommodation to
nursery' use. Just under half of three- and four-year-olds receive education in
nursery schools or classes or in infants’ classes in primary schools. In addition,
many children attend informal pre-school playgroups organised by parents and
voluntary bodies such as the Pre-School Playgroups Association.
Compulsory education begins at five, when children go to infant schools or
departments; at seven many go on to junior schools or departments. The usual
age for transfer from primary to secondary schools is 11 in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland, but a number of local authorities in England have established
‘first’ schools for pupils aged 5 to 8, 9 or 10 and ‘middle’ schools covering various
age-ranges between 8 and 14. In Scotland primary schools take children from 5
to 12.
The publicly maintained system of education aims to give all children an
education suited to their particular abilities. Over 90 per cent of the maintained
secondary school population in England and Wales attend comprehensive
schools, which take pupils without reference to ability or aptitude and provide a
wide range of secondary education for all or most of the children in a district.
The schools can be organised in a number of ways, including those that take the
full secondary school age-range from 11 to 18; middle schools, whose pupils
move on to senior comprehensive schools at 12, 13 or 14, leaving at 16 or 18;
and schools with an age-range of 11 or 12 to 16, combined with a sixth-form or a
tertiary college for pupils over 16. Tertiary colleges offer a full range of vocational
courses for students over 16, as well as academic courses. Most other children
receive secondary education in ‘grammar’ or ‘secondary modern’ schools, to
which they are allocated after selection procedures at the age of 11. By
September 1989 26 schools had achieved grant-maintained status under the
Education Reform Act’s ‘opting out’ provisions. These schools are no longer
under the auspices of local education authorities; they are managed by
governing bodies which receive an annual maintenance grant from central
government to cover running costs.
Scottish secondary education is almost completely non-selective; the majority
of schools are six-year comprehensives. Because of local circumstances there are
some comprehensive schools at which courses last only four years or less; pupils
may transfer at the end of their second or fourth years to a six-year
comprehensive.
In Northern Ireland secondary education is organised largely along selective
lines, based on a system of testing. There are, however, certain areas where
secondary schools operate on a non-selective basis.
Independent schools are outside the publicly maintained sector, but they must
register with the appropriate education department and are open to inspection.
They can be required to remedy serious shortcomings in their premises,
accommodation or instruction, and to exclude anyone regarded as unsuitable to
teach in or to be the proprietor of a school. About 7 per cent of British
schoolchildren attend independent schools.
There are about 2,500 independent schools educating 580,000 pupils of all
ages. They charge fees, varying from about £200 a term for day pupils at nursery
age to £2,800 a term for senior boarding pupils. Many offer bursaries to help
pupils from less wrell-off families. Such pupils may also be helped by local
education authorities—particularly if the authorities’ own schools cannot meet
the needs of individual children—or by the Government’s Assisted Places
Scheme, under which assistance is given according to parental income (over 280
schools participate in the scheme). The Government also gives income-related
help with fees to pupils at certain specialist music and ballet schools.
180
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Special
Educational
Needs
Teachers
The
Curriculum
There is great variety of provision within the independent sector, ranging
from small kindergarten to large day and boarding schools and from new and in
some cases experimental schools to ancient foundations. A number of indepen¬
dent schools have also been established by religious and ethnic minorities. The
600 boys’, girls’ and mixed preparatory schools are so called because they
prepare children for the Common Entrance Examination to senior schools. The
normal age range is from seven-plus to 11, 12 or 13, but many of the schools now
have pre-preparatory departments for younger children.
Independent schools for older pupils—from 11, 12 or 13 to 18 or 19—include
about 550 which are sometimes referred to as ‘public schools’. Today the term is
less frequently used but refers to schools belonging to the Headmasters’
Conference, the Governing Bodies Association, the Society of Headmasters of
Independent Schools, the Girls’ Schools Association and the Governing Bodies
of Girls’ Schools Association. They should not be confused with the state-
supported public schools in Scotland.
Special educational needs embrace learning difficulties arising from emotional
or behavioural disorders as well as physical or mental handicap. Local education
authorities in England, Wales and Northern Ireland must ensure that children
with special needs are educated in ordinary schools, provided that the parents’
wishes have been taken into account and that this is compatible with meeting
the needs of the child, with the provision of efficient education for the other
children in the school, and with the best use of resources. In Scotland school
placing is a matter for agreement between education authorities and parents.
There are 1,900 special schools (both day and boarding), including those run
by voluntary organisations, which cater for a wide variety of pupils with special
educational needs.
Teachers in publicly maintained schools are appointed by local education
authorities or school governing bodies. There are almost 540,000 teachers in
maintained and independent schools, and the average pupil-teacher ratio for all
schools is 17 to 1. Teachers in maintained schools must hold qualifications
approved by the appropriate education department (see p 190).
Under provisions contained in the Education (No 2) Act 1986, head teachers in
England and Wales have been responsible for determining and organising the
curriculum within their schools, taking into consideration the policy of their
local education authority and that of their governing body. The Government is
in favour of widening educational opportunities as much as possible through a
broad and balanced curriculum which is differentiated to meet the individual
needs of pupils and is relevant to the requirements of the modern world. Under
the Education Reform Act 1988, it is introducing in stages from September
1989 a National Curriculum in England and Wales, which, during the
compulsory period, includes the core subjects of English, mathematics and
science, as well as the other foundation subjects of history, geography,
technology, music, art, physical education and (for secondary level pupils) a
modern foreign language. Economic and industrial awareness are important
cross-curricular themes in the National Curriculum.
Attainment targets are being devised to establish what children should
normally be expected to know, understand and be able to do at the ages of 7, 11,
14, and 16, enabling the progress of each child to be measured against national
standards; pupils’ performance in relation to attainment targets will be assessed
and reported on at the four key stages. Regulations are being introduced
covering the manner and form in which assessments of individual pupils are to
be made available to parents and others (see p 184).
EDUCATION
181
Religious education (already compulsory under the Education Act 1944) is
required for all pupils as part of the basic curriculum, although parents have a
right to withdraw their children from religious education classes (see p 183).
The content of religious education courses is determined locally. In Wales the
Welsh language is taught and used as either the main or secondary medium of
teaching in many schools (it will constitute a core subject in Welsh-speaking
schools and a foundation subject elsewhere when the National Curriculum is
brought in); in the primary sector 80 per cent of schools either use Welsh as a
teaching medium or teach it as a second language, while nearly 90 per cent of
secondary schools teach Welsh as a first or second language.
The content and management of the curriculum in Scotland is the responsi¬
bility of education authorities and individual head teachers, though guidance is
issued by the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Scottish Consultative
Council on the Curriculum. The Council has issued guidelines to secondary
head teachers recommending that secondary level pupils should follow a broad
and balanced curriculum consisting of English, mathematics, science, a
modern European language, social studies, technological activities, art, music
or drama, religious and moral education, and physical education. A major
programme of curricular review and development has been proposed for the
5-to-14 age-range. The Government is to issue new national curriculum
guidelines on all aspects of the curriculum. New guidelines are also to be
published on assessment and Scottish standardised tests will be introduced in
English and mathematics for primary school pupils at stages 4 and 7 (normally
at ages 8 and 12). Formal arrangements are to be instituted, subject to
legislative approval, for national testing in primary schools. As part of a
development programme for 16- to 18-year-olds, a flexible system of vocational
courses based on modules or short units of study has been introduced in schools
and colleges in disciplines ranging from business and administration to
engineering and industrial production. Though designed primarily to improve
the preparation of young people for working life, the courses are also intended to
meet the needs of many adults entering training or returning to education. The
courses lead to the award of a National Certificate. Provision is made for
teaching in Gaelic in Gaelic-speaking areas.
In Northern Ireland major programmes of curriculum review and development
are in progress in both primary and secondary schools. The aim in the
secondary sector is to improve the quality and relevance of education for all
pupils in the 1 l-to-16 age-range by promoting, in particular, courses in science
and technology, and the development of economic awareness and information
technology across the curriculum. The Government proposes to introduce a
common curriculum in all grant-aided schools, based on six broad areas of
study: English, mathematics, science and technology, the environment and
society, creative and expressive studies, and (for secondary school pupils)
language studies. Religious education would be compulsory at all stages.
Attainment targets, programmes of study and methods of assessment (at ages 8,
11, 14 and 16) would be specified for all prescribed subjects. Similar provision
would be made for the study and assessment of Irish in primary schools. In
addition the Northern Ireland school curriculum would include six compulsory
cross-curricular themes: careers education, health education, economic aware¬
ness, information technology, ‘education for mutual understanding’ and
cultural heritage.
Over the last 20 years or so much has been done by the education authorities
to meet the special needs of ethnic minority children. English language teaching
has received priority, but attention has been increasingly directed at the use of
mother tongues, especially in the early years. Emphasis has been placed on the
need for schools to take account of the ethnic and cultural backgrounds of
182
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technical
and Vocational
Education
Initiative
Information
Technology
British
School
Technology
pupils. Measures are being taken not only to improve the achievement of ethnic
minority pupils but also to prepare all children, not just those of ethnic minority
origin, for living in a multi-ethnic society.
In England curriculum development is promoted by the National Curriculum
Council and in Wales by the Curriculum Council for Wales. At some 500
teachers’ centres in England and Wales, teachers meet for curriculum develop¬
ment work, discussion and in-service training. In Scotland such development
work is undertaken by the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum
and in Northern Ireland by the Northern Ireland Council for Educational
Development (NICED). The Government intends to create a new Northern
Ireland Curriculum Council which would subsume the functions of the NICED
and keep all aspects of the curriculum under review.
Recognising the need to equip pupils of all abilities with the skills needed for
adult and working life, the Government launched the Technical and Vocational
Education Initiative (TVEI) in England and Wales in 1983 and in Scotland in
1984. Originally a series of pilot projects, it was extended into a national scheme
in 1987. The scheme is funded and administered by the Department of
Employment’s Training Agency, working in close co-operation with government
education departments and Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Schools. Projects
emphasise a practical, problem-solving approach to learning for 14- to 18-year-
olds in maintained schools and colleges and encourage the use of new technology
in all areas of the curriculum; it is estimated that in September 1989 300,000
students in over 2,000 schools and colleges were participating in the TVEI.
Britain has developed a world lead in several aspects of the use of information
technology (IT) in education. In 1987 the Government announced a major
five-year initiative to integrate the use of IT throughout the school curriculum
and extend its benefits as widely as possible to children of all ages, aptitudes and
abilities. The main objectives of the first three years of the programme, which
began in 1988, are to increase the number of microcomputers in schools;
provide support for the appointment of advisory teachers trained in the
applications of IT; and offer in-service training for teachers in the effective use of
IT in their specialist subject areas. Government-supported expenditure in the
first three years will amount to some £90 million.
The application of IT will feature in programmes of study and attainment
targets for core and foundation subjects of the National Curriculum. The
Government is making available £410,000 to the National Educational Re¬
sources Information Service (an electronic database, see p 185) to place all
National Curriculum programmes of study, attainment targets and statements
of attainment on the database over a three-year period, starting in 1989.
The National Council for Educational Technology (NCET) has been set up by
the Government to evaluate the newest technologies as they can be applied to
education. Formed from a merger of the Council for Educational Technology and
the Microelectronics Education Support Unit, the NCET will carry toward the
Support Unit’s functions of providing an information service on hardware and
software as well as support to local authorities and teacher training establish¬
ments for teacher training. In this way, the NCET will make available an
integrated professional service covering the whole spectrum of educational and
information technology.
British School Technology, an independent education centre to promote the
teaching of technology in secondary schools and colleges, has been developed
with funding from the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of
Employment. The centre provides help to local education authorities wanting to
introduce courses into their schools, assists in training teachers, co-operates
EDUCATION
183
Religious
Education
and Collective
Worship in
Schools
Examinations
with examination boards to assess new courses, and assists new firms planning
to produce equipment for British schools and for export.
In England and Wales county and voluntary schools are required to provide
religious education and a daily act of collective worship for all pupils except
those withdrawn by their parents; under the Education Reform Act 1988 due
recognition must be given to the place of Christianity within religious education
and collective worship in county schools. The Act amends requirements for daily
collective worship so that it can be organised at times other than the beginning
of the day, and allows for separate acts of worship for different groups of pupils.
In county schools, and sometimes in voluntary schools, non-denominational
religious education is given in accordance with a locally agreed syllabus which
may include the comparative study of religions. Syllabuses have been revised in
many areas to take account of the faiths of the local population. In all kinds of
voluntary schools there is the opportunity for denominational religious educa¬
tion. In Scotland education authorities are required to see that schools practise
religious observance and give pupils religious instruction; parents may with¬
draw their children if they wish. Certain schools provide for Roman Catholic
children but in all schools there are safeguards for the individual conscience. In
Northern Ireland, too, there must be provision for religious education; in
controlled schools clergy have a right of access which may be used for
denominational instruction and in voluntary schools collective worship and
religious education are controlled by the management authorities. Under new
legislative proposals, an agreed core syllabus in religious education would be
prepared for use in all schools: individual schools would be able to supplement
this if they wished. Safeguards would continue to exist in all Northern Ireland
schools for individual conscience.
The principal examinations taken by secondary school pupils in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland around the age of 16 are those leading to the General
Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE), which replaced the General
Certificate of Education (GCE) Ordinary (O) level and the Certificate of
Secondary Education (CSE) in 1988. GCSE courses were introduced in 1986
with a view to raising standards of performance. GCSE examinations are
normally taken after five years of secondary education and have a seven-point
scale of grades denoted by the letters A to G. Grades A to C have standards at
least as high as GCE O level grades A to C and CSE grade 1, which were the
normal qualifying grades for more advanced education or training. The
Government intends the GCSE to be the principal means for assessing
attainment at stage 4 of the National Curriculum.
The GCE Advanced (A) level is normally taken after a further two years of
study. New examinations. Advanced Supplementary (AS) levels, have been
introduced alongside them and were examined for the first time in the summer
of 1989. The AS level, the first courses for which began in 1987 in England and
Wales (in 1989 in Northern Ireland), provides an opportunity for sixth-form
pupils to study a wider range of subjects than before. Students specialising in
the arts and humanities, for example, are able to continue the study of
mathematics and technological subjects at the new level. Requiring the same
standard of work but with only half the content of A levels, AS levels are designed
to occupy half the teaching and study time of an A level. A levels or a mixture of A
and AS levels are the standard for entrance to university and other higher
education and to many forms of professional training.
The Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education, awarded for the first time in
1986, is intended for those at school or college who wish to continue in full-time
education for a year after the age of 16 to prepare either for work or for vocational
184
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Records of
Achievement
Educational
Standards
and other courses. In common with other Business & Technician Education
Council (BTEC—see p 190) qualifications, it can serve as a stepping stone into
higher education. The Certificate is devised by BTEC and the City and Guilds of
London Institute (see p 190).
All GCSE and other qualifications offered to pupils of compulsory school age in
maintained schools in England and Wales have to be approved by the
Government. Associated syllabuses and assessment procedures must comply
with national guidelines and be approved by the School Examinations and
Assessment Council. The aim is to secure a reasonably wide choice of
qualifications and syllabuses which promote a broad, balanced curriculum and
support the National Curriculum.
The School Examinations and Assessment Council has been established to
keep under review all aspects of examinations and assessment in England and
Wales. It also carries out research and development and advises the Government
on matters relating to examinations and assessment. The Council co-operates
with the National Curriculum Council (for England) and the Curriculum
Council for Wales (both set up under the Education Reform Act 1988) on work
connected with the National Curriculum in schools.
The public examination system in Scotland is different from that in other
parts of Britain. Scottish pupils take the Scottish Certificate of Education (SCE)
at Ordinary grade at the end of their fourth year of secondary education
(equivalent to the fifth year in England and Wales). Pupils in the fifth and sixth
years sit the SCE Higher grade; passes at this grade are the basis for entry to
university, colleges of education or professional training. For those who have
completed their main studies at the Higher grade but wish to continue studies
in particular subjects there is the Certificate of Sixth Year Studies (CSYS).
New Standard grade courses and examinations are being introduced to
replace the Ordinary grade. These cater for the whole ability range and all pupils
will be assessed in examinations against nationally determined standards of
performance. The Higher and CSYS examinations are also being revised to
ensure compatibility with the Standard grade.
Under the Government’s plan for the reform of non-advanced further
education in Scotland, the National Certificate was introduced in 1984-85 for
students over 16 who had successfully completed a programme of vocational
courses based on study units known as modules (see p 181). These modules are
now being used in schools for pupils in the 14-to-18 age-range, and other short
courses specifically for use in schools are being devised.
In Northern Ireland the Government intends to create a new Northern Ireland
School Examinations and Assessment Council responsible for new assessment
arrangements and for taking over the duties of the Northern Ireland School
Examinations Council.
A system of school reporting of individual pupils’ achievement in the National
Curriculum subjects will be introduced in stages from 1991, under which
parents in England and Wales will receive a yearly progress report. In Scotland
the report card system is being reformed to give parents a clearer view of their
children’s progress, and in Northern Ireland there is a commitment for all pupils
to be issued with a record of their performance on leaving primary and
secondary school.
Her Majesty’s Inspectors report to ministers on the quality of education provided
in all schools (and in most further and higher education establishments outside
the universities) and advise local education authorities, schools and the
Government; their reports on individual establishments are published (except
in Northern Ireland). Local education authorities also employ inspectors or
advisers to guide them on maintained schools.
EDUCATION
185
Educational
Aids
Careers
Education and
Guidance
Health and
Welfare of
Schoolchildren
POST-SCHOOL
EDUCATION
The Assessment of Performance Unit (part of the School Examinations and
Assessment Council) promotes the development of methods of assessment and
monitors the achievement of schoolchildren. Programmes of monitoring have
been undertaken in England, Wales and Northern Ireland in English language
and mathematics at the ages of 11 and 15, in science at the ages of 11, 13 and
15, and in the first foreign language at the age of 13. A survey of performance at
the age of 15 in design and technology was undertaken in 1988. In Scotland the
Assessment of Achievement research programme has surveyed attainments of
pupils in English and mathematics at ages 8, 12 and 14.
Teachers and pupils use a range of aids to assist the processes of teaching and
learning. The government-funded National Educational Resources Information
Service enables schools to find out about a wide range of teaching aids. Most
schools have audio-visual equipment such as slide projectors and overhead
projectors, and educational broadcasting is of major importance. Each year
more than 450 hours of school radio and 850 hours of television are transmitted
nationally by the BBC and the independent broadcasting companies. Teachers’
notes, pupils’ pamphlets and computer software accompany many broadcast
series. Virtually all primary and secondary schools now have microcomputers
which are used for computer-assisted learning (see p 182).
Increasing importance is being attached by schools (and by further and higher
education establishments) to careers education to increase young people’s
awareness of further and higher education and careers opportunities and
generally help them to prepare for post-school life; as a result, links between
schools and the careers service are being strengthened. The work of the careers
service at local level is supported by careers information material produced by
the Government’s Careers and Occupational Information Centre. The Govern¬
ment is sponsoring the development of a computer-assisted careers guidance
system for students in universities, polytechnics and colleges.
Physical education, including organised games, is part of the curriculum of all
maintained schools, and playing fields must be available for pupils over the age
of eight. Most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
The government health departments are responsible for the medical inspec¬
tion of schoolchildren and for advice on, and treatment of, specific medical and
dental problems associated with children of school age. The Government
believes that the education service has a role to play in preventing and dealing
with juvenile drug misuse and in helping to prevent the spread of AIDS
(Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome).
Local education authorities are free to decide what milk, meals or other
refreshment to provide at their schools, and what charges to make. (In Northern
Ireland school meals must be provided for primary school pupils.) Provision has
to be made free of charge, however, for pupils from families receiving certain
social security benefits. Under certain conditions the authorities must provide
free school transport, and they have discretionary powers to help with the cost of
travel to school.
Corporal punishment is prohibited by law in maintained schools in Britain.
About a third of young people receive some form of post-school education,
compared with a fifth in 1965, with 1 in 7 young people in the 18- to 19-year-old
age-group entering full-time higher education. The number of degrees awarded
by age-group is comparable with that of other developed countries and the
proportion of people in all further and higher education also compares well,
taking into account the large proportion of part-time students and the large
group of students receiving professional training in firms rather than in
educational institutions.
186
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Post-school education is provided at universities, polytechnics, the Scottish
central institutions, further and higher education colleges, adult education
centres, colleges of technology, tertiary colleges, colleges of art and design, and
agricultural and horticultural colleges. There are also many independent
specialist establishments, such as secretarial and correspondence colleges and
colleges for teaching English as a foreign language. Several voluntary and public
bodies provide cultural and general education, sometimes with assistance from
local education authorities and central government, and many education and
training schemes are run by public or private organisations, or firms.
The Government is seeking to improve awareness of the opportunities for
further and higher education and training through the development of national
information services, such as the Educational Counselling and Credit Transfer
Information Service funded by the Department of Education and Science.
Higher education is provided by universities, polytechnics, the Scottish
central institutions and institutions of further and higher education, some
concerned wholly with teacher training. The Government considers that access
to higher education courses should be available to all those who can benefit from
them and who have the necessary intellectual competence, motivation and
maturity. Although GCE A levels have traditionally been the standard for entry
to higher education courses, other qualifications and courses are now consi¬
dered equally appropriate prerequisites: AS levels, some BTEC qualifications
(see p 190) and access/foundation courses (see p 189) all enable people to go on
to higher education. By 1990 the Government expects over 1 million students to
be in higher education, 25 per cent above the 1980 level. One of the
Government’s main aims in higher education is to effect a change in the balance
of provision in favour of scientific, technological and directly vocational courses.
In order to maintain British expertise in information technology and related
fields, a three-year initiative was launched in 1982 to expand higher education
and research in electronics, engineering and computer science by providing
5,000 extra student places, and additional staff and research fellowships in
universities, polytechnics and Scottish central institutions. Under a separate
scheme, some 950 researchers and lecturers were appointed, mostly in the
natural sciences and technology. The Engineering and Technology Programme
announced in 1985 will provide a further 5,000 student places in engineering,
information technology and related scientific disciplines by 1989—90.
In 1988 the Department of Employment brought in a new Graduate
Enterprise Programme offering 450 places on management training courses for
recently qualified graduates intending to start their own businesses.
Further education in England and Wales comprises all provision outside
schools to people aged over 16 of a standard up to and including GCE A level (or
equivalent). Courses are run by 490 or so colleges of further education, many of
which also offer higher education courses. The great majority of such colleges
are controlled by local education authorities. In Scotland the new modular
courses at the non-advanced level (see pp 181 and 184) can be taken in schools,
further education colleges or as part of government training schemes.
Much of the provision outside the universities is broadly vocational in
purpose; it extends from lower-level technical and commercial courses to
advanced courses for those aiming at higher-level posts in commerce, industry
and administration, or taking up a variety of professions (for example, town
planning or estate management). However, most colleges provide non-vocational
courses, including GCSE and GCE A level courses. The system is flexible and
enables the student to acquire whatever qualifications his or her capabilities
and time allow.
A large proportion of students on further education courses attend part time,
either by day release or block release from employment or during the evenings. A
EDUCATION
187
Students
Universities
particular feature of the further education system is its strong ties with
commerce and industry: a major part of the further education sector is devoted
to work-related studies. Co-operation with the business world is encouraged by
the Government and its agencies, and employers are often involved in designing
courses. Further education colleges provide much of the education element in
industrial training programmes like the Youth Training Scheme and Employ¬
ment Training, both sponsored by the Training Agency. The Youth Training
Scheme offers the opportunity of two years’ planned work experience and
training to 16-year-old school-leavers and one year’s to 17-year-old school-
leavers; Employment Training provides a broad range of directed and practical
training to anyone unemployed for over six months. The Further Education Unit
is an advisory and development body for further education.
The Education Reform Act 1988 requires every local education authority in
England and Wales to prepare a scheme outlining procedures for planning
further education provision, setting college budgets, delegating control over
budgets to college governing bodies and to increase employer representation on
governing bodies. The Government also intends to institute financial delegation
in Scottish and Northern Ireland further education establishments and to
strengthen industrial and commercial representation on their governing bodies.
Around 1 million students were taking full-time courses in 1987-88, including
sandwich courses (where substantial periods of full-time study alternate with
periods of supervised experience on a relevant job), at universities and major
establishments of further and higher education in Britain. Of these about
321,000 were at universities, while another 305,000 were following advanced
courses outside universities, at colleges of further and higher education,
polytechnics and Scottish central institutions. More than 400,000 were taking
non-advanced courses, the majority of which lead to recognised vocational or
educational qualifications.
There were also about 3-5 million part-time students, some of whom are
released by their employers for further education during working hours. Many of
the remainder take part in adult education classes.
Over 90 per cent of full-time students on advanced courses are helped by
grants from public funds, which are mandatory for those students taking first
degree and other comparable courses who qualify under national rules. (Grants
for other courses may be given at the discretion of a local education authority.)
Grants cover tuition fees and maintenance, but parents contribute to main¬
tenance costs according to their income. They are awarded by local education
authorities in England and Wales up to first degree level; equivalent schemes are
administered in Scotland by the Scottish Education Department, and in
Northern Ireland mainly by the education and library boards. For postgraduate
study and research, grants are offered by the education departments and the
research councils. Some scholarships are available from endowments and from
particular industries or companies.
The Government believes that the cost of student maintenance should be
shared more equitably between students, parents and taxpayers. It proposes
that from 1990 all home students in full-time higher education, except
postgraduates, should be eligible for a top-up loan averaging over £400 in a full
year in addition to a maintenance grant.
There are 47 universities in Britain, including the Open University, compared
with 17 in 1945. They are governed by royal charters or in some cases by Act of
Parliament, and enjoy complete academic freedom, appointing their own staff
and deciding which students to admit, what and how to teach, and which
degrees to award. The English universities are: Aston (Birmingham), Bath,
188
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Open
University
Birmingham, Bradford, Bristol, Brunei (London), Cambridge, City (London),
Durham, East Anglia, Essex, Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury, Lancaster,
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough, Manchester, University of
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, Newcastle upon Tyne, Notting¬
ham, Oxford, Reading, Salford, Sheffield, Southampton, Surrey, Sussex,
Warwick, York and the independent University of Buckingham. The Royal
College of Art, the Cranfield Institute of Technology, the London Graduate
School of Business Studies and the Manchester Business School also have
university status. The federated University of Wales comprises six constituent
institutions. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, Heriot-Watt (Edinburgh), St Andrews, Stirling and Strathclyde
(Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there are the Queen’s University of Belfast and
the University of Ulster.
The universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, and the Scottish universities of St Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities in Britain were founded in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.
Admission to universities is by examination or selection. Of the 321,000
full-time university students in 1987-88 (excluding those at the Open
University and the University of Buckingham), 56,000 were postgraduate. About
half lived in colleges, halls of residence and other accommodation owned by
universities. There are almost 30,000 full-time university teachers paid wholly
from university funds. The ratio of full-time staff to full-time students is about 1
to 11, one of the most favourable in the world.
Except at the Open University, first degree courses are mainly full time and
usually last three or four years, though medical and veterinary courses normally
require five or six years. Degree titles vary according to the practice of each
university; in England, Wales and Northern Ireland the most common titles for a
first degree are Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of Science (BSc) and for a
second degree Master of Arts (MA), Master of Science (MSc), and Doctor of
Philosophy (PhD); in the older Scottish universities Master is used for a first
degree in arts subjects. Uniformity of standards between universities is
promoted by employing external examiners for all university examinations, and
the general pattern of teaching is fairly similar throughout Britain.
Research is an important feature of university work; many staff combine
research with their teaching duties and about half of postgraduate students are
engaged on research projects. The Government has announced its intention to
pursue a policy of separate funding for teaching and research in the university
sector. It is encouraging universities to co-operate closely with industry on
research projects. In 1987 a new information technology institute, sponsored
jointly by industry and the Cranfield Institute of Technology, was opened to link
academic and commercial interests.
The Open University is a non-residential university which provides degree and
other courses for adult students of all ages throughout Britain. In the main it
uses a combination of specially produced printed texts, correspondence tuition,
television and radio broadcasts, audio and video cassettes, and summer schools,
together with a network of study centres for contact with part-time tutors and
counsellors and with fellow students. No formal academic qualifications are
required to register for these courses, but the standards of the University’s
degrees are the same as those of other universities. Its first degree, for which
courses began in 1971, is the BA (Open), a general degree awarded on a system
of credits for each course completed. In 1989 there were 72,000 registered
undergraduates, and in all 96,000 first degrees have been awarded since the
EDUCATION
189
Polytechnics
and Other
Institutions
Council for
National
Academic
Awards
National Council
for Vocational
Qualifications
University’s inception. The University also has a programme of higher degrees,
BPhil, MPhil and PhD, available through research, and MA and MSc through
taught courses; more than 2,200 students were registered on higher degree
courses in 1988. A Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree course was
introduced in 1989.
A Continuing Education Programme, including short courses of community
education, in-service training for teachers, health and social welfare workers
and other professional staff, and up-dating courses for managers, scientists and
technologists, is the fastest-growing aspect of the University’s work. In 1989
some 170,000 students were following its courses. Whereas students must
normally be resident in Britain, undergraduate courses are also available to
English-speakers in Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. The University
has advised many other countries on setting up similar institutions.
A major contribution to post-school education in England and Wales is made by
the 30 polytechnics which have been established since 1967. They offer mainly
higher education courses in a wide range of subjects, including those leading to
first and higher degrees and certain graduate-equivalent qualifications in
addition to courses leading to the examinations of the chief professional bodies,
and to qualifications such as those of the Business & Technician Education
Council (see p 190). One-year ‘access’ courses provide a foundation and an
appropriate test before enrolment on a course of higher education for
prospective students who lack the standard entry qualifications. Polytechnics
have close links with commerce and industry, and many polytechnic students
have jobs and attend on a part-time basis. Similar provision is made in Scotland
in the 15 central institutions and a number of further education colleges, and in
Northern Ireland by the University of Ulster.
Institutes and colleges of higher education, formed by the integration of
teacher training with the rest of higher education, also account for a significant
proportion of higher education students, and other further education colleges
run some, usually specialised, higher education courses.
An increasing proportion of students on advanced courses in Great Britain
outside the universities are taking courses leading to the qualifications of the
Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA). The Council awards degrees
and other academic qualifications comparable in standard with those granted
by the universities. The courses range from science and technology to the
arts, social studies, business studies and law, but the proportion of techno¬
logical, business or other broadly vocational courses is much higher than in
universities. In 1987 the CNAA instructed institutions running CNAA-approved
courses that they could apply to have delegated to them responsibility for
approving and reviewing their own courses; by September 1989 there
was a total of 39 institutions accredited by the CNAA for taught degree
courses.
A National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) was established in 1986
to reform the existing vocational qualifications system in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. The Council is instituting a system of accreditation for
qualifications awarded for various levels of occupational competence by
approved bodies. It is designing a new framework—called the National
Vocational Qualification (NVQ)—which will incorporate qualifications that meet
agreed criteria within a simple structure of levels. The first accreditations within
the NVQ framework were made in 1987 and the first four levels should be
operating by 1991. A new vocational qualification structure has already been
brought into operation in Scotland.
190
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Examining
Bodies
Teacher
Training
The Business & Technician Education Council (BTEC) plans and administers a
unified national system of courses at technician or equivalent level for students
in industry, commerce and public administration in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. Courses leading to BTEC awards are available at polytechnics,
colleges of further and higher education, and in some schools. The Scottish
Vocational Education Council (SCOTVEC) is the principal examining and
awarding body in the field of further education in Scotland. SCOTVEC is
responsible for the administration and development of the non-advanced
SCOTVEC National Certificate.
Qualifications in a wide range of craft skills are offered by the City and Guilds
of London Institute, and a variety of qualifications in commercial and office
practice are awarded by the Royal Society of Arts.
Almost all entrants to teaching in maintained and special schools in England
and Wales complete a recognised course of initial teacher training. Such courses
are offered by university departments of education as well as by many
polytechnics and colleges. Non-graduates usually qualify by taking a four-year
Bachelor of Education (BEd) honours degree; there are also specially designed
two-year BEd courses—mostly in subjects where there is a shortage of teachers
at the secondary level—for suitably qualified people. Graduates normally take a
one-year Postgraduate Certificate of Education (PGCE), and two-year PGCE
courses are available in the secondary shortage subjects for those whose first
degree in an associated subject did not include at least one year’s study of the
subject they intend to teach. The Government has introduced new regulations
in England and Wales to ease entry into the profession for people who do not
have formal teacher-training qualifications but do have relevant qualifications
and experience. They will have to complete a period as a licensed teacher before
achieving qualified teacher status. In addition the Government has made it
easier for teachers trained abroad to take up posts in English and Welsh schools.
In Scotland all teachers in education authority schools must be registered
with the General Teaching Council for Scotland. It is government policy that all
entrants to the teaching profession in Scotland should be graduates. New
primary teachers qualify either through a four-year BEd course or a one-year
postgraduate course of teacher training at a college of education. Teachers of
academic subjects at secondary schools must hold a degree containing two
passes in the subject which they wish to teach. In certain non-academic
subjects, a relevant specialist diploma has been acceptable in place of a degree,
but this provision is being phased out. Secondary teachers must undertake a
one-year postgraduate training course. In the case of music and technology,
four-year BEd courses are also available, and for physical education all teachers
take BEd courses.
In Northern Ireland teacher training is provided by the two universities and
the two colleges of education. The principal courses are BEd Honours (four
years), BA with education, BA Honours and the one-year Certificate of
Education for graduates.
The Government is taking steps to improve the quality of teaching by revising
selection, training and placement procedures for new teachers, and by making
available more in-service training opportunities. Management training courses
for head teachers are also being provided. The Government believes that more
systematic planning is required by schools and local education authorities to
match in-service training to both the career needs of teachers and to the
curricular needs of schools. A major new in-service training programme to
improve the quality of teaching in schools and institutions of further education
was introduced under the Education (No 2) Act 1986. The programme will cost
up to £214 million in 1989-90, of which £84 million is being allocated to
EDUCATION
191
Adult and
Continuing
Education
projects of national priority, particularly training related to the implementation
of various aspects of the Education Reform Act 1988.
Measures taken to strengthen initial teacher training in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland have included the issuing of criteria which courses must meet
and the establishment of the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education
to review courses against the criteria. The Education (No 2) Act 1986 gives the
Government powers to require local education authorities in England and Wales
to appraise the performance of teachers. In Scotland all courses have been
revised following recommendations of working parties on teacher training. All
new pre-service and major in-service courses provided by colleges of education
must be approved by the Scottish Education Department and a validating body.
The Government proposes to introduce legal powers for appraising the
performance of teachers in Scotland.
It is becoming increasingly recognised that education is a process which
continues throughout adult life. The scope of adult and continuing education
has widened in recent years and now includes, in addition to the development of
the individual through cultural, physical and craft pursuits, such subjects as
basic education (for example, in literacy and numeracy); education for disadvan¬
taged groups and those with special needs, such as ethnic minorities or the
disabled; consumer education; health education; and pre-retirement education.
Continuing education also includes training for those in employment to enable
them to keep pace with technological change. The Government has taken a
number of initiatives to improve opportunities for both adult and continuing
education. In 1982 it launched a Professional, Industrial and Commercial
Updating Programme (PICKUP), designed to help colleges, polytechnics and
universities to meet the need to up-date and broaden the skills of those in
mid-career in industry, commerce and the professions. By 1992 the Government
aims to have one in ten of Britain’s workforce attending job skills updating
courses every year under PICKUP. A programme to encourage the expansion of
educational opportunities for the adult unemployed, called REPLAN, was
launched in 1984. The first courses of the Open College, bringing together
broadcasters, educationists and sponsors and providing vocational education
and training courses below degree level, were transmitted in 1987; since then
more than 60,000 people have taken courses and about 600 companies are now
associated with the college. Up to £12 million will be allocated by the
Government for the college’s commercial activities over the next three years, as
well as £6 million for broadcasting. The Open College of the Arts, also launched
in 1987, offers an art foundation course to those wishing to study at home.
Apart from provision for mature students at universities, courses are offered
by the Open University, further education colleges, adult education centres,
residential colleges, extra-mural departments of universities and various other
bodies such as voluntary organisations. Most of the provision is made by the
local education authorities in a wide variety of establishments, including
schools used for adult evening classes and ‘community schools’, which provide
educational, social and cultural opportunities for the wider community. Most
courses are part time. Local authorities also maintain or aid many of the
short-term residential colleges or centres which provide courses lasting between
a weekend and a fortnight. Long-term residential colleges, grant-aided by central
government departments, have courses of one or two years and aim to provide a
liberal education without academic entry tests. Most students admitted are
entitled to full maintenance grants.
University extra-mural departments and the Workers’ Educational Associa¬
tion, the largest recognised voluntary educational body in Britain, offer
extended part-time courses of liberal studies; they also run short courses for
192
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Teaching
Methods
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
EDUCATIONAL
LINKS
OVERSEAS
special (including vocational) interests. Various kinds of education and training
are provided by a wide range of other organisations, for example, the National
Federation of Women’s Institutes, the Young Men’s Christian Association and
the Pre-Retirement Association.
The National Institute of Adult Continuing Education is a centre of
information, research, development work and publication for adult and
continuing education, as well as a channel of co-operation and consultation for
the many interested organisations in England and Wales. The Institute also
administers with government funding the Unit for the Development of Adult
Continuing Education, which undertakes research and development work; the
Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit, covering proficiency in literacy, numeracy
and communications skills; and a large part of the REPLAN programme. The
Institute’s counterpart in Scotland is the Scottish Institute of Adult and
Continuing Education.
In Scotland the Scottish Community Education Council advises the Govern¬
ment and promotes all community education matters, including adult literacy
and basic education, and the youth service.
In Northern Ireland the Council for Continuing Education advises the
Department of Education on adult and continuing education matters.
The general pattern of teaching and learning on full-time courses of higher
education remains a mixture of lectures; prescribed or suggested reading;
seminars and tutorials; essays, exercises and tests; and, where appropriate,
practical work or work experience. Educational aids are widely used.
Radio and television programmes, both specifically educational and general,
are important media for continuing education and are often linked to
supplementary publications, courses and activities. The BBC, the independent
television companies and Channel 4 provide programmes which range from
basic education and progressive vocational training to domestic, social and craft
skills. The BBC also works with the Open University (see p 188), producing and
broadcasting radio and television programmes as part of the University’s
courses. Channel 4 has a similar relationship with the Open College.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of
educational services is supported financially by central and local government,
the Economic and Social Research Council, philanthropic organisations,
universities and other higher education institutions, teachers’ associations and
certain independent bodies.
The major research institute outside the universities is the autonomous
National Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales, with
income mainly from funds received from research projects and from corporate
members, including local education authorities, teachers’ organisations and
universities; it also receives a small government grant. The Scottish Council for
Research in Education and the Northern Ireland Council for Educational
Research have similar functions.
Schoolchildren, students, teachers and others concerned with education come
to Britain from overseas to study, and British people work and train overseas.
Many opportunities for such movement are the result of international co¬
operation at government level within the European Community and within the
Commonwealth, and of educational schemes, courses and professional contacts
organised in Britain by officially funded and voluntary organisations. The
British aid programme encourages links between educational institutions in
Britain and developing countries.
British membership of the European Community is creating closer ties with
EDUCATION
193
Overseas
Students in
Britain
other member countries. Both in schools and in the colleges and universities
there has been an expansion of interest in European studies and languages,
and exchanges of teachers, schoolchildren and students take place. The
European Community’s European Action Scheme for Mobility of University
Students (ERASMUS), for instance, promotes the exchange of students and
academic staff throughout the Community. Britain has adhered to the Statute
of the European Schools (nine of which have been established throughout the
Community, including one at Culham, Oxfordshire) to provide education for
children of people employed in Community institutions.
Students come to Britain from all over the world to study at universities and
other educational institutions or for professional training. British universities,
polytechnics and other further and higher education establishments have built
up their reputation overseas by offering tuition of the highest standards,
maintaining low student-to-staff ratios, and providing courses and qualifica¬
tions to meet present-day and possible future needs. First degree courses tend to
be shorter and more intensive than in many other countries (three years is the
normal length in England, Wales and Northern Ireland; three or four years in
Scotland).
In the academic year 1987—88 there were about 46,000 overseas students at
universities and 22,000 at polytechnics and other establishments of further and
higher education. In addition, many thousands of people from abroad were
training for such occupations as nursing, law, banking and accountancy, and
service and other industries. Almost half of all overseas students were from the
Commonwealth and Britain’s dependencies. Many come to Britain for advanced
training: one-third of students enrolled for full-time postgraduate study or
research in Britain in 1987-88 came from overseas.
Most overseas students pay their own fees and expenses or hold awards from
their own governments. Those following courses of higher or further education
are charged fees which cover the full cost of their courses. Nationals of other
member countries of the European Community are generally charged the lower
level of fees that applies to British students.
The Government continues, however, to make considerable provision for
students and trainees from overseas under its overseas aid programme and
other schemes. At present more than 15,000 overseas students are supported
annually (including some studying overseas) at a cost of £94 million. Around
three-quarters of this number are from developing countries, most of them from
the Commonwealth, and financed from the aid programme. Under a new
Overseas Development Administration Shared Scholarship Scheme, launched
in 1986-87, 750 awards over five years are available mainly at postgraduate level
for students from the developing countries of the Commonwealth, with costs
being shared between the Government and the educational institutions.
Outside the aid programme, the Overseas Research Students Awards Scheme,
funded by the Department of Education and Science, provides assistance for
overseas research students of high ability to attend British universities, while
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office Scholarships and Awards Scheme, which
operates in some 90 countries, is designed to benefit individuals likely to hold
positions of responsibility in their future careers.
Many public and private scholarships and fellowships are available to students
from overseas (and to British students who want to study overseas). Among the
best known are the British Council Scholarships, the Commonwealth Scholar¬
ship and Fellowship Plan, the Fulbright Scholarship Scheme, the Marshall
Scholarships, the Rhodes Scholarships, and the Churchill Scholarships for men
and women in all walks of life. Most British universities and colleges offer
scholarships for which graduates of any nationality are eligible.
194
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
English as a
Foreign
Language
Educational
Exchanges
A number of British colleges of further education have entered into arrange¬
ments with British universities to provide ‘bridging’ courses for overseas
students before they enter university.
The continuing increase in interest in English as a foreign language is reflected
in the growth of the number of private language schools in Britain, the majority
of which are recognised by the British Council. At the same time the British
Council has expanded the volume of its own teaching of English overseas
by opening several new centres and extending existing ones; it also runs a
programme for teaching English related to specific jobs and skills. Other British
language schools provide opportunities for people to learn English in their own
countries, while in Britain university language and linguistics departments are
an important resource. The Government’s aid programme supports the teaching
of English in many developing countries by financing major projects in schools,
universities and other institutions. Publications and other material relating to
English language teaching have increased in number and are now a large
component in many publishers’ lists, constituting a major export.
BBC English, the English teaching arm of the BBC’s World Service, offers a
world-wide facility for the individual learner at home.
The promotion of cultural and educational relations with other countries is a
major concern of the British Council, which plays an important part in the
management of the aid programme to education. It recruits teachers for work
overseas, organises short visits overseas by British experts, and encourages
cultural exchange visits. It also runs schemes to foster academic interchange
between universities and higher education institutions in Britain and other
countries, and exchange schemes in other scientific, educational and cultural
areas. Co-operation between universities in Britain and developing countries is
promoted with funding from the Overseas Development Administration by
means of recruiting staff for overseas universities, the secondment of staff from
British universities, interdepartmental faculty links, local staff development,
short-term teaching and advisory visits, and general consultancy services.
The Central Bureau, a charity financed by the Government, supplies
information and advice on all forms of educational visits and exchanges. It
develops and administers a wide range of exchange programmes, such as
teacher exchanges with European countries and the United States; short
courses in Europe for teachers; international visits for education specialists;
and the European Community Young Worker Exchange Scheme. It is responsi¬
ble for the linking of educational establishments and local education authorities
with counterparts abroad and the organisation of meetings and conferences. It
publishes a series of guides for people of all ages seeking advice on work, study
and travel abroad. The Language Assistants Scheme and the Junior Assistants
Scheme for young people wishing to teach English abroad or those coming to
Britain to teach their language to English-speaking pupils are also administered
by the Bureau in Britain.
The Youth Exchange Centre, managed by the British Council, promotes youth
exchanges between Britain and other countries. It provides advice, information,
training and grants to British youth groups involved in international ex¬
changes. The Centre is the national agency for the European Community-
sponsored exchange scheme, Youth for Europe.
The Association of Commonwealth Universities promotes contact and co¬
operation between 330 member universities in 29 Commonwealth countries or
regions. It assists student and staff mobility by administering various award
schemes including, for Britain, the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship
Plan, and by providing an academic appointments service; it publishes
EDUCATION
195
information about Commonwealth universities, courses and scholarships; and
organises meetings in different parts of the world.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth. The
United Kingdom Council for Overseas Student Affairs is an independent body
serving overseas students, and those concerned with student affairs.
The Youth Service
The youth service forms part of the education system and is concerned with
promoting the personal development and social education of young people by
providing opportunities for them to participate in a broad range of leisure-time
and extra-curricular activities. Young people take part in the youth service on a
voluntary basis. Extending the breadth of experiences open to young people and
giving them opportunities to participate in the running of their organisations
are seen as key elements in the provision.
The youth service is a partnership between central government, local
authorities and voluntary youth organisations; at local level the youth service is
provided by voluntary organisations and local education authorities. Govern¬
ment education departments formulate broad policy objectives and encourage
their achievement through financial assistance and advice. The need to achieve
better planning, management and co-ordination of the youth service in
England, emphasised in an official review published in 1982, has been endorsed
by the Government and in 1988 the Government announced new arrangements
for periodic consultations with the youth service; these will take the form of
national conferences to be attended by representatives of both the statutory and
voluntary sectors of the youth service. Major issues of common concern will be
discussed and the first conference is expected to take place in late 1989.
In Scotland the youth service forms a part of adult education, which is
integrated within community education. The Scottish Community Education
Council has the role of promoting community education. In Northern Ireland a
youth council with executive and advisory powers will be established before the
end of 1989.
National voluntary youth organisations promote the major share of youth
activities through local groups which raise most of their day-to-day expenses by
their own efforts. Many receive financial and other assistance from local
education authorities, which also provide facilities in many areas. The voluntary
organisations vary greatly in character and include the uniformed and church
organisations. Many local authorities and voluntary youth organisations have
responded to new needs in society by making provision, for example, for the
young unemployed, young people from the ethnic minorities, young people in
inner cities or rural areas and those in trouble or especially vulnerable. Young
Enterprise is a national organisation which gives people aged 15 to 19 the
chance to gain practical business experience by helping them to form and run
their own companies. Other areas of concern are homelessness and provision for
handicapped young people. Among the largest of the voluntary youth organisa¬
tions are the Scout and Girl Guides Associations (with about 560,000 and
710,000 members), and the Young Men’s Christian Association (1 million), all of
which have worldwide affiliations. Youth Clubs UK (about 685,000), the
National Association of Boys’ Clubs (170,000), and clubs run by the churches.
The Young Farmers’ Clubs are distinguished as a movement in which decisions
are taken by the members themselves. There are also organisations like the
Outward Bound Trust, providing opportunities for adventurous outdoor
pursuits. The three pre-service organisations (the Sea Cadet Corps, Army Cadet
Force and Air Training Corps), with a membership of some 75,000, undertake
196
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Youth Workers
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Young People
Voluntary
Service by
Young People
activities related to the work of the armed forces. Many authorities have youth
committees on which official and voluntary bodies are represented, and employ
youth officers to co-ordinate youth work and to arrange in-service training.
There are also youth councils, which are representative bodies of young people
from local youth organisations. At national level many voluntary organisations
belong to the National Council for Voluntary Youth Services, a representative
and consultative body which aims to develop the partnership between voluntary
and statutory bodies in England. Similar councils exist in Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland. The British Youth Council is a national forum for young
people, youth organisations and youth councils, including the youth wings of
the major political parties, and represents young people at an international level.
The youth service in England and Wales can draw on information, advice,
training and research services provided by the National Youth Bureau, which is
funded primarily by central government.
In England and Wales a basic two-year training course at certain universities
and higher education colleges leads to the status of qualified youth and
community worker; there are also several part-time and postgraduate courses
available. In Scotland one-, two- and three-year courses are provided at certain
colleges of education and in Northern Ireland courses are run by the University
of Ulster.
Full-time youth workers are supported by some 500,000 part-time workers,
many of them unpaid, both qualified and unqualified. Short courses and
conferences are held on youth and community work. There are also in-service
courses for serving youth workers and officers. Both initial and in-service
courses are validated by the Council for Education and Training in Youth and
Community Work.
A substantial sum of money is awarded by the many grant-giving foundations
and trusts each year for activities involving young people. The Royal Jubilee
Trusts, formed in 1978 from King George’s Jubilee Trust (started in 1935 at the
time of the Silver Jubilee of King George V) and The Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust
(which arose from the 1977 Queen’s Silver Jubilee Appeal), support work
involving young people aged 8 to 25 (King George’s Jubilee Trust) and young
people up to the age of 25 involved in voluntary community service work (The
Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust). King George’s Jubilee Trust has distributed
nearly £7 million since 1935 and The Queen’s Silver Jubilee Trust over £11
million since 1978. In addition, The Prince’s Trust, which was set up in 1976 to
help disadvantaged young people aged 14 to 25, has disbursed some £3 million
to individuals and small ad hoc groups.
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme, which operates through bodies such
as local authorities, schools, youth organisations and industrial firms, enables
young people from Britain and other Commonwealth countries to take part,
with the voluntary assistance of adults, in a variety of challenging activities in
four areas: community service, expeditions, the development of personal
interests and social and practical skills, and physical recreation.
Thousands of young people voluntarily undertake community service designed
to assist those in need, including the elderly and the disabled, and many others
work on environmental projects. Organisations providing opportunities for
community service, such as Community Service Volunteers, International
Voluntary Service and the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers, receive
grants from the Government. Many schools also organise community service
activities as part of the curriculum, and voluntary work in the community is
sponsored by a number of churches.
Development
Plans
Planning, Housing and
Urban Regeneration
Britain seeks to resolve the conflicting demands of industry, commerce, hous¬
ing, transport, agriculture and recreation by means of a comprehensive statu¬
tory system of land-use planning and development control. The Government’s
aim is for the maximum use of urban land to be made for new developments,
with the intention of protecting the countryside and assisting urban regenera¬
tion. Most development requires planning permission’, and applications are
dealt with in the light of development plans (which set out strategies for each
area on such matters as housing, transport, industry and open land) and of any
other material considerations. However, many minor developments are subject
to a general permission under which they do not need a specific planning
application. The Government’s wish is to remove unnecessary planning controls
as part of its policy to promote private enterprise. A comprehensive programme
to revitalise the inner cities and other urban areas (such as peripheral housing
estates) includes a number of initiatives designed to encourage enterprise,
employment and educational opportunities, and to improve the quality of
housing.
Planning
The system of land-use planning in Great Britain involves a centralised struc¬
ture under the Secretaries of State for the Environment, Wales and Scotland and
compulsory planning duties for local planning authorities. The Department of
the Environment brings together the major responsibilities in England for
land-use planning, housing and construction, countryside policy and environ¬
mental protection. The Welsh Office and the Scottish Development Department
have broadly equivalent responsibilities. Strategic planning in England and
Wales, excluding London, is primarily the responsibility of the county councils
and the metropolitan district councils, while district councils and, in London,
the councils of the London boroughs and the City of London are responsible for
local plans and development control, the main housing functions and many
environmental health matters. In Scotland planning functions are undertaken
by regional and district councils whose responsibilities are divided on a basis
broadly similar to that in England and Wales. In the more rural regions and the
islands, all planning responsibilities are carried out by the regional and islands
councils respectively. In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment
for Northern Ireland is responsible for planning matters through six divisional
planning offices, which work closely with the district councils. The councils
have local environmental health responsibilities.
The development plan system in England and Wales involves ‘structure’ and
local’ plans. Structure plans are prepared by county planning authorities and
require ministerial approval. They set out broad policies for the development and
other use of land, including measures for the improvement of the physical
environment and traffic management. Local plans provide detailed guidance for
198
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public
Participation
development expected to start within about ten years; they are normally
prepared by district planning authorities, although sometimes by county
planning authorities, and must conform generally to the approved structure
plan. In exceptional cases, with ministerial approval, the adoption of a local plan
may precede the approval of a structure plan. Local plans are adopted by the
planning authorities without being subject to ministerial approval unless called
in by the Secretary of State. All plans are kept under review and may be altered
from time to time.
In 1989 the Government announced its intention to simplify the two-tier
planning system in the non-metropolitan areas of England and Wales by
replacing it with a single tier of district development plans. The strategic role of
the counties would continue, but county structure plans would be replaced by
statements of county planning policies, dealing with the main issues. The
statements would not be subject to formal approval by the Secretary of State, but
counties would be required to ensure that the statements were consistent with
any regional planning guidance issued by the Secretary of State. In Greater
London and the other six metropolitan areas in England new unitary develop¬
ment plans are in force. They set out the strategic and detailed development
control policies. Planning authorities must take account of any regional gui¬
dance proposed by the Secretary of State when formulating the plans.
In Scotland structure plans are prepared by regional or islands authorities,
and local plans by the districts. Regional and islands authorities may also
produce a regional report outlining their priorities and policies. Under Northern
Ireland’s single-tier system, plans are prepared by the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland.
Members of the public and interested organisations are given an opportunity to
express their views on the planning of their areas during the formative stages of
the structure and local plans. The local planning authorities must ensure
adequate publicity for matters proposed for inclusion in the plans; representa¬
tions may be made about them to the authorities. These opportunities for public
participation are additional to provisions for objecting to prepared plans. In the
case of structure plans the Secretary of State normally holds an examination in
public of matters on which he or she requires more information in order to reach
a decision. In the case of local plans objectors have a right to be heard at a public
local inquiry held by the planning authorities. There are similar provisions for
participation in the preparation of unitary development plans and for making
objections to them.
Where specific proposals for development differ substantially from the inten¬
tions of a development plan, they must be publicised locally. Other schemes
affecting a large number of people are usually advertised by the local planning
authority, and applications seeking permission for certain types of
development—for example, those affecting historic buildings and conservation
areas—must also be advertised. (In Scotland there is a system of neighbour
notification of planning applications, under which the applicant must notify the
proprietors of land and buildings adjoining the site of a proposed development at
the same time as the application is submitted to the local planning authority.)
The applicant has a right of appeal to the Secretary of State if planning
permission is refused or is granted subject to conditions. Most appeals are
transferred for decision to inspectors (in Scotland, reporters) appointed by the
Secretary of State.
Similar provision is made in Northern Ireland for public participation in the
planning process and for the hearing of representations at public inquiries. For
planning applications which do not give rise to public inquiries there is a right
of appeal to an independent Planning Appeals Commission.
PLANNING, HOUSING AND URBAN REGENERATION
199
Major
Schemes
New Towns
Architectural
Standards
The Secretaries of State can direct that a planning application be referred to
them for decision. This power is exercised sparingly and usually only in respect
of proposals of national or regional importance which give rise to substantial
controversy—for example, proposals for a major new airport or power station.
The applicant and the local planning authority have the right to be heard by a
person appointed by the Secretary of State and a public inquiry is normally held
for this purpose. In the case of development schemes of exceptional importance
the departments concerned have set up procedures to aid the progress of the
inquiry by helping the parties to resolve procedural matters beforehand and by
streamlining the inquiry procedures. Where highway development is proposed,
the government minister concerned can hold such inquiries as he or she
considers appropriate; these generally relate to the compulsory acquisition of
land.
The 32 new towns designated since 1946—21 in England, two in Wales, five in
Scotland and four in Northern Ireland—represent one of the most significant
achievements in British planning, and have now largely achieved their aims of
dispersal of industry and population from congested cities and the stimulation
of regional economies. Most of them had an existing town or village as a nucleus.
The new towns have a total population of over 2 million; several have become
regional centres for shopping and office accommodation. The new town develop¬
ment corporations’ priorities now are to maximise private investment in
housing and employment and to achieve balanced communities able to generate
their own growth.
With the completion of the new towns programme, the development corpora¬
tions which administered the new towns are being dissolved. The remaining
three corporations in England will be wound up by 1992 and dissolution of the
five Scottish development corporations will begin in 1991. In Wales responsibil¬
ity for Newtown rests with the Development Board for Rural Wales, while the
corporation responsible for Cwmbran was dissolved in 1988. In Northern Ireland
development of the new towns has been incorporated in a new District Towns
Strategy, which is the responsibility of the Department of the Environment for
Northern Ireland.
High standards in new building are encouraged by the Government. The
Department of the Environment, in collaboration with the independent Royal
Institute of British Architects (RIBA) and the National House-Building Council,
sponsors the biennial Housing Design Awards Scheme for England and North¬
ern Ireland, with categories for renovation as well as new building. Scotland and
Wales have similar but separate award schemes. The Government has also
encouraged the use of architectural competitions, and has set an example in the
award of some of its own contracts. Royal Fine Art Commissions for England and
Wales and for Scotland advise government departments, planning authorities
and other public bodies on questions of public amenity or artistic importance.
The RIBA, the principal professional body for architects, exercises control over
standards in architectural education and encourages the maintenance of high
architectural standards in the profession. The Royal Incorporation of Architects
in Scotland is allied to it, as is the Royal Society of Ulster Architects.
Urban Regeneration
Revitalising the run-down inner areas of towns and cities is a government
priority. Much has been achieved under a variety of special programmes, but
problems remain, including a lack of private investment in local economies, high
200
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Urban
Programme
City Action
Teams
Task Forces
unemployment, physical dereliction and decay. The population structure often
contains a high proportion of the disadvantaged and the elderly.
A comprehensive programme of renewal initiatives, ‘Action for Cities’, was
launched in 1988. The economic recovery of inner city areas is being encouraged
by the promotion of enterprise and new business, and job prospects are also
being improved through better education and training. The environment is
being improved and inner city areas are being made safer and more attractive
places in which to live and work. The programme involves government depart¬
ments in a co-ordinated effort, the main contributing programmes being those
of the Department of the Environment, the Department of Trade and Industry
and the Department of Employment. However, a major aspect is effective
co-operation between the public sector, local and central government, and
private business and voluntary organisations. About £3,500 million is being
spent on urban regeneration in Britain in 1989-90, and this is expected to bring
in several times that total in private investment.
The Urban Programme was the first major public spending programme directed
solely at the inner cities. It gives specific grant through local authorities to some
10,000 projects a year in the inner cities, and has increasingly been used to
support capital investment projects which strengthen and revive the local
economy, foster enterprise and improve the environment of run-down areas to
rebuild confidence and encourage private investment. In 1988—89 the Urban
Programme supported 740 new firms and helped to fund the development of over
1,000 managed workshops. It improved nearly 2,000 hectares (5,000 acres) of
unsightly land and supported management improvement schemes for over
89,000 council homes and nearly 90,000 inner city jobs or training places.
Spending on the Programme in England amounted to £307 million in 1988-89.
In 1987 the Government announced that, in order to achieve a greater impact
with available funds, resources were to be concentrated on 57 target areas with
special problems and needs (see map, pp 202-3). The Urban Programme
represents only a part of the central assistance to urban, and other, local
authorities. The main contributions are through the annual rate support grant,
housing subsidy and other programmes.
There is a co-ordinated ‘partnership’ approach in seven English areas (Birm¬
ingham, Liverpool, Manchester/Salford, Newcastle upon Tyne/Gateshead and
the inner London boroughs of Hackney, Islington and Lambeth), in which
central and local government work together to tackle urban problems where they
are at their most severe. Each partnership has a three-year action programme,
reviewed annually, which is based on the needs of the area and its particular
priorities.
In 1985 the Government announced the establishment of five ‘City Action
Teams’ (one for the inner London boroughs of Hackney, Islington and Lambeth
and one for each of the other partnership areas) to co-ordinate the range of
government programmes for tackling inner city problems. Three further teams
have been set up in Cleveland, Leeds and Nottingham. These teams have special
budgets to enable them to encourage the development of joint projects and
initiatives between the public and private sectors.
‘Task forces’, first created in 1986 to intensify and bring together the efforts of
government departments, local government, the private sector and the local
community to regenerate inner cities, are small, locally based teams working in
16 inner city areas (see map, pp 202—3); the most recent were announced for
Liverpool, Bradford, and Lewisham in London in 1989. Task forces have their
PLANNING, HOUSING AND URBAN REGENERATION
201
own funds and are particularly concerned to encourage enterprise and to
improve training opportunities in their areas.
Urban Development Corporations have been set up by the Government in order
to reverse large-scale urban decline. The first, modelled on the new town
development corporations, were established in London Docklands and
Merseyside in 1981. By the end of March 1989 the London Docklands Develop¬
ment Corporation had received £500 million in government grant and secured
private investment commitments of around £6,900 million. It has reclaimed
over 300 hectares (741 acres) of derelict land for housing, commercial and
recreational use. Over 8,000 homes have been completed and over 20,000 jobs
have been attracted to the area. The Merseyside Development Corporation has
reclaimed 285 hectares (703 acres) of derelict land and 240,000 square metres
(2-6 million square feet) of buildings have been refurbished in its area.
Five new Corporations were set up in 1987: Trafford Park (Greater Manches¬
ter), Teesside, Tyne and Wear, Black Country (West Midlands) and Cardiff Bay.
Four more—in Bristol, Leeds, Central Manchester and Sheffield—were set up in
1988— 89, and the Black Country and Merseyside Development Corporations
were extended. Urban Development Corporations cover about 16,000 hectares
(about 40,000 acres) and public expenditure on the programme will be around
£270 million in 1989—90.
City Grant was introduced in 1988 to simplify the grants available to encourage
private sector developments in inner cities: it replaced the Urban Development
Grant and the Urban Regeneration Grant, which had been available since 1982
and 1986 respectively. It also covers projects that would previously have been
assisted by private sector Derelict Land Grant (see p 204) within urban priority
areas. It is paid on projects with a total value exceeding £200,000 and is paid
direct to the private sector for projects which contribute to the regeneration of
an urban area. By the end of April 1989 approval had been given for 55 schemes
involving City Grant of £36 million which, it was calculated, would generate
£146 million in private investment.
In 1988 the Government announced measures to foster good business practice
which involve the private sector further in inner city regeneration and widen the
choice and opportunities open to inner city residents. Under its ‘Enterprise
Initiative’, the Department of Trade and Industry, among other measures, offers
help towards consultancy costs for advising small independent businesses on
marketing, design, quality, manufacturing systems, business planning, and
financial and information systems; more than £91 million is available in
1989— 90. Higher levels of grant are available in Urban Programme and assisted
areas.
Since 1981 the Government has set up 26 ‘enterprise zones’ (see map, pp 202—
3). The aim of this experimental policy is to see how far industrial and
commercial activity can be stimulated by the removal of certain tax burdens and
by relaxing or speeding up the application of a number of administrative
controls. The zones, which contain land suitable for development, range in size
from about 50 to 450 hectares (about 120 to over 1,100 acres). Benefits in the
zones include exemption from rates (the local property tax); 100 per cent
allowances for corporation and income tax purposes for capital expenditure on
industrial and commercial buildings; a much simplified planning system in
which many forms of development are automatically permitted; and a reduction
in government requests for statistical information.
Urban Policy Initiatives
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
l—l—l l i l i
I 1 1 1 1
nset A
Benarty
Glenrothes
Buckhavent
Alloa
• Inverkeithing
Leven
Kirkintilloch Grangemouth
Falkirk/” •
Polmont
Edinburgh#
w Broxburn® Musselburgh
Coatbridge Bathgate# ® ^
Glasgow # •Airdrie # Livingston Da|keith
Viewpark# Bellshill Whitburn
* #Cleland
•Wishaw
restonpans
Tranent
Inset C
Inset D
Valleys Programme Boundary
^ r**—
■ Ebbw Vale
I  f
l. Pontardawe ■
Aberdare# Merthyr Tydfil {
Tonypandy \
i Maesteg Pontypool (
^ n ■ ■
30 40 km
_l i
—i 1 1 1
10 15 20 25 miles
Islington
Hammersmith
and Fulham
A
Kensington
and
Chelsea *
Wandsworth
Lambeth—
Hackney
Tower Hamlets *
London Docklands
Greenwich
Isle of Dogs
Lewisham *
Southwark *
Greater London Boundary
10
30 40 km
j i
T
20 25 miles
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
204
Simplified
Planning
Zones
Land
Reclamation
and Use
Registers of
Unused and
Under-used
Land
Garden
Festivals
Education,
Training and
Employment
The Housing and Planning Act 1986 provided for the establishment of ‘simpli¬
fied planning zones’. They use a simplified planning framework, already oper¬
ational in enterprise zones, under which advance planning permission is given
for specified types of development within a zone without payment of a fee. This
removes the need for each developer to make a separate planning application in
these cases. Simplified planning zones are intended to stimulate investment and
regeneration by removing the uncertainty from the planning system.
Derelict land is often concentrated in places associated with nineteenth-century
industrial development, but the restructuring of particular industries over the
past decade or so is continuing to add significantly to this problem in certain
areas. Dereliction can take various forms and includes mineral waste tips, old
mineral workings, and former industrial sites (such as steelworks, disused
railways and docks), many of which are contaminated sites.
In England government grants are available under the Derelict Land Act 1982
to local authorities and to other public bodies, to the private sector and to
nationalised industries for the reclamation of such land in order to bring it into
beneficial use or to improve its appearance. The expenditure provision for the
Derelict Land Grant reclamation programme in 1989-90 is £67 million. The
main priority is given to reclamation schemes in urban, particularly inner city,
areas that lead to development by the private sector for industry, commerce and
especially housing. Between 1 April 1979 and 31 March 1989 some 13,000
hectares (over 32,000 acres) of derelict land were reclaimed in England with the
aid of some £540 million of grant.
In Scotland and Wales responsibility for derelict land reclamation rests with
the respective development agencies, which may acquire and reclaim land,
employ local authorities as their agents (in Scotland) or make grants to local
authorities for the purpose (in Wales). In Northern Ireland grants may be paid to
landowners who restore or improve derelict sites.
To prevent new dereliction, planning controls may require that when permis¬
sion is given for mineral working, various measures must be taken to minimise
the disturbance caused by the work and, where practicable, to secure effective
restoration to the former land use or to a new use.
In Wales land use is additionally encouraged by the Land Authority for Wales,
a statutory body with powers to make land available for development in
circumstances where the private sector would find this difficult or impossible.
In England the Government has instituted, and made available for inspection,
registers of unused and under-used land held by local authorities, nationalised
industries and other public bodies; some 66,700 hectares (164,900 acres) have
been registered. Of this, some 32,700 hectares (80,700 acres) have been
removed from the registers, mainly because the land has been sold to the private
sector or brought into use. There is power to direct a public body to dispose of
registered land; directions in respect of 79 sites had been issued by the end of
March 1989. Registers are also published for certain areas of Wales.
National garden festivals, based on the European idea of garden shows, have
been introduced with the aim of rejuvenating inner urban areas and reclaiming
derelict sites. The first festivals in Liverpool in 1984, Stoke-on-Trent in 1986,
and Glasgow in 1988, are being followed by similar events in Gateshead in 1990
and Ebbw Vale in 1992.
Schools/industry ‘Compacts’ have been introduced in 30 deprived urban areas
since August 1988. Groups of employers work with schools to guarantee a job
with training for all young school-leavers aged 16 to 18 who meet agreed targets
PLANNING, HOUSING AND URBAN REGENERATION
205
Other
Measures
Scotland
Wales
for motivation and achievement. The Government announced funding for a
further ten Compacts in March 1989. The first of a network of at least 20 City
Technology Colleges opened near Birmingham in September 1988, and others
have been announced for Nottingham, Middlesbrough, Gateshead, Bradford,
Dartford (Kent) and Selhurst (Croydon). Intended to raise educational stan¬
dards, City Technology Colleges are funded jointly by the Government and
industry. Employment and training programmes, such as Jobclubs to help the
unemployed back into work, the Youth Training Scheme for young people aged
16 and 17, and Employment Training, aimed particularly at adults unemployed
for more than six months, involve nearly 500,000 people in the inner cities each
year.
Higher than average crime rates and the fear of crime are particular problems in
the inner cities. Safer Cities projects are being established in 16 areas, bringing
together all sections of the local community to tackle these problems.
The Urban Programme supports the provision of recreation, sport, play and
leisure facilities in the inner cities. Sport and recreation provision in the inner
cities is being reviewed, with the aim of achieving a more effective use of
resources and encouraging further private sector involvement.
Tourism is encouraged by the Government as a force for the improvement of
inner city areas, and several major projects which create a cultural and artistic
focus for inner city regeneration have been undertaken: for example, the Tate
Gallery of the North at the Albert Dock in Liverpool.
There has been major investment in road schemes of benefit to inner city
areas. The Government’s priorities for inner city housing are to secure a wide
range of good quality housing available for rent or purchase, and to improve
conditions and opportunities for residents, particularly on local authority
estates (see p 211).
Under proposals for intensifying urban regeneration announced in 1988,
increased priority is being given to peripheral housing estates, building on
experience gained from inner city regeneration schemes such as the Glasgow
Eastern Area Renewal project. Partnerships involving the Scottish Office and its
agencies, the private sector, local authorities and the local communities have
been established to devise and implement regeneration strategies. A separate
Urban Programme amounts to £57 million in 1989-90. The Scottish Develop¬
ment Agency (which is to become Scottish Enterprise under the Government’s
proposals to amalgamate it with the Training Agency in Scotland) operates the
Local Enterprise Grants for Urban Projects Scheme (equivalent to the City
Grant) and is making urban renewal a major priority. Four major initiatives to
tackle the economic, environmental, housing and social problems of large
peripheral estates in Glasgow, Paisley, Edinburgh and Dundee were announced
by the Government in 1988.
Spending on the Urban Programme in Wales is expected to be £36-6 million in
1989—90, with priority being given to the ten most severely deprived urban
areas.
Urban Investment Grant was introduced in April 1989 to simplify the grants
available to support private sector projects, replacing Urban Development Grant
and Urban Regeneration Grant. To qualify, projects must have a total develop¬
ment cost of over £150,000.
The Programme for the Valleys, launched in 1988, is the most extensive
programme of economic and urban regeneration in Wales, and covers an area of
some 2,200 sq km (860 square miles) in the south Wales valleys (see map,
p 203). It involves increased levels of factory building, land clearance and Urban
206
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Northern
Ireland
Programme support, in addition to action to stimulate private enterprise,
improve health care and educational services, support private housing improve¬
ments and strengthen tourism, the arts and voluntary organisations.
The Cardiff Bay Development Corporation was set up in 1987 to bring forward
redevelopment in an area of south Cardiff which was once the commercial centre
of the city. By the end of March 1989 the Corporation had received £29-8 million
in government grant, which has been spent mainly on land acquisition, site
investigation for reclamation schemes, and environmental and community-
based projects. The Corporation’s regeneration strategy includes proposals for
the construction of a barrage across Cardiff harbour mouth, which would create
a large freshwater lake and 12 km (7 miles) of waterside frontage. It is expected
that over 30,000 new jobs will be created and that over £1,000 million of private
investment will be attracted.
In Northern Ireland inner city problems on a substantial scale are largely
confined to Belfast, where a major housing programme is supplemented by
Urban Development Grants, environmental improvement schemes and a com¬
prehensive development programme to regenerate the commercial areas of the
inner city. In 1989—90 these programmes have a combined allocation of £117
million. Eight Action Teams have been established to tackle the problems of
particularly deprived areas of the city.
The ‘Making Belfast Work’ initiative, launched in 1988 to stimulate greater
economic activity and improve the quality of the environment in the most
disadvantaged areas, has been extended for a further three years, with an
additional allocation of £15 million for 1989-90 and £40 million for the
subsequent two years.
Housing
The pattern of housing tenure has changed considerably in recent years, with a
substantial increase in owner-occupation and a decline in privately rented
accommodation. Between the end of 1971 and 1988 the proportion of dwellings
that were owner-occupied in Great Britain rose from over 50 to 65 per cent, while
the proportion rented from a local authority or new town authority fell from 31 to
25 per cent, and the proportion of other types of tenure fell from 19 to less than
10 per cent. The fall in the last category reflects the decline in privately rented
dwellings, while the number of housing association dwellings increased sub¬
stantially during this period. There are variations, however, in the distribution
of tenure between different parts of the country; owner-occupation ranges from
45 per cent in Scotland to 73 per cent in south-west England. The encourage¬
ment of further home ownership and the regeneration of the independent rented
sector are major aims of the Government’s housing policy, while the emphasis of
public sector housing policy has shifted from new building to modernisation,
improvement and making better use of existing dwellings.
There are 22 -5 million dwellings in Britain, houses being much more common
than flats (the ratio is roughly four to one), and around 50 per cent of families
live in a post-1945 home. Throughout this century pressure on housing
accommodation has been increased more by the rapid rise in the number of
households than by the increase in population. While the number of people has
increased by about two-fifths, the number of households has more than
doubled.
New house construction is undertaken by both public and private sectors but
over the past few years the private sector has built many more dwellings than the
public sector. In 1988, 5 per cent of new building was carried out by voluntary
housing associations. Private interests build mainly for sale to owner-occupiers.
PLANNING, HOUSING AND URBAN REGENERATION
207
Administration
Home
Ownership
Mortgage Loans
while public sector dwellings are provided mainly for renting, although tenants
do have the right to buy the property in which they live after a qualifying period.
As with environmental planning, responsibility for formulating housing policy
and supervising the housing programme is borne by the Secretary of State for
the Environment in England and by the Secretaries of State for Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland. Although the policies are broadly similar throughout
Britain, provisions in Northern Ireland and Scotland may differ slightly from
those in England and Wales.
The construction or structural alteration of housing is subject to building
regulations laid down by the Government. Nearly all house construction in the
private sector has been regulated by an independent organisation, the National
House-Building Council. The Council sets standards and enforces them by
inspection and certification, and provides a ten-year guarantee against major
structural defects, while a two-year guarantee is also given against faulty
workmanship. In 1989 the Housing Standards Co Ltd (a subsidiary of Municipal
Mutual Insurance Ltd) began operating, providing a 15-year guarantee against
major structural defects and a separate inspection and certification service.
Most lenders will only make a loan for purchase of a new house if it is covered by
a guarantee scheme.
Local authorities are responsible for the payment of house renovation grants
and the implementation of housing renewal programmes. (In Northern Ireland
the Northern Ireland Housing Executive has these responsibilities.) Many have
housing advisory centres to provide information on aspects of housing.
The number of people owning their own homes has more than trebled in the last
40 years, and the number of owner-occupied dwellings in Great Britain
amounted to over 14-7 million at the end of 1988, compared with 4 million in
1951. Most public sector tenants have the right to buy the homes they occupy at
discounts which vary according to the length of their occupancy. Local author¬
ities have been asked to encourage low-cost home ownership in a variety of ways,
for example, by selling land to builders to construct homes for ‘first-time’ buyers,
or to individuals or groups to build their own ‘first-time’ homes in partnership
with private builders. Changes in mobility and in working and retirement
patterns have put pressure on rural housing in many areas, and in 1989 the
Department of the Environment announced that where local planning author¬
ities in England were satisfied that there was a need for low-cost housing in
rural areas, sites which would not normally be released for housing development
could exceptionally be released, provided arrangements were made to reserve the
housing for local people. In Scotland, Scottish Homes (see p 210) is developing a
rural housing strategy.
In Northern Ireland shared ownership has been developed in the public sector
by the Northern Ireland Housing Executive and in the private sector by the
Northern Ireland Co-ownership Housing Association. The Executive has offered
most of its homes for sale to tenants; almost 40,000 have been sold.
Most people buy their homes with a mortgage loan (for which the properties are
regarded as securities). Building societies are the largest source of such loans,
although banks and other financial institutions are taking an increasing share
of the mortgage market, while some companies also make loans for house
purchase to their own employees. For first-time buyers a lender will usually
advance about 90 per cent of the valuation of a property with the help of an
appropriate insurance guarantee, but it is possible to borrow up to 100 per cent.
Loans are normally repayable over periods of 20 or 25 years (up to 30 or 35 years
in certain circumstances) by equal monthly instalments to cover capital and
208
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public Sector
Housing
interest. Ordinary mortgage loans from building societies are usually available to
purchasers on average income or above. People with insufficient income to
obtain a mortgage for outright purchase may be able to participate in a scheme
in which a housing association buys the home and sells a share in it to them,
allowing them to rent the remainder and to purchase it later if they wish.
Owner-occupiers are entitled to tax relief on interest payments arising from their
mortgage loans on up to £30,000 a property (on their main home only).
Most of the public housing in Great Britain is provided by 460 local housing
authorities. The authorities are: in England (outside London) and Wales, the
district councils; in London, the London borough councils and the Common
Council of the City of London; and in Scotland, the district and islands councils.
Other public housing authorities are the new town authorities, Scottish Homes
(which has a stock of some 75,000 houses), and the Development Board for
Rural Wales. The Northern Ireland Housing Executive is responsible for the
provision and management of public housing in Northern Ireland. Public '
housing authorities own about 6 million houses and flats. The number of homes
owned by each authority varies widely, from 141 homes in the Isles of Scilly to
160,500 in Glasgow. Most authorities own between 2,500 and 15,000 dwellings,
although a number of local authorities are considering transferring their stock
to independent landlords (mostly housing associations). The Northern Ireland
Housing Executive owns almost 175,000 homes.
Local authorities meet the capital costs of new house construction and of
modernisation of their existing stock by raising loans on the open market, by
borrowing from the Public Works Loan Board (an independent statutory body set
up to make loans to local authorities) or from the capital receipts generated by
the sale of local authority houses and housing land. The Northern Ireland
Housing Executive is similarly financed.
Sheltered housing (usually accommodation with an alarm system and resi¬
dent warden) is provided for those elderly people who need this degree of
support, but increasing emphasis is being placed on schemes to help elderly
people to continue to live in their own homes and on schemes to adapt existing
housing to meet the needs of physically handicapped people. Local authorities
have a statutory duty to ensure that accommodation (not necessarily owned by
the authority) is available for homeless people who have dependent children or
are vulnerable on grounds such as age or disability. In 1988 local authorities in
England accepted responsibility for securing accommodation for 116,100
households under the homeless provisions of the Housing Act 1985.
The Housing Act 1980 and subsequent legislation have established a charter
for public sector tenants in England and Wales, giving them statutory rights
which include security of tenure. With a few exceptions, public sector tenants of
at least two years’ standing can buy their house or flat at a discount which
depends on the length of occupation. Similar provisions are made for Scotland
and Northern Ireland under separate legislation. By the end of 1988, 1 -4 million
council, housing association and new town homes had been sold in Great
Britain.
The Housing Act 1988 and the Housing (Scotland) Act 1988 (see p 209) make
provision for public sector tenants to change their landlord where they are not
satisfied with the service provided by their local authority. Where there are
serious social problems and housing disrepair, Housing Action Trusts are to be
set up to take over responsibility for local authority housing in designated areas
(see p 211).
A National Mobility Scheme, sponsored by the Department of the Environ¬
ment, the Scottish Development Department, the Welsh Office and the Depart¬
ment of the Environment for Northern Ireland, assists tenants who need to move
PLANNING, HOUSING AND URBAN REGENERATION
209
Privately
Rented
Housing
to another area for employment or social reasons. Tenants who wish to move by
exchanging homes are able to make use of the Tenants Exchange Scheme, a free
computer-based national information scheme. Specific mobility arrangements
are also available for tenants in London and for housing associations. With the
increased role of housing associations as the provider of subsidised housing,
consideration is being given to a rationalisation of their schemes.
There has been a steady decline in the number of rented dwellings available from
private landlords (including tied accommodation), from over 50 per cent of the
housing stock in 1951 to 7 per cent in England in 1988. Major factors have been
the increased demand for owner-occupation, the greater availability of public
rented housing and the operation of rent restriction. Privately rented dwellings
are predominantly found in older housing. Many landlords are individuals
owning a small amount of property, but some rented housing is provided by
larger property owners, including property companies. The Government’s policy
is to increase the availability of privately rented accommodation and it is
encouraging a greater variety of agencies to let such accommodation.
This is being implemented through the Housing Act 1988 for England and
Wales and the Housing (Scotland) Act 1988, which provide for the deregulation
of new private sector lettings, the reform of housing association finance, the
creation of Housing Action Trusts, and, for council tenants, the right to choose a
new landlord.
Previously most private lettings were subject to the system of protection
provided by the Rent Act 1977 (and similar legislation in Scotland) and
associated legislation. Where the letting was a fully protected ‘regulated tenancy’,
the tenant or the landlord could apply for a ‘fair rent’ to be fixed by independent
rent officers and there was a wide degree of security of tenure. Under the
Housing Acts, two forms of tenancy are created: the assured tenancy, which
gives the tenant long-term security in return for a market rent, to be freely
negotiated between landlord and tenant; and the assured shorthold tenancy
(short assured tenancy in Scotland), which is for a fixed term, at a rent
negotiated between landlord and tenant. The holder of a shorthold tenancy,
however, is able to apply to a rent assessment committee for the rent to be
determined at any time during the initial period of the tenancy and the
committee is empowered to reduce the rent if it proves to be excessive in
comparison with other market rents for shorthold tenancies of similar property
in the area. The previous system of registered fair rents is continuing for
existing lettings. The Acts strengthen the law concerning harassment of
tenants, which is a criminal offence, and provide for improved compensation for
tenants driven out by harassment or illegally evicted. Tenants and most other
residential occupiers may not be evicted without a court order.
It is expected that the facility for landlords to charge a market rent will lead to
an increase in the supply of accommodation available to rent. Government
support is being focused on tenants rather than on property, through the
housing benefit system. Depending on their personal circumstances, occupiers
may be eligible for housing benefit to assist them in paying their rent and rates.
(In Scotland rates were replaced from April 1989 by a community charge, payable
directly to the local authority and not included in the rent paid to the landlord.)
In Northern Ireland only certain pre-1956 properties subject to rent restriction
come under statutory control. Rent levels are linked to those of the Northern
Ireland Housing Executive, and both landlords and tenants may apply to a rent
assessment committee for rent determination in cases where the current rent is
considered to be inappropriate. Rent increases are permitted only for properties
which meet a prescribed standard. There are no assured tenancies in Northern
Ireland, but lettings under the shorthold concept are available.
210
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Housing
Associations
Improving
Older Houses
Housing associations extend the choice of housing by providing accommodation
available for rent or sale through new building or the rehabilitation of older
property. The associations normally cater for people who would otherwise look to
a local authority for a home, and also provide particularly for the special needs of
elderly, disabled and single people.
The associations, which are non-profit-making, have grown under govern¬
ment encouragement and are making a major contribution to the provision of
low-cost housing for rent. They now own over 500,000 homes and provide
37,000 beds in hostels. Individual associations range in size from a group of
‘almshouses’ for fewer than ten old people to associations with more than 10,000
homes. In Great Britain housing schemes carried out by associations qualify for
government grant if the association is one of over 2,600 registered with the
Housing Corporation, Scottish Homes, or Housing for Wales, statutory bodies
which pay grant to, supervise and monitor housing associations in England,
Scotland and Wales respectively. Increased government resources are being
made available for the statutory bodies’ development programmes for 1989—92,
which, together with their expanding use of private sector finance, will enable
housing associations to become the main providers of new subsidised housing
for rent.
Housing associations also provide accommodation on a shared ownership
basis, allowing the occupier to part-rent and part-own a home, and they can
purchase older properties for improvement or outright sale. These activities are
eligible for government grants.
Under the 1988 Acts nearly all new housing association lettings are on an
assured tenancy basis. In England tenants’ rights are protected under the
Tenants’ Guarantee, which is enforced by the statutory bodies and covers
matters such as tenancy terms, principles for determining rent levels and the
allocation of tenancies. Under the guarantee tenants receive contractual rights
in addition to their basic statutory rights, and associations are required to set
and maintain rents at levels within the reach of people in lower paid employ¬
ment.
In Scotland the new housing development agency, Scottish Homes, was set up
in 1989 under the Housing (Scotland) Act 1988, with a wide range of general
functions and powers, both providing financial assistance to housing associa¬
tions and others, and directly owning, managing and disposing of housing. It
incorporated both the Housing Corporation in Scotland and the Scottish Special
Housing Association. The main objectives of the Government’s housing policy in
Scotland, in which Scottish Homes has an important role, are to give people a
wider choice of housing; to encourage greater individual responsibility for, and
control over, the conditions in which people live; and to improve the supply and
quality of housing.
Under the Housing Act the new body, Housing for Wales, was set up in 1989 to
carry out the functions formerly undertaken in Wales by the Housing Corpora¬
tion, which now operates in England only.
In Northern Ireland broadly similar assistance is available to associations
registered with the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. Rent
levels are linked to those of the Northern Ireland Housing Executive. Tenants
have rights under a tenants’ charter, but not the right to buy, although housing
associations may sell their dwellings voluntarily, with discount as appropriate,
in line with the ‘right to buy’ arrangements.
In urban areas of Britain slum clearance and redevelopment used to be major
features of housing policy, but large-scale clearance is now virtually at an end,
and there has been a trend in recent years towards the retention of existing
communities, accompanied by the modernisation and conversion of sub-
PLANNING, HOUSING AND URBAN REGENERATION
211
Estate
Action
Programme
Priority
Estates
Project
Housing
Action
Trusts
standard homes. Housing conditions have improved considerably, but problems
remain in some areas where there are high concentrations of dwellings lacking
basic amenities or requiring substantial repairs; and there are still some pockets
of unfit housing for which demolition is considered the best solution. The
emphasis now is on area renewal, with an integrated approach to renewal and
renovation.
More recently there has been concern about the problems associated with
high-density local authority estates in inner city areas or on the outskirts of
cities, some of which have not been popular with tenants, and about serious
structural defects found in some local authority dwellings. Authorities are
tackling these problems in a variety of ways, including refurbishment and sale to
the private sector. In Scotland community-based housing associations and
tenant ownership co-operatives are being formed by some groups of tenants.
Scottish Homes has been given a major role in tackling housing-related urban
dereliction, in co-operation with local communities, the private sector, local
authorities and other statutory agencies.
The Government’s Estate Action Programme, which started in 1985, is working
with local authorities to apply innovative approaches to run-down council
housing estates. Measures being developed include local housing management
along the lines of the Department of the Environment’s Priority Estates Project
(see below); the use of private sector skills and resources; tenant management
co-operatives; estate management boards and other bodies which provide
tenants with more direct control over the management of their homes; the
introduction of local training, enterprise and employment opportunities; and
diversification of tenure. These measures are often concerned with investment
in physical improvements to the housing stock and the environment. Estate
Action provides additional resources to enable local authorities to carry out
agreed measures tailored to meet the requirements of individual estates. During
1986—87 to 1988-89 approval was given to 440 schemes involving additional
resources of £260 million. Resources available for 1989—90 amount to £190
million.
The Priority Estates Project (PEP) was set up in England in 1979 (in Wales in
1983) to promote locally based housing management, under which control of
landlords’ services is devolved to a local team with maximum involvement and
consultation of residents. There are 36 projects on estates in England and Wales,
and many more local authorities are now applying local management to their
own estates. Several schemes in England propose the formation of a local
autonomous selected management board, with a majority of tenants, to act as
the management agent on behalf of the local authority. Broadly similar arrange¬
ments apply in Northern Ireland.
Where social problems and housing disrepair are so serious that additional
action is required, the Housing Act 1988 provides for the establishment of
Housing Action Trusts. The trusts may take over responsibility for local
authority housing in designated areas, renovate and improve it, and then pass it
to other owners and managers, including housing associations and tenants’
co-operatives. All new landlords must be approved by the Housing Corporation
and subscribe to the principles of the Tenants’ Guarantee. Tenants will have a
chance to vote on whether a Housing Action Trust should be set up for their
area. The trusts may also encourage the provision of other community facilities,
such as shops, workshops and advice centres, and stimulate local enterprise.
Housing Action Trusts have been proposed for areas in Leeds, Sandwell (West
Midlands), Sunderland, and Lambeth and Southwark in London.
212
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Home
Improvement
Grants
Housing
Action
Areas
About 1 -6 million home improvement grants were paid in respect of privately
owned dwellings in Great Britain between 1980 and 1988. At present there are a
number of types of grants: for carrying out improvements to bring a property up
to a good overall standard; for provision of standard amenities (such as a bath
and an inside lavatory); for structural repairs to older houses; for loft insulation;
for repairs and improvements to the common parts of buildings containing flats;
and for providing means of escape from fire in houses which are in multiple
occupancy. Under the Local Government and Housing Bill a single system of
renovation grants is proposed in England and Wales primarily to help private
owners with the costs of essential repair and improvement work. There will be a
mandatory grant, subject to a test on an applicant’s financial means, to enable
dwellings to be brought up to a new and more objective fitness standard. In
Scotland, Scottish Homes has the power to provide improvement and repair
grants to complement the role of local authorities in private house renewal.
Declaring ‘general improvement areas’ and ‘housing action areas’ enables local
authorities in England and Wales to tackle the improvement of whole areas
systematically. General improvement areas, of which there are more than 1,800,
contain fundamentally sound houses and a stable population, while housing
action areas (of which there are about 200 in England and Wales) are character¬
ised by relatively poor housing and bad environmental conditions combined
with social problems. Local authorities have special powers to bring about an
improvement in living conditions for the benefit of residents. In both types of
area government financial aid for environmental improvement (such as land¬
scaping and work to improve the external appearance of buildings) is available to
local authorities. In these areas home improvement grants may range up to 75
per cent of the eligible expense limit, and in certain cases of hardship up to 90
per cent. ‘Enveloping’, introduced in 1982, involves the renovation of the
external fabric of whole terraces or streets of mainly privately owned property in
housing action areas which has deteriorated beyond routine maintenance; it is
carried out by local authorities at public expense. A new framework for
facilitating the revitalisation of areas of housing in poor condition by local
authorities in England and Wales is proposed in the Local Government and
Housing Bill, which would provide for the declaration of housing renewal areas.
In Scotland housing action area powers are available for the improvement of
areas in which at least half the houses fail to meet a statutory tolerable standard.
Since 1975, 1,765 housing action areas, covering houses requiring improve¬
ment or demolition, have been declared by local authorities. Outside such areas
in Scotland local authorities have powers to require the improvement of houses
below the statutory tolerable standard, or lacking certain basic amenities, by
improvement orders. In housing action areas or where an improvement order
has been made, grants of 75 per cent (up to 90 per cent in cases of hardship) of
the eligible expense limit may be made. Government financial aid is also given
towards the costs incurred by local authorities in improving the environment of
predominantly residential areas.
Northern Ireland has a large number of houses which are either unfit or in
serious disrepair. Since 1977, 50 housing action areas have been declared,
involving a continuous programme of rehabilitation, enveloping and associated
environmental improvement schemes. In addition, the Northern Ireland Hous¬
ing Executive undertakes a programme of improvement of its own stock.
Historic
Buildings,
Ancient
Monuments
and
Conservation
Areas
Environmental
Protection
For more than a century Britain has been evolving policies to protect the
environment against pollution from industry and other sources. Legislation to
control air and water pollution, to conserve wildlife, landscape, historic
monuments and buildings and to plan land use was introduced at an early
stage, and has subsequently been regularly revised to meet changing circum¬
stances. Recently, with increasing scientific understanding of the global
implications of pollution caused by modern development, the Government has
been considering how its own policies and actions can be further guided by the
principle of ‘sustainable development’, called for in the report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development in 1987. Sustainable develop¬
ment is defined as meeting the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs. In practical terms, it
requires that environmental considerations should be taken into account in all
areas of policy-making.
Britain attaches great importance to international co-operation on matters of
environmental protection, and in 1989 hosted, with the United Nations
Environment Programme, an international conference to promote further
action to safeguard the ozone layer. The Government is making considerable
investment in environmental research, in the belief that it is essential to have a
proper understanding of the science of environmental issues before taking
action. Britain is actively involved in the scientific assessment of climate change
for the Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change, set up jointly by the United
Nations Environment Programme and the World Meteorological Organisation.
Increasingly, much of Britain’s law on pollution control is being developed in
co-operation with other member states of the European Community and
organisations such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development and the United Nations and its agencies. The Government is
committed to the concept of the ‘best practicable environmental option’ (see
p 220) and is working towards a more integrated system of controlling the
processes that give rise to the most serious pollution.
There is a strong conservation movement in Britain, with a wide range of
groups, including many voluntary organisations, actively involved in environ¬
mental conservation and protection. The Department of the Environment has
responsibility for countryside policy and environmental protection in England;
the Welsh Office, the Scottish Development Department and the Department of
the Environment for Northern Ireland have broadly equivalent responsibilities.
Conservation
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historical interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Secretary of State for the Environment and
the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; some 430,000 buildings are
listed in England, some 36,000 in Scotland and 13,000 in Wales. It is against
the law to demolish, extend or alter the character of any listed building without
special consent from the local planning authority or the appropriate Secretary of
State; where consent is given to demolish a building, the Royal Commission on
Historical Monuments (for England) and similar bodies for Scotland and Wales
have an opportunity to make a photographic and written record of the building.
Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served by the local planning
authority to protect buildings not yet listed. Ancient monuments are similarly
214
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Tree
Preservation
protected through a system of scheduling. There are 13,000 scheduled ancient
monuments in England, about 4,500 in Scotland and over 2,600 in Wales.
Maintaining royal parks (which are open to the public) and palaces is the
responsibility of the Secretaries of State for the Environment and Scotland.
English Heritage (the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for
England) is charged with protecting and conserving England’s architectural and
archaeological heritage; it manages some 400 ancient monuments on behalf of
the Secretary of State for the Environment and gives grants for the repair of
ancient monuments, historic buildings and buildings in conservation areas in
England. In Scotland and Wales similar functions are performed by Historic
Buildings and Monuments, Scotland, which manages over 330 ancient monu¬
ments, and by Cadw: Welsh Historic Monuments, which manages 125, with
advice from an ancient monuments board and a historic buildings council for
each country. Local authorities can make grants and loans for any building of
architectural or historic interest. The National Heritage Memorial Fund provides
assistance towards the cost of acquiring, maintaining or preserving land,
buildings, works of art and other items of outstanding interest which are also of
importance to the national heritage. In 1988-89 the Fund assisted in the
preservation of about 100 heritage items.
Local planning authorities have designated for special protection about 6,000
‘conservation areas’ of particular architectural or historic interest in England.
Grants and loans are available from the appropriate historic buildings and
monuments body for works which make a significant contribution towards the
preservation or enhancement of such an area.
In Northern Ireland the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland
has 165 historic monuments in its care, and some 1,000 monuments are
scheduled for protection. It is also responsible for listing buildings of special
architectural or historic interest and for designating conservation areas; there
are some 7,500 listed buildings and 26 conservation areas. It may also provide
grants and loans to help with the repair and maintenance of listed buildings and
to preserve or enhance conservation areas. It is advised by a Historic Buildings
Council and a Historic Monuments Council.
Among the voluntary organisations which campaign for the preservation of
buildings are the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and the Ancient
Monuments Society; the Georgian Group; the Architectural Heritage Society of
Scotland; the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society; the Victorian Society;
and the Council for British Archaeology. The National Trust (for Places of
Historic Interest or Natural Beauty), an independent charity with more than
1 -6 million members, owns and protects over 200 historic buildings in addition
to 224,500 hectares (554,700 acres) of land and 800 km (500 miles) of coastline
in England, Northern Ireland and Wales. Scotland has its own National Trust.
The Civic Trust, with associate trusts in Scotland, Wales, and north-east and
north-west England, makes annual awards for development and restoration
work which enhances its surroundings. It advises local authorities on the revitalis¬
ation of surrounding areas and acts as an ‘umbrella’ organisation for 1,000 local
amenity societies. The Architectural Heritage Fund provides short-term loan
capital to help preservation trusts preserve and rehabilitate old buildings.
Local planning authorities have power to protect trees and woodlands in the
interest of amenity by means of tree preservation orders. When granting
planning permission for development, a local planning authority must, where
appropriate, ensure adequate provision for the preservation or planting of trees.
In general, landowners must replace trees which die or are removed, uprooted or
destroyed in contravention of a preservation order. In October 1987 an
estimated 15 million trees in the south and east of England were felled by gales
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
215
Green Belts
The Coast
Countryside
Commissions
of hurricane force. Many of the trees destroyed were in areas of outstanding
natural beauty and in urban areas. The Government is providing some £13
million for planting replacement trees, and a special unit of the Countryside
Commission, Task Force Trees, is administering the greater part of the scheme.
English Heritage (see p 214) is assisting in the restoration of parks and gardens
of outstanding architectural or historical importance.
Green Belts’ (areas where it is intended that land should be left open and free
from inappropriate building development and where people can seek recreation)
have been established around the major conurbations, including London,
Merseyside, Greater Manchester and the West Midlands. They are intended to
restrict the sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent neighbouring towns
merging, to preserve the special character of historic towns and to assist in
urban regeneration. Some 1 -8 million hectares (4-5 million acres) are designated
as Green Belt in England, equivalent to 14 per cent of the land area. The
Government attaches great importance to the protection of Green Belts and
expects local planning authorities to do likewise when considering applications
for planning permission.
The maritime local planning authorities are responsible for planning land use at
the coast, providing, for example, recreational facilities and amenities for holiday¬
makers and local residents; they also attempt to safeguard and enhance the
coast s natural attractions and preserve areas of scientific interest. The protection
of the coastline against erosion is administered centrally by the Ministry of Agri¬
culture, Fisheries and Food, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Office. Certain
stretches of undeveloped coast of particular scenic beauty in England and Wales
are treated as heritage coast; jointly with local authorities, the Countryside
Commission has defined 41 coasts, protecting 1,400 km (870 miles).
The National Trust, with its Enterprise Neptune campaign, raises funds for
the nation to acquire stretches of coastline of great natural beauty and
recreational value. More than £12 million has been raised so far and the Trust
now has under its protection 800 km (500 miles) of coastline in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland, and is working to acquire a further 630 km (390 miles)
considered at risk. Large parts of the Scottish coastline are either owned by, or
protected by conservation agreements with, the National Trust for Scotland.
In exceptional cases, economic arguments override conservation interests.
Coastal planning guidelines drawn up by the Scottish Development Department
aim to ensure that oil-related activities and other major developments are sited
to make the best use of existing labour and infrastructure and to minimise the
effect on the remote and unspoilt coastlines. Provision has also been made for
funds to be set aside for restoration of sites once there is no further need of them.
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for
Scotland) are responsible for conserving and enhancing the natural beauty and
amenity of the countryside, and for encouraging the provision and improvement
of facilities for open-air recreation. These include the provision by local
authorities (sometimes in association with other bodies) and private individuals
of country parks and picnic sites often within easy reach of towns, the provision
or improvement of recreational paths and the encouragement of amenity
tree-planting schemes. The Countryside Commission recognises 226 country
parks and 270 picnic sites in England and Wales. In Scotland 35 country parks
are recognised and a large number of local authority and private sector schemes
for the provision of a variety of countryside facilities have been approved for
grant aid. The Commissions undertake research projects and experimental
schemes, working in consultation with local authorities and such bodies as the
Nature Conservancy Council (see p 217) and the Sports Councils. The Commis-
216
National Parks,
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
and National
Scenic Areas
Public Rights
of Way
and Open
Country
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sions give financial assistance to public, private and voluntary bodies and
individuals carrying out countryside recreation and amenity projects, and
landscape conservation projects.
The Countryside Commission (for England and Wales) is empowered to
designate, for confirmation by the appropriate minister, national parks and
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’; to define heritage coasts in conjunction
with local authorities (see p 215); and to make proposals for the creation of
long-distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been estab¬
lished, covering 13,600 sq km (5,250 sq miles), 9 per cent of the area of England
and Wales, and 38 areas of outstanding natural beauty have been designated
and confirmed, covering 19,300 sq km (7,450 sq miles).
The land in these designated areas generally remains privately owned, but
agreements or orders to secure additional public access may be made by local
authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance the landscape’s natural
beauty by high standards of development control, and by measures, for which
grants are available, such as tree planting and the removal of eyesores. In the
national parks other measures for the benefit of the public include the provision
of car parks, camping and caravan areas, and information centres. All national
parks and some other designated areas have warden services. Most local
authority expenditure on national parks is met by government grants. A special
statutory authority to manage the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads, long considered
to have equivalent status to a national park, was established in April 1989.
In Northern Ireland the Council for Nature Conservation and the Countryside
advises the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland on the
preservation of amenities and the designation of areas of outstanding natural
beauty. Eight such areas have been designated, covering 278,000 hectares
(687,000 acres), and seven areas are being managed as country parks and one as
a regional park.
In Scotland there are no national parks as such, but there are three regional
parks and 40 ‘national scenic areas’, covering more than 1 million hectares (2-5
million acres), or 13 per cent of the country, where certain kinds of development
are subject to consultation with the Countryside Commission for Scotland, and
in the event of a disagreement, with the Secretary of State for Scotland. More
than 98 per cent of the land in Scotland is designated countryside within which
the Commission may provide grants for a wide range of countryside projects.
There are 11 forest parks in Great Britain, covering some 244,000 hectares
(603,000 acres) and administered by the Forestry Commission, and nine in
Northern Ireland administered by the Forest Service of the Department of
Agriculture. Camping and other recreational facilities are provided.
Many voluntary organisations are concerned to preserve the amenities of the
countryside; they include the Councils for the Protection of Rural England and
of Rural Wales, the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland and the
Ulster Society for the Preservation of the Countryside.
County councils in England and Wales are required to prepare and keep under
review definitive maps showing public rights of way; they are also responsible for
keeping rights of way free from obstruction, and signposted. If a path is not
shown on the map, a private citizen may claim that it is a public right of way if it
has been regarded as such and used without hindrance for at least 20 years.
Public paths are maintained by local authorities, which also supervise land-
owners’ duties to repair stiles and gates. Local authorities in Great Britain can
create paths, close paths no longer needed for public use and divert paths to
meet the needs of either the public or landowners. Local planning authorities
can also convert minor roads into footpaths or bridleways to improve the
amenities of their area. In England and Wales there are some 217,000 km
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
217
Nature
Conservation
(135,000 miles) of rights of way. There are 13 approved national trails
(long-distance footpaths and bridleways) in England and Wales covering some
2,740 km (1,700 miles) and three approved long-distance routes in Scotland
covering some 580 km (360 miles).
There is no automatic right of public access to open country, although many
landowners allow it more or less freely. Local planning authorities can secure
access by means of agreements with landowners; if agreements cannot be
reached, authorities may acquire land or make orders for public access. Similar
powers cover Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Common land, a large proportion of which is open to the public, totals an estima¬
ted 600,000 hectares (1-5 million acres) in England and Wales. (There is no com¬
mon land in Scotland or Northern Ireland.) This land is usually privately owned,
but people other than the owner may have various rights on or over it, for example,
as pasture land. Commons are protected by law and cannot be built on or
enclosed without consent of the Secretaries of State for the Environment or Wales.
The official body responsible for nature conservation in Great Britain is the
Nature Conservancy Council, which has the functions of establishing, main¬
taining and managing nature reserves, advising the Government, providing
general information and advice, and commissioning or supporting research.
There are 235 national nature reserves covering some 166,000 hectares
(410,000 acres). The first statutory marine reserve, the island of Lundy, off the
Devon coast, was designated in 1986, and more are proposed. Some 5,000 sites
of special scientific interest have been notified for their flora, fauna or geological
or physiographical features.
The Forestry Commission has 344 ‘sites of special scientific interest’ on its
land—covering 70,000 hectares (173,000 acres)—on which nature conservation
is a primary objective. Local authorities have declared about 150 local nature
reserves. Voluntary nature conservation trusts and the Royal Society for the Pro¬
tection of Birds play an important part in protecting wildlife, having established
between them some 1,800 reserves. The trusts are affiliated to a parent organis¬
ation, the Royal Society for Nature Conservation. The Royal Society for the Pro¬
tection of Birds, with over 540,000 members and 100,000 young ornithologists,
is the largest voluntary wildlife conservation body in Europe.
In Northern Ireland the Council for Nature Conservation and the Countryside
advises the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland on nature
conservation matters, including the establishment and management of terrest¬
rial and marine nature reserves and the declaration of areas of special scientific
interest; 45 national nature reserves have been established and 24 areas of
special scientific interest declared.
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 extended the list of protected species
(further extended by Order in 1988), restricted the introduction into the
countryside of animals not normally found in the wild, and afforded greater
protection for areas of special scientific interest and other important habitats.
In Northern Ireland two Orders, which became operative in 1985, have brought
legislation into line with the rest of Britain on species and habitat protection.
Following the epidemic of seal deaths in the North Sea in 1988, the
Government announced measures to increase the statutory protection given to
common and grey seals under the Conservation of Seals Act 1970. In view of the
serious decline in the African elephant population, in 1989 the Government
imposed a ban on imports of ivory into Britain. The Government is supporting
the case for the transfer of the African elephant to Appendix I of the Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which
would result in a ban on commercial trade in ivory.
Other conservation measures promoted by the Government have included a
218
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Environmental
Improvement
Schemes
World
Heritage
Sites
ban (in conjunction with other European Community countries) on the import
of whale products and certain seal pup products, a system of licensing zoos to
ensure that captive animals are kept in suitable conditions, and stricter controls
for the protection of wild birds. Certain areas, of importance for their landscape,
historic and habitat value, are being designated ‘environmentally sensitive
areas’ as a result of a change in European Community regulations allowing
governments to make special payments to farmers to continue their traditional
farming methods for the sake of preserving the countryside and its wildlife. By
mid-1989, 19 areas had been designated.
In 1986 the Government launched UK 2000, an initiative to encourage a wide
range of local environmental improvement work. Bringing together representa¬
tives of voluntary organisations and independent members from business, it
aims to improve the natural and built environment and people’s enjoyment of it,
create jobs, and provide work and training for the participants. Voluntary
organisations promote programmes of work and assist local projects such as
creating parks, footpaths and other areas of greenery in cities, conserving the
industrial heritage and the natural environment, and recycling waste.
The Groundwork Foundation developed from a Countryside Commission
proposal in 1980 for an experiment to revitalise the urban fringe. A partnership
of public bodies, the private sector, voluntary organisations and individuals, it
aims to tackle environmental problems such as dereliction and vandalism, and
to increase public awareness of the opportunities individuals and organisations
have for changing and making improvements to their own local environment. It
has 17 Groundwork Trusts covering local authority areas. In view of its
increasing involvement in urban areas, it now receives funding from the
Department of the Environment rather than the Countryside Commission.
Britain is fully represented in the World Heritage List, established under the
World Heritage Convention to identify and secure lasting protection for those
parts of the world heritage of outstanding universal value. The Government
nominates sites from the natural and built environment for consideration by the
inter-governmental World Heritage Committee. So far 13 sites in Britain have
been listed: Canterbury Cathedral, together with St Augustine’s Abbey and St
Martin’s Church; Durham Cathedral and Castle; Studley Royal Gardens and
Fountains Abbey, both in North Yorkshire; Ironbridge Gorge with its iron bridge
and museum of industrial archaeology in Shropshire; the prehistoric stone
circles of Stonehenge and Avebury in Wiltshire; Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire;
the City of Bath; Hadrian’s Wall; the Tower of London and the Palace of
Westminster with Westminster Abbey and St Margaret’s in London; the islands
of St Kilda in Scotland, with their historical and archaeological records of life in
a primitive community; the castles and town walls of King Edward I in Gwynedd
in Wales; and the Giant’s Causeway and Causeway Coast, formed of columnar
basalt, a lava which has cooled into hexagonal pillars, in Northern Ireland.
Control of Pollution
The Control of Pollution Act 1974, which applies to England, Scotland and
Wales, sets out a wide range of powers and duties for local authorities, including
control over waste, air pollution and noise, and contains important provisions
on the release of information to the public on environmental conditions. In
particular, it introduced a new system for the comprehensive planning of waste
disposal operations so as to ensure that disposal is carried out to satisfactory
standards and that, where practicable, waste materials are recovered and
recycled. The Act also increased the penalties for a large number of pollution
offences. Similar legislation applies in Northern Ireland.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
219
Administration
Her Majesty’s
Inspectorate
of Pollution
Executive responsibility for pollution control is divided between local authorities
and central government agencies. Local authorities are responsible for matters
such as collection and disposal of domestic wastes; control of air pollution from
domestic and many industrial premises; and noise abatement measures. The
supply of drinking water, sewerage and sewage treatment and disposal are the
responsibilities of ten water and sewage companies in England and Wales. In
some areas drinking water is supplied by 29 statutory water companies. In
Scotland these services are the responsibility of local authorities and in
Northern Ireland of the Department of the Environment. Under the Water Act
1989 a new body, the National Rivers Authority, has taken over responsibility for
the control of water pollution in England and Wales.
An independent standing Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution
advises the Government on national and international matters concerning the
pollution of the environment, on the adequacy of research and on the future
possibilities of danger to the environment. It has so far produced 13 reports
covering a wide range of topics, and has developed the concept of ‘best
practicable environmental option’, based on an integrated approach to the
protection of the environment.
Central government is principally concerned with formulating policy, exercis¬
ing general budgetary control, promoting legislation, and advising pollution
control authorities on policy implementation. The Secretary of State for the
Environment has general responsibility for co-ordinating the work of the
Government on environmental protection and is assisted by a Central Directo¬
rate of Environmental Protection within the Department. In Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland the respective Secretaries of State are responsible for pollution
control co-ordination in their countries. They are assisted by the Scottish
Development Department, the Water and Environmental Protection Division of
the Welsh Office, and the Environmental Protection Division of the Department
of the Environment for Northern Ireland respectively.
The Government acknowledges the value of the concept of ‘best practicable
environmental option’. In 1987 it amalgamated the former Industrial Air
Pollution Inspectorate (of the Health and Safety Executive), the Radiochemical
Inspectorate and the Hazardous Waste Inspectorate, together with a new Water
Pollution Inspectorate, in a single unified inspectorate for England and Wales
known as Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP), with a remit to work
towards an integrated approach to pollution control. In 1988 the Government
published proposals for creating, under the Inspectorate, an integrated system
for the control of certain categories of industrial pollution. Under the proposals,
all industrial processes currently under the Inspectorate’s control because of
their emissions to air, together with new categories of processes which
discharge specified dangerous substances to water or which generate ‘special
wastes , would be prescribed for integrated pollution control, requiring consent
from the Inspectorate. In granting a consent for integrated pollution control, the
Inspectorate would enforce any existing emission limits or environmental
quality standards and require the application of the best available technology
(not entailing excessive cost) to minimise polluting emissions at source.
In Scotland and in Northern Ireland, where different administrative struc¬
tures and legislative provisions apply, the implications of introducing a similar
system are being considered. Her Majesty’s Industrial Pollution Inspectorate is
the equivalent of HMIP in Scotland. In Northern Ireland broadly similar controls
are exercised by the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of the
Environment for Northern Ireland.
The Government intends to bring forward the necessary legislation as soon as
possible to give effect to the proposals to establish an integrated system for the
220
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Land
Recycling and
Materials
Reclamation
Water Pollution
control of certain categories of industrial pollution, and to the proposals to
improve the present system of controls over waste disposal (see below).
The Environmental Protection Technology Scheme, launched by the Depart¬
ment of the Environment in 1988, aims to encourage the development of cleaner
industrial technologies.
The main risks of land pollution lie in the indiscriminate dumping of waste
materials, careless disposal of pesticides and chemicals, and the deposition of
materials from the atmosphere and from flood-water. Under the Control of
Pollution Act waste disposal authorities are responsible for controlling the
disposal of controlled wastes. The Act requires them to draw up and revise
periodically a waste disposal plan and establishes a licensing system for waste
disposal sites, treatment plants and storage facilities receiving controlled
wastes. In addition, it provides for a more intensive control system for certain
especially hazardous or difficult wastes. The Inspectorate of Pollution and the
Hazardous Waste Inspectorate for Scotland advise local authorities on how to
improve their control of waste management and to work towards environmental¬
ly acceptable standards for dealing with hazardous wastes.
The Government has announced plans to strengthen legal controls on waste
management. Legislation is planned, including provision for a statutory duty of
care, to be imposed on both producers and holders of waste, to ensure that their
waste is properly disposed of; a requirement for the registration of waste
carriers; powers for waste disposal authorities to take account of technical
competence and financial standing when considering licences, and to impose
long-term pollution control measures; new measures against ‘fly-tipping’ (illegal
dumping of waste); new powers to control the import and export of waste; a
requirement that waste disposal authorities separate out their waste disposal
operations into waste disposal companies which would be subject to the full
licensing procedures; and a statutory role for the Inspectorate of Pollution in
auditing the performance of waste regulatory authorities.
It is a criminal offence to leave litter in any public place in the open air or to
dump rubbish except in designated places. To help counteract the problem of
litter, financial support is given to the Tidy Britain Group, which provides a
comprehensive litter abatement programme in collaboration with local authori¬
ties and secures sponsorship from industry to undertake litter abatement
promotions. In 1989 the Government increased its annual grant to the Tidy
Britain Group from £1-25 million to £3 million; the Group is leading a new
anti-litter initiative, involving a number of pilot projects. In July 1989 the
Government announced proposals for legislation to enable more effective action
to be taken against litter and those who cause it.
The Government encourages the reclamation and recycling of waste materials
wherever this is practicable and economic in order to reduce waste disposal
costs and to help to conserve natural resources. Industry already makes
considerable use of reclaimed waste material such as metals, paper and textiles.
Local authorities reclaim about 20,000 tonnes of waste paper and about 30,000
tonnes of metals annually. In an increasing number of areas there are ‘paper
banks’, ‘bottle banks’ and ‘can banks’ where the public can deposit old
newspapers and magazines, used glass and metal containers respectively.
Voluntary organisations also arrange collections of waste material. Waste
disposal authorities have powers to take full account of opportunities for waste
reclamation and have a duty when drawing up their waste disposal plans to
include information on the disposal methods to be used, including reclamation.
There has been a general improvement in water quality in Britain since the
1950s. A comprehensive survey in 1985 classified 90 per cent of river length in
England and Wales as of good or fair quality, that is, waters capable of
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
221
supporting game or coarse fish populations, suitable for drinking water
abstraction and of moderate to high amenity value. Surveys of river quality in
Scotland and Northern Ireland in 1985 showed that 99 per cent of Scotland’s
rivers were unpolluted or of fairly good quality, and that 96 per cent were of good
or fair quality in Northern Ireland. These standards compare favourably with
those in other European Community countries.
Over the past 30 years, progress has been made in cleaning up the major
estuaries of the east coast of England and Scotland - the Thames, Humber,
Tees, Tyne and Forth — which had become heavily polluted through industrial
and sewage discharges. Major reductions in the inputs of dangerous sub¬
stances, such as cadmium, mercury and oil, have been achieved; the appearance
and amenity value of these estuaries have been improved, and they now support
varied populations of fish and other wildlife. In addition, a 25-year scheme
supported by the Government and the European Community aims to reduce
river pollution and improve water quality throughout the Mersey river basin and
estuary. Other major schemes in progress include programmes to improve water
quality in the Clyde in Scotland and the Lagan in Northern Ireland.
Among the main causes of poor river quality are discharges from substandard
sewage treatment works and pollution from agriculture. The Government, water
and sewage companies and the farming industry have recognised the need for
remedial action; the water and sewage companies have embarked upon capital
expenditure programmes designed to bring substandard sewage treatment
works into compliance with their discharge consents by 1992; and a number of
measures are being introduced to combat farm pollution of rivers and streams.
A number of government measures seek to control effluent discharges to
rivers, estuaries, coastal waters and underground waters. Information about
these discharges, the discharge consents granted and about water quality is
publicly available on registers maintained by the National Rivers Authority, by
the river purification authorities in Scotland and by the Environmental
Protection Division of the Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland.
More than 95 per cent of the population in Britain live in properties connected to
a sewer, and sewage treatment works serve over four-fifths of the population.
Under the Water Act 1989, the utility functions of water supply, sewerage and
sewage treatment have been separated from river regulation responsibilities in
England and Wales. The National Rivers Authority brings together the pollution
control and other river functions of the former water authorities and the
functions of the Inspectorate of Pollution in respect of water, regulating all
pollution discharges to water through a consent system. Where pollution takes
place, or is likely, the Authority will be able to carry out emergency works to clean
up or prevent such pollution and recover its costs from the polluter, under the
polluter pays’ principle. It will have a duty to safeguard water resources for
public water supply and all other uses, and will be required to promote
conservation, amenity and recreation on inland waters.
The Government has also decided to tighten the controls over the discharge to
water of a Red List of the most dangerous substances, which include mercury,
cadmium, organic pesticides and chlorinated solvents. Emissions of these
substances would be governed both by environmental quality standards, and by
a requirement for dischargers to use the best available technology that did not
entail excessive cost.
In Scotland, where the current system of public ownership of water supplies is
being maintained, the Government envisages limited changes to the existing
arrangements, with the object of continuing the broad uniformity of control
procedures and standards throughout Britain. In Northern Ireland water
pollution control is the responsibility of the Environmental Protection Division
of the Department of the Environment.
222
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Marine
Pollution
The Government is committed to the implementation of a number of
European Community directives for the protection and improvement of water
quality, for example on the quality of surface water for abstraction for drinking
water, the quality needed to support freshwater fisheries, and the quality of
water for bathing areas (see p 223).
Control of marine pollution from ships is based largely on international
conventions drawn up under the auspices of the International Maritime
Organisation, a United Nations agency with headquarters in London, and
implemented for British ships by domestic legislation. The Merchant Shipping
(Prevention of Oil Pollution) Regulations 1983 and 1988 and the Prevention of
Oil Pollution Act 1986 make it an offence for ships of any nationality to
discharge oil, oily mixtures, or ships’ garbage into British territorial waters and
for British-registered ships to make similar discharges anywhere into the sea,
except in accordance with the regulations.
The Department of Transport’s Marine Pollution Control Unit undertakes
operations at sea to counter pollution when oil (or other dangerous substances)
threatens major coastal pollution or is likely to harm important fisheries or
concentrations of sea birds. It maintains a national contingency plan and
dispersant spraying, cargo transfer and mechanical recovery resources, includ¬
ing a remote sensing aircraft capable of detecting possible illegal discharges and
of quantifying oil pollution.
Offshore operators must ensure that oil does not escape into the sea and are
required to have contingency plans for dealing with oil spilled accidentally.
Discharges containing oil are controlled under the Prevention of Oil Pollution
Act 1971. Discharges of chemicals are controlled and monitored by a non-
statutoiy Chemical Notification Scheme, administered by the Department of
Energy in consultation with fisheries departments.
The Food and Environment Protection Act 1985 tightened the controls over
dumping at sea, the most significant change being the introduction of specific
controls on marine incineration. Under the Act a licence has to be obtained for
the permanent deposit of any substance or article into tidal waters and the sea.
Dumping at sea is permitted on the basis of the scientific criteria set out in the
annexes to the Oslo Convention (International Convention for the Prevention of
Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft 1972) and the London
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and
Other Matter 1972.
In Britain, where receiving waters are suitable, some sewage is discharged at
sea, where it is broken down by natural biochemical processes. Modern outfalls
screen out solids and plastics and discharge sewage some way out to sea. In
1988, 67 per cent of bathing waters in England, Wales and Northern Ireland met
the mandatory coliform standards of the European Community Bathing Water
Directive, compared with 55 per cent in 1987. Water and sewage companies are
undertaking an accelerated programme of improvements to bring bathing
waters up to European Community standards by 1995, wherever practicable, at
a cost of about £1,000 million. In Scotland 52 per cent met the standards in
1988. Sewage sludge, the residue left after treatment at sewage works, is often
spread as fertiliser on farmland, but about 30 per cent is disposed of at sea in
cases where no practicable land-based alternative is available and sea disposal is
identified as the best practicable environmental option. It is licensed only where
it can be shown to pose no risk to the marine environment and is monitored for
its effect on the environment and fisheries.
At the Second International Conference on the Protection of the North Sea,
held in London in 1987, it was agreed to take action to protect and enhance the
quality of the North Sea and benefit the environment as a whole. Britain is
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
223
Clean Air
Sulphur Dioxide
and Nitrogen
Oxide Emissions,
and Acid Rain
applying the agreed measures to all its coastal waters. In 1988 the Government
issued guidance to the water industry and other interests on reducing inputs of
pollutants to the seas around Britain. Water and sewage companies are being
required to prepare plans to reduce inputs of dangerous substances into rivers
and estuaries (see p 221), one of the major sources of such inputs to the North
Sea, in order to meet the agreed objectives by 1995. At the conference ministers
agreed to cease the dumping of harmful industrial waste by the end of 1989, and
Britain agreed to ensure that contaminants in sewage sludge do not rise above
1987 levels. The conference also established a scientific task force to ensure
better co-ordination of North Sea research and monitoring, and ministers
agreed to hold a third conference in early 1990 to review progress.
Responsibility for clean air rests primarily with local authorities. Under the
Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968 they may declare ‘smoke control areas’ within
which the emission of smoke from chimneys constitutes an offence. About
two-thirds of the premises in conurbations are now covered by smoke control
orders. Emissions from most industrial premises are also subject to the control
of local authorities under the Clean Air Acts and the Public Health Acts. The
emission of dark smoke from any trade or industrial premises or from the
chimney of any building is in general prohibited, and new furnaces must be
capable as far as practicable of smokeless operation. Regulations prescribe
specific limits to the quantities of grit and dust which may be emitted from
certain furnaces. Industrial premises that have the greatest potential for giving
rise to noxious or offensive emissions are, in England and Wales, under the
control of the Inspectorate of Pollution. In Scotland this function is discharged
by the Industrial Pollution Inspectorate. The Inspectorates require the best
practicable means to be used to prevent emissions or render them harmless.
Similar legislation and controls apply in Northern Ireland.
Considerable progress has been made towards the achievement of cleaner air
and a better environment, especially in the last 30 years or so. Total emissions of
smoke in the air have fallen by over 85 per cent since 1960. The domestic smoke
control programme has been particularly important in achieving this result.
London no longer has the dense smoke-laden ‘smogs’ of the 1950s and in central
London winter sunshine has increased by about 50 per cent since 1958. Similar
improvement has been achieved in other cities, including Glasgow and Sheffield.
National sulphur dioxide emissions have fallen by about 40 per cent since 1970.
The Government fully accepts the need for further reductions of both sulphur
dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions. Under a £1,000 million programme, all
new coal-fired power stations are to have equipment to remove acid emissions;
the equivalent of three Central Electricity Generating Board power stations are
being retrofitted with flue gas desulphurisation equipment, and all 12 major
coal-fired power stations with low nitrogen oxide burners. In 1988 agreement
was reached on the European Community directive on the control of emissions
from large combustion plants, under which Britain accepted a phased pro¬
gramme of reductions in sulphur dioxide emissions from existing large
combustion plants by 20 per cent of 1980 levels by 1993, 40 per cent by 1998
and 60 per cent by 2003, and agreed to reduce nitrogen oxide emissions by 15
per cent by 1993 and 30 per cent by 1998. The Government is considering with
the electricity supply industry how best to implement these further reductions.
In November 1988 Britain signed the Nitrogen Oxide Protocol to the United
Nations/Economic Commission for Europe Convention on Long-Range Trans¬
boundary Air Pollution, making a commitment to reduce overall nitrogen oxide
emissions to their 1987 levels by 1994.
Scientific evidence for the damaging effect of acid depositions from combus¬
tion processes on rivers, lakes and soils has been growing, and Britain is
224
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Vehicle
Emissions
Chlorofluoro-
carbons and
the Ozone Layer
spending £10 million a year on an extensive research programme into the
causes and effects of acid rain, and the likely results of possible abatement
technologies. It is also participating in international research programmes and
monitoring schemes, and has collaborated particularly with Norway and Sweden
on research into the effects of acid rain.
There are about 22 million vehicles on Britain’s roads, using about 30 million
tonnes of petrol and diesel fuel a year, and contributing substantially to Britain’s
total emissions of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide and
hydrocarbons. Since 1970 a series of increasingly stringent regulations on
petrol vehicles has been implemented by the Government to bring carbon
dioxide emissions down by 50 per cent and hydrocarbon and nitrogen oxide
emissions by over 30 per cent. The European Community has now agreed strict
new standards for these vehicles, which will reduce all emissions by a further 80
per cent, and which will require cars to be fitted with fully-controlled three-way
catalysts. Britain is also pressing for strict standards to be introduced to reduce
pollution from heavy goods vehicles.
The amount of lead in the air in Britain has halved since the permitted lead
content in petrol was reduced in 1986 from 0-4 to 015 grammes per litre.
Britain agreed a European Community directive requiring unleaded petrol to be
available throughout the Community by October 1989, and from 1 October 1990
most new cars in Britain will have to be able to run on unleaded petrol. New
unleaded pumps are being opened at service stations at the rate of 250 a week,
and a substantial tax differential has been created in favour of unleaded fuel.
Demand for unleaded petrol has risen rapidly. By August 1989 unleaded petrol
accounted for 23 per cent of petrol sales in England.
Britain is closely involved in international measures to prevent further damage
to the ozone layer of the atmosphere by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)—the
man-made gases widely used as propellants in aerosols, in the manufacture of
foams, in refrigeration and air-conditioning, and as solvents—and by other
related compounds such as halons, which are used in fire-extinguishers. In
1987 Britain signed the Montreal Protocol to the Vienna Convention on the
Protection of the Ozone Layer, which came into force on 1 January 1989.
Signatories to the Protocol agreed to reduce their consumption and production
of CFCs by 50 per cent in three stages by 1999, a target which Britain expects to
have achieved by the end of 1989, with the voluntary phasing-out by the British
aerosol industry of the non-essential use of CFCs as propellants.
In response to further scientific evidence confirming the depletion of the
ozone layer, Britain hosted, together with the United Nations Environment
Programme, an international conference—‘Saving the Ozone Layer’—in London
in March 1989, with the aim of encouraging all governments to make further
urgent reductions in emissions of CFCs, and to show how such reductions could
be achieved in practical terms. The conference agreed that the ultimate goal
should be the elimination of production and consumption of CFCs and halons,
expressed support for the Montreal Protocol and put forward constructive ideas
to help developing countries move to alternative technologies without impeding
their economic growth.
Britain and the other European Community member states have called for a
reduction of at least 85 per cent as soon as possible in the current level of produc¬
tion and consumption of CFCs controlled by the Montreal Protocol, with a view
to their being eliminated towards the end of the century, and for the Montreal
Protocol to be strengthened accordingly. Britain is to host the meeting to review
the Protocol in 1990, which it hopes will agree to strengthen the controls.
The British Antarctic Survey first observed unusual depletions in the ozone
layer in 1982, and in 1985 the Department of the Environment and the
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
225
Climate
Change
Noise
Meteorological Office set up the Stratospheric Ozone Review Group to review
understanding of stratospheric ozone and to recommend areas for further
research. In 1988 it confirmed that significant depletion of the ozone layer was
resulting from human activities. The group is making a major contribution to
the assessment taking place in preparation for the review of the Protocol.
CFCs are also one of the gases, such as carbon dioxide, which appear to be
contributing to ‘the greenhouse effect’, a gradual warming of global average
temperatures, which could lead to a rise in sea levels as a result of thermal
expansion of sea water and melting of land ice. The Government is giving a high
priority to the improvement of understanding of the science of climate change,
and is spending £15-5 million annually on research. The Meteorological Office is
developing and refining mathematical models of the climate to give more definite
indications of expected warming, the time-scale concerned and the likely
regional changes. In 1988 the United Nations Environment Programme and the
World Meteorological Organisation established an Inter-governmental Panel on
Climate Change, and Britain is leading its first working group, which is carrying
out an assessment of the available scientific evidence on climate change.
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (and similar legislation in Northern Ireland)
requires local authorities to inspect their areas for noise nuisance and gives
them the power to take action by serving a noise abatement notice on a person
responsible for it. It also enables them to designate ‘noise abatement zones’
within which registered levels of noise from certain premises may not be
increased without their permission. The Act contains specific provisions to
control noise from construction and demolition sites and the use of loudspeak¬
ers in the streets. It also contains provisions enabling individuals to take action
through the courts against noise amounting to a nuisance. The Act empowers
the Government to approve codes of practice on methods for minimising noise.
A number of codes have been approved covering several noise sources.
Transport is a major source of noise pollution, and control measures are
aimed at reducing noise at source, through requirements limiting the noise that
aircraft and motor vehicles may make, and at protecting people from its effects.
The Road Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1986 set out the permiss¬
ible noise levels for various classes of new vehicles. More stringent limits are
being introduced for new vehicles between October 1988 and April 1991. New
standards for replacement motor cycle silencers are also being introduced.
Under the Land Compensation Act 1973 and similar legislation in Scotland,
compensation is payable for loss in property values caused by physical factors,
including noise from new or improved public works such as roads and airports.
Regulations under the Acts also enable highway authorities to carry out or make
grants for insulation of homes subject to specified levels of increased noise
caused by new or improved roads. Noise insulation may also be provided where
construction work for new roads may seriously affect nearby homes.
Noise emission levels of almost all aircraft on the United Kingdom Register are
regulated in accordance with standards agreed by the International Civil
Aviation Organisation. Since 1986 all subsonic jets on the United Kingdom
Register have had to comply with these standards, and this requirement was
extended to overseas-registered aircraft in 1988. Various operational restric¬
tions have been introduced to reduce noise disturbance further at Heathrow,
Gatwick and Stansted, where the Secretary of State for Transport has assumed
responsibility for noise abatement. These measures include restriction on the
type and number of aircraft operating at night, the routing of departing aircraft
on noise preferential routes, and quiet take-off and landing procedures. The
population affected by aircraft noise at Heathrow fell from nearly 1-5 million in
1978 to less than 340,000 in 1988, even though the number of air transport
226
Radioactivity
Radioactive
Waste
Disposal
Environmental
Research
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
movements increased by about a quarter. The Government is spending about £2
million a year on research into quieter aircraft engines.
Radiation resulting from industrial and other processes represents only a small
fraction of that to which the population is exposed from the natural environ¬
ment. Nevertheless, that fraction is subject to stringent control because of
possible effects on health or longer-term genetic effects. Under the Radioactive
Substances Act 1960 most users of radioactive materials other than those
subject to licence under the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 must be registered by
the appropriate department, and authorisation is also required for the disposal
of radioactive waste. The Health and Safety Executive, through its Nuclear
Installations Inspectorate, is the authority concerned with the granting of
nuclear site licences for commercial nuclear installations. No installation maybe
constructed or operated without a licence granted by the Executive. The
National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB), established under the Radio¬
logical Protection Act 1970, provides an authoritative point of reference on
radiological protection. Following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power
station in the Soviet Union in 1986, the Government has set up a national
radiation monitoring network. Ultimately, more than 80 stations throughout
Britain will continuously monitor radiation in order to improve emergency
arrangements in the event of a nuclear accident overseas. In 1987 the
Government announced measures to deal with the problem of naturally
occurring radon gas in houses, including a survey by the NRPB to identify
houses with the highest levels where remedial action would be necessary.
Radioactive wastes vary widely in nature and level of activity, and the practices
followed reflect this variation. Some wastes are dispersed safely in the
environment. UK Nirex Ltd is responsible for developing and operating a
disposal facility for solid wastes with a low or intermediate level of activity and is
seeking to identify a suitable location for a deep dual-purpose facility. The
Department of the Environment is also sponsoring research, in collaboration
with other countries, into disposal of high-level wastes, but these will first be
stored in vitrified form for at least 50 years.
Research into the environment and its protection is carried out by the
government departments concerned, particularly by the Department of the
Environment, which spent £26 million in 1988—89, the Department of Energy
(£19 million), the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (£16 million), and
by other government bodies such as the Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC), the Meteorological Office and the Nature Conservancy Council.
Expenditure on environmental research into climate change in 1988—89 was
£7-5 million, into air pollution £6 million, into the North Sea £7 million, and
into renewable energy £16 million.
The major body co-ordinating environmental research is NERC, sponsored by
the Department of Education and Science, with expenditure of some £90 million
in 1988—89. It was established by Royal Charter in 1965 to undertake and
support basic and strategic research in the environmental sciences and to
support specialised postgraduate training. Its research programmes are largely
interdisciplinary, requiring co-operation between scientists, universities and
industry, and encompassing the marine, earth, terrestrial, freshwater, polar
and atmospheric sciences. The Council is responsible for the British Geological
Survey and the British Antarctic Survey, and is giving increasing priority to
international collaborative work on global environmental issues, such as climate
change; it is, for example, developing global atmospheric climate models,
strengthening atmospheric research in the Arctic and participating in the World
Ocean Circulation Experiment, which aims to assess the role of the ocean in
modifying the earth’s climate.
Everyone in Britain has the right to religious freedom (in teaching, worship and
observance) without interference from the community or the State. Churches
and religious societies may own property, run schools, and propagate their
beliefs in speech and writing. There is no religious or denominational bar to the
holding of public office, although ministers of the Church of England and the
Church of Scotland are not eligible to be Members of Parliament.
Britain has a long tradition of religious tolerance, a feature which has been
much in evidence during the past 30 years with the acceptance of a wide variety
of religious beliefs and traditions brought in by substantial numbers of immi¬
grants of different nationalities. There are now large and growing communi¬
ties of Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs, and arrangements are made at places of
work to allow the members of non-Christian religions to follow their religious
observances.
Freedom of conscience in religious matters in Britain was achieved gradually
from the seventeenth century onwards. The laws discriminating against minor¬
ity religious groups were gradually administered less rigorously and then finally
repealed. Heresy ceased to be a legal offence with the passing of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction Act 1677, and the Toleration Act 1688 granted freedom of worship
to Protestant dissenters. In 1828 the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts
freed nonconformists from political disadvantage and made it possible for them
to be appointed to public office. Roman Catholics gained political emancipation
under the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829, and the Jewish Relief Act 1858
enabled Jews to become Members of Parliament. In addition, the religious tests
which had been imposed on prospective students and members of the academic
staff of the universities of Oxford, Cambridge and Durham were successively
abolished by Acts of 1854, 1856 and 1871. Similar restrictions imposed on
members of staff of Scottish Universities were formally removed in 1932.
There are two established churches in Britain, that is, churches legally
recognised as official churches of the State: in England the (Anglican) Church of
England, and in Scotland the (Presbyterian) Church of Scotland. Clergy of the
established churches work in services administered by the State, such as the
armed forces, national hospitals and prisons, and are paid a salary for such
services by the State. Clergy of other denominations are also appointed.
Voluntary schools provided by religious denominations may be wholly or partly
maintained from public funds. The churches’ involvement in broader social
issues and the practical help they give to groups of many kinds—from young
people to the bereaved and homeless—were highlighted in the Church of
England report Faith in the City: A Call for Action by Church and Nation,
published in 1985. This made recommendations for alleviating the problems of
the inner cities and other areas of social deprivation and led to a decision by the
Church of England in 1986 to set up an urban aid fund with the aim of raising
capital for its work in inner city and other priority areas. The Church of
England’s Church Urban Fund was launched in April 1988, and by early 1989
had raised more than £6 million and given grants to more than 100 inner city
projects.
228
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Church of
England
There is no precise or uniform information about the number of church
adherents since no inquiries are normally made about religious beliefs in
censuses or other official returns, and each church adopts its own criteria in
counting its members. Membership figures are therefore approximate.
There has been a decline in recent years in both the number of full¬
time ministers and the recorded adult membership of the larger Christian
denominations. This has been accompanied by significant growth in a range of
independent and Pentecostal churches and new religious movements. However,
the churches today share a strong desire to work together and the ecumenical
movement is well supported. Religious education in schools is required by
statute in England, Wales and Scotland, but the subject has increasingly become
concerned with religious beliefs and moral values, often taking into account
many different faiths, rather than simply being a vehicle for instruction in the
Christian faith.
The Church of England, founded by St Augustine in ad 597, derives its status as
the established church of the land from the Reformation in the sixteenth
century, its form of worship being embodied in the Book of Common Prayer, first
compiled in 1549. The Church of England’s relationship with the State is one of
mutual obligation—privileges accorded to the Church balanced by certain duties
it must fulfil. The Sovereign must always be a member of the Church, and
promise to uphold it; Church of England archbishops, bishops and deans are
appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; all clergy take an
oath of allegiance to the Crown. The Church can regulate its own worship. The
two archbishops (of Canterbury and York), the bishops of London, Durham and
Winchester, and 21 other bishops (according to their seniority as diocesan
bishops) sit in the House of Lords. Clergy of the Church (together with those of
the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church)
are not allowed to sit in the House of Commons.
The Church has two provinces: Canterbury, comprising 30 dioceses (includ¬
ing the Diocese of Europe), and York, with 14 dioceses. The Archbishop of
Canterbury is ‘Primate of All England’, and the Archbishop of York ‘Primate of
England’. The dioceses are divided into 13,250 parishes. In 1987 it was
estimated that, in the two provinces (excluding the Diocese of Europe), some
230,000 people were baptised into the Church; of these 187,000 were under one
year old (29 per cent of live births). In the same year there were 65,850
confirmations. Attendances at services on a normal Sunday are around 1-2
million. Many people who rarely, if ever, attend services, nevertheless regard
themselves as belonging to the Church of England (amounting to perhaps half
the population).
The central governing body, the General Synod, has both spiritual authority
and legislative and administrative powers; and bishops, clergy and lay members
are involved in decisions. Certain important issues must be referred for the
approval of the dioceses before being decided by the Synod. Lay members are
associated with church government in the parishes through the ancient office of
churchwarden and the modern parochial church councils.
The General Synod is the centre of an administrative system dealing with
such matters as education, mission, inter-church relations, social questions,
recruitment and training for the ministry, church work in Britain and overseas
and the care of church buildings, particularly those of historical and architectu¬
ral interest. It is also concerned with church schools (which are maintained from
public funds) and colleges of education, theological colleges, and centres for
training women in pastoral work. At present, only men are admitted to the
priesthood, but in 1987 the General Synod voted to proceed with legislation to
enable women to be ordained priests; final decisions on the matter, however, are
RELIGION
229
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
The Free
Churches
not expected to be taken for some years. The Deacons (Ordination of Women)
Measure 1986 has made it possible for women to be ordained as deacons.
The Church has its own courts, whose jurisdiction today extends only to
church property and matters of ecclesiastical discipline.
Church finance is administered locally by the parishes and the dioceses, with
contributions to a central fund for the maintenance of central services, includ¬
ing capital expenditure on training and theological colleges and grants for
training candidates for ordination. The State makes no direct financial con¬
tribution to church expenses. The Church’s endowment income is mainly
administered by the Church Commissioners, the body largely responsible for the
payment of clergy stipends and pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 27 autonomous provinces in Britain and
overseas and three regional councils overseas with a total membership of about
70 million. In the British Isles there are four provinces: the Church of England
(established), the Church in Wales, the Scottish Episcopal Church in Scotland,
and the Church of Ireland.
Every ten years the Lambeth Conference meets for consultation between all
Anglican bishops. (The last Conference was held in Canterbury in 1988.)
Presided over by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Conference has no executive
authority, but enjoys great prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline,
relations with other communions, and attitudes to political and social questions
are widely studied. The Anglican Consultative Council (an assembly of laymen
and clergy as well as bishops) meets every two or three years and is designed to
provide consultations within the Anglican Communion and to serve as an
instrument of common action. The Council will meet in Wales in 1990.
The Church of Scotland has a presbyterian form of government, that is,
government by elders, all (including ministers) of equal rank. Its status as the
national church derives from the Scottish Reformation and legislation of the
Scottish Parliament, consolidated in the Treaty of Union 1707 and the Church of
Scotland Act 1921, which confirmed its complete freedom in all spiritual
matters. It appoints its own office bearers and its decisions on questions of
doctrine, worship, government and discipline are subject to no civil authority.
Both men and women are admitted to the ministry and each of 1,716
churches is governed locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister and
the elected elders of the Church. Above the Kirk Session is the Court of the
Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod, and finally the General Assembly,
consisting of elected ministers and elders, which meets annually under the
presidency of an elected moderator, who serves for one year. The Sovereign is
represented at the General Assembly by the Lord High Commissioner. The adult
communicant membership of the Church of Scotland is nearly 823,000.
The expression ‘Free Churches’ is commonly used to describe those Protestant
churches in Britain which, unlike the Church of England and the Church of
Scotland, are not established as official churches of the State. In the course of
history they have developed their own forms of belief, church order, and
worship. All the major Free Churches—Methodist, Baptist, United Reformed
and Salvation Army—admit both men and women to the ministry.
The Methodist Church, the largest of the Free Churches with just over
450,400 adult full members and a community of more than 1-3 million,
originated in the eighteenth century following the evangelical revival under John
Wesley and is based on a 1932 union of most of the separate Methodist
Churches. The Methodist Churches which did not join the union include the
Independent Methodists (nearly 4,000 members) and the Wesleyan Reform
230
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Union (with nearly 3,200 members). The Methodist Church in Ireland has over
52,000 members in Northern Ireland.
The Baptists are nearly all grouped in associations of churches, most of which
belong to the Baptist Union of Great Britain (formed in 1812), with a total
membership of about 167,000. In addition, there are separate Baptist Unions
for Scotland, Wales and Ireland, and other Baptist Churches.
The United Reformed Church, with some 128,000 members, was formed in
1972, when the Congregational Church in England and Wales (the oldest
community of dissenters in Britain) and the Presbyterian Church of England
merged—the first transdenominational union of churches in Britain since the
Reformation in the sixteenth century. In 1981 there was a further union with
the Re-formed Association of the Churches of Christ.
Among the other Free Churches are the Presbyterian Church in Ireland; the
Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose from the
revivalist movement led in 1735 by Howell Harris; the Union of Welsh Indepen¬
dents; the Free Church of Scotland; the United Free Church of Scotland; the Free
Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scot¬
land; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland; and the Non-Subscribing
Presbyterian Church of Ireland.
Other Protestant denominations include the Unitarian and Free Christian
Churches; the Fellowship of the Churches of Christ (known also in the United
States as Disciples of Christ), which has been an organised community in
Britain since the early nineteenth century; the British Province of the Moravian
Church, which is an international missionary church; the Free Church of
England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in 1844 as a direct
result of the Oxford Movement; and the Congregational Federation, formed from
Congregational Churches which did not enter the United Reformed Church.
There are also the Pentecostalists, who are increasing in number. Their two
main bodies operating in Britain are the Assemblies of God and the Elim
Pentecostal Church, many of whose members are of West Indian origin. There is
also a growing number of black-led churches.
The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), with about 18,000 adult members
in Britain and 400 places of worship, came into being in the middle of the
seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox. Silent worship is
central to its life as a religious organisation and Friends work for peace and the
relief of suffering in many parts of the world.
The Salvation Army, founded in Britain in 1865, has since spread to 89 other
countries. Within Britain there are 60,000 active members operating from
nearly 1,000 centres of worship. The Salvation Army’s distinctive ministry of
Christian evangelism and practical care is also expressed through the work of
some 100 social service centres, ranging from hostels for the homeless to homes
for elderly people, for abused children and for teenagers on probation, and
recreational centres for Service personnel. The Salvation Army also provides a
chaplaincy service to more than 100 prisons in Great Britain.
A recent development in Christian worship has been the house church
movement, which began in the early 1970s and now has an estimated mem¬
bership of 95,000 (attendance being considerably greater than membership).
Each house church has an average of 100 members, the majority of whom are
former members of various Protestant denominations; groups of members hold
services and prayer meetings in private houses, with the position of chairman
being taken in rotation. House churches receive money from their members
to enable them to support their leaders and carry out missionary and social
work.
There are also a number of other religious organisations in Britain, all of
which were founded in the United States in the last century. These include the
TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS
Pilots all over the world train on flight
simulators such as this one. Based on the
latest microprocessor simulation
technology pioneered by Singer Link-Miles
Ltd, it can produce a high degree of realism,
using, for example, a variety of weather and
air traffic effects.
Scientists at Courtaulds have developed a
process to convert the sodium alginate found
in brown seaweed into a wound dressing that
speeds up the healing of ulcers and pressure
sores.
CONSERVATION AND RECREATION AREAS
Park, County Down,
Northern Ireland.
The Cheviots, Northumberland
National Park.
Brecon Beacons National Park,
Powys, Wales.
WYTCH FARM
Perforating operations
during the drilling of a
production well on Furzey
Island.
Wytch Farm in Dorset is
Britain’s largest onshore
oilfield. Owned by British
Petroleum, it started
production in 1979.
RELIGION
231
The Roman
Catholic
Church
Jewry
Other
Religious
Communities
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (the
Mormon Church), the Christian Scientists and the Spiritualists.
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became tempo¬
rarily defunct at the time of the Reformation during the sixteenth century, was
restored in 1850; the Scottish hierarchy became defunct in the early seven¬
teenth century and was restored in 1878. However, throughout this period
Catholicism never disappeared entirely. There are now seven Roman Catholic
provinces in Great Britain, each under an archbishop, 30 episcopal dioceses (22
in England and Wales, eight in Scotland), and over 3,000 parishes. In Northern
Ireland there are six dioceses, some with territory partly in the Irish Republic.
Approximately one citizen in ten ordinarily claims to be an adherent of the
Roman Catholic faith in Britain. Only men are admitted to the priesthood. In
1982 Pope John Paul II paid a pastoral visit to Britain, the first by a reigning
pontiff.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of
its children and requires its members to try to bring up their children in
the Catholic faith. A number of schools for Catholic children are staffed by
members of the religious orders (to the extent of one teacher in 25). These
orders also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care, and
running homes for old people. The great majority of Catholic schools are main¬
tained out of public funds and new schools may be established with
government grants.
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman Conquest, but the
present community in Britain dates from 1656, having been founded by those of
Spanish and Portuguese origin (known as Sephardim). Later and more numer¬
ous settlers were of German and eastern European origin, known as Ashkena¬
zim. The present community, numbering about 330,000, is the second largest
in Europe.
The community is, broadly speaking, divided into two groups. Some 77 per
cent of the majority Ashkenazi Jews are Orthodox and most acknowledge the
jurisdiction of the Chief Rabbi, with the Sephardi Orthodox element following
their own spiritual head (the Haham). The Reform movement, which was
founded in 1840, and the Liberal and Progressive movement, which followed in
1901, account for the remaining 23 per cent.
Jewish congregations in Britain number about 300. Jewish denominational
schools (some of them supported by public funds) are attended by about one in
three Jewish children. There are a number of charitable and welfare agencies
caring for the elderly and handicapped people.
The officially recognised representative body is the Board of Deputies of
British Jews.
Christian communities of foreign origin, including the Orthodox, Lutheran and
Reformed Churches of various European countries, together with the Armenian
Church, have established their own centres of worship, particularly in London.
Britain’s Muslim population is estimated at around T5 million, the largest
number of whom originate from Pakistan and Bangladesh, with sizeable groups
from India, Cyprus, the Arab world, Malaysia and parts of Africa. There is also a
growing community of British-born Muslims, mainly the children of immigrant
parents, but including an increasing number of converts to Islam. There are
some 385 mosques and numerous prayer centres throughout Britain. Mosques
are not only places of worship; they are also cultural and social centres offering
instruction in the Muslim way of life and facilities for social and welfare
activities. The first was established at Woking in Surrey in 1890, and they now
232
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CO-OPERATION
AMONG THE
CHURCHES
range from converted terraced houses in the inner areas of many industrial
towns to the Central Mosque in London and its associated Islamic Cultural
Centre, which is one of the most important Muslim institutions in the Western
world. The Central Mosque has the largest congregation in Britain, and during
festivals it may number over 30,000. There are also important mosques and
cultural centres in Liverpool, Manchester, Leicester and Glasgow.
There are large Sikh and Hindu communities in Britain, comprising approxi¬
mately half a million and some 300,000 respectively, both of which originate
mainly from India. The temples of each group, gurdwaras for Sikhs and mandirs
for Hindus, cater for the religious, educational, social, and cultural needs of the
respective communities. The oldest central gurdwara in London was established
in 1908 and the largest one at present is in Southall, Middlesex, where
congregations number over 5,000 during special festivals. The largest Hindu
communities are to be found in Leicester, north and north-west London,
Birmingham and Bradford, while the largest Sikh communities are in Greater
London, Manchester, Coventry, and Gravesend (Kent).
In Britain there are also approximately 130 Buddhist groups and some 55
centres, with at least 13 monasteries and a number of temples. All principal
schools of Buddhism are represented. The Buddhist Society, with its head¬
quarters in London, publicises the principles of Buddhism and encourages their
study and practice; it does not adhere to any particular school of Buddhism.
The British Council of Churches, with representatives or observers from all the
main Christian churches in the British Isles, facilitates common action and
seeks to further Christian unity. It works through five divisions: Christian Aid
(which has a separate constitution); Conference for World Mission; Ecumenical
Affairs; Community Affairs; and International Affairs.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches of England and
Wales. It promotes unity and joint action among the Free Churches and is a
channel for communication with central and local government.
Inter-church conversations about the doctrinal and practical issues involved
in the search for unity now take place through international as well as national
bodies. The Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches are represented on some of
these as well as the Anglican and some of the Free Churches.
The Anglican and the main Free Churches also participate in the World
Council of Churches (of which the British Council of Churches is an associated
national council). This links together some 300 churches in over 100 countries
for co-operation and the study of common problems. The Council of Christians
and Jews works for better understanding among members of the two religions
and deals with problems in the social field. The British Council of Churches has
also established a Committee for Relations with People of Other Faiths.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made by
two or more churches for sharing church buildings.
ECONOMIC
BACKGROUND
National Economy
From 1981 the British economy has experienced the longest period since 1945 of
sustained growth at an annual average rate of over 3 per cent. Investment,
export volume, the number of jobs and productivity have risen substantially.
However, the rate of inflation started to rise in early 1988, exceeding 8 per cent
at an annual rate by the middle of 1989, but pulling back to 7-3 per cent by
August. Unemployment fell by 1-4 million between July 1986 and August 1989
although, as in most other industrialised countries, it remains high compared
with the levels of the 1960s and 1970s.
The current account of the balance of payments has been in deficit since
1987, following seven successive years of surplus.
Britain has an open economy, in which international trade is a vital part of
economic performance. In 1988 exports of goods and services accounted for
about one-quarter of its gross domestic product (GDP)—a comparatively high
share among the major economies. The proportion has increased over the last
two decades, from about 20 per cent in the early 1960s. Similar rises have
occurred in most other developed countries, reflecting the growing importance
of international trade in an increasingly interdependent world economy.
The economy is primarily—and increasingly—based on private enterprise,
and government policy is aimed at encouraging and expanding the private
sector, which accounts for about three-quarters of GDP and a similar proportion
of total employment.
While manufacturing, the traditional engine of economic growth in Britain,
continues to play a vital role, recent decades have generally seen a faster growth
in the services sector (although manufacturing grew faster in 1987 and 1988),
in response to rising living standards. An adjustment to the relative size of the
manufacturing sector has also resulted from the growth of North Sea oil output.
Services now account for three-fifths of GDP and for two-thirds of employment,
compared with about half of both GDP and employment in 1950. Manufacturing
accounts for about a quarter of each compared with over a third in 1950.
Some 2-3 per cent of Britain’s working population is engaged in agriculture—
a lower proportion than in any other major industrialised country. However,
because of a high level of productivity, Britain is able to produce nearly
two-thirds of its own food.
With the exploitation of oil and natural gas from the Continental Shelf under
the North Sea, the country is self-sufficient in energy in net terms and expects to
remain so for some years. Together, the extraction of oil and gas accounted for
some 2 per cent of GDP in 1988. Coal—traditionally the most important source
of energy—still meets over a third of Britain’s energy needs. Nuclear power plays
a vital role in helping to meet the country’s long-term needs.
One of the largest exporters of visible goods, Britain accounts for about 6 per
cent of the world total. It is among the major exporters of aerospace products,
electrical equipment, most types of machinery, chemicals and oil. It is also one of
the world’s largest importers of agricultural products, raw materials and
semi-manufactures.
In about half the years since the end of the second world war, a deficit on
Britain’s visible trade has been offset by a surplus on transactions in invisibles.
The significant contribution made by invisibles to the current account is partly a
reflection of Britain’s position as a major financial centre. The banks, insurance
underwriters and brokers, and other financial institutions of the City of London
234
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Economic
Growth
Inflation and
Competitiveness
Industrial
Production
Table 10: Economic Indicators
Gross domestic product
(average estimate)3
Exports3
Imports3
Consumer expenditure3
Gross domestic fixed capital
formation3
Percentage increase in retail
prices index
Workforce in employment (000s)
Percentage of workforce unemployed
1978 1983 1988
320,883 335,593 400,999
85,720 90,971 113,186
76,593 88,116 127,833
186,759 205,484 257,918
54,914 53,476 75,680
8-3 4-6 4-9
25,014 23,626 25,749
5-2 11-7 80
a £ million at 1985 market prices.
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition; Economic Trends Annual Supplement 1989 Edition ■
Employment Gazette.
provide world-wide financial services, and the City contains perhaps the most
comprehensive and advanced capital market in the world.
Values for some of the main economic indicators in selected years since 1978
are shown in Table 10.
The marked rise in living standards in recent years has been accompanied by the
emergence of new industries and the renewal and improvement of much of the
country’s infrastructure. In earlier decades, in spite of short periods of rapid
economic expansion, the rate of growth had been low in comparison with the
rates in most other industrialised countries, averaging 2 to 3 per cent annually
up to 1973, but only about 1 per cent from then until the recession of the early
1980s. Since then, however, the average rate of growth has been over 3 per cent
a year. Since 1980 Britain has had the highest rate of growth of the major
European Community countries.
From the late 1960s until about 1980 high rates of inflation reduced Britain’s
competitiveness. Huge rises in the price of oil in 1973-74 and 1979 and
substantial increases in the money supply and public spending were followed by
upsurges in inflation; retail prices rose by 24 per cent in 1975 and by 18 per cent
in 1980. Earnings also grew rapidly; in 1980 the rate of increase was 21 per cent.
From 1981 inflation has been on a downward trend, though rising of late—the
annual rate was 7-3 per cent by August 1989. In the year to July 1989 earnings
rose at an underlying rate of some 9-25 per cent.
In the late 1970s competitiveness suffered from a much more rapid increase
in unit labour costs than in most other industrialised countries. Since then,
greater moderation in pay settlements and a substantial rise in productivity (see
p 235) have contributed to a considerable improvement in competitiveness.
Between 1981 and 1988 Britain’s unit wage costs in manufacturing rose by an
average of 3 per cent a year.
In the decade to 1973 output of the manufacturing industries grew at a faster
rate than the economy as a whole. After the oil price rises of 1973-74, however,
and with increasing competition from overseas—from both developed and newly
industrialising countries—manufacturing output fell sharply; in 1975 it was 8
per cent lower than two years previously. It then increased from this trough but,
following another oil price rise and stagnation in the world economy, fell back by
NATIONAL ECONOMY
235
Investment
Employment
and
Productivity
Overseas
Sector
over 14 per cent between 1979 and 1981. It has since grown steadily to pass its
1973—74 peak. Manufacturing output grew especially sharply between 1986 and
1988—by 13 per cent. In 1988 alone it rose by 7 per cent.
Output of the production industries as a whole (manufacturing, energy and
water) had by 1985 risen above its earlier peak of 1979; by 1988 it was almost 11
per cent higher than in 1979. In 1986 energy output was more than twice the
level of ten years earlier but, with oil output having passed its peak level of the
mid-1980s, was 5 per cent lower by 1988. However, production in that year had
been disrupted by a major disaster.
Fixed investment grew by about 5 per cent a year during the 1960s, but between
1970 and 1983 was virtually unchanged. Since 1983 it has increased by almost
7 per cent a year on average and by nearly 12 per cent in 1988 alone. Sharply
rising company profits and substantial borrowing from overseas have been
contributory factors. Over the decade 1978—88 there was an increase in the
private sector’s share of fixed investment from 69 per cent to 88 per cent. Over
the same period there was a rise in the share of investment undertaken by the
services sector and a fall in that carried out by manufacturing. An improvement
in the quality of investment has contributed to the rise in the net real rate of
return on capital employed in non-North Sea industrial and commercial com¬
panies, which in 1987 was, at over 10 per cent, the highest since the late 1960s.
Britain’s workforce in employment amounts to some 26 million, having in¬
creased by about 2-7 million in the six years to March 1989. Over half the jobs
created over the period were full-time. Self-employment has grown by over 1
million since 1979; the number of women seeking work has also risen. As the
workforce has expanded, unemployment has not fallen as quickly as it might
have done. As in other industrialised countries, high unemployment has been a
problem since the early 1970s. From a level of 300,000 to 400,000 in the
mid-1960s, unemployment rose to over 1 million in the mid-1970s (representing
around 5 per cent of the workforce) and then increased again very sharply after
1979 to reach 3 million in 1985. The rate of increase then slowed and, with the
economy growing, unemployment fell by 1-4 million between July 1986 and
August 1989, when it amounted to T8 million, equal to 6T per cent of the
workforce. The figure is well below the average for the European Community.
Other labour market indicators have improved. Overtime in manufacturing
has increased and short-time working has fallen. The shedding of surplus
labour and renewed growth have led to gains in productivity: between 1980 and
1988 output per head rose by 21 per cent in the economy as a whole, and by 50
per cent in manufacturing alone.
As a result of demographic changes, the labour force will grow more slowly
during the 1990s than it has in recent years, with a fall in the number of young
people. Accordingly, there will be a need for increased flexibility among those in
work and for employers to tap new sources of recruitment. The Government has
put forward proposals for a new training framework, the main feature of which
will be a network of local employer-led Training and Enterprise Councils.
Britain’s overseas trade performance fluctuated during the 1970s. In general,
imports of food, energy, raw materials and manufactured goods were greater
than visible exports, around 80 per cent of which were manufactured goods.
This deficit on visible trade was wholly or partly offset by a surplus on invisibles,
which cover earnings from services, together with interest, profits and
dividends, and transfers.
In the years 1980 to 1982 Britain ran surpluses on visible trade. Since then,
however, imports—especially of manufactures—have tended to rise more
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sharply than exports and the deficit on visible trade has reappeared. After a
long period of deterioration in the balance of trade in manufactures there
was a deficit in 1983, which has continued in subsequent years. Substantial
and rising net earnings on invisible transactions, however, kept the current
account in surplus up to 1986.
Membership of the European Community (throughout which a single market
is to be established by 1992, for which Britain is preparing) has had a major
impact on Britain’s pattern of trade, increasing the proportion with other
member countries and reducing the share of trade with other members of the
Commonwealth. Between 1972 and 1988 the proportion of Britain’s exports of
goods going to other members of the Community rose from 34 to 50 per cent
while that going to other Commonwealth countries fell from 19 to 11 per cent.
Imports followed a similar trend. Trade with Japan and with the newly
industrialised countries, including Singapore, Korea, Taiwan and Malaysia, has
risen substantially.
The strength of overseas earnings from invisibles has been maintained by the
continued adaptation to new conditions, particularly following the abolition of
exchange controls in 1979, and the growth in world markets of insurance,
banking, tourism, construction, consultancy and other services. In 1988 ex¬
ports of services were valued at over one-third of exports of goods.
The substantial cumulative surplus on current account in the first half of the
1980s implied a corresponding increase in Britain’s net external assets, which
are estimated to have risen from £12,000 million at the end of 1979 to £94,000
million at the end of 1988—second in size only to those of Japan. These assets
enable the current account deficits that have occurred since 1987 to be readily
financed. These deficits are largely a reflection of private investment unmatched
by private savings. The Government believes that, of their nature, such deficits
are eventually self-correcting. Following the abolition of exchange controls,
investment outflows increased sharply. Portfolio investment has been high since
the mid-1980s, partly a reflection of investment by banks as they moved into
lending in readily marketable forms (such as floating rate notes) and away from
traditional loans. In 1987 there was net portfolio disinvestment by British
residents but by 1988 net portfolio investment had been resumed. Net direct
investment is at a consistently high level.
The development of North Sea oil and gas production has had a significant effect
on the economy; in 1988 Britain was the world’s seventh largest oil producer.
The benefits to the balance of payments began to appear in the second half of the
1970s; in 1980 Britain had its first surplus on oil trade. In 1974 oil accounted
for some 4 per cent of Britain’s visible exports and 19 per cent of visible imports;
in 1988 the proportions were 7 per cent and 3 per cent respectively (the export
proportion having been as high as 21 per cent in the mid-1980s). The oil surplus
reached its peak in 1985, at £8,100 million. With the fall in oil prices (see p 237)
the surplus has fallen and amounted to some £2,300 million in 1988. Exports,
mainly to other European Community countries, are equivalent to about a half
of domestic production. They are partly offset in balance-of-payments terms
by imports of other grades of crude oil from the Middle East and else¬
where.
North Sea oil helped to alleviate the fall in real national income which Britain,
along with other industrialised countries, suffered following the oil price rises of
the 1970s. It has helped to ease the task of controlling public sector borrowing,
contributing to the Government’s counter-inflation strategy. Even as
production—which reached a peak in the mid-1980s—runs down, the stock of
external assets that has been built up, largely during the period of oil surpluses,
provides a steady flow of income.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
237
ECONOMIC
STRATEGY
Monetary
Policy
The Exchange
Rate
Fiscal Policy
The price of oil fell gradually in the early 1980s and then, after almost three
years of virtual stability, declined sharply again in late 1985 and the first half of
1986. The dollar price has since partly recovered but, by August 1989, was still a
little over half its level of early 1986. Although a fall in the oil price leads to some
loss of revenues from oil exports and oil taxation, consumers and non-oil
industry benefit from lower costs and prices.
British governments traditionally sought to influence the rate of growth and the
level of employment by macroeconomic policy measures (for example, by varia¬
tions in government expenditure, taxes or controls on consumer credit). From
the late 1960s until about 1980, increases in wages and prices had an adverse
effect on competitiveness, profitability and business confidence. This was
associated with an increase in unemployment over the period. At various times
governments attempted to control pay rises and (less frequently) price rises by
voluntary or statutory controls, but such policies were largely unsuccessful.
The present Government’s economic objectives may be summarised as the
establishment of conditions that stimulate enterprise and encourage the crea¬
tion of wealth. In pursuit of these aims it has adopted economic policies which
in many ways represent a break with those of its predecessors. Macroeconomic
(monetary and fiscal) policies are now directed mainly at bringing down the rate
of inflation and ultimately achieving price stability. They are set in the context of
a medium-term financial strategy, which is reviewed each year in the Budget.
Microeconomic policies are aimed at improving the working of markets by
encouraging enterprise, efficiency and flexibility, and so improving the supply
side performance of the economy (see p 238). Together these policies are aimed
at improving the division of the increase in money GDP between output growth
and inflation, and helping to create jobs.
The central aim of monetary policy is the creation of conditions that will exert
steady downward pressure on the rate of growth of money GDP, so bringing
down the rate of inflation. Interest rates are the essential instrument of
monetary policy and they are set so as to bring such conditions about. Narrow
money as measured by MO1 has had a stable relationship with money GDP over a
number of years and has proved a reliable indicator of monetary conditions. A
target range of 1 to 5 per cent has been set for MO growth in 1989—90. Changes
in broad money, or liquidity, have become increasingly difficult to interpret;
far-reaching changes in financial practices have meant that there is no simple
relationship between the growth in broad money and in money GDP. Conse¬
quently, no explicit target range is set for broad money, though the assessment
of monetary conditions continues to take broad money into account.
Exchange rates play a central role in both domestic monetary decisions and
international policy co-operation. The Government does not allow increases in
domestic costs to be accommodated either by monetary expansion or by
exchange rate depreciation. The major industrialised countries share an in¬
terest in establishing more stable exchange rates. Britain is a member of the
European Monetary System, but not of its exchange rate mechanism. This
matter is being kept under review.
Monetary policy has been complemented by a firm fiscal policy whose aim has
been a progressive reduction in public borrowing as a proportion of GDP by
seeking to limit public expenditure as a proportion of GDP. General government
1 MO is notes and coin in circulation with the public and banks' holdings of cash and their
operational balances at the Bank of England.
238
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Supply Side
Policies
Economic
Management
expenditure, excluding privatisation proceeds (which count as negative expend¬
iture), fell as a proportion of GDP from nearly 47 per cent in 1982-83 to a little
over 39 per cent in 1988-89. In the early years of the financial strategy the public
sector borrowing requirement amounted to around 5 per cent of GDP, but by
1988-89 this had been turned into a public sector debt repayment of around 3
per cent of GDP—a second successive annual surplus. The Government’s aim is
to maintain a balanced budget in the medium term.
While designing macroeconomic policy with the intent of reducing inflation, the
Government has sought to improve the supply response, and thus the efficiency,
of the economy through microeconomic policies. Action has been taken to
expose more of the economy to market forces. Direct controls (for example, on
pay, prices, foreign exchange, dividend payments and commercial credit) have
been abolished, competition in domestic markets strengthened, labour market
reforms introduced, measures taken to encourage share ownership, a substan¬
tial amount of activity transferred from the public to the private sector by
privatisation and contracting work out, and efforts made to improve value for
money in the public sector. Also, regulatory burdens on business have been
reduced.
In the labour market the Government has sought to improve work incentives
by reducing personal income tax rates and raising tax thresholds. It has also,
through the tax system, encouraged the extension of share ownership among
employees. A scheme of income tax relief has been introduced to encourage the
spread of profit-related pay. To improve employment prospects, the Government
has also abolished the National Insurance surcharge (a tax on employed labour)
and established a graduated structure of National Insurance contribution rates
which has reduced the cost to employers of hiring lower-paid workers. The
Government has also taken steps to achieve a better-balanced legal framework
for industrial relations and has expanded training opportunities. Obstacles to
the mobility of labour have been reduced. For example, the rights of those
leaving occupational pension schemes early have been improved and new
arrangements for personal pensions introduced, both of which will reduce the
pension disadvantage of changing jobs. Also, the Housing Act 1988 aims at
improving the availability of private rented housing. The Government has
enacted legislation to limit the scope of wages councils. However, in spite of
these measures, wages have continued to rise in excess of the inflation rate. This
has taken place despite the Government’s emphasis on the link between pay and
jobs: it has repeatedly pointed out that, if employment is to rise faster, wages
must rise more slowly.
To improve the working of capital markets, the Government has abolished
controls on foreign exchange transactions, company dividends, hire purchase
and bank lending. Competition among financial institutions is being encour¬
aged within a new statutory framework of investor protection. The Government
has also taken steps to reduce the distorting effects of the tax system on
investment and savings decisions by, among other things, reforming corpora¬
tion tax (the burden of which has been eased) and the system of capital
allowances. Planning restrictions on industrial investment have been eased,
while government support to industry has been made more selective and, where
appropriate, more closely related to job creation. Particular efforts have been
made to improve the flow of investment funds to small firms, to assist
innovation in industry and to attract industry to the inner cities.
The Treasury has prime responsibility for the formulation and conduct of
economic policy, which also involves the Departments of Trade and Industry,
Employment, Energy, the Environment and Transport and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
239
NATIONAL
INCOME AND
EXPENDITURE
Expenditure
Other bodies are concerned with specific aspects of economic policy. These
include the Bank of England (the central bank), the National Economic Develop¬
ment Council (in which the Government meets representatives of management,
trade unions and other interests), the Office of Fair Trading and the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission.
On matters of major public policy such as the broad economic strategy, and on
the economic problems it faces, the Government makes known its purposes and
keeps in touch with developments throughout the economy by means of
informal and continuous links with the chief industrial, financial, labour and
other interests. Final responsibility for the broad lines of economic policy rests
with the Cabinet.
The value of all goods and services produced in the economy is measured by
GDP. This can be expressed either in terms of market prices (the prices people
pay for the goods and services they buy) or at factor cost (the cost of the goods
and services before adding taxes and subtracting subsidies). It can also be
expressed in current prices or in constant prices (that is, removing the effects of
inflation in order to measure the underlying growth in the economy). In 1988
GDP at current factor cost totalled £395,000 million.
Gross domestic product is conventionally estimated in three different ways as
the sum total of expenditure, income or output. Each method yields the same
total in principle, but in practice there are slight differences. The output
measure is usually considered the most reliable measure of short-term move¬
ments. In 1988 the index of the average estimate of GDP at constant factor cost
was 112-5 (1985 = 100), compared with 90-2 in 1978, an increase of some 25
per cent.
Table 11 gives figures for the expenditure-based measure of GDP, at both
current market prices and current factor cost, and shows how two other main
aggregates used in the national accounts, gross national product and national
income, are derived.
Table 12 shows the categories of total final expenditure in 1988. Consumers’
expenditure accounted for 61 per cent of domestic expenditure. Between 1978
and 1988 the proportion of final expenditure devoted to exports amounted to 21
per cent.
Table 11: Gross Domestic Product, Gross National Product and National
Income
£ million
1978
1988
Total final expenditure 214,591 587,071
less imports of goods and services —45,555 -125,194
Gross domestic product at market prices 168,123 463,933
plus net property income from abroad 806 5,619
Gross national product at market prices 168,929 469,552
less factor cost adjustment (taxes less subsidies) -18,981 -69,146
Gross domestic product at factor cost 149,142 394,787
Net property income from abroad 806 5,619
Gross national product at factor cost 149,948 400,406
less capital consumption —19,378 —54,769
National income (net national product
at factor cost) 130,570 345,637
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition.
240
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Personal
Incomes and
Expenditure
Table 12: Total Final Expenditure in 1988 at Market Prices
£ million per cent
Consumers’ expenditure 293,569 50 0
General government final consumption 91,847 15-6
Gross domestic fixed capital formation 88,751 15-1
Value of physical increase in stocks and work in
progress 437! 0.7
Total domestic expenditure 478,538 8T5
Exports of goods and services 108,533 18-5
Total final expenditure 587,071 100 0
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition.
Personal disposable income (that is, personal incomes after deductions—mainly
taxation and social security contributions) rose rapidly and fairly steadily from
£113,422 million in 1978 to £307,170 million in 1988, 4-9 per cent higher in
real terms than in 1987. Consumers’ expenditure amounted to 75 per cent of
pre-tax personal income in 1988 compared with 70 per cent in 1978.
Table 13 shows the pattern of consumers’ expenditure in 1988. Housing,
food, alcoholic drink, clothing and footwear, and fuel and power together
accounted for 44 per cent of the total. Consumers’ expenditure increased by 6-9
per cent in real terms between 1987 and 1988. The changes in the pattern
between 1978 and 1988 in Britain were paralleled in other industrialised
countries, with declining proportions spent on food, tobacco, clothing and
footwear, and fuel and power. Over the longer term, as incomes rise, people tend
to spend increasing proportions on consumer durables and services.
Saving as a percentage of personal disposable income has varied over the last
decade and in 1988 was 4-4 per cent, down from 13-5 per cent in 1980. The
recent reduction in the saving ratio partly reflects an adjustment to declining
Table 13: Consumers’ Expenditure in 1978 and 1988
1978
1988
per cent per cent £ million
Food (household expenditure) 18-2
Alcoholic drink 7-2
Tobacco 3-9
Clothing and footwear 7-8
Housing 13-0
Fuel and power 4-6
Household goods and services 7-5
Transport and communications 15-5
Recreation, entertainment and education 9-3
Other goods and services 12-4
Other items3 0-7
12-5
6-3
2- 7
6-7
14-6
3- 9
6-5
17-2
8-9
17-3
3-3
36,687
18,508
7,945
19,791
42,993
11,562
19,163
50,398
26,096
50,848
9,578
Total
1000
1000
293,569
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition.
a Household expenditure overseas plus final expenditure by private non-profit-making bodies plus national
accounts statistical adjustment minus expenditure by foreign tourists in Britain.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
NATIONAL ECONOMY
241
Sources of
Income
Current
Government
Expenditure
Gross Domestic
Product
by Industry
Table 14: Gross Domestic Product by Industry3
1978 1988
£ million per cent £ million per cent
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 3,371 2-3 5,625 1-4
Energy and water supply 10,079 6-8 21,845 5-4
Manufacturing 43,512 29-5 93,433 23-7
Construction 9,126 6-2 25,745 6-5
Distribution, hotels and
catering: repairs 19,968 13-5 55,131 14-0
Transport and communications 11,754 8-0 28,657 7-3
Banking, finance, insurance,
business services and leasing 16,680 1T3 76,922 19-5
Ownership of dwellings 8,598 5-8 21,407 5-4
Public administration, defence
and social security 9,942 6-7 27,023 6-8
Education and health services 12,377 8-4 35,237 8-9
Other services 8,031 5-4 25,785 6-5
Total 153,438
Adjustment for financial services -5,812
103-9 416,810 105-6
-3-9 -22,204 -5-6
Gross domestic product at
factor cost (income-based)
147,626
100-0 394,606
100-0
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition.
a Before provision for depreciation but after deducting stock appreciation.
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
rates of inflation: during periods of rapidly rising prices people need to increase
their rate of saving to maintain the real value of assets fixed in money terms.
The proportion of total personal income accounted for by income from employ¬
ment was 64 per cent in 1988; average gross weekly earnings in April 1988 in
Great Britain were £241 for full-time male workers and £160 for full-time female
workers. The three other main sources of personal income were self-employment
(11 per cent), income from rent, dividends and interest (10 per cent) and current
grants from general government (14 per cent).
Final consumption by central government and local authorities amounted to
£92,000 million in 1988; it rose by 12 per cent in real terms over the period 1978
to 1988. The main cause of this was the growth over the period in the social
services, especially education and health.
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sector, by way of
National Insurance and other social security benefits, grants, and interest and
subsidies. Central government also makes grants to local authorities to finance
about half of their current expenditure.
Table 14 shows GDP by industry in 1978 and 1988. Over a period of time
agriculture and manufacturing have come to account for smaller proportions of
national income, while services have grown relatively; services now account for a
little over 63 per cent of GDP.
Productivity
Framework of Industry
and Commerce
Introduction
Among the most prominent trends in industrial activity in Britain since the
mid-1970s have been the growth of the offshore oil and gas industries and their
related products and services; the rapid development of electronic and microelec¬
tronic technologies and their application to a wide range of other sectors; a
steady decline in the share of output and employment accounted for by public
sector enterprises as privatisation has progressed; and a continuous rise in the
service industries’ share of total employment. Industrial output has risen
steadily since the recession of 1980—81, which, as in other market economies,
was largely brought about by a rise in world oil prices.
This chapter outlines some of the general features of industrial and commer¬
cial performance and organisation, and goes on to describe government policies
and legislation, the functioning of markets, and research and innovation.
Performance
In early 1989 total output was some 27 per cent higher than at its trough in
1981. It was only during 1985, however, that production regained the level of
mid-1979, which had been the high point of a period of growth since 1976. A
marked increase in productivity has been a major feature of recovery. Gains in
productivity, however, meant that this increased output was produced with
fewer workers. Manufacturing productivity has grown by over 50 per cent since
1980, the highest increase among the major industrialised countries. Conse¬
quently, employment, though increasing, was still lower than in 1981. Table 15
shows GDP by sector and the percentage of total GDP and of total employment in
each sector in 1988.
Output per head in Britain has in the past been lower than in some other major
industrialised countries but it has risen sharply since 1981 and in recent years
the growth has been among the highest in the major industrialised nations. The
Table 15: Gross Domestic Product8 by Industry in 1988
Standard Industrial Classification % of %
Revised 1985 £ million total Employment
0 Agriculture, forestry and fishing
1 Energy and water supply
2—4 Manufacturing
5 Construction
6-9 Services
Adjustment for financial services
Gross domestic product at factor cost
(income-based)
5,625 1-4 1-3
21,845 5-5 20
93,433 23-7 23-2
25,745 6-5 4-5
270,162 68-5 690
-22,204 -5-6 —
394,606 1000 1000
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
a Before depreciation but after providing for stock appreciation.
244
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Investment
Profitability
Inward
Investment
index of output per head for the economy as a whole was 106-3 (1985= 100) in
1988. The productivity of the manufacturing sector has improved more rapidly
and in 1988 the index stood at 115-5. The metals manufacturing sector has
achieved sustained gains in productivity during the 1980s against a back¬
ground of declining employment, such that output per head was 39 per cent
greater in 1988 than in 1985. Employment in all other sectors rose between
1987 and 1988. Table 16 shows output and employment indices for these years.
Table 16: Output and Employment (Indices: 1985 = 100)
Output
Employment*
Index
1987
Index
1988
Index
1987
Index
1988
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 99-3 100-5 94-1
Production industries 105-8 109-5 95-2
of which: Energy and water supply 103-9 99-4 84-5
Manufacturing 106-6 114-0 96-3
Construction 109-0 117-0 99-7
Services 109-7 115-3 105-1
of which: Distribution, hotels,
catering and repairs 110-6 118-0 103-1
Communications 112-5 119-1 100-5
Financial and
business services 108-8 113-6 108-5
Whole economy 1081 113-1 101-9
91-6
96-0
79-8
98-0
102-3
109-4
106-7
104- 9
112-3
105- 1
Sources: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
aExcluding self-employment.
Investment in the manufacturing, construction, distribution, transportation,
communications, financial services industries and ‘other services’ grew by 16
per cent in real terms in 1988. Investment in major sectors of the economy in
1988 (at 1985 prices) is shown in Table 17. The figures for manufacturing
industry do not include expenditure on leased assets since these are attributed
to the service industries on the basis of ownership. Manufacturing industry is,
however, a major user of leased assets. The practice of leasing grew rapidly in the
early 1970s. The trend was distorted in the mid-1980s following changes in the
tax treatment of capital investment announced in the 1984 Budget. Leasing rose
sharply in 1985 but then declined, showing some recovery in 1987.
The quality of investment undertaken has shown a marked improvement in
recent years, contributing to a net rate of return on capital employed by all
non-North Sea industrial and commercial companies of just over 10 per cent in
1987, while that of manufacturing companies alone was over 9 per cent. These
were the highest levels since 1969, when each stood at about 10 per cent.
Britain is recognised as an attractive location for inward direct investment. This
reflects its membership of the European Community and proximity to other
European markets, improved labour relations, and comparatively low rates of
corporate and personal taxation. Direct investment from overseas is encour-
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
245
Table 17: Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation (Investment) by Sector
£ million
1988
(at 1985 prices)
Index
1988
(1985 = 100)
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Oil and gas extraction
Other energy and water supply
Manufacturing
Construction
Distribution, hotels, catering and repairs
Transport and communications
Finance and business services
Leased assets
Other assets
979
1,852
3,882
10,112
31,576
99-6
65-7
98-9
115-8
147-4
Other services
Dwellings
Transfer costs of land and buildings
National accounts statistical adjustment
8,016
14,802
3,611
850
105-0
124-8
121-5
Whole economy
75,680
125-4
Source: United Kingdom National Accounts 1989 Edition.
aged, overseas-owned firms generally being offered the same facilities and
incentives as British-owned ones. The Department of Trade and Industry’s
Invest in Britain Bureau provides foreign companies with advice and assistance
on all aspects of locating and relocating businesses in Britain, and on expanding
existing facilities. Similar advice and assistance is also available in Scotland
through Locate in Scotland and in Wales through Welsh Development Inter¬
national, the investment arm of the Welsh Development Agency. The Bureau
reported over 300 new inward investment projects in 1988.
At the end of 1987 total United States investment in Britain was valued at
$45,000 million, representing over 36 per cent of United States investment in
the European Community. Britain has for many years been the leading country
for United States manufacturing investment in Europe. Britain has attracted
around 31 per cent of Japanese investment in the European Community since
1951. The cumulative value of Japanese investment in Britain is $6,600 million.
Organisation and Ownership
The forms of industrial and commercial organisation and the patterns of
ownership and control are varied. The main categories of organisation are:
unincorporated businesses (sole traders and partnerships) of which there are
more than 1 million; incorporated companies; and public sector enterprises,
which are owned by the Government (see pp 246—7). Incorporation means that
companies are entered on an official register of companies (see p 261); at the end
of 1988 there were over 1 • 1 million companies on the register, although about 14
per cent of these were in liquidation or in the process of removal. About 8,000 of
these companies were public limited companies. Although not numerous,
co-operative enterprises increased in number from about 900 in 1979 to nearly
1,500 in 1988. There has also been a rise in the number of‘buy-outs’ in which
246
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nationalised
Industries
the staff, or management, of a company raises the finance to purchase it. In the
period from 1982 to 1988 there were nearly 1,900, with a total value of more
than £10,000 million.
In some sectors a small number of large companies and their subsidiaries are
responsible for a large proportion of total production, notably in the vehicle,
aerospace and transport equipment industries. However, it is rare for a few
shareholders to have a controlling interest since shares in these companies are
usually distributed among many holders or held by insurance companies or
pension funds representing a cross-section of the community.
Private enterprises generate about three-quarters of total domestic income.
They account for the greater part of activity in the agricultural, manufacturing,
construction, distributive, financial and miscellaneous service sectors. There is
substantial public ownership in the energy, transport and communications
sectors, though, with privatisation (see p 251), this has declined. The private
sector accounted for 79 per cent of total domestic expenditure in 1988, general
government for 20 per cent and public corporations for 1 per cent.
About 200 British-registered company groups and independent companies
each had annual sales of more than £500 million in 1987-88. In terms of annual
turnover, BP is the second largest European company, the British element of
Royal Dutch/Shell is the third largest and four other British firms are among the
top 25 companies.
The major nationalised industries are: the electricity supply industry (including
the Central Electricity Generating Board and 12 area electricity boards in
England and Wales, the South of Scotland Electricity Board and the North of
Scotland Hydro-Electricity Board); the ten regional water and sewage companies
of England and Wales (see p 251); British Coal; British Rail; the Post Office, and
London Regional Transport. In total the industries account for just over 5 per
cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and employ about 3-1 per cent of all those
in employment.
The managing boards and staffs of the nationalised industries are not civil
servants, although they are responsible to ministers who appoint the chairman
and members of each board. Ministers are responsible for agreeing with the
industries their general strategies and have the power to give general directions
as to how the industry should be run, but do not interfere in day-to-day
management. The Government’s policy is to encourage the nationalised indus¬
tries to behave as far as possible as commercial enterprises, and this is carried
out through the financial framework, set by the Government, within which the
industries are expected to operate. This is also designed to integrate the
industries’ medium-term commercial aims with the requirements of govern¬
ment policy on the management of the economy. The maiq elements of the
framework are: clear government objectives for the industries; regular corporate
plans and performance reviews; agreed principles relating to investment
appraisal and pricing; financial targets and performance aims; external fi¬
nancing limits; and systematic monitoring.
To ensure that nationalised industry investment earns an adequate economic
return, there is a ‘required rate of return’ which investment programmes are
expected to achieve. The current rate is 8 per cent in real terms before tax.
Financial targets are set for individual nationalised industries to give them a
framework similar to those of private sector companies, which need to earn
profits. The financial target is usually set in terms of a rate of return on current
cost assets, and is usually supported by a series of performance aims, covering
costs and, where appropriate, standards of service. These performance aims are
considered particularly important for industries with some monopoly power,
where financial targets would not automatically impose pressures for operating
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
247
Industrial
Associations
INDUSTRIAL
FINANCING
efficiency. External financing limits, which control the amount of finance
(grants and borrowing) that a nationalised industry can raise from external
sources in any financial year, are an important short-term operating control.
They are set in the light of a nationalised industry’s financial target and its
expected performance and investment requirements. Nationalised industries
are planning to finance a greater proportion of investment from internally
generated funds.
External scrutiny of nationalised industry efficiency is conducted by the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission (see pp 258—9), which carries out a
number of investigations each year at the instigation of ministers. Where
appropriate, investigations may also be undertaken by management consul¬
tants. Nationalised industry matters are also considered by parliamentary
committees such as the Treasury and Civil Service Committee and the Public
Accounts Committee.
There are several types of voluntary association representing private enterprises
and covering, with varying degrees of completeness, most of British industry.
The central body representing British business and industry is the Confedera¬
tion of British Industry (CBI). The CBI directly represents about 250,000 parent
and subsidiary companies, as well as the members of some 200 trade associa¬
tions and employers’ organisations and the majority of public sector enterprises.
For its members, the CBI provides a lobby, a forum and a service. It represents
their views nationally to the Government and the public as well as internation¬
ally. CBI representatives sit on such bodies as the National Economic Develop¬
ment Council and the Health and Safety Commission. The CBI provides a forum
where members can exchange views and experiences and discuss ways of
tackling common problems, and it offers information and advice on subjects
which members may be unable to cover themselves, in particular, on overseas
markets, health and safety, company law, environmental issues and employ¬
ment affairs.
The decentralised body representing business and industry is the Association
of British Chambers of Commerce, which represents over 70,000 businesses in
98 chambers. Chambers of commerce provide a forum for business, represent¬
ing their views and interests to the Government both at national and local levels.
Chambers promote local economic development, for example through regenera¬
tion projects, tourism, inward investment promotion and business services,
including overseas trade missions, exhibitions and training conferences.
Trade associations consist of companies producing or retailing a particular
product or group of products. They exist to provide common services, regulate
trading practices and represent their members to government departments.
Employers’ organisations are usually concerned with the negotiation of wages
and conditions of work in a particular industrial sector, although sometimes
one institution may combine this function with that of a trade association. At
the end of 1988 there were some 330 employers’ organisations.
Other voluntary associations include industrial development associations for
particular regions or areas and the Scottish Council (Development and Industry)
in Scotland.
Over half of companies’ funds for further investment and other purposes are
internally generated. Banks provide the chief external source of finance, but
companies have increasingly turned to equity finance in the mid-1980s. The
main forms of short-term finance available in the private sector are bank
overdrafts, trade credit and factoring (making cash available to a company in
exchange for debts owing to it). Types of medium- and long-term finance include
bank loans, the mortgaging of property and the issue of securities and shares to
248
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
MANAGEMENT
DEVELOPMENT
AND
INDUSTRIAL
TRAINING
Government
Management
Initiatives
the public through the International Stock Exchange. The leasing of equipment
may also be regarded as a form of finance. Other sources of finance for industry
include the Government, the European Community and specialist financial
institutions.
The 1980s have been particularly notable for the growth of schemes involving
venture capital (funds made available by financial institutions in support of
innovative or other new and growing business ventures). Investment by
Britain’s venture capital industry, which accounts for about half of total funds
raised in the European Community, has grown from £7 million in 1979 to over
£1,400 million in 1988. The establishment of two new securities markets under
the auspices of the International Stock Exchange and over-the-counter markets
outside the Exchange has enabled fast-developing young companies to raise
capital through share issues, even though they are not eligible for a full
Exchange listing.
Management education is provided by many polytechnics and colleges of higher
and further education, and some regional management centres have been
established in England and Wales by associations of these colleges, with several
similar organisations in Scotland. Universities make an important contribu¬
tion, especially through the full-time postgraduate programmes at business
schools such as those of London, Manchester, City, Durham, Warwick and
Strathclyde universities. Training courses for managers are offered by several
independent colleges, including the Management College (Henley-on-Thames),
Ashridge College (Berkhamsted) and the Cranfield School of Management
(Bedford). Open and distance learning opportunities are becoming more widely
available. The British Institute of Management, which aims to encourage
excellence in management, has a particular interest in management training.
There are a number of other professional bodies concerned with standards and
training in specialised branches of management.
The Management Charter Initiative was launched by the Council for Manage¬
ment Education and Development in 1987. A code of best practice for manage¬
ment development was produced in 1988, and 200 founder members were
recruited to implement it. The Initiative will redefine management qualifica¬
tions on the basis of knowledge and experience.
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) is working with other government
departments and with industry to improve management education and develop¬
ment and to spread awareness about best management practices. It strongly
supports the Management Charter Initiative (see above). The consultancy
support offered by the DTI to businesses with fewer than 500 employees also
bears directly on aspects of management (see p 249). Another programme,
‘Managing into the 90s’, is designed to encourage managers to evaluate their
function in the use of design and quality, manufacturing management, and
purchasing and supply, with a view to creating more competitive business
strategies.
The DTI has also actively encouraged the growth of links between industry
and higher education in recent years, primarily through collaborative research,
the purchase of equipment for use in higher education institutions and the
development of new engineering courses. Under the Teaching Company Scheme
young graduates undertake key projects in companies under the joint super¬
vision of academic and company staff.
‘Industry Year 1986', launched by the Royal Society of Arts with the aim of
changing attitudes to industry, was successful in establishing links between
companies and schools. The campaign, which the Government strongly sup¬
ports, is continuing under the title ‘Industry Matters’.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
249
Engineering
Council
The
Enterprise
Initiative
The Engineering Council was established under Royal Charter in 1981. Its
objectives are to promote the science and practice of engineering and to advance
education in engineering. The Council maintains a register of 300,000 char¬
tered engineers, incoiporated engineers and engineering technicians. In co¬
operation with the various professional institutions and other organisations
concerned with training in engineering, it has set standards for education,
training and experience, and accredited courses by which people qualify for
registration. The Council is advised by some 235 industrial affiliates, who
are employers of engineers, on industrial requirements for engineers and
technicians.
Government Policies and Legislation
The DTI has the main responsibility for the Government’s relations with
industry and commerce. The results of a review of policies and organisation of
the DTI were published as a White Paper, DTI—the department for Enterprise, in
1988. This confirmed the Government’s belief that economic decisions are best
taken by those competing in the market place, and that the responsibility of
government is to create the right climate for markets to work better, and to
encourage enterprise.
The Enterprise Initiative, announced at the same time, brings together a wide
range of the services that the DTI provides for industry and commerce. It
comprises various initiatives, including six consultancy initiatives, which
encourage small and medium-sized businesses to use outside consultancy
services as a regular part of their management strategy. These offer consultancy
support in design, marketing, manufacturing systems, quality, business plan¬
ning, and financial and information systems. In Scotland and Wales these
initiatives are operated by the respective Development Agencies. Assistance is
available to businesses with fewer than 500 employees; in the Assisted Areas (see
p 254) and Urban Programme Areas, two-thirds of the costs of a project are met;
elsewhere the rate is 50 per cent. Some £80 million is being provided in 1989-90
to support 1,250 consultancies a month.
The emphasis of the Department’s work is therefore increasingly on promot¬
ing open markets through competition policy, privatisation, deregulation and
international trade negotiations. Positive attitudes to enterprise are being
encouraged through improved links between business and education. Smaller
firms, in particular, are being helped to gain access to the specialised skills and
information essential to successful enterprise in a competitive market. There is
special emphasis on promoting enterprise in the less prosperous regions.
These changes to meet the needs of an expanding economy are being reflected
in the pattern of DTI spending and in that of its organisation. There has been a
marked reduction in expenditure on support for nationalised industries, a
number of which have been successfully transferred to the private sector. Within
a smaller total, expenditure on innovation has increased substantially. There
has been a shift from near-market support for individual companies towards
collaborative research. In order to emphasise the importance of markets and to
encourage the spread of best practices, the DTI Industry Divisions have been
reorganised into Market Divisions, focusing on the markets for particular goods
or sendees rather than on supplier industries or firms.
The DTI’s specific responsibilities include technology and research, overseas
trade and export promotion, competition policy and consumer affairs, company
legislation and the Patent Office. Through the Invest in Britain Bureau, it
provides advice and assistance to foreign companies on locating in Britain.
250
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Single
European
Market
Small Firms
Deregulation
Other departments whose responsibilities have a bearing on industrial and
commercial activity include the Treasury, through its responsibility for macro-
economic policies—emphasising the control of inflation and firm management
of monetary conditions—and through its policies on corporate taxation, includ¬
ing allowances for investment and for scientific research; the Department of
Employment, responsible for employment and training services, small firms
counselling services and promotion of tourism; the Departments of Energy,
Transport and the Environment; and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food. The Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland Offices are responsible for the
range of industrial policies in their areas.
The Government remains firmly committed to the objective of completing the
single European market by the target date of 1992. This will provide major
benefits to business and consumers and improve European competitiveness in
world markets. The DTI’s ‘Europe—Open for Business’ campaign is designed to
bring home to business the importance of 1992 and the need to prepare for the
single market.
The contribution of small businesses to the British economy is now well
established. Small firms bring competition, innovation and a large share of new
jobs. They account for around 25 per cent of those in employment and 20 per
cent of total turnover.
The Government’s success in lowering the rate of inflation and achieving
steady growth and lower levels of public expenditure and personal taxation has
helped to create the conditions in which people are willing to invest and start
businesses. New businesses were being set up at a net rate of around 1,400 a
week in 1989.
The Government recognises that creating a suitable economic environment is
not enough by itself. It therefore runs a number of schemes which provide either
direct assistance or advice and guidance on a wide range of business problems
affecting small firms. In addition to DTI schemes such as the consultancy
initiatives, the Department of Employment (in England) runs schemes aimed at
small firms; there are corresponding schemes in Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland. These include the Small Firms Service, which provides information,
advice and counselling to prospective and established small businesses; the
Loan Guarantee Scheme, under which the Government guarantees repayment
of 70 per cent of medium-term loans made by financial institutions (rising to 85
per cent of loans in inner city Task Force areas); the Business Expansion
Scheme, which improves the flow of equity finance to small firms by offering tax
incentives to individuals who invest in qualifying unquoted companies; and the
Enterprise Allowance Scheme, which allows unemployed people to claim an
allowance while establishing a new business. In addition, the Government has
introduced a range of tax concessions as well as training for people setting up on
their own, and has encouraged the development of new advisory services and of
new sources of venture capital within the private sector.
The Government is seeking to create a framework within which enterprise can
flourish and where barriers to entry into market areas and barriers to business
growth are kept to a minimum. All requirements placed on businesses by the
public sector have a cost and can divert scarce resources away from mainstream
commercial activities. All proposed requirements, whether of British or Euro¬
pean Community origin, are examined by the DTI’s Enterprise and Deregulation
Unit for their impact on business, and the costs to business are considered in
deciding how and whether to impose new requirements. Other government
departments with regulatory responsibilities have their own deregulation units.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
251
Privatisation
Government
Finance
Taxation
During 1989 six experimental business shops were set up in British cities,
providing a single point of contact for businesses to deal with the requirements
of various government departments and agencies. The initiative was part of the
most recent package of deregulation measures, announced in November 1988.
At the same time, the Government announced the Bridge Programme, which
provides for expanded contact between staff of both business and the Civil
Service, to increase awareness of the needs of business. A rolling programme of
annual reviews by government departments to examine their work in removing
unnecessary and outdated regulations has begun.
The Government believes that the best way to improve the performance of the
nationalised industries in the long term is to expose them to market forces,
through privatisation and the promotion of competition. Privatisation also
provides a major opportunity for the Government to pursue its policy of
widening share ownership, encouraging both employees and the general public
to take a direct stake in British industry. Employees in privatised companies are
normally given a preferential right to buy shares in the new companies. Since
1979 the Government has mounted 19 major public offers of shares, with net
proceeds of some £23,000 million, and this has led to a substantial increase in
the proportion of the population who are shareholders (estimated at over 20 per
cent in early 1989, compared with 7 per cent in 1979). Businesses which have
been privatised include British Aerospace, British Airways, British Gas, British
Steel, British Telecom, Cable and Wireless, the National Freight Consortium,
Amersham International, the Rover Group, Jaguar, Enterprise Oil, Britoil,
Associated British Ports, Rolls-Royce, Royal Ordnance, BAA (formerly the British
Airports Authority), nearly all the National Bus Company subsidiaries and much
of British Shipbuilders. Many other state enterprises have also been sold and
about 750,000 jobs have been transferred to the private sector. Legislation to
provide for the privatisation of the regional water and sewage companies in
England and Wales was passed in July 1989, with the sale of the companies
planned for later in the year. Legislation has also been passed to privatise the
electricity supply industry in Great Britain. To stimulate efficiency, the Govern¬
ment has relaxed the statutory monopolies of a number of nationalised indus¬
tries.
In 1988—89 the DTI spent some £1,560 million on regional and all other forms of
industrial support. Following the 1988 review of policy (see p 249), it is expected
that marked changes in support will occur in the next few years; spending on the
use of consultancy services by small and medium-sized businesses will increase;
and there will be a shift away from automatic and near-market support for
individual companies towards consultancy services, technology transfer and
collaborative research. Combined with the initiatives on business and educa¬
tion, management development and the encouragement of enterprise in less
prosperous areas of Britain, these changes imply an increase in spending over
that planned before the policy review.
The rates of corporate taxation have been progressively reduced. In the case of
industrial plant and machinery there is an annual allowance against profits for
tax purposes of 25 per cent (on a reducing balance basis) beginning in the year
in which expenditure occurs. There is an allowance for investment in industrial
building of 4 per cent a year (on a straight-line basis). Special arrangements
exist for short-life (usually high-technology) assets. There is a 100 per cent
allowance for capital expenditure on scientific research.
252
Technical and
Vocational
Training
Business and
Education
DESIGN,
QUALITY,
STANDARDS
AND AWARDS
Design
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A well-trained workforce is essential for economic growth, and recent technolo¬
gical advances have created a need for an even greater quantity, range
and quality of technical and vocational training, both for young people and
for adults. The main responsibility for training rests with employers and
individuals. The Business & Technician Education Council (BTEC), a privately
funded body, deals with the education and training of technicians and their
equivalents in the professions and commerce, by designing syllabuses and
validating courses offered at colleges of further education and elsewhere in
England and Wales; its Scottish counterpart is the Scottish Vocational Educa¬
tion Council.
In 1989 the first Training and Enterprise Councils were set up. They seek to
evaluate local labour markets with the help of managers and directors of
businesses, aiming to create training opportunities suited to local needs.
Employment Training, a programme operating since September 1988, com¬
bines a number of other programmes. It is administered by the Training Agency
within the Department of Employment. Another programme is the Youth
Training Scheme, which offers a course of planned work experience integrated
with off-the-job training for 16- or 17-year-old school-leavers. The aim of the
Government’s adult training strategy is to encourage employers and others to
give adult training a high priority and to secure an adequate supply of people
with up-to-date skills. There are a number of adult training programmes with
the objective of meeting national and local demands for skills.
The Open University, which provides degree courses using distance learning
techniques, notably television broadcasts, has set up the Open University
Business School, which offers part-time courses leading to a diploma in
management. The School, which is strongly supported by the British Institute of
Management, has been used by over 3,100 companies and organisations since it
opened in 1983. Managers continue to work while studying, which is of
particular use to those small companies which cannot afford to release staff on a
full-time basis.
The pilot network of City Technology Colleges, announced by the Department of
Education and Science in 1986, provides a broadly based secondary education
with a strong technological content, and involves employers in the management
of the colleges.
As part of its policy review in 1988 the DTI announced a range of other
initiatives to give both teachers and children personal experience of the world of
business. The DTI also co-operates with the Department of Education and
Science in the provision of information technology software and equipment in
schools.
Good design is seen as crucial for maintaining and improving the quality and
competitiveness of goods and services; the DTI gives priority to encouraging
greater awareness in industry and commerce (among both producers and
consumers) of the value of good design. It organises conferences to underline the
importance of design and has taken steps to include design education in the
school system and widen awareness of design in business schools.
Advice and assistance on design matters are available from the government-
sponsored Design Council. With centres in London, Cardiff, Wolverhampton,
Manchester, Belfast and Glasgow, it plans to extend its operations to assist
industry in Britain’s regions by 1990. Its activities include giving advice on
design problems, the organisation of conferences and seminars, providing help
for design education, training courses and the production of a range of
publications. The Government’s business development initiative on design,
operated by the Design Council, offers firms employing up to 500 people 5 to 15
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
253
Quality and
Standards
Measurement
Standards
days of subsidised consultancy. The Council provides annual awards for
consumer and contract goods, engineering products and components, compu¬
ter software, medical equipment, and motor vehicles and accessories. The
Chartered Society of Designers is the representative professional
body of industrial designers in Great Britain.
An important aim of government policy is to enhance the quality of British goods
and services by encouraging an integrated approach by industry and commerce
to quality at all stages of design, production, marketing and delivery to
customers.
Through its support for consultancy projects the Government is helping small
and medium-sized firms to learn about and apply quality-management techni¬
ques based on a national standard which meets international requirements. To
increase customer confidence, companies are being encouraged to obtain
certification to the standard. The National Accreditation Council for Certifica¬
tion Bodies was set up to assess and officially approve the competence and
performance of organisations undertaking such certification. Companies certi¬
fied by accredited bodies are permitted to use the national quality mark.
The British Standards Institution (BSI), a voluntary body which is responsible
for setting national standards, works with industry and government to produce
standards which are of the required quality, relevant to the needs of the market,
internationally respected, and suitable for public purchasing and regulatory
purposes. With government support, the BSI has become increasingly involved
in European and international standards-making; the common standards will
contribute to the aim of creating a single internal market in the European
Community by 1992. About a quarter of the 10,600 British Standards are now
identical with international standards. Resource, a joint venture by the BSI and
the Government, has been launched to promote collaboration with overseas
countries in standards, quality assurance, metrology and testing.
The National Physical Laboratory (NPL) is responsible for providing the measure¬
ment standards and calibration facilities necessary to ensure that measure¬
ments in Britain are made on a common basis and to the required accuracy. It
maintains links with national standards laboratories all over the world to ensure
international compatibility in standards and measurement essential for over¬
seas trade and technological co-operation. The NPL’s National Measurement
Accreditation Service (NAMAS) provides a focal point for the voluntary accredita¬
tion of calibration and testing facilities in Britain. It forms a link between the
national standards maintained by the NPL and accredited measurement labor¬
atories, including those servicing the Government, manufacturers and other
producers, contractors, regulating bodies, quality assessment and product
certification schemes, the health service and consumer bodies. NAMAS-
accredited laboratories offer calibration of scientific instruments and provide
official certificates in many areas, primarily the physical, chemical and engineer¬
ing fields, for calibration and testing. Related NPL functions are research in
scientific and technological areas of national importance, such as engineering
materials and information technology. Standards associated with analytical
measurement are the responsibility of the Laboratory of the Government
Chemist (LGC). International agreement is based on the provision of appro¬
priate standards and the utilisation of approved methods of analysis. These
standards and approved methods also form the basis for NAMAS accreditation
of laboratories carrying out analytical measurement. In addition to this work
in support of chemical analysis, the LGC undertakes research on the develop¬
ment of special materials, chemical sensors and the automation of analytical
techniques.
254
Industrial
Awards
REGIONAL
INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National Weights and Measures Laboratory is responsible for administer¬
ing the Weights and Measures Act 1985, which is largely concerned with
standards and measuring equipment for use in trade. The Government has
accepted most of the recommendations of the committee appointed to review the
metrological control of weighing and measuring equipment for commercial use,
including the introduction of a self-verification scheme. Similar arrangements
are likely to feature in new European Community directives on measuring
instruments, which will replace national legislation by 1992, ensuring free
circulation of approved equipment within the Community.
Recognition of outstanding industrial performance is conferred annually by The
Queen’s Awards for Export and Technology. The Queen’s Awards are granted on
the recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Advisory Committee, which
includes senior representatives from industry, commerce, the trade unions and
government departments. All firms incorporated in Britain are eligible to apply,
regardless of size and the products or services they provide. Other awards
include the Export Awards for Smaller Manufacturers (for firms employing fewer
than 200 people) and the MacRobert Award, the major award for engineering in
Britain (made by the Fellowship of Engineering for successful technological
innovation).
Regional industrial policy operates within a general economic framework de¬
signed to encourage enterprise and economic growth in all areas of Britain. In
some areas, however, specific additional help is needed, which is provided under
the Regional Initiative. Help is focused on the Assisted Areas—Development Areas
and Intermediate Areas (see map, opposite).
The principal instruments are regional selective assistance, available for
investment projects undertaken by firms throughout the Assisted Areas pro¬
vided they meet certain criteria, and Regional Enterprise Grants, available to
firms with fewer than 25 employees in Development Areas to support investment
and innovation. The English Industrial Estates Corporation provides industrial
and commercial premises in certain parts of the Assisted Areas in England
where private sector provision is deficient.
Regional industrial policy is the DTI’s responsibility, with similar policies
administered in Scotland by the Scottish Office and in Wales by the Welsh Office.
The Industrial Development Board, formed in 1982 under the aegis of the
Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development, offers a range of
incentives similar to those available in the Assisted Areas (in some cases at
higher rates). Incentives available to manufacturing industry include training
grants, grants for key workers moving to Northern Ireland and exemption from
local authority rates (local property taxes) for manufacturing premises. Manu¬
facturing and service industry projects which create jobs may be eligible for
interest relief grants, favourable rental terms for factories, and grants to assist
with setting-up costs and research and development costs. The Board can also
provide equity and loan capital for new and expanding businesses, assist the
development of new high-technology products and processes, and promote joint
ventures with overseas companies. Other incentives include corporation tax
relief of up to 80 per cent for certain new projects; 30 per cent grants for
approved energy conservation projects; grants to attract and retain good
management; and an advisory service on production methods. A similar range of
incentives and advisory services is available to the small business sector (firms
employing fewer than 50 people) from the Local Enterprise Development Unit.
Glasgow
Manchester
Nottingham
f ^^Birmingham
Cambridge
London
Bristol
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
i i i i i i i
l 1 1 1 1
0 20 40 60 80 miles
Development Areas
Intermediate Areas
Northern Ireland
(full range of incentives
under separate legislation)
Main offices
of Industry Departments
The Assisted Areas
castle upon Tyne
Isles of Scill)H
(Development Area)
256
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Agencies
Rural
Industries
European
Community
Regional Policy
and Aid
European
Regional
Development
Fund
The Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies promote industrial development
in their respective countries. They encourage investment by overseas com¬
panies, provide equity and loan capital for industrial projects (which they are
expected to do with a maximum of private sector participation), provide
government factories, and have powers to assist small firms, promote new
technology and undertake land reclamation and urban renewal. In 1988 the
Government published proposals to create a new agency in Scotland, called
Scottish Enterprise, which would incorporate some of the Scottish Development
Agency’s functions and administer training programmes broadly similar to
those in the rest of Britain.
The Rural Development Commission is responsible for advising the Government
on issues affecting rural England and for promoting its economic and social
development. It provides small factories and workshops which are built and
managed by English Estates, and administers a grant scheme for the conversion
of redundant buildings to industrial or commercial premises. The Commission’s
Business Service provides technical, management and financial advice, training
facilities and loans to small businesses from 32 county offices. The Commission
also supports voluntary bodies in rural areas to encourage community activity
and self-help and provides finance for small-scale rural housing and transport
schemes. Though its responsibility extends over the whole of rural England, the
Commission’s resources are concentrated in the areas of greatest need, which
are designated as Rural Development Areas.
In Scotland and Wales similar services are provided, generally through the
development agencies, but separate bodies cater for two particular rural areas.
In Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development Board provides loans and
grants for viable projects in manufacturing, agriculture, fisheries and services,
makes available training grants and advice, and builds factories. The Develop¬
ment Board for Rural Wales (usually referred to as ‘Mid-Wales Development’)
provides factories, key worker housing and advice for small businesses. It has
a general responsibility to promote the economic and social well-being of
mid-Wales and a particular responsibility for the new town of Newtown,
Powys.
The European Community seeks to increase the degree of economic cohesion
and to ensure a more balanced distribution of economic activities within the
Community. The principal responsibility for helping depressed areas remains
with national authorities but the Community may complement schemes
through aid from a number of sources.
The European Regional Development Fund was established in 1975. Its purpose
is to contribute to the correction of the main regional imbalances within the
Community by participating in the development and structural adjustment of
regions whose development is lagging behind and in the conversion of declining
industrial regions. Following decisions taken in 1988, the Fund is to be
considerably enlarged and further concentrated on the regions of greatest need,
including Northern Ireland. By 1988 about £395 million had been allocated to
Britain, mainly for the Assisted Areas (see p 254) and Northern Ireland, since
1975. In 1989 the European Commission extended eligibility to certain non-
Assisted Areas in Britain. In addition, about £170 million has been allocated to
Britain for specific programmes running over several years to improve the
environment and encourage the development of employment in certain steel,,
shipbuilding, textile and fisheries closure areas and in the border regions of
Northern Ireland.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
257
European
Investment
Bank
European Coal
and Steel
Community
Competition
Policy
The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a self-governing institution set up by
the Treaty of Rome with member states of the European Community subscrib¬
ing to its capital. The Bank’s aims are to help to stimulate development in
less-favoured regions, to modernise or convert industries, to help to create new
activities and to offset structural difficulties affecting certain sectors. The EIB
also serves projects of common interest to several member states or the
Community as a whole. It has lent nearly £4,000 million since 1973 for projects
in Britain, mostly for public works, infrastructure works, and manufacturing
projects in the Assisted Areas.
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) provides loans and grants to
encourage rational distribution of production and a high level of productivity in
the coal and steel industries while safeguarding employment and avoiding
unfair competition. Areas eligible for aid are coal industry projects, conversion
schemes, construction of housing for workers, allowances for redeployed
workers, and research, including research of a social or medical nature.
Exchange risk cover may be provided by the Government on certain ECSC loans
for projects qualifying for regional selective assistance. The British borrower
then takes on only a sterling liability.
Functioning and Regulation of Markets
While preferring to let markets operate with as little regulatory machinery as
possible, the Government recognises that action is needed from time to time to
ensure that markets remain open and fair. Therefore, the stimulation of
competition and the control of practices which are restrictive or anti-competitive
are important features of government policy. Responsibilities are exercised by
the DTI and by the Office of Fair Trading, a government agency headed by a
Director General.
Related policies concern consumer and investor protection, the conduct of
companies and their officers, insolvency, and the openness of markets for
foreign trade and investment. This section concentrates on policies covering
domestic markets.
Within the public sector the Government has taken a number of steps to
increase the exposure of trading organisations to competition, notably by
adopting a policy of privatising them where this is practicable. Within the DTI
the work of the Enterprise and Deregulation Unit is specifically concerned with
reducing regulations which inhibit competition, innovation or consumer choice
(see pp 250-51).
Competition policy is supported by machinery for scrutinising and regulating
monopolies, mergers, anti-competitive practices and restrictive trade practices,
and by powers to regulate any structured changes, anti-competitive practice, or
other behaviour found to operate against the public interest. The Director
General of Fair Trading administers the Fair Trading Act 1973, which deals with
monopolies and mergers; the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, which deals
with restrictive trading agreements; the Resale Prices Act 1976, which deals
with resale price maintenance; the Competition Act 1980, which deals with
anti-competitive practices; and those provisions of the Financial Services Act
1986 which apply competition policy considerations to the financial services
sector. In 1989 the Government published a White Paper on mergers and
restrictive trade practices (see pp 259-60).
The Government is taking steps to increase competition in professional
services, through relaxation of unjustifiable restrictive practices including
restrictions on fee scales and on advertising. The opticians’ monopoly on the
258
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Monopolies and
Mergers
dispensing of spectacles and the solicitors’ monopoly on conveyancing have been
ended. Certain professional groups (for example, accountants, solicitors, veter¬
inary surgeons, stockbrokers, dentists and surveyors) have eased restrictions on
advertising by their members. During 1989, undertakings were being sought by
the Director General of Fair Trading from the doctors’, consulting engineers’ and
osteopaths’ professional bodies that they would revise their restrictions on
advertising as recommended by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (see
below). Building societies are now allowed to offer a greater range of services
than in the past, which is bringing more competition to the fields of financial
services and estate agency. The Government is considering steps which it might
take to end the separation of professional practice between barristers and
solicitors and thus increase competition.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Director General of Fair
Trading can refer monopolies for investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission, an independent body whose members are drawn from a variety of
backgrounds, including lawyers, economists, industrialists and trade union¬
ists. The legislation defines a monopoly as a situation where at least a quarter of
a particular kind of goods or service is supplied by a single person or a group of
connected companies or by two or more people acting in a way which prevents,
restricts, or distorts competition. Local monopolies can also be referred to the
Commission. If the Commission finds that a monopoly operates against the
public interest, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry has powers to take
action to remedy or prevent the harm which the Commission considers may
exist. Alternatively the Director General may be asked to negotiate undertakings
to remedy the adverse effects identified by the Commission.
The Government believes that the market is a better judge than itself of the
advantages and disadvantages of mergers. Accordingly, policy provides for the
great majority of proposed mergers which do not pose a threat to competition to
be decided by the market. However, it recognises the need to control mergers
which could lead to a significant reduction in competition or otherwise raise
matters of public concern; this is provided for by the Fair Trading Act 1973.
Proposals for a merger (defined as occurring when two or more enterprises are
brought under common ownership or control) may be referred to the Commis¬
sion by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, taking account of advice
from the Director General, if the merger would result in a monopoly or if the total
value of gross assets to be taken over would exceed £30 million. If the
Commission finds that a merger or proposed merger may be expected to operate
against the public interest, the Secretary of State can prevent it or impose
conditions on it either by asking the Director General to obtain suitable
undertakings from the companies involved to remedy the adverse effects
identified, or by making a statutory order. If the merger has already taken place,
the Secretary of State can take similar action to reverse it. The Fair Trading Act
1973 contains special provisions for newspaper mergers.
The conclusions of the review of mergers policy, published in 1988, reaffirmed
that merger reference decisions would continue to be made mainly on competi¬
tion grounds; and, in evaluating the competitive situation, account is taken of
the extent of competition in the domestic market from overseas sources and of
the competitive position of British firms in overseas markets.
Three legislative changes were proposed in the policy paper, aimed at improv¬
ing merger control procedures: a voluntary procedure for pre-notification of
proposed mergers which would, in straightforward cases, permit very prompt
clearance; acceptance of statutory undertakings by the parties concerned so as
to obviate the need for a full investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission; and introduction of a charge to meet the costs of merger control.
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
259
Financial
Services
European
Community
Anti¬
competitive
Practices
Restrictive
Trade
Practices
The Competition Act 1980 empowers the Secretary of State to refer to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission any questions concerning the efficiency
and costs of, the service provided by, or the possible abuse of a monopoly
situation by, certain bodies in the public sector. A number of inquiries are
carried out each year and the results are reported to Parliament.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986, the Director General of Fair Trading is
required to consider the implications for competition of rules, regulations,
guidance and other arrangements and practices of the regulatory bodies,
investment exchanges and clearing houses, and to report to the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry where a significant or potentially significant effect
on competition has been identified. If the Secretary of State agrees with this view
and does not consider that the provisions are necessary for the protection of
investors the Secretary of State may refuse or revoke recognition of the
organisation or require it to make alterations to its provisions.
The objective of the European Community’s competition policy is to ensure that
there is free and fair competition in trade between member states and that the
government trade barriers which the Treaty of Rome seeks to dismantle are not
replaced by private barriers which fragment the common market. The competi¬
tion rules are set out in articles of the Treaty of Rome which are directly
applicable to member states and in regulations made under the articles. In most
areas of economic activity their enforcement is primarily the responsibility of the
European Commission, which has powers to investigate and terminate alleged
infringements and to impose fines.
The Treaty prohibits agreements or concerted practices which may affect
trade between member states and have as their object, or effect, the prevention,
restriction or distortion of competition within the common market. Agreements
meeting specified criteria may be exempted from this prohibition and, subject to
particular conditions and safeguards, certain categories of agreement are
exempted completely: these include agreements in respect of exclusive distribu¬
tion and purchasing, patent licensing, research and development, franchising,
specialisation, cargo liner conferences, certain aspects of European Community
air services, and motor vehicle distribution and servicing. The Treaty also
prohibits any abuse of a dominant position within the common market or a
substantial part of it to the extent that it affects trade between member states.
Subject to limited exemptions, the Director General of Fair Trading can
investigate any business practice (whether in the public or private sectors)
which may restrict, distort or prevent competition in the production, supply or
acquisition of goods or services in Britain. If the Director General concludes that
a practice is anti-competitive, an undertaking may be sought from the business
responsible for the practice or, in default of such an undertaking, refer the
matter to the Commission to establish whether it operates against the public
interest. On an adverse finding by the Commission, the Secretary of State has
powers to take remedial action.
Under the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, certain kinds of restrictive
trading agreements have to be notified to the Director General of Fair Trading for
registration. Broadly, an agreement is registrable if two or more people who are
party to it supply goods or services in Britain and accept some limitation on their
freedom to make their own decisions about matters such as prices or conditions
of sale. Failure to register an agreement within the required period means that
the restrictions are void and the parties may be liable to legal proceedings. Once
an agreement has been registered, the Director General is under a general duty
260
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consumer
Protection
to refer it to the Restrictive Practices Court, and the Court must declare the
restrictions in it contrary to the public interest unless the parties can satisfy the
Court by reference to criteria laid down in the Act that this is not the case.
Restrictions declared contrary to the public interest are void, and the Court can
order the parties not to give effect to them or make any similar agreement. In
practice, however, the great, majority of agreements never reach the Court
because, for example, the parties elect to give up the restrictions rather than go
to court, or the Secretary of State accepts the Director General’s advice that the
restrictions are not significant enough to warrant reference to the Court.
In 1989 the Government published a White Paper which set out proposals to
amend the existing legislation. These would prohibit agreements which had the
effect of preventing, restricting or distorting competition unless an exemption
had been granted because they had offsetting economic benefits. The present
requirement to register agreements would be abolished. The powers of the
competition authorities would be strengthened and financial penalties for
violation of the prohibition would be introduced. Decisions of the authorities
would be subject to appeal to the Restrictive Practices Court and the scope for
private actions extended. Existing exemptions from the Restrictive Trade
Practices Act—for example, those for many professional services—would not
automatically be carried over into the new legislation.
The Government believes that consumers are best protected by open and
competitive markets offering the widest range of choice in goods and services,
backed by adequate information to assist consumer choice. In addition to laws
designed to benefit customers by encouraging effective competition, there is a
body of legislation whose purpose is to ensure that consumers are adequately
protected.
The Fair Trading Act 1973 provides machinery (headed by the Director
General of Fair Trading) for the continuous review of consumer affairs, for
action to deal with trading practices which unfairly affect consumers’ interests,
for action against persistent offenders under existing law, and for the negotia¬
tion of self-regulatory codes of practice to raise trading standards. The Director
General is responsible for the operation of legislation which regulates consumer
credit and hire business and estate agency work. The Director General also has
responsibilities under legislation controlling misleading advertisements.
The consumer’s interests with regard to the purity of foods, the description
and performance of goods and services and pricing information are safeguarded
by the Food Act 1984, the Medicines Act 1968, the Misrepresentations Act 1967,
theTrade Descriptions Act 1968, the Prices Act 1974, the Unfair Contract Terms
Act 1977, the Sale of Goods Act 1979, the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982
and the Consumer Protection Act 1987. The marking and accuracy of quantities
are regulated by the Weights and Measures Act 1985. The Consumer Credit Act
1974 provides comprehensive protection for consumers who enter into credit or
hire transactions. The Consumer Protection Act 1987 implements a harmonised
European Community regime of civil law covering product liability; establishes a
general criminal offence of supplying unsafe consumer goods; makes it an
offence to give any misleading price indication; and consolidates powers pro¬
vided under safety-related Acts.
The Financial Services Act 1986 offers greater protection to investors by
establishing a new regulatory framework for the industry.
The European Community’s consumer programme covers a number of impor¬
tant topics, such as health and safety, protection of the consumer’s economic
interests when purchasing goods and services, promotion of consumer educa¬
tion and strengthening the representation of consumers. The views of British
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
261
Consumer
Advice and
Information
Company Law
consumer organisations are represented by the Consumers in the European
Community Group (UK).
Advice and information on consumer matters is provided to the general public at
local level by Citizens Advice Bureaux and the trading standards or consumer
protection departments of local authorities and in some areas by specialist
Consumer Advice Centres.
The independent, non-statutory National Consumer Council (and associated
councils for Scotland and Wales), which receives government finance, ensures
that the consumer s view is made known to those in government, industry and
elsewhere whose decisions affect the consumer’s interest. In Northern Ireland
the General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland has wide-ranging responsi¬
bilities in the field of consumer protection and consumer affairs in general.
Consumer councils for the energy, rail and other nationalised industries and
the privatised gas industry investigate questions of concern to the consumer,
while some trade associations in industry and commerce have established codes
of practice. In addition, several private organisations work to further consumer
interests. The largest is the Consumers’ Association, funded by the subscrip¬
tions of its membership of over 1 million. The Association conducts an extensive
programme of comparative testing of goods and investigation of services; its
views and test reports are published in its monthly magazines and other publi¬
cations. The Association also provides a legal advice service for an additional
subscription. Local consumer groups, many belonging to a national federation,
also promote consumers’ interests and provide information and advice.
The formation and conduct of companies is regulated by the Companies Act
1985. Incorporation’ involves registering with the Registrar of Companies in
Cardiff, Edinburgh or Belfast, depending on whether a company’s registered
office is in England or Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland. The Act also deads
with capital structure, the rights and duties of directors and members, and the
preparation and filing of accounts. Most corporate businesses are ‘limited
liability’ companies. Each company is a legal entity distinct from its members,
who are not as such liable for its debts. The liability of members of a limited
company is limited to contributing an amount related to their shareholding. In
unincorporated businesses, such as sole proprietorships or partnerships, by
contrast, individuals are personally liable for any business debts (except where a
member of a partnership is a limited liability company).
Companies may be either public or private. A company must satisfy three
conditions before it can be a public limited company (pic): it must be limited by
shares and have a share capital; it must state in its memorandum of association
that it is to be a public limited company; and it must meet specified mini¬
mum capital requirements. All other registered companies are, by definition,
private companies and, as such, prohibited from offering their shares to the
public.
The consolidation of the Companies Acts 1948-83 restates existing law in a
clearer and more convenient form, and makes application and interpretation
easier for those concerned with the regulation of company affairs. The consolida¬
tion resulted in the Companies Act 1985 and three smaller Acts: the Business
Names Act 1985, which regulates the names under which people may carry on
business in Great Britain; the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985,
which restates the law on insider dealing; and the Companies Consolidation
(Consequential Provisions) Act 1985, which deals with the technical aspects of
the consolidation. (Powers to investigate suspected insider dealing were streng¬
thened in the Financial Services Act 1986, and the penalties for such dealing
have been increased.)
262
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Industrial and
Intellectual
Property
The Insolvency Act 1985 affects both corporate and individual insolvency
proceedings. It introduced for England, Wales and Scotland a licensing pro¬
cedure to ensure the professional competence, integrity and independence of
people who act as trustees of bankrupt individuals, or as liquidators, receivers or
administrators of insolvent companies. The Act also amended and sup¬
plemented the legislation relating to the winding-up of limited companies and
the appointment of receivers in England, Wales and Scotland. In so doing the Act
made substantial changes to parts of the Companies Act 1985. Subsequently
these parts were consolidated with the Insolvency Act 1985 into the Insolvency
Act 1986 and the Company Directors Disqualification Act 1986. A new
framework for dealing with directors of limited companies who are demonstrably
unfit to act as such came into operation in April 1986: they can be disqualified
from office and, in some cases, held personally liable for a company’s debts. It is
now also possible for individual and corporate debtors to reach agreements with
their creditors without the necessity for formal bankruptcy or insolvency
proceedings. The law relating to individual insolvency proceedings in Scotland is
now dealt with separately. Legislation analogous to that formulated for the rest
of Britain exists to define insolvency and bankruptcy laws in Northern Ireland.
To improve the investigation and prosecution of fraud, a Serious Fraud Office
has been set up to collaborate with police work on fraud cases; restrictions on
the use of documentary evidence in court cases have been relaxed; and court
procedures have been streamlined.
During 1989, legislation was under consideration which provided for an
updated system of company law which would reflect changes or prospective
changes in the business environment. It would also permit the implementation
of changes in policy aimed at reducing unnecessary burdens on business,
change existing rules for the disclosure of interest in shares and refine and
strengthen powers to investigate companies.
There is a substantial body of legislation designed to secure the rights of the
originators of inventions, new industrial designs and trade marks. These
matters are administered by the Patent Office, which includes the Design
Registry and the Trade Marks Registry. The Patent Office is a division of the
Department of Trade and Industry. Protection is also available under the
European Patent Convention and the Patent Co-operation Treaty, and benefits
may be claimed in other countries by virtue of the International Convention for
the Protection of Industrial Property.
The Government is concerned to encourage innovation by providing a more
adequate legal and administrative system for the protection of the ownership of
ideas by means of patents, registered designs, trade marks and copyright, and to
improve awareness of the value of these intellectual property rights and of their
accessibility and usage, particularly by individuals and small businesses.
Measures taken in recent years include a sharp increase in penalties for making
and trading in pirate sound and film recordings (including video); the extension
of copyright protection to owners of computer software; the widening of the law
on trade marks to embrace services; and the introduction of powers for customs
authorities to prevent the entry of counterfeit goods. Further fundamental
changes were introduced in the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, which
reformed and restated the law to combat the unauthorised reproduction of
copyright material, provided a new form of protection for designs, established a
framework of civil law for the protection of performers, and made the arrange¬
ments for litigation regarding patents cheaper and simpler.
Research and Innovation
Britain was a pioneer in both computing and telecommunications and remains
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
263
Research
Policy
Research and
Development
Expenditure
Research and
Technology
Initiative
Collaborative
Research
among the leading nations in the production of micro- and mini-computers as
well as in the provision of computing services and systems.
British firms are also in the forefront of technical innovation in the aerospace
industry, especially in the application of electronics. In the pharmaceuticals
sector, the three best-selling drugs in the world in 1987 were discovered and
produced in British laboratories. In the field of medical technology British
companies and hospitals have been among the leaders in applying techniques
such as magnetic resonance imaging and laser surgery.
Biotechnology has gained a new impetus from research achievements in
genetic engineering and cell fusion. The DTI and other government bodies are
encouraging the exploitation of new developments. A Biotechnology Unit at the
Laboratory of the Government Chemist is the focus for government co-operation
with industry.
Priorities in science and technology policy are decided by ministers collectively
under the leadership of the Prime Minister. Ministers are assisted by the
Advisory Council on Science and Technology (ACOST) which was set up in 1987
and maintains a secretariat in the Cabinet Office. In general the Government’s
view is that research and development with obvious commercial application
should be the responsibility of industry. The Government funds basic and
strategic research to provide the foundations for future exploitation. It favours a
selective approach to funding based primarily on the scientific quality of
research, but it is for industry to identify important areas and decide what
should be exploited.
The Government sees the prime responsibility for increasing expenditure on
industrial research and development as belonging to firms themselves. It
considers that companies’ profitability should enable them to provide more
funding in this important area.
Industrial expenditure on research and development in 1987 was £6,337
million, of which £1,229 million came from government sources, £784 million
from overseas and £4,324 million from other sources (mostly from private
sector companies themselves). The main areas of expenditure were electronics
(£1,855 million), chemicals (£1,303 million), aerospace (£871 million), motor
vehicles (£450 million), and mechanical engineering (£286 million).
Following the DTI’s review of its policies in 1988 it is concentrating on
encouraging collaborative research projects, both in Britain and internationally,
and on assisting the transfer of technology, especially that between the academic
world and industry. In consequence it has ended most of its schemes of support
to single companies, although it is continuing to provide encouragement for
small high-technology companies through the Small Firms Merit Award for
Research and Technology (SMART) competition, and for very small companies in
the Development Areas (see map, p 255). The policy is focused on situations in
which research is necessary before commercial applications can be developed or
in which the benefits of research are likely to be widespread.
In order to maximise the strengths of industries and researchers, both in
Britain and abroad, particularly in Europe, the DTI encourages British com¬
panies to participate in technological collaboration with other firms and re¬
search communities. There are four main ways in which collaborative research
is encouraged and supported:
1. The LINK programme encourages companies to undertake joint research
with higher education institutions and research councils. The research is
pre-competitive but industrially relevant.
264
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Technology
Transfer
DTI Research
Establishments
2. Eureka is a scheme to encourage European co-operation in the development
and production of high-technology products with global sales potential, and
has the support of 19 European governments and the European Commis¬
sion. British companies and research institutions are full participants in 86
of the 297 projects announced and have expressed an interest in around
another 10.
3. National collaborative research programmes promote longer-term industri¬
ally led projects between British companies in advanced technologies. The
role of the DTI in these is to help establish the collaborative links both among
firms and between firms and the research community at the pre-competitive
stage. The DTI is currently running collaborative programmes in advanced
robotics, gallium arsenide (a semi-conductor material with the potential to
provide very fast microelectronic operations), and high temperature super¬
conductivity (electrical conduction with zero resistance).
4. General industrial collaborative projects have a variety of roles. Support is
given to organisations serving the research and development needs of
industries in which small and medium-sized firms predominate. Some
projects encourage the adoption of technology originating in the science
base, particularly in the Government’s research establishments. Others are
collaborative projects involving only industrial participants in joint research
for companies with similar interests.
Within the context of these policies the Government has considered the next
stage in a national collaborative research programme in information technology.
The Government has already agreed to support ESPRIT II (European Strategic
Programme of Research into Information Technology), for which there will be a
British contribution through the Community budget of some £200 million. The
Government also recognises that some resources should be devoted to a national
initiative complementary to ESPRIT. Accordingly the DTI has earmarked £34
million for the period 1988-92 for programmes in this area, and the Science and
Engineering Research Council plans to devote some £57 million up to 1994 to
related academic research, mainly in partnership with companies.
British companies are also encouraged to participate in European Com¬
munity research and development programmes.
The DTI aims to encourage technology transfer, particularly in three areas: links
between industry and educational institutions, research councils and govern¬
ment research establishments; the access of small firms to sources of tech¬
nology, especially in those localities where technology transfer networks are least
developed; and the diffusion of new technologies likely to have pervasive
applications but in novel and unfamiliar ways, often requiring changes in other
aspects of existing products and processes.
The range of the DTI’s programmes includes; the establishment of regional
technology centres; training, demonstrator and awareness programmes in
modern manulacturing techniques and technologies; and inward technology
transfer.
The Department’s research establishments are the National Physical Laboratory
(see p 253), the National Engineering Laboratory (research and development
in mechanical engineering, including manufacturing systems and robotics,
materials applications, thermodynamics and fluid power systems), the Warren
Spring Laboratory (environmental process engineering) and the Laboratory of
the Government Chemist (see p 253).
FRAMEWORK OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
265
British
Technology
Group
Following a review into the future structure of the four establishments, it was
announced in 1988 that they should concentrate on research required by the
Government rather than on industrially relevant research and development. In
the case of the National Engineering Laboratory, where roughly three-quarters
of the work is for the benefit of industry, it was thought appropriate that
ownership should eventually be transferred to the private sector. Warren Spring
Laboratory has become an executive agency within the public sector in order to
increase its flexibility and responsibility. Consideration is also being given to
establishing the National Physical Laboratory and the Laboratory of the Govern¬
ment Chemist as executive agencies.
British Technology Group (BTG) promotes the development of new technology
into commercial products, particularly where the technology originates from
public sector sources, such as universities, polytechnics, research councils and
government research establishments. It offers to take responsibility for protect¬
ing and licensing inventions from these sources, provides funds for develop¬
ment, seeks licensees and negotiates licence agreements with industry. As part
of its technology transfer role BTG also provides finance to British industry to
encourage innovation, most commonly through equity or project finance.
Project finance offers companies up to 50 per cent of their development costs.
BTG also helps companies with licensing exploitation of their developed inven¬
tions overseas. BTG approaches transactions on a commercial basis and expects
to recover its investment by means of a percentage levy on sales of the resulting
product or process. In cases where a particular technology requires the setting
up of a new company, BTG can perform a catalytic role in launching start-up
companies.
BTG currently has a portfolio of 6,788 British patents and patent applica¬
tions, 537 licensees in Britain and overseas, 495 development projects at
universities and other public sector institutions, and 170 projects with indus¬
trial companies. Its licensing activities provide some 86 per cent of its income.
Some of the major technical achievements which it has exploited or supported
are cephalosporin antibiotics, pyrethin analogues, cancellous bone pins,
cholesterol assays, dental silicate cement and magnetic resonance imaging.
Structure
Growth
Manufacturing and
Service Industries
The manufacturing and service industries, together with construction, account
for about 93 per cent of Britain’s gross domestic product (GDP), the remainder
being accounted for by energy production and agriculture. As in other developed
countries, rising living standards have led to a faster growth of demand for
services than for manufactures in recent decades, so that the proportion of GDP
accounted for by services has increased steadily and that of manufacturing has
fallen. The service industries described in this chapter are the traded ones such
as business services, distribution, and travel and tourism. Financial and
professional services and large non-traded service sectors such as education,
health, public administration and defence are dealt with in other chapters.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing accounted for 24 per cent of gross domestic product in 1988 and
for about one-fifth of the workforce in employment. Around 80 per cent of visible
exports consisted of manufactured or semi-manufactured goods.
Most manufacturing is carried out by private enterprise. The Government
continues to reduce the extent of state ownership of industry. Following a share
flotation in November 1988, the British Steel Corporation was returned to the
private sector, and by early 1989 several public sector shipyards had been sold to
private interests.
Table 18 shows the number of businesses in manufacturing in 1988. About
two-thirds of those employing over 1,000 people were in engineering (excluding
instrument engineering), metals and minerals, and vehicle manufacturing. The
ten largest manufacturing concerns (by £ million turnover in the latest financial
year) are BAT Industries (11,255), Imperial Chemical Industries (11,123),
Hanson Trust (6,682), Grand Metropolitan (5,706), Unilever (5,428), General
Electric Company (5,247), Ford Motor Company (5,211), Allied Lyons (4,236),
British Aerospace (4,075) and Gallaher (3,887).
Manufacturing output, output per head and profitability have all risen from the
low point of the recession of 1980—81. In 1988 output was 23 per cent higher
than in 1981 (see Table 19). Output per head increased by about 16 per cent
between 1985 and 1988—a better record than that of the other major industrial¬
ised economies. Net manufacturing profitability reached 9-2 per cent in 1987,
the highest real rate of return on capital for 18 years, the level having risen
steadily from a little more than 2 per cent in 1981. The index of output finally
exceeded its 1979 level in 1987 and reached 114-2 in 1988 (1985—100). Part of
the improvement in productivity reflects the shedding of labour in the early
1980s which firms undertook in response to the recession. Manufacturing
employment fell from 71 million in 1979 to 5-8 million in 1982; in 1988 it was
51 million. Productivity, however, has continued to increase.
The recovery since 1981 has been most notable in chemicals and electrical and
instrument engineering, both in terms of output and productivity. Productivity
268
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 18: Manufacturing—Size of Businesses by Turnover and Employment
Turnover size
(£’000)
Number of
businesses3
1988
Employment
size
Number of
businesses3
1988
21—50b
51-100
101-250
251-500
501-1,000
1,001-5,000
over 5,000
38,036
25,923
29,381
17,221
11,878
13,976
5,621
1-9
10-19
20-49
50-99
100-199
200-499
500-999
1,000 and over
105,936
17,152
16,533
7,370
4,768
3,240
913
452
Total
142,036
Total
156,364
Source: Size analyses of United Kingdom businesses 1988, Business Monitor PA 1003.
a Including companies, public corporations, partnerships, sole proprietors and non-profit-making bodies.
b The figures are compiled from value added tax returns and exclude businesses with a turnover below the tax
threshold (£20,500 in 1986—87, the period to which most turnover figures relate).
has also grown sharply in metal manufacturing (see Table 19), where there has
been extensive reorganisation and modernisation.
Investment in manufacturing tends to be cyclical and 1984 saw the beginning
of an upturn following a decline after 1979. In terms of constant (1985) prices
Table 19: Indices of Manufacturing Output (1985 = 100)
Share of
output 1985
(weight per 1,000)
1982
1987
1988
Chemicals and man-made
fibres
Metal manufacturing
Other minerals and mineral
products
Electrical and instrument
engineering
Mechanical engineering
Other metal goods
Motor vehicles and parts
Aerospace and other
transport equipment
Food, drink and tobacco
Textiles
Clothing, footwear and
leather
Paper, printing and
publishing
Other manufacturing
103
38
51
142
123
54
55
54
132
32
36
103
80
84-9
92- 5
93- 5
76-1
97- 6
93-9
91-8
108-8
98- 9
91- 5
87- 3
92- 5
88- 2
109-0
108-6
106-8
106-6
97-4
103-1
105-4
111-1
103- 3
104- 5
102-2
114- 4
115- 3
114-2
121-6
117- 1
118- 8
105-9
110-4
116-8
107-4
105-5
102-2
102-4
125-9
127-8
Total
1,000£
91-1
106-6
114-2
Source: Central Statistical Office.
a The difference between the total and the sum of its component parts is due to rounding.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
269
High-
technology
Industries
Take-up of
Advanced
Technology
fixed investment increased by 29 per cent between 1984 and 1988. Total fixed
capital expenditure in manufacturing (excluding leased assets) at current prices
was £11,431 million in 1988, comprising £9,392 million in plant and machin-
ery, £1,258 million in new building work and £781 million in vehicles.
Investment by sector is shown in Table 20. In addition, assets worth a further
£1,221 million were leased to manufacturers by the financial community.
The underlying level of exports of manufactured goods has risen in volume
terms. On the basis of overseas trade statistics, the index stood at 118-6 in 1988
(1985=100). This represented a considerable recovery from 1981. Manufactur¬
ing exports rose to £66,000 million in 1988, on an industry basis, compared
with £40,000 million in 1983 and £34,800 million in 1980, at current prices.
Manufacturing exports accounted for just over 30 per cent of total sales in 1988.
Among the leading exports in 1988 were electrical, electronic and instrument
engineering products (£10,900 million, excluding the value of electrical instru¬
ments and control systems and instrument engineering), chemicals and man¬
made fibres (£10,950 million), motor vehicles and other transport equipment
(£10,970 million), mechanical engineering and metal goods (£9,480 million),
metal manufacturing and mineral products (£5,575 million) and aerospace
products (£5,240 million).
Import volumes rose strongly in the 1980s, the index reaching 121-4 in 1983
and 137-7 in 1988. Imports were valued at £83,327 million in 1988. Manufac¬
turing imports accounted for about 36 per cent of home demand in 1988.
The high-technology manufacturing industries in Britain divide into the broad
categories of electrical, electronic and instrument engineering, chemicals and
aerospace. The definition is arrived at primarily by selecting industries with the
highest levels of research and development spending in relation to their gross
output. In some cases assessments of the ratio of scientific and technical staff to
other staff are also counted.
Most of the electrical and electronic industries count for inclusion: office
machinery, electronic data-processing equipment, basic electrical equipment,
telecommunications equipment, electric instruments and control systems,
radio and electronic capital goods, and components. Within instrument en¬
gineering, precision equipment for measuring and checking, and medical,
optical, photographic and filming equipment are included. In chemicals the
definition covers plastics materials, synthetic resins, synthetic rubbers and
pharmaceuticals. Aerospace production as a whole is defined as high-
technology.
The high-technology industries have shown strong growth in recent years
with levels of output, productivity and exports well above the average for
manufacturing. High-technology manufacturing sectoral growth now exceeds
manufacturing industrial growth as a whole.
Microelectronics are increasingly used in production processes in Britain.
Computer-aided design (CAD) facilities with mechanical design applications
have been taken up by about 60 per cent of all engineering plants (a higher
percentage in the case of firms involved in instrument, electrical and vehicle
engineering). In 1988 the proportion of companies using computers for some
aspect of manufacturing ranged from 67 per cent for firms employing between
100 and 199 people to 91 per cent for firms employing more than 500 people.
The number of British firms using robots has more than doubled since 1984.
Many British concerns are also making use of advanced materials, such as
carbon fibre composites in the aerospace industry, new types of plastics in the
automotive sector and high-fibre cholesterol-free protein in food production.
In the traditional branches of heavy industry, re-equipment and rationalisa¬
tion has led to significant improvements in productivity in recent years. For
270
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE SECTORS
OF MANU¬
FACTURING
Chemicals and
Man-made
Fibres
example, British Steel’s modernisation of its facilities at Port Talbot in south
Wales and elsewhere helped the company to raise labour productivity levels
above those of its Federal German and Japanese competitors. The widespread
adoption of Advanced Manufacturing Techniques (AMT) has enabled the motor
vehicle industry to become more efficient. This sector spent almost twice as
much on research and development in 1987 than it did four years earlier.
The Government provides extensive financial assistance to companies and
research organisations seeking to develop and improve the technologies needed
by industry. It has, for example, made available resources to encourage and
assist companies to take advantage of the emerging technologies of multi-vendor
computer communications.
The relative sizes of the various branches of manufacturing are shown in the
first columns of Tables 19 and 20. Table 20 also shows employment, productivity
and investment levels in each industry. A more detailed description of the main
branches is given in the sections that follow. The statistics in tables 21-29 are
supplied by the Department of Trade and Industry. Sales figures given are for the
sale of the principal products of each industry, so that they exclude, for example,
any non-electrical goods produced by firms classified as part of the electronics
industry. Where reference is made in the text to the total sales of an industry, the
total includes principal products, merchanted goods, the sale of waste products,
services and work done. For this reason, total sales figures are generally higher
than those given for principal products. In some cases, particularly in the
services sector, new figures are gathered at intervals of several years by
government agencies. In all cases, the figures given are for the most recent year
available.
Britain’s chemicals industry is the third largest in Western Europe and the fifth
largest in the non-communist world. Nearly half of its production of principal
products is exported, and in 1988 it had a trade surplus of £2,054 million. One
company, Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), accounts for a substantial part of
the industry’s production and is the fourth largest chemicals company in the
world. Traditionally Britain has been a major producer of basic industrial
chemicals, such as inorganic and basic organic chemicals, plastics and fertilis¬
ers. Although these sectors still make up about 40 per cent of the industry’s
output, the most rapid growth in recent years has been in the production of
speciality and ‘problem-solving’ chemicals, especially pharmaceuticals, pesti¬
cides and cosmetics. The value of chemicals produced increased by 11 per cent
between 1986 and 1987.
Pharmaceutical products exported in 1988 were valued at over £1,800 million;
the trade surplus of £867 million in pharmaceuticals was the second largest of
all manufacturing sectors. British firms manufacture about one-fifth of the
world’s 50 best-selling drugs. Glaxo’s ulcer treatment and Id’s beta-blocker
Tenormin, which reduces high blood pressure, are the first and third best¬
selling drugs in the world respectively. The United States subsidiary of Britain’s
Wellcome Foundation has been responsible for the first drug for the treatment of
HIV and AIDS (Retrovir) to win government approval and also for the first
routine treatment for the herpes group of viruses (Zovirax). Other recent major
developments pioneered in Britain are semi-synthetic penicillins and cephalo¬
sporins, new treatments for asthma, arthritis and coronary disease, and a
synthetic form of insulin. Britain is among the world leaders in the production
of antibiotics by fermentation.
In the field of biotechnology the British Celltech company was the first to be
licensed by the United States Food and Drugs Administration for the mass
production of monoclonal antibodies, proteins which each seek out a particular
Table 20: Output, Employment, Productivity and Investment in Manufacturing
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
*3 gg
£ s
CO
V
I _
^ ’B ,2 Crf
$ .3 ~
o
oo o
S oo 2
D, 05 °
-M r-H
=3 II
o TD A
O 00
° 00
X 05
4)
£ c
45
I
o
a
E
<u
^ 00 §
|2p
c c
V
w
11“
a O CT5
° E
■4—' ^
OJ 02
2 -
05 05
io in
q q
C0 CO
00 N 05
Pi 00 00
-h CO O
00
oo
6 cb
o o
co tp in
cs P P
o oo o
<N O 00 O 05 W i—i CD in r-HCS]
in CO ^t<(N05'^'^^ CO 05 CO
co ■'* n in cn <n in m in ^in
(Nin^f^cocDcscsi^
co'-ics^inooot^
o m co co co co ‘
05 CO rf
05
CO
d
o cd m
n m -<
CD 05 N CO
<N CS 00
uc
c
'C
05
45
C
'Ed
g
45
45
G
•an E
G X3
'C G
D cc
45 “
45
C
10
45
E
a
|
45
O
a
£
45 'Qfi
E .£
E fc
£ 45
cn r-
C >pH
•- 'a/D
C
45
ns 2 ro
o £ S O
15 S
V £
S O
TO
13 %
45 C
- OS
tl
S S
CC
a
tfi "O
TO G
Bo g
13 2
E >
>1 i-
o
c
45
aJ
„ Xi
45 O
X £
o q
•on
G
’n
a an
’G £
c E
as G
!!§ II
45 .
d o
o S
'on
CO rj
QJ JH
3 p
$ 2
H O
on o
0
- Nh
l §
o, g
fc 45
Oh X
rt x
Oh O
s-s
a v,
•a aa
§ C8
o •=
73 c
o«
w g
•a u
h c
go.
3 S
O U5
271
272
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 21: Chemicals and Man-made Fibres
Sales3 Exports Imports
1988 (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Chemicals and man-made fibres
of which: basic industrial
chemicals
specialised industrial
products
pharmaceuticals
soap and toilet
preparations
25,423 11,795 9,741
10,230 5,771 5,626
4,359 1,921 1,118
4,779 1,808 941
2,531 618 401
a The overseas trade figures for some industries include imports for re-export and exports for re-import. Where
this entrepot trade is substantial, it can distort comparisons with the sales figures.
natural substance. They are used to diagnose diseases and identify different
blood types and can be used in the treatment of cancer. Britain is foremost
among the world’s developers of molecular graphics, a computer-aided techni¬
que for studying the structure of complicated organic molecules on a visual
display unit, contributing to the rational design of new and improved drugs.
Notable recent British discoveries and developments in agricultural chemicals
include pyrethroid insecticides. Id’s diquat and paraquat herbicides, systemic
fungicides and aphicides, genetically engineered microbial pesticides and
methods of encouraging natural parasites to attack common pests in horticul¬
ture. A substantial proportion of world research and development in agro¬
chemicals is conducted in Britain.
Exports of cosmetics, toiletries and perfumery in 1988 were £413 million,
compared with imports of £277 million. The home market amounted to about
£1,513 million.
A high proportion of inorganic chemicals production consists of relatively
simple bulk chemicals, such as sulphuric acid and metallic and non-metallic
oxides, serving as basic materials for industry. The most important products
sold in the organic chemicals range (by weight) are ethylene (1,432,800 tonnes
produced in 1988), benzene (614,780 tonnes) and propylene (436,540 tonnes).
About one-third of semi-manufactured plastics production is exported. Ex¬
pansion in recent years has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of which
the most important are polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride, polystyrene and poly¬
propylene. Total sales of plastics packaging products, valued at just over £2,000
million in 1988, were largely accounted for by the home market. Output rose by
42 per cent between 1985 and 1988. A new group of plastics materials reinforced
with carbon fibres is also in commercial production; they have up to three times
the strength but are only 20 per cent of the weight of steel, and are being
increasingly used in aircraft and vehicle manufacture. ICI has recently produced
the world’s first biodegradable thermoplastic, Biopol, which has so far been used
as a slow release agent for drugs and herbicides, as well as for making bottles
and films that can be disposed of without polluting the environment. Synthetic
rubbers in large-scale production include butadiene-based neoprene for tyres,
high-styrene for shoe soles and flooring, and oil-resistant nitrile rubbers.
With the development of multi-layer technology, plastics are fast replacing
traditional packaging materials such as paper, tin and glass.
Specialised products in the paint industry include new ranges of synthetic
resins and pigments, powder coatings, non-drip and quick-diying paints and
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
273
Mineral and
Metal Products
Iron and Steel
Products
Non-ferrous
Metals
paints needing only one top coat. Two significant recent innovations have been
solid emulsion paint and a temporary water-based finish for vehicle bodies and
road markings, which can be removed easily by chemical treatment. ICI is the
world’s largest paint manufacturer.
The main types of man-made fibre are still those first developed—regenerated
cellulosic fibres such as viscose and the major synthetic fibres such as nylon
polyamide, polyester and acrylics. Extensive research continues to produce a
wide variety of innovative products with characteristics designed to meet market
needs, such as anti-static and flame-retardant fibres. More specialist products
include the aramids (with very high thermal stability and strength), elastanes
(giving very high stretch and recovery), melded fabrics (produced without the
need for knitting or weaving), and carbon fibres (originally developed for the
aerospace industry but now finding applications in other areas such as the
motor vehicle and sports goods industries). In 1988, nearly 300,000 kilogram¬
mes of unprocessed continuous filament yarn were produced.
Britain is the world’s ninth largest steel-producing nation (by volume). British
producers delivered 16-7 million tonnes of finished steel in 1988, of which 65
per cent was sold on the home market and the remainder exported. British Steel
is the fourth largest steel company in the Western world and accounts for some
78 per cent of crude steel production in Britain. British Steel’s output is based
on flat products, plate, heavy sections, tubes and stainless items. Other
steel-making firms are prominent in the manufacture of engineering and other
special steels, wire rod and wire products, reinforcements for use in the
construction industry, and other more specialised goods. The major areas of
steel production are Wales, Scotland and northern England.
The industry has recorded sharp improvements in productivity in recent
years, partly as a result of an extensive programme of rationalisation and
closures: whereas it took British Steel 14-3 man hours to produce a tonne of
liquid steel in 1978—79, it now takes 4-5 man hours. Most firms have shown
improved profitability and in 1988-89 British Steel returned a pre-tax profit of
£593 million.
Output of non-ferrous metals and their alloys in 1988 included: aluminium, of
which the principal types were wrought aluminium, with sales of £884 million;
unwrought aluminium, with sales of £546 million; and lead, with sales of £210
million. Some 260,000 tonnes of copper and brass were exported. Primary metal
production relies mainly on imported ores, concentrates and partially refined
metal. Britain still operates a small tin mine. Exports of tin were valued at £69
million in 1988, representing most of the industry’s output.
Table 22: Mineral and Metal Products
1988
Sales3
(£ million)
Exports
(£ million)
Imports
(£ million)
Metal manufacturing
of which: iron and steel products
non-ferrous metals
Non-metallic mineral products
of which: glass and glassware
ceramic and heat-
resistant goods
7,929
5,659
2,270
7,453
1,302
1,395
4,322
2,290
2,032
1,253
317
449
5.376
2,265
3,111
1.377
594
314
See Table 21, footnote a.
274
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ceramics
Other
Mineral
Products
Electrical,
Electronic and
Instrument
Engineering
Britain is a major producer of specialised alloys for high-technology require¬
ments in the aerospace, electronic, petrochemical, and nuclear and other fuel
industries. Titanium and titanium alloys are produced and used in aircraft
production, power generation and North Sea oil production. Nickel alloys are
produced, notably for use in aero-engines operating in high temperature
environments.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands and Wales. In recent
years considerable progress has been made in the development of ‘superplastic’
alloys, which are more ductile and elastic than conventional alloys. Aluminium
lithium is a relatively new alloy which has been developed by British Alcan
Aluminium and is now used in both military and civil aircraft. It is 10 per cent
lighter than normal aluminium and is stronger and stiffer.
Exports of all precious non-ferrous metals and their alloys reached £296
million in 1988, an increase of 11 per cent over 1987.
The ceramics industry comprises manufacturers of a wide range of clay pro¬
ducts, including domestic pottery, sanitaryware and tiles, and clay pipes used in
the building trade. Total sales of ceramic goods in 1988 were £1,120 million.
The domestic pottery industry is an important element within the group. It
includes the manufacture of china, earthenware and stoneware, and accounts
for over 50 per cent of the industry’s output. Production of tableware is
concentrated in Stoke-on-Trent. Britain is the world’s leading manufacturer of
fine bone china, much of which is exported.
Research is being conducted into ceramics for use in housebuilding and diesel
and jet engines. Important industrial ceramics invented in Britain include
silicon carbides developed by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority and
sialons developed at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Among building materials glass-reinforced cement composites were invented in
Britain in the early 1970s and are manufactured under licence in over 40
countries.
Companies manufacturing bottles and jars form a large part of the glass
industry. They are major suppliers to the food and drink and the pharmaceutical
industries. Another major section is devoted to the manufacture of flat glass in
its various forms, chiefly by the float glass process developed in Britain by
Pilkington Brothers and licensed to glassmakers throughout the world. Pilking-
tons has also developed an energy-saving window glass which reflects room heat
without impairing visibility. Britain is the world’s biggest exporter of china clay
(kaolin). In 1988, some 2-9 million tonnes, valued at £197 million, were sold
overseas. The main company involved is English China Clays.
Output by this group of industries has grown steadily since 1982. Sales of
electronic data-processing equipment more than tripled between 1983 and
1988. Almost 90 per cent of the value of principal products in this sector was
exported in 1988. Advances in microelectronics have meant that the borderlines
between office machinery, data-processing equipment, telecommunications
equipment and consumer electronic equipment are becoming very hard to
define.
The computer sector, which has grown strongly over the past five years,
produces an extensive range of computer systems, central processors and
peripheral equipment, from large computers for large-scale data-processing and
scientific work to mini- and microcomputers for use in control and automation
systems and for home, educational and office use. Britain is one of the top three
markets in Western Europe for data-processing equipment; expenditure on
data-processing as a proportion of GDP is the highest in Western Europe.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
275
Reflecting the importance of Britain as a market, many of the leading overseas
manufacturers of data-processing equipment—for example, IBM, Unisys, Com¬
paq and Seiko—have established manufacturing plants in Britain. These serve
both Britain and overseas and thus contribute to Britain’s exports. Other
companies have succeeded by developing new products for specialised markets,
such as the transputer, produced by Inmos, a Thorn EMI subsidiary; in effect a
computer on a single chip, a transputer can be combined with hundreds of
others in parallel to form a machine as powerful as existing ‘supercomputers’
but at less than a quarter of their price. British firms and research organisa¬
tions, with government support, are also heavily involved in the development
and application of the new family of ‘three-five’ semiconductor materials, such
as gallium arsenide, which will ultimately enable much faster computers to be
produced and are already used in a number of microwave devices.
British companies are strongly involved in the development of electronic
revenue control equipment, including electronic funds transfer and point of sale
equipment. British-made computerised ticketing equipment is being installed
throughout British Rail’s network and in the London Underground system.
The main communications products are switching and transmission equip¬
ment, telephones and terminals for telex, facsimile and teletext. British Telecom
(BT) is the main customer for network equipment and carries out research and
development work in co-operation with suppliers. Mercury Communications is
licensed to compete with BT in the provision of network services, while the
market for terminals and telephones has been fully liberalised. Innovative work is
being particularly stimulated by the expansion of cable television and the growth
in value added network services. In 1984 two cellular radio networks began
operation, providing sophisticated telephone services on portable telephones.
There has been rapid expansion in the market for those products and services,
and provision has been made for the licensing of a larger system in future.
One important part of the industry produces transmission equipment and
cables for telecommunications and information networks and other purposes.
Its products include submarine and high-specification data-carrying cables. BT,
supported by a technically advanced cable industry, has led the way in the
development of optical fibre communications systems. In 1986 it opened the
world’s first international submarine optical fibre link, which has doubled the
number of telephone lines between Britain and Belgium. BT has also paved the
way for simpler and cheaper optical cables by laying the first non-repeatered
Table 23: Electrical, Electronic and Instrument Engineering
Sales3 Exports Imports
1988 (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Data-processing equipment
Basic electrical equipment
Communications equipment
Electrical instruments and
control systems
Radio and electronic capital goods
Electronic components
Consumer electrical and
electronic goods
Instrument engineering
5,229 4,592 5,473
2,692 1,426 1,268
1,970 283 640
1,588 n.a n.a
3,189 1,459 1,134
2,816 2,146 3,132
2,024 1,012 2,489
2,953 n.a n.a
a See Table 21, footnote a.
n.a. = not available.
276
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
cable, over 100 km (62 miles) long, and developing the first all-optical repeater.
Well over half of the world’s undersea communications cables (of all types) have
been made and laid by another British company, STC Submarine Systems,
which, with its US and French partners, completed the laying of the first
transatlantic optical fibre cable, TAT 8, in 1988. Britain also has a world lead in
the transmission of computerised data along telephone lines for reproduction on
television screens. British Telecom’s Prestel service is now capable of transmit¬
ting full-colour photographs to domestic television reception quality. Sales of
telegraph and telephone apparatus and equipment by British firms more than
doubled between 1979 and 1987.
Another expanding sector of the industry is that which covers the manufac¬
ture of radio communications equipment, radar, radio and sonar navigational
aids for ships and aircraft, thermal imaging systems, alarms and signalling
equipment, public broadcasting equipment and other capital goods. Radar was
invented in Britain and British firms are still in the forefront of technical
advances. Racal Avionics’ new X-band radar can distinguish different types of
aircraft flying at very low altitude and is already in use at airports in several
countries. GLORIA is a new type of ship-towed side-scan sonar, developed at
Britain’s Institute of Oceanographic Sciences and now being used by the United
States Geological Survey to map the ocean floor within the US 200-mile
Exclusive Economic Zones. The Cable and Wireless Company has the submarine
cable-laying robot ‘CIRRUS’, which can work at depths of up to 1 km (3,280 ft)
controlled entirely by a computer on its mother ship.
A range of electrical and electronic measurement and test equipment is made
in Britain, as well as analytical instruments. Production of process control
equipment is a large and expanding area, along with the manufacture of
numerical control and indication equipment for use in machine tools. British
companies are among the leaders in several types of advanced electronic medical
equipment. Pioneering work has been undertaken in magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), a technique in which the patient is placed in a strong magnetic
field and scanned with radiofrequency (RF) energy. The body interacts with this
energy and the information generated is processed by computer to construct
images of internal organs and tissues. MRI enables large areas of the body to be
examined internally without recourse to surgery or potentially harmful radia¬
tion. Developments in the field of laser technology over the last 25 years helped
British doctors in 1986 to invent new techniques for destroying cancers in their
early stages and for unblocking arteries.
British companies also produce other advanced electronic medical equip¬
ment, including ultrasound scanners, electromyography systems and patient
monitoring systems for intensive and coronary care and other uses.
The comprehensive indigenous electronics components industry is sup¬
plemented by subsidiaries of a number of large overseas companies. The
manufacture of integrated circuits is an area of particularly rapid change.
Britain has strength in the manufacture of advanced components over a wide
range of products and application areas.
The electrical engineering industry manufactures a wide variety of products
for the generation, transmission, distribution and utilisation of electricity,
ranging from power plant, cable transformers and switchgear to lighting, plugs
and sockets and other installation equipment. A mature industry, it neverthe¬
less makes extensive use of advanced technologies in its products and processes.
It also earns a considerable foreign trade surplus; for example, GEC won a £165
million contract in 1988 to design and supply a 2 x 362 MW power station to
China.
The domestic electrical appliance sector is dominated by a few large firms. The
major electronic consumer goods produced are radio and television sets, and
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
277
Mechanical
Engineering
and Metal
Goods
high-fidelity audio and video equipment. In the audio field British manufac¬
turers have a reputation for high-quality goods but are less strong in the mass
market.
The instrument engineering industry produces measuring, photographic,
cinematographic and reprographic equipment; watches, clocks and other tim¬
ing devices; and medical and surgical instruments and appliances. Its precision
instrument and medical branches both earn significant and growing export
surpluses, but the sector as a whole is contracting.
Since much of the production of this industry is of capital equipment, it suffered
particularly during the recession which began in 1979. However, from 1984
there was a recovery in some parts of the industry. In 1988 sales of all types of
printing machinery rose by 13 per cent, while machinery for the processing and
packaging of food, drink and tobacco had sales 15 per cent higher. Over 40 per
cent of the industry’s sales go to overseas buyers, and exports of mechanical
engineering equipment amounted to about 14 per cent of all visible exports.
Of particular importance are fabricated steel products such as pressure
vessels, heat exchangers and storage tanks for chemical and oil-refining (pro¬
cess) plant, steam-raising boilers (including those of high capacity for power
stations), nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment plant, and fabricated
steelwork for bridges, buildings and industrial installations.
Although the agricultural machinery industry’s output fell sharply as world
demand contracted in the 1970s, Britain is still the Western world’s largest
producer of tractors, which make up over three-quarters of the country’s total
output of agricultural equipment. Sales of the principal products of the tractor
industry were £1,235 million in 1988, of which £1,053 million was accounted
for by overseas sales. Recent technical innovations include computer-controlled
tractors, a highly efficient pesticide sprayer and combined mower/conditioners
that significantly reduce the drying time for grass. Much of the new machinery is
designed for use in a variety of conditions to meet the needs of overseas farmers.
The Royal International Agricultural Show, held annually near Coventry, has a
Table 24: Mechanical Engineering and Metal Goods
1988
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Mechanical engineering 23,425 9,479 9,196
of which: industrial plant and
steelwork 3,285 551 487
agricultural machinery
and tractors 1,523 1,053 763
machine tools 2,002 799 896
machinery for
process industries
and non-metallic
materials working 2,911 1,918 2,323
mining, construction and
mechanical handling
equipment 3,977 1,545 1,446
Other metal goods 11,012 1,730 2,250
a See Table 21, footnote a.
278
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
specialised tropical machinery centre, where demonstrations of such machinery
are given.
Almost all of Britain’s machine tools are purchased by the engineering,
vehicles and metal goods industries. The most commonly used metal-cutting
machine tools are milling, grinding and turning machines. The manufacture of
computerised numerically controlled machine tools and the adoption of flexible
manufacturing systems have become increasingly important. Total sales of
metal-working machine tools doubled between 1983 and 1988, and exports were
more than 50 per cent higher over the same period, both rising sharply in 1988.
In 1988, 74 per cent of the sales of textile machinery were to export markets.
Recent British innovations in this field include computerised colour matching
and weave simulation, friction spinning, high-speed computer-controlled knit¬
ting machines and electronic jacquard attachments for weaving looms.
Overseas sales of mining machinery and tunnelling equipment are substan¬
tial, while exports of construction equipment amounted to £779 million in 1988
(62 per cent of output). J. C. Bamford Ltd is the world’s second largest
manufacturer of backhoe loaders. It exports over 60 per cent of its output. The
British mining equipment industry is very strong, especially in the production
of coal-cutting and road-heading (shearing) equipment, hydraulic roof supports,
conveying equipment, flameproof transformers, switchgear, and subsurface
transport equipment and control systems. The main products of the mechanical
handling equipment industry are cranes and transporters, lifts, escalators,
conveyors, elevators, hoists, powered industrial trucks and air bridges. Electro¬
nically controlled and completely automatic handling systems are also produced.
Britain is an important producer of other machinery such as industrial engines,
pumps, valves and compressors, and pneumatic and hydraulic equipment.
Despite an overall decline in the castings industry, some foundries have been
investing in new melting, moulding and quality control equipment. Cosworth
Engineering, for example, has developed a high-quality aluminium casting
process and uses it to produce cylinder heads in quantity for Mercedes Benz and
Ford cars.
Motor Vehicles
and Other
Transport
Equipment
(excluding
Aerospace)
Output of cars is dominated by five groups, accounting for around 95 per cent of
the total. They are Rover (in which the Government had a majority shareholding
prior to the company’s sale to British Aerospace in 1988), Ford, Vauxhall,
Peugeot-Talbot and Nissan. The remainder is in the hands of smaller, specialist
producers such as Jaguar and Rolls-Royce, whose cars are renowned for their
quality and durability. The West Midlands and the South East account for
around two-thirds of total employment in the motor industry.
Table 25: Motor Vehicles and Other Transport Equipment
1988
Sales3
(£ million)
Exports
(£ million)
Imports
(£ million)
Motor vehicles (including
bodies, trailers, caravans
and engines)
Motor vehicle parts
Other transport equipment
of which: shipbuilding and
repairing
12,137
4,888
7,908
868
3,033
2,104
5,832
259
8.631
2.631
4,427
183
3 See Table 21, footnote a.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
279
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
Aerospace
In recent years the industry has faced increased competition from imports,
particularly from the rest of Europe and Japan. However, British manufacturers
are responding to the situation, largely by resorting to collaboration. Rover’s 800
range was designed and developed in collaboration with Honda, with which it is
working on a new range of medium-sized cars. The industry remains a major
exporter: in 1988 Rover Group exports alone amounted to £908 million.
Major component manufacturers include GKN and Lucas, which has de¬
veloped a new cheap anti-lock braking system and the first direct fuel injection
system for small, high-speed, automotive diesel engines.
About half the domestic market for pedal cycles is supplied by British firms,
the largest being Raleigh, which was taken over by the specially created Derby
International Corporation in 1987.
Britain has a long tradition of shipbuilding and remains active in the construc¬
tion, conversion and repair of merchant vessels, warships and offshore struc¬
tures.
The largest sector is the building of warships, including both nuclear-powered
and diesel-electric submarines, frigates, glass-reinforced plastics vessels, fast
patrol craft and specialist naval auxiliaries. As well as meeting all the needs of
the Royal Navy, the warship yards build and convert ships for overseas govern¬
ments.
British yards build some of the most sophisticated and technologically
complex merchant vessels in the world, including ferries and offshore support
and research vessels, as well as more traditional ships and craft of all kinds for
the leisure market. In 1987 British merchant shipbuilders had 65 orders in
hand for the construction of ships (of more than 100 gross tonnes) with a total
value of £622 million. Nearly half of these orders were for overseas registrations.
The shipbuilding industry is supplemented by ship-repairers, including the
Royal Dockyards, which the Government leased to commercial management in
1987. Repairers also modernise and convert all types of vessels and floating
structures. The British marine equipment industry offers a range of products
from anchors to sophisticated navigational systems.
Nearly two decades of oil exploration and exploitation in the North Sea have
generated a major offshore industry in Britain. Shipbuilders and fabricators
build fixed platforms and semi-submersible units for drilling, production and
emergency/maintenance support, drill ships, jack-up rigs, modules and offshore
loading systems. Over 4,000 manufacturing and service industry firms supply a
wide range of goods and services, including consultancy, design, project man¬
agement, and research and development, to the offshore industry. In conjunc¬
tion with the Offshore Supplies Office of the Department of Energy, the
Department of Trade and Industry has a responsibility for promoting Britain’s
offshore interests overseas and maintains a central co-ordination unit to assist
this activity.
Britain’s aerospace industry is the third largest in the world, behind those of the
United States and the Soviet Union. In 1988 it had a turnover of more than
£10,000 million, with exports totalling £6,055 million, and contributed £1,690
million to the balance of payments. Over the past decade, the industry has
doubled its productivity, nearly doubled its turnover in real terms, and more
than doubled the value of its exports.
More than half the value of the industry’s exports in 1988 were due to Britain’s
main airframe manufacturer, British Aerospace (BAe), which at the beginning of
1989 had an order book worth some £11,000 million. BAe is Britain’s largest
manufacturing company and the largest aerospace company in Europe. The
company manufactures an extensive range of aerospace, space and electronic
products. It has developed its own family of civil aircraft, with seating capacities
280
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ranging from 8 to 112 seats, which includes the 146 family of regional airliners
(one of the world’s quietest jetliners), the ATP (advanced turboprop) airliner, the
125 (the world’s best-selling middle-sized business jet) and the Jetstream 31
commuterliner, of which more than 250 have been ordered. BAe owns a 20 per
cent share of the European consortium Airbus Industrie, which has sold well
over 1,000 airliners. BAe supplies the wings of the whole family of Airbus
Industrie airliners.
The military production of BAe includes the V-STOL Harrier, the Hawk trainer
and the Tornado combat aircraft in collaboration with Federal German and
Italian manufacturers. BAe also produces the Harrier II and Goshawk (a
development of the Hawk for the United States Navy) jointly with the United
States firm McDonnell Douglas. As a partner of Eurofighter, BAe has a 33 per
cent share of the production of the European Fighter Aircraft (EFA), which is
being produced in collaboration with Federal German, Italian and Spanish
manufacturers. Much of the technology for the EFA -was developed by BAe and
other British aerospace firms and was demonstrated in the BAe Experimental
Aircraft Programme.
BAe is a major producer of air, sea and ground-launched guided weapons,
including the Rapier air defence system and naval Seawolf system. Collaborative
guided missile weapon projects between Britain and its NATO partners are
increasingly important. In 1988 BAe expanded into motor vehicles with the
acquisition of Rover from the Government.
Short Brothers of Belfast produces a range of aerospace products, including
the Shorts 330 and 360 commuter airliners and the military freighter version of
the 330 known as the Sherpa. It also produces the Tucano, a turboprop basic
military trainer which is in use with the Royal Air Force. The company, which
was being privatised in 1989 by its sale to the firm Bombardier, also produces
guided missiles and a wide range of airframe components, some in composites,
for other aerospace manufacturers overseas such as the wings for the Dutch
Fokker 100 twin jet airliners.
In addition to its production of aerospace equipment, Westland manufactures
a range of helicopters, notably the Sea King and Lynx military helicopters and
the civilian W30. In collaboration with Agusta of Italy, Westland is developing the
multi-role EH 101 three-engine helicopter, which will be delivered to the Royal
Navy and the Italian Navy in the early 1990s. The company is a leading
manufacturer of composite helicopter blades. A Lynx fitted with Westland’s
‘Berp-tip’ rotor set a new helicopter world speed record at over 400 km/h (249
mph) in 1986.
Rolls-Royce is one of the three largest manufacturers of aero-engines in the
world, with a turnover in 1988 of some £2,000 million and a forward order book
Table 26: Aerospace
1988
Sales3 Exports Imports
(£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
4,883
3,435
1,624
113
1,293
1,246
115
Guided weapons and parts*5
804
Total, including products
not specified above
8,466
5,241
3,701
a See Table 21, footnote a.
b Excluding those for military use.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
281
Food, Drink
and Tobacco
at the beginning of 1989 in excess of £4,000 million. The company’s civil engine
group produces engines for airliners and executive and corporate jets. Its
RB211-535 engines have been selected by 75 per cent of the airlines using
Boeing 757 airliners. The RB211-524G and H engines, which were launched in
1986 with orders from Cathay Pacific and British Airways to power their Boeing
747.4OO airliners, entered into service in 1989. The company’s new Tay
turbofan engines are in service with the Gulfstream IV and Fokker 100 airliners,
and some 600 of these engines were on order in 1989. Rolls-Royce is a partner in
the five nation International Aero Engine consortium which produces the V2500
aero-engine, now used on the new A320 airliner.
The military engine group of Rolls-Royce produces a wide range of engines for
military aircraft and helicopters. These include the Turbo-Union RBI99 for the
Panavia Tornado; the Pegasus series of vectored thrust engines for the Harrier,
the Adour and the Spey jets; and the RTM 322 helicopter engine. Rolls-Royce is a
partner in Eurojet, a consortium from four countries formed to develop the
EJ200 for the Eurofighter’s EFA. In addition, the company produces gas
turbines for power generation and for oil and gas pumping, gas turbine power
for 25 of the world’s navies, and propulsion systems for the Royal Navy’s
nuclear-powered submarines.
Aviation equipment manufacturers provide a wide range of systems essential
to engines and aircraft, including engine and flight controls, electrical genera¬
tion, mechanical and hydraulic power systems, cabin furnishings, flight deck
control and information displays. British firms have made important advances
in the development of ejector seats, fire-fighting equipment and flight simula¬
tors, and are playing a major role in the development of both fly-by-wire and
fly-by-light technology (where control surfaces are moved by means of automatic
electronic signalling and fibre optics respectively, rather than by mechanical
means). They provide radar and air traffic control equipment and ground power
supplies to airports and airlines throughout the world.
The British space industry’s major strength is in the manufacture of satel¬
lites. BAe is Europe’s largest—and the world’s third largest—producer of
communication satellites. It has been the prime contractor for all such
spacecraft launched by the European Space Agency (ESA), as well as for
scientific probes such as the Giotto satellite. BAe has developed and built 18
space pallets (payload and instrument carriers) for the United States Space
Shuttle and has 25 orders for the SPELDA lightweight payload bay structure for
the ESA’s Ariane 4 rocket launcher, which enables Ariane to launch two or more
spacecraft independently during the same mission. BAe was the prime contrac¬
tor for the Olympus 1 satellite, which, when placed into orbit in June 1989,
became the world’s most powerful communications satellite.
Marconi Space Systems (a subsidiary of GEC) has acted as principal contrac¬
tor on many telecommunications satellite payloads, including those for the
ESA’s Olympus satellite (Inmarsat). BAe is prime contractor for the second
generation of Inmarsat satellites. In 1987 BAe and Marconi together won an
order from NATO for military communications satellites worth more than £100
million, the first time such an order had been awarded to a non-United States
company.
The trade association for the industry is the Society of British Aerospace
Companies, which organises a major international air show at Farnborough,
Hampshire, every two years (the next is in September 1990).
Britain has a large and sophisticated food processing industry, which has
accounted for a growing proportion of total domestic food supply in recent
decades.
Convenience foods (particularly frozen foods, sales of which now exceed
282
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£2,000 million), yoghurts and instant snacks have formed the fastest-growing
sector of the food market in recent years. The market is also growing in foods for
consumers concerned about the effects of their diet on their health and weight.
Food from Britain is a body with a wide remit to improve the marketing of
British food and agricultural produce both domestically and overseas. It has
selected France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Benelux countries, Spain
and the United States as key export markets.
Production of milk was some 14,400 million litres in 1988, of which just
under half was for sale as liquid milk. Eight out of ten households in Britain
receive milk through a door-step delivery system employing about 37,000
roundsmen (not included in the employment figure in the table) driving electric
vehicles. Domestic milk consumption per head (2-8 litres—4.1 pints per week in
1988) is among the highest in the world. Consumption of skimmed milk is
rising as some people seek to reduce the fat content in their diet.
The main milk products are butter (140,000 tonnes produced in 1988),
cheese (300,000 tonnes), condensed whole milk (85,000 tonnes), condensed
skimmed milk (42,000 tonnes) and dried whole and skimmed milk (241,000
tonnes). The dairy industry accounted for 54 per cent of new butter supplies to
the British market in 1988, 64 per cent of new cheese supplies and nearly all of
other milk products. Butter exports in 1988 were 119,000 tonnes and cheese
exports 28,000 tonnes, compared with 57,000 tonnes and 16,000 tonnes
respectively in 1978. The other main exports are skimmed and whole milk
powder (84,000 and 72,000 tonnes respectively in 1988).
About 70 per cent of bread is manufactured in large mechanised bakeries,
most of which use a British process (the ‘Chorleywood’ process). This process or
other similar procedures are used in many other countries. After years of
decline, overall consumption of bread stabilised in the 1980s. There has been
increased demand for wholemeal varieties at the expense of the standard sliced
white loaf, though recently this has slackened with the introduction of soft-
grained white bread. Biscuit exports were valued at £163 million in 1988.
Of prime importance among the alcoholic drinks produced in Britain, and in
the food and drink industry as a whole, is Scotch whisky. There are 114
Table 27: Food, Drink and Tobacco
Sales3 Exports Imports
1988 (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Food manufacturing
of which: meat products
milk and milk products
flour-based products
sugar and confectionery
cocoa and chocolate
goods
animal feedstuffs
Drinks b
of which . brewing and malting
distilling and
compounding
soft drinks
Tobacco1*
33,852 2,584 6,748
4,254 602 1,719
3,840 362 704
4,532 174 114
2,028 72 453
3,279 316 357
4,084 152 192
6,081 1,654 1,456
1,981 111 158
1,944 1,460 220
1,857 46 321
1,962 486 109
See Table 21, footnote a.
Sales figures exclude duty paid.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
283
Textiles,
Footwear,
Clothing and
Leather
distilleries in Scotland and the well-known brands of blended Scotch whisky are
made from the products of a number of different distilleries. Guinness pic,
owners of the Distillers Company and Arthur Bell and Sons, accounts for 40 per
cent of Scotch whisky output and 25 per cent of the British market. Some 84 per
cent of all Scotch whisky produced is exported. The value of whisky exports was
nearly £1,300 million in 1988, the United States taking nearly a fifth.
In the brewing and malting industry there are six major brewery groups whose
products are sold nationally. Demand for traditional cask-conditioned ales grew
substantially in the 1970s but has now stabilised. The main raw materials used
are malt, sugar, other cereals and hops. British malt, which is made almost
entirely from home-grown barley, is used by brewers throughout the world.
Lager has increased steadily in popularity since the late 1960s and accounts for
nearly 50 per cent of beer sales. Annual sales of beer in Britain now exceed
£9,000 million, over 2 per cent of GDP.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade. There are
some very large companies among about 20 producing brands which are
marketed on a national scale.
The British tobacco industry manufactures 91 per cent of cigarettes and
tobacco goods sold in Britain. Almost all of domestic output is provided by three
major manufacturers (Imperial Tobacco, Gallaher and Carreras Rothmans). The
industry specialises in the production of high-quality cigarettes made from
flue-cured tobacco and achieves significant exports, with the participation of
BAT Industries, mainly of cigarettes—countries in Europe, the Middle East and
Africa are important markets. Britain’s most important sources of raw tobacco
are Brazil, the United States, Zimbabwe, India and Canada. By voluntary
agreement with the Government, cigarette manufacturers restrict their adver¬
tising, print health warnings on packets and advertisements and are reducing
the tar yield of cigarettes.
Textiles, footwear, clothing and leather make a substantial contribution to the
British economy in terms of employment, exports and turnover. Together, they
employ 480,000 people, equal to about 2-3 per cent of total employment and
almost 10 per cent of manufacturing employment. For textiles, there is a high
degree of regional concentration. Particularly important areas are the North
West (mainly cotton), West Yorkshire (mainly wool), the East Midlands (lace and
knitwear), Scotland and Northern Ireland. Most of the clothing industry is
widely scattered throughout the country and does not represent a large propor¬
tion of employment in any region, although there are significant concentrations
in certain inner city areas such as Manchester, Leeds and east London. The
industries’ main products are yarn, woven and knitted fabrics, apparel, indust¬
rial and household textiles, and carpets based mainly on wool, cotton and
man-made fibres.
The textile industry has around 5,000 firms, comprising a few large multi¬
process companies, including two of the largest in the world—Coats Viyella and
Courtaulds—and a large number of small and medium-sized firms. Increased
investment in new machinery and enhanced attention to design, training and
marketing have helped the industry to raise its competitiveness.
The Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA) of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade allows a measure of restraint on imports of textiles and clothing from
low-cost countries into the European Community; agreement on a fourth MFA
was reached in 1986.
Britain’s woollen industry is one of the largest in the world; it includes the
world’s biggest wool textile company, Illingworth Morris. In the last few years the
industry’s export earnings have been consistently high. There are two main
branches, woollens and worsted. An increasing amount of man-made fibre is
284
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Other
Manufacturing
Table 28: Textiles, Footwear, Clothing and Leather
Sales3 Exports Imports
1988 (£ million) (£ million) (£ million)
Textile industry
of which: woollen and worsted
industry
cotton and silk industry
hosiery and other
knitwear
carpets, rugs and matting
Footwear
Clothing, hats and gloves
Made-up textiles
Leather and leather goods
6,545 2,132 4,108
1,469 586 444
1,096 469 1,810
1,860 544 983
1,134 189 425
1,174 205 898
4,279 916 2,192
984 118 233
838 322 502
a See Table 21, footnote a.
blended with wool. West Yorkshire is the main producing area, but Scotland and
the west of England are also famous as specialised producers of high-quality
yarn and cloth. Large quantities of raw wool are scoured and cleaned in Britain
in preparation for spinning. British mills also process the bulk of rare fibres
such as cashmere and mohair.
Low-cost competition has cut progressively into British markets for cotton.
Production includes yarn and fabrics of cotton, spun man-made fibres and
mixtures of these. The linen industry is centred in Northern Ireland, where the
lighter types of fabrics for apparel, furnishings and household textiles are
produced. The heavyweight canvas for sailcloth, tents, awnings and tarpaulins
is mainly produced in Scotland.
Over half of the value of carpet and rug output is made up of tufted carpets, in
the production of which the pile, usually with a high man-made fibre content, is
inserted into a pre-woven backing. Woven carpets, mainly Axminster, account
for most of the remainder of sales. There is a higher wool content in woven types,
although in these, too, more use is being made of man-made fibres. The high
quality and variety of design make Britain one of the world’s leading producers of
woven carpets.
Jute products are manufactured in the Dundee area. Jute yarn and man¬
made polypropylene yarn are used in the manufacture of carpets, cordage and
ropes and woven into fabrics for a wide range of applications in the packaging,
upholstery, building and motor vehicle industries.
The clothing industry is labour intensive, with about 9,000 companies
accounting for around 4 per cent of total manufacturing employment. While a
wide range of clothing is imported from the rest of Europe and Asia, British
industry supplies two-thirds of domestic demand. Exports have risen since the
mid-1970s and the British fashion designer industry has become prominent
during the 1980s. The hosiery and knitwear industry comprises about 1,500
companies, mainly in the East Midlands and Scotland, of which most are of
small to medium size. The footwear manufacturing industry is made up
predominantly of small companies. It supplies 36 per cent of all the shoes sold in
Britain. Imports have risen in recent years. About one-third of the total value of
leather production is exported, amounting to £322 million in 1988.
The furniture industry is very diverse, comprising some 2,500 companies which
supply the domestic, contract and institutional markets. Domestic production
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
285
Table 29: Other Manufacturing
1988
Sales3
(£ million)
Exports
(£ million)
Imports
(£ million)
Timber and wooden furniture
Paper and paper products
Printing and publishing
Processing of rubber and
plastics
Toys and sports goods
7,509
8,850
11,947
10,102
573
395
1,147
950
2,009
333
3,097
4,339
800
2,813
622
a See Table 21, footnote a.
of softwood timber, which in 1988 reached 911,000 cubic metres (3.2 million
cubic feet), has been steadily increasing but the timber-using industries are
mainly dependent on imported supplies. There were about 90 paper and board
mills employing 33,000 people in 1988, operated by 65 companies. Among the
largest British groups are Wiggins Teape, the Dickinson Robinson Group and
Davidsons. Overseas paper and board groups with manufacturing investments
in Britain include Georgia Pacific, Kimberly Clark, Consolidated Bathurst, the
Scott Corporation and United Paper Mills of Finland. Total sales of pulp, paper
and board manufactures exceeded £3,000 million in 1988.
There has been a substantial growth in newsprint production in Britain.
British newsprint producers now supply about 36 per cent of British demand.
Announcements have been made of further major investments, which will lead
to significant new capacity from 1990.
There has been a significant trend towards waste-based packaging grades in
order to reduce the industry’s reliance on imported woodpulp supplies. The use
of recycled waste paper is increasing and research is helping to extend it. Waste
paper provides about half of the industry’s fibre needs. Domestically produced
wood pulp represents only a small percentage of raw material supplies.
Mergers have led to the formation of large groups in newspaper, magazine and
book publishing, the largest being the Maxwell Communications Corporation;
but general printing, engraving, bookbinding and a large part of publishing still
include many small firms. With the increasing use of new technology, such as
computer typesetting, fragmentation of the industry into small specialised units
has taken place in the 1980s. The book publishing industry is a major exporter,
selling one-third of production in overseas markets. Security printers (of, for
example, banknotes and postage stamps) are important exporters, the major
company being De La Rue. Total employment in the paper, printing and
publishing industries in Great Britain in 1988 was 491,000.
Tyres and tubes represent about 46 per cent of sales of rubber manufactures,
the most important other goods being vehicle components and accessories,
conveyor belting, cables, hoses, latex foam products, and footwear, gloves and
clothing. Tyre manufacturers include subsidiaries of United States and other
overseas companies. The industry’s consumption of rubber includes natural,
synthetic and recycled rubber.
There are some 500 manufacturers of a wide range of toys and games, but few
of significant size. About half of total production is exported. There are 250
manufacturers of sports equipment. British fishing tackle and golf and tennis
equipment are established in export markets. Jewellery, gold and silverware and
the refining of precious metals are industries with a strong craft tradition.
286
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Structure
Housing
Construction
The construction industry accounts for 6'5 per cent of gross domestic product.
The industry experienced rapid growth during 1988, with the total value of
output in Great Britain in 1988 reaching £40,500 million, of which new work
accounted for £23,400 million (58 per cent) and repairs and maintenance the
remainder. In housing, new work was valued at £8,550 million and repairs and
maintenance at £9,300 million. About 1 million people are employed in the
industry (including apprentices), accounting for about 4-5 per cent of the
employed labour force. There are also more than 500,000 self-employed.
Efficiency and productivity are benefiting from new computerised techniques
such as the use of electronic load safety measures for cranes, distance measur¬
ing equipment, computerised stock ordering and job costing, and computer-
aided design. Increasingly, major contractors are managing projects (particular-
ly higher value ones) and using subcontractors to do the actual work.
Government promotion of the construction market is the responsibility of the
Department of the Environment. Building regulations prescribe minimum
standards of construction in England and Wales. Made by the Secretary of State
for the Environment and administered and enforced by local authorities, the
regulations apply to new building, the installation or replacement of fittings,
and alterations and extensions to existing buildings. There are broadly similar
controls under separate legislation in Scotland and Northern Ireland. As an
alternative to local authority building control and in order to simplify proce¬
dures, an optional system of private certification of compliance with building
regulations is provided for in the Housing and Building Control Act 1984 and
was introduced in 1985. The British Board of Agrement, sponsored by the
Department, assesses and issues reports and certificates relating to products
and systems for use in the construction industry. The Government is concerned
to see quality assurance extended to the construction process as well as to the
materials used. In 1986 the Institute of Plumbing became the first body to have
its register covered by the British Standards Institution’s Public Register
Inspection Maintenance Assessment (PRIMA) scheme.
Construction work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. In 1988, over 90 per cent of the work
was done by private firms. Although there were nearly 100,000 firms employing
two or more people, 95 per cent of them employed fewer them 25. Some large
firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops, mechanised
plant and standard builders’ equipment; some undertake responsibility for
projects from initial design to finished building. All but the smallest projects are
generally carried out under professional direction, either by architects or, in the
case of the more complicated civil engineering projects, by consulting engineers.
The latter, acting on behalf of a client, may advise on the feasibility of projects,
draw up plans and supervise the construction work.
The Property Services Agency (PSA), which is part of the Department of the
Environment, is responsible for the construction programmes undertaken
directly by the Government, including work for the armed forces both in Britain
and overseas. From April 1988 government departments have been able to use
agents other than the PSA for civil building projects costing more than
£150,000.
During 1988 a total of 245,000 dwellings were started in Great Britain. Starts in
the public sector were 29,000 and those for private owners 216,000. Some
216,000 dwellings were completed, 31,000 in the public sector and 185,000 in
the private sector.
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
287
Civil
Engineering
Projects
Research and
Advisory
Services
Among important construction projects in hand or recently completed in Britain
were the Heysham and Torness nuclear power stations, the Queen Elizabeth II
Conference Centre in London, the new British Library, the Docklands Light
Railway and associated development in London’s former docklands, the M25
motorway and its extension, and the Channel Tunnel.
In 1988 British construction companies won new overseas contracts worth
over £2,300 million and at the end of the year the total value of overseas work
carried out or outstanding stood at £5,860 million. The industry’s most
important markets in the year were the Americas and the European Commun¬
ity. British consulting engineers, process engineers, and chartered surveyors
had net earnings of £685 million in 1988 from overseas contracts. Members of
the Association of Consulting Engineers were awarded new work valued at more
than £9,700 million, a 19 per cent increase over 1987.
British companies provided consulting engineering services in 1988 for many
projects around the world. Among the biggest were the Greater Cairo Wastewater
Scheme, valued at some £1,000 million; the Baghdad Metro in Iraq, worth
£4,000 million; the Great Man-made River Project in Libya, costed at £2,300
million; and a gas pipeline system in Nigeria, valued at £500 million. Overseas
construction contracts awarded to British companies in 1988 include a £200
million housing project in California, United States; a road tunnel in Hong
Kong, valued at £150 million; and a highway in Turkey, for which work is costed
at £140 million.
The export interests of the various sectors of the British construction industry
are promoted by the Export Group for the Constructional Industries, the
Association of Consulting Engineers, the British Consultants Bureau (whose
members include architects, surveyors and management consultants), the
Building Materials Export Group, the Federation of Manufacturers of Construc¬
tion Equipment and Cranes, and the British Water Industries Group.
The Government’s national research and advisory body on construction and
building is the Building Research Establishment, which is part of the Depart¬
ment of the Environment. It has four laboratories, including a fire research
station, and is the site of a building energy management systems centre.
Research is also carried out by the major construction and materials firms,
universities, colleges of technology and research associations. The research
associations provide advisory services.
The Building Centre Group consists of four building centres throughout
Britain, most of which provide exhibition and information services on materials,
products, techniques and building services.
Service Industries
In 1988 services contributed around 63 per cent of gross domestic product,
compared with 45 per cent in 1960, and accounted for 69 per cent of employees
in employment, compared with 48 per cent in 1960. Overseas trade in services,
particularly financial services, has also grown, and in 1988 overseas earnings
from services amounted to nearly half the value of exports of manufactures.
Between 1978 and 1980 total service employment rose by 500,000; it then fell
for two years, but recovered again to grow from about 13-1 million in 1982 to
15-5 million in 1988. The net increase between 1978 and 1988 was 2-3 million
jobs, compared with a net decline of nearly 2-4 million in production industries.
Much of this was accounted for by growth in part-time (principally female)
employment. Since the late 1970s employment has grown more rapidly in the
private sector than in the public sector, a reversal of the pattern of the 1960s and
the early 1970s, partially reflecting the Government’s policy of restricting
288
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DISTRIBUTION
WHOLESALE
TRADES
employment in public sector services. The fastest-growing sectors in the 1970s,
measured by employment, were leisure and personal services, financial services,
distribution, and hotels and catering. In the 1980s the financial services have
continued to grow strongly.
Among the reasons for the growth in services is the tendency to spend a
greater proportion of income on personal, financial and leisure services as real
incomes rise. While, to some extent, consumers have exchanged services (such
as public transport, laundries and cinemas) for goods (motor cars, washing-
machines and television sets), this has generated demand for fresh services in
the distribution, maintenance and repair of these goods. Increased consumer
expenditure on the running costs of motor cars is a significant factor in the rise
in consumer expenditure on services. Demand for British air travel, hotel and
catering services has resulted from the increase in real incomes in other
countries.
Other factors include a greater readiness to use banking services and the
spread of home ownership, which has increased demand for legal and estate
agency services. Demographic changes, such as the increase in the elderly as a
component of the population, help to explain the growth of medical services.
Shorter working hours tend to raise the demand for leisure services.
Changes in technology have also played a part in the growth of services.
Examples range from the computer services industry to the provision of cash
and credit by means of cards and the growth of information systems such as
viewdata and teletext.
A notable trend is the growth in franchising, an operation in which a company
owning the rights to a particular form of trading licenses them to franchisees,
usually by means of an initial payment with continuing royalties. Cleaning
services, film processing, print shops, car rental, engine tuning and servicing,
and fast food retailing have been among the major areas where franchising has
developed.
There were just under 4-6 million people engaged in the distributive and allied
trades in Great Britain in mid-1989, together with a large number of owners of
businesses. There were 974,000 people in wholesaling, some 2-2 million in
retailing, 1 • 1 million in hotels and catering, and 267,000 in the repair of vehicles
and consumer goods. The distributive and allied trades accounted for about
14 per cent of national income in 1988.
In 1988 there were 130,000 businesses engaged in wholesaling and dealing.
Despite the decline in independent food shops, wholesale growth has been rapid,
turnover of both delivered and cash and carry goods rising in value from £5,000
million in 1981 to £8,500 million in 1987.
London’s wholesale markets play a significant part in the distribution of
foodstuffs. New Covent Garden is the main market for fruit and vegetables,
Smithfield for meat and Billingsgate for fish.
The co-operative movement in Britain has its own wholesale organisation, the
Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS), to serve the needs of retail societies; its
turnover was £2,559 million in 1988—89. Retail societies are encouraged to buy
from the CWS, which supplies the greater proportion of their requirements.
In the food and drink trade a number of large retailers carry out the functions
of the wholesaler by having their own warehouses and buying and distributive
organisations. Elsewhere in the trade voluntary groups have been formed by
wholesalers with small independent retailers, in which the retailers are encour¬
aged by discounts and other incentives to buy as much as possible from the
wholesaler. This has helped to preserve many smellier retail outlets for the
wholesaler, including the traditional ‘corner shops’ and village stores, of value to
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
289
RETAIL
TRADES
local communities, and has given small retailers the advantages of bulk buying
and co-ordinated distribution.
Turnover of the retail trades has been growing slowly in real terms in recent
years. In 1988 retail sales were 8-9 per cent higher than in 1987, representing a
7-7 per cent increase in volume. There were about 265,000 businesses in the
retail trade in Great Britain in 1988. Their turnover was about £100,000 million
in 1987. As the large multiple retailers (those with ten or more outlets) have
grown in size and diversified their product ranges, there has been a decline in
the number of retail businesses and outlets. The decline has been particularly
evident among small independent businesses and retail co-operative societies.
Shops selling durable household goods have experienced the fastest growth in
turnover in recent years, while food retailers have recorded the slowest growth.
The largest multiple retailers in the packaged grocery market are the retail
co-operatives, Sainsbury, Tesco, the Gateway Corporation, the Argyll Group and
the Asda Group. Retail co-operative societies are voluntary organisations con¬
trolled by their members, membership being open to anyone paying a small
deposit on a minimum share. Retail co-operatives and the Co-operative
Wholesale Society (see p 288) are members of the Co-operative Union, as are a
number of other co-operative bodies such as the Co-operative Bank. In 1988—89
Sainsbury had some 284 stores and the company’s sales amounted to nearly
£5,100 million. Tesco had about 380 outlets and sales were valued at over
£4,700 million.
The leading mixed retail businesses are Marks and Spencer (with sales of
£5,121 million in 1988—89), Boots, Kingfisher, Storehouse, W. H. Smith, Argos,
Littlewoods, Savacentre and John Menzies.
About 20 million people regularly shop by post. Leading items sold by mail
Table 30: Retail Trade in Great Britain 1986"
Number of
people
Number of Number of engaged Turnoverb
businesses outlets (’000s) (£ million)
Single-outlet retailers 217,050 217,050
Small multiple retailers 26,331 66,765
Large multiple retailers (ten
or more retail outlets) 904 60,144
838
328
27,935
11,950
1,169 56,540
Food retailers 77,301 100,171 813 34,761
Drink, confectionery and
tobacco retailers 44,379 56,858 277 9,969
Clothing, footwear and
leather goods retailers 32,711 58,874 290 9,199
Household goods retailers 42,785 60,839 302 14,719
Other non-food retailers 39,395 51,357 235 8,234
Mixed retail businesses 4,853 10,077 382 18,224
Hire and repair businesses 2,861 5,783 36 1,319
Total retail trade
244,285 343,959
2,335
96,425
Source: British Business.
a Figures cover businesses registered for value added tax and are revised for the most recently surveyed year.
b Includes value added tax.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
290
Trends
Large
Shopping
Centres
Diversification
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
order are clothing, footwear, furniture, household textiles, and radio, television
and electrical goods.
One of the most significant trends in retailing in recent years has been the
increase in the proportion of turnover accounted for by large multiple retailers;
they have 59 per cent of retail turnover. Other developments include an increase
in very large self-service stores selling a wide variety of products, diversification
by food multiples into selling a wider range of goods, the creation of specially
designed shopping precincts, the growth of shops selling computers, software
and video-cassettes, and an increasing emphasis on price competition.
Britain has a wide range of complementary shopping facilities inside and
outside town and city centres. There continues to be a strong demand for the
services provided by small, specialised shops, but the trend is towards larger
shops in order to increase efficiency and the range of goods available. The main
multiple grocery companies have been steadily increasing the size of their stores
both in towns and cities and on suburban and out-of-town sites. Also, retailers
of goods such as do-it-yourself products, furniture and electrical appliances have
for some years found it advantageous to develop retail warehouses outside town
and city centres, particularly to attract shoppers with cars. More recently, there
has been a trend towards the grouping of retail warehouses into retail ware¬
house parks.
Proposals have also been made recently for a number of regional out-of-town
shopping centres, sometimes as part of retail/leisure complexes, on sites which
offer good access to large numbers of customers with cars and ample space for
car parking, and to benefit from low acquisition and operating costs. One of the
few such centres built to date is the Metro Centre at Gateshead, Tyne and Wear,
which includes over 93,000 sq m (1 million sq ft) of floorspace.
Britain also has a wide variety of purpose-built shopping centres in towns and
cities, and there is increasing interest in the modernisation and redevelopment
of these and other town centre facilities in order to improve their attractiveness
and their ability to compete efficiently.
All new retail development requires planning permission from the local
planning authority. These authorities must consult the Department of the
Environment before granting permission for developments of 250,000 sq ft
(23,325 sq m) or more. It is the Government’s policy to encourage the provision
of a wide range of shopping facilities to the public, while ensuring that the
cumulative effects of major new retail development do not undermine the
viability and vitality of existing town centres.
Many of the large multiple groups have diversified over the last few years to offer
a much bigger range of goods and services than previously. This has been
especially noticeable for the large food retailers, which often sell non-food
products, such as beer, wines and spirits, clothing and household appliances, as
well as packaged groceries. Another trend is that many superstores and large
supermarkets offer fresh as well as packaged food, often with special counters or
areas for fresh meat, fish, vegetables and bread baked on the premises. Some
large retailers have in recent years begun to provide financial and estate agency
services.
Retailers are placing greater emphasis both on price competition and quality as
a means of promoting sales. With the growth of payments by credit card, certain
of the large retailers have issued their own credit cards for regular customers in
an attempt to increase sales, particularly of high-value goods.
Promotions
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
291
Use of
Technology
Vehicle and
Petrol Retailing
Hotels and
Catering
BUSINESS
SERVICES
Laser-scanning electronic check-outs are already having a major impact on
retailing in Britain. Substantial savings are expected from improved stock
control and a reduction of individual price marking in stores. Key Markets
introduced the first operational laser-scanning electronic check-out in Britain at
Spalding (Lincolnshire) in 1979. Computerised shopping services are being
introduced in the home which enable people to order goods from retailers. Some
large multiple retailers are using electronic order and invoice systems in dealing
with their suppliers, following a legal change permitting tax invoices in forms
other than paper. Small independent retailers are also using electronic ordering,
pricing and delivery systems. High-speed labelling techniques are being
adopted, including the use of electronic printers which can overprint labels, the
use of pressure-sensitive glues and printing in foil instead of ink.
A single nationwide ‘electronic funds transfer at point of sale’ (EFTPOS) system
is to be established for the retail market in co-operation with the English and
Scottish clearing banks. The system uses magnetically striped cards and
terminals installed in retail premises to transfer funds instantaneously from
card-holders’ accounts to the retailers’ accounts. Several major schemes are well
established, with a total of more than 30,000 terminals, a number which is
growing quickly.
At the end of 1988 some 241,000 people were employed in Great Britain in the
retail distribution of motor vehicles and parts and in petrol stations. In spite of
the continuing increase in the number of road vehicles, the number of petrol
stations is declining and at the end of 1988 there were some 20,000, of which 33
per cent were owned by oil companies. There were about 13,800 outlets selling
diesel fuel and by June of 1988, about half of all outlets sold unleaded petrol as
well. Unleaded petrol sales now account for about one-quarter of the petrol
retailing market. Self-service stations are becoming increasingly important and
in 1988 they accounted for nearly half of petrol stations. Some 236,000 people
were employed in the repair of motor vehicles in March 1989.
The hotel and catering trades employed 1-2 million people in Great Britain in
mid-1988; in 1987, 261,000 people were employed in hotels and other residen¬
tial establishments; 238,000 in restaurants, cafes and snack bars; 282,000 in
public houses and bars; 147,000 in clubs; and 136,000 in canteens. A large
number of self-employed people are also engaged in hotels and catering. There
were 12,800 hotel businesses in Great Britain in 1987, with a turnover of
£4,260 million. Many licensed hotels as well as most of the numerous guest
houses are small, with fewer than 20 rooms. Of the major hotel business groups
the biggest is Trusthouse Forte pic, which runs 800 hotels including over 240 in
Britain, and has catering and leisure interests. Among the largest firms running
holiday centres (including holiday camps with full board, self-catering centres
and caravan parks) are Butlins, Pontins, Ladbroke Holidays, Warners and Haven
Leisure. Many restaurants, snack bars, cafes, fish and chip shops and other
establishments sell take-away food. Britain has a very wide range of restaurants,
of which a substantial number specialise in Chinese, Italian, Indian and Greek
foods. ‘Fast-food’ catering, in which establishments sell hot food such as
hamburgers or chicken to be eaten either on the premises or elsewhere, is
becoming increasingly significant. There are about 75,000 ‘pubs’ (public
houses, which mainly sell beer, wines and spirits for consumption on the
premises) in Great Britain.
Business services include advertising, market research, management consul¬
tancy, exhibition and conference facilities, computing services and auction
houses. Most of these sectors have grown rapidly in recent years.
292
Advertising
Computing
Services
Management
Consultancy
Market
Research
Exhibition and
Conference
Centres
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Advertising expenditure rose by 12 per cent in 1988 to nearly £6,780 million,
with the proportion going to television increasing by 8 per cent, according to the
Advertising Association. That in the press accounted for 63 per cent of the total,
television for 31 per cent, posters for 4 per cent, and commercial radio and
cinema for the rest. Advertising has been growing fastest in the free distribution
press and directories. Campaigns are planned mainly by advertising agencies, of
which there are several hundred in Britain; in some cases they also provide
marketing, consumer research and other services.
The industry comprises software houses, whose services include the writing of
bespoke (application specific) software; production of packaged software for
more general applications; consultancy; facilities management; computer
bureaux services, which process customers’ data; and systems houses, which
provide complete computer systems (hardware and software).
The computing services industry continues to be one of the fastest growing
sectors of the British economy, with a current annual growth of around 20 per
cent. The turnover of the independent software/systems houses in 1988 was
around £2,500 million. They provide employment for some 55,000 people. In
addition there are about eight times this number working on ‘in-house’
computer activities in other companies across the whole range of British
industry and commerce. The industry has traditionally been particularly strong
in professional services and bespoke software, and has been especially active in
the provision of systems in the financial services sector. New developments
include the adoption of advanced software engineering techniques and the
design of systems kernels, used to assist productivity and enhance product
quality.
There are thought to be well over 10,000 management consultants in Britain, of
whom 3,400 are practising members of the Institute of Management Consul¬
tants. Among the largest management consultancy companies are the 29
members of the Management Consultancies Association, whose turnover
amounted to £385 million in 1988. Revenue earned within Britain comprised
£350 million, an increase of 32 per cent on the previous year, while overseas
revenue amounted to £35 million. The Association reports a growing demand for
services supporting the application of information technology, particularly
micro-processing, to all aspects of business. The Association’s members account
for some 65 per cent of Britain’s fee-paying management consultancy market.
The 31 members of the Association of Market Survey Organisations (AMSO)
accounted for about 75 per cent of total turnover by market research companies
in 1988. The turnover of AMSO members increased to £207 million in 1988 from
£179 million in 1987. The largest company, the AGB group, had a turnover of
£37 million. Research on behalf of food and soft drinks companies by AMSO
members accounted for 16 per cent of revenue, and research for all consumer
goods accounted for 40 per cent of revenue, as against 60 per cent for
business-to-business services and industrial goods.
With the steady increase in new and renovated facilities, some 80 towns and
cities are well equipped to hold conferences and exhibitions. Among the most
modern facilities are the National Exhibition Centre at Birmingham, the
Wembley Conference Centre, the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre and the
Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences in London, the Brighton Centre in
Sussex, the Harrogate Centre in North Yorkshire, the Bournemouth Interna¬
tional Centre in Dorset, St David’s Hall in Cardiff, the Scottish Exhibition and
Conference Centre in Glasgow, the G-MEX Centre in Manchester, the Royal
MANUFACTURING AND SERVICE INDUSTRIES
293
Auction
Houses
MISCEL¬
LANEOUS
SERVICES
Film and
Television
TOURISM
AND
TRAVEL
Centre in Nottingham, the English Riviera Centre in Torquay, the Com
Exchange in Cambridge and the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre.
Other large facilities are the Earls Court, Olympia, Alexandra Palace, London
Arena (Docklands) and Wembley Arena sites in London. New centres are being
constructed in Birmingham, Glasgow and Cardiff. Britain is one of the world’s
three leading countries for international conferences (the others being the
United States and France).
Britain’s chief auction houses are active in the international auction markets for
works of art, trading on the acknowledged expertise of British valuers and
dealers. The two largest houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, are established
worldwide and had turnovers of £1,356 million and £1,041 million in 1988—89
respectively.
Some 12,600 businesses provided film, theatre, literary, musical, broadcasting
and related services in Great Britain in mid-1988. There is a large number of
self-employed people in these fields. About 500,000 people work in arts-related
activities in Britain. About 390,000 people were employed in the provision of
sanitary services in 1987 and 107,000 in research and development services.
There are about 13,100 businesses connected with sport, recreation, gambling
and betting, 9,850 hairdressing and beauty parlours and 3,100 dry cleaners.
Other services include photographic studios, religious organisations, tourist
offices, learned societies, employers’ and trade union organisations and funeral
services.
Recent years have seen further development of the independent programme
production sector, and of specialised film and television services. The BBC and
the commercial television stations have agreed to meet a government target
whereby 25 per cent of original programmes will be made by independent
producers by 1993. New technical developments include origination on profes¬
sional standard video as opposed to film, and an increasing use of computer¬
generated graphics and picture manipulation in both production and post¬
production work. Production of films for cinema (an activity particularly cyclical
in nature) declined in the mid-1980s.
The Department of Trade and Industry conducts an annual inquiry into the
value of overseas transactions relating to the production and exhibition of
cinema and television material. For many years the inquiry has shown a surplus
of receipts over expenditure. In 1987 receipts by film and television companies
were £382 million, while expenditure was £268 million. Film companies’
receipts totalled £264 million and television companies’ receipts £118 million,
the North American market accounting for over half of revenue in both cases. A
total of 201 film companies and 26 television broadcasting companies were
covered in the 1987 inquiry.
Tourism is one of Britain’s most important industries and is recognised as a
major and growing source of employment. Spending by British residents and
overseas visitors on tourism in Britain during 1988 amounted to around
£19,000 million (including fares paid on travel to and from Britain). It is
estimated that about 1 -5 million jobs in Britain were supported directly or
indirectly by tourism spending in 1988. The British Tourist Authority forecasts
that around 200,000 new jobs will be created in the period 1988-93.
In 1988 overseas residents made 15-7 million visits to Britain (slightly more
than in 1987), spending £6,200 million, compared with £5,600 million in the
previous year. British residents made 29 million trips abroad and spent £8,190
million, giving a deficit on the travel account of nearly £2,000 million. About 60
294
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
per cent of overseas visitors to Britain came from Western Europe, 21 per cent
from North America and about 18 per cent from elsewhere in the world. There
was a 5 per cent increase in visits abroad by British residents in 1988; the
majority of visits (85 per cent) were to Western Europe.
Some 2,950 travel agencies, with about 7,500 offices (over 90 per cent of the
total), belong to the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA). In general travel
agents are small businesses but many ABTA members have more than one
office. There are a few large firms—for example, Lunn Poly, with some 507
branches and Thomas Cook, with about 380. Computerised information and
booking systems are being introduced in travel agencies. There are also 683 tour
operator members of ABTA; some 340 companies are both retail agents and tour
operators. ABTA operates financial protection schemes to safeguard its mem¬
bers’ customers, maintains codes of conduct drawn up with the Office of Fair
Trading, and offers a free conciliation service to help to resolve complaints
against members and an independent arbitration scheme for tour operators’
customers.
Official support for the promotion of tourism to and within Britain is provided
by the British Tourist Authority and the tourist boards for England, Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland. The boards have been asked by the Government to
encourage tourism in regions of the country where unemployment is high and
where there is potential for development. Voluntary registration schemes exist
for tourist accommodation throughout Britain and facilities offered by regis¬
tered establishments are listed in the boards’ accommodation guides. At the
beginning of 1987 the boards for England, Scotland and Wales introduced a one-
to five-crown classification scheme for hotels and other serviced accom¬
modation, based on facilities offered, and a quality grading scheme for caravan,
chalet and camping parks. In June 1989 a quality grading option was intro¬
duced within the crown classification scheme for serviced accommodation.
Grading and classification were extended to cover self-catering accommodation.
Information on tourist facilities and accommodation is available from official
information centres throughout Britain (most of which are administered by
local authorities) and on videotex information services in Britain and overseas.
Energy Policy
Energy and
Natural Resources
Energy and non-fuel minerals make an important contribution to the British
economy. The approximate value of minerals produced in 1987 was £18,193
million (representing about 4-4 per cent of gross domestic product), of which
crude oil accounted for 53 per cent, coal 24 per cent and natural gas 14 per cent.
All minerals in Great Britain are privately owned, with the exception of gold,
silver, oil and natural gas (which are owned by the Crown), and coal and some
minerals associated with coal. In Northern Ireland gold and silver are owned by
the Crown, while rights to petroleum and other minerals are vested in the
Government. On the United Kingdom Continental Shelf the right to exploit all
minerals except coal is vested in the Crown. The exclusive right to extract coal,
or license others to do so, both on land in Great Britain and under the sea, is
vested in the British Coal Corporation. Normally, ownership of minerals belongs
to the owner of the land surface but in some areas, particularly those with a long
history of mining, these rights have become separated. Mining and quarrying,
apart from coalmining, are usually carried out by privately owned companies.
Water resources are normally sufficient for domestic and industrial require¬
ments; supplies are obtained from surface sources such as mountain lakes and
from underground sources by such means as wells and boreholes.
Energy
Britain has the largest energy resources of any country in the European
Community and is a major world producer of oil, natural gas and coal. The other
main primary sources are nuclear power and some water power; secondary
sources are electricity, coke and very small quantities of town gas. Since 1980
Britain has been self-sufficient in energy in net terms as a result of the growth in
offshore oil production, and self-sufficiency should be maintained for a number
of years. Coal is the country’s richest natural resource and is expected to
maintain its role in meeting Britain’s energy needs. Nuclear power provided
about 18 per cent of electricity available from the British public supply svstem in
1988.
Private sector companies carry out offshore oil and gas production and oil
refining, while publicly owned bodies are at present responsible for most coal
production and electricity generation and distribution. The electricity supply
industry in Great Britain is to be restructured and offered for sale, while the
Government is considering ways of privatising the electricity supply industry in
Northern Ireland. The Secretary of State for Energy is responsible for these
industries in Great Britain, except for electricity in Scotland, which is under the
Secretary of State for Scotland. The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is
responsible for all energy matters there.
Energy policy is designed to ensure the secure, adequate and economic
provision of energy to meet Britain s requirements. The Government, while
encouraging the exploitation of Britain s diversity of energy sources, seeks to
296
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
ENERGY
EFFICIENCY
ensure that all economic forms of energy are produced, supplied and used as
efficiently as possible, having regard also to the international application of the
technologies involved. The Government stresses the importance of the con¬
tinued profitable development of Britain’s oil and gas resources, the develop¬
ment of a competitive coal industry, the safe and economic development of
nuclear power, and the most cost-effective use of energy through the adoption of
energy efficiency measures. It also funds an extensive research and development
programme into renewable sources of energy.
Privatisation has already had a considerable impact in the energy field, with
the return of British Gas and of Britoil (Britain’s fourth largest producer of oil
and gas and a major explorer in the North Sea) to the private sector, the planned
privatisation of the electricity supply industry, and the Government’s wish to
privatise the coal industry in the next few years. It considers that these
industries will thus improve their competitiveness and efficiency, free of
government pressures, and attract new investment to provide cheaper and
cleaner energy.
Britain is actively engaged in international collaboration on energy questions,
notably through its membership of the European Community and of the
International Energy Agency (IEA, a body with 21 member countries attached to
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).
Inland primary energy consumption amounted to 340-1 million tonnes of coal
equivalent in 1988 (see Table 31), 0-6 per cent more than in 1987. Energy
consumption by final users in 1988 amounted to 59,471 million therms1 on a
‘heat supplied’ basis, of which transport consumed 30 per cent, industrial users
28 per cent, domestic users about 28 per cent, and commerce, agriculture and
public services 13 per cent.
Table 31: Inland Energy Consumption (in terms of primary sources)
million tonnes coal equivalent
1978 1983
1986
1987
1988
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear energy
Hydro-electric power
Net imports of electricity
139-3
119-9
65-1
13-4
2-1
106-1
111-5
74-8
18-1
2-4
112-6
113-5
83-6
21-3
2-4
— 1-7
109-3
116-2
85-9
19-8
2-1
4-7
116-1
112-0
81-5
22-9
2-4
5-2
Total
339-8 312-9 335-2 338-1 340-1
Source: Department of Energy.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
The Government encourages the improvement of energy efficiency through the
work of the Energy Efficiency Office (EEO). Since its establishment in 1983 the
EEO has promoted efficiency in various ways, and energy savings of over £500
million a year are being achieved. Between 1985 and 1987 Britain reduced its
energy intensity (the amount of energy used for each pound of gross domestic
product) by 7 per cent—twice the average rate of the European Community as a
whole.
1 1 therm = 105,506 kilojoules.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
297
OIL AND GAS
Offshore
Supplies
OIL
North Sea
Fields
The EEO, with a budget of £15 million in 1989-90, is now concentrating on
key areas of energy use and offers advice backed by technical support. In
particular, it promotes the work of its regional energy efficiency officers and
provides a best practice programme which gives industrial and commercial
consumers advice on energy efficiency and on how it can be improved.
The community insulation programme has insulated over 600,000 homes of
low-income householders and pensioners. Further work is carried out under the
homes insulation scheme (operated by the Department of the Environment and
by the Scottish and Welsh Offices), which gives grants to house owners and
tenants, and especially to low-income households, for loft insulation. About 90
per cent of accessible lofts have been treated.
The Government promotes investment in combined heat and power—the
co-generation of electricity and heat—within the best practice programme. It
also believes that the technology, with its high levels of fuel efficiency and
consequent environmental benefits, is well placed to take advantage of a
competitive power market.
Britain’s energy position is strengthened by substantial oil and gas reserves
offshore in the United Kingdom Continental Shelf (UKCS). The total area
covered by production licences is 96,512 sq km (37,263 sq miles) out of a total
designated area of about 651,650 sq km (251,600 sq miles), over which Britain
has exercised its rights to explore and exploit the seabed and subsoil.
Expenditure on offshore and onshore exploration and development amounted to
some £3,066 million in 1988. By the end of 1988, 3,831 wells had been or were
being drilled in the UKCS (1,776 development wells, 1,300 exploration wells and
755 appraisal wells).
The Offshore Supplies Office (OSO) of the Department of Energy is responsible
for ensuring that British industry has a full and fair opportunity in the supply of
goods and services to the UKCS. In 1988 goods and services valued at £2,523
million were ordered for UKCS developments, the British share of orders
received being £2,131 million (84 per cent). Britain’s offshore supplies industry
is the second largest in the world (after that of the United States) and the OSO is
increasing resources to help companies develop contacts overseas.
Before the 1970s Britain was almost wholly dependent for its oil supplies on
imports, the only indigenous supplies coming from a small number of
land-based oilfields. However, the first notable offshore discovery of oil in the
UKCS was made in 1969 and the first oil was brought ashore in 1975. Output of
crude oil from the UKCS in 1988 averaged 2-3 million barrels (313,000 tonnes) a
day, making Britain the world’s seventh largest producer.
There were 36 offshore fields producing crude oil in 1988, and the Secretary of
State for Energy approved 21 new offshore developments during the year.
The largest producing fields are Brent and Forties. Production from most large
fields is controlled from production platforms of either steel or concrete which
have been built to withstand severe weather, including gusts of wind of up to
260 km/h (160 mph) and waves of 30 m (100 ft).
Primary oil production, including condensates and petroleum gases,
amounted to about 114-4 million tonnes in 1988 (see Table 32). Output is
forecast to decline slowly, but Britain should remain self-sufficient in oil well
into the 1990s and a significant producer into the twenty-first century. The
Government s oil policy is intended to encourage exploration and development
with the objective of maximising economic oil production for the foreseeable
future. Remaining recoverable reserves of UKCS oil in the proven plus probable
Oil
50
 1 
100 150 km
_J l
 1
100 miles
Offshore oilfields in production
or under development
Onshore oil finds
Oil refineries (over 1 million
tonnes annual capacity)
Crude oil pipelines
Terminals
Norway o <
ol
I
Magnus
Deveron
Osprey
Eider
Tern
N Cormorant
S Cormorant
N W Hutton
Heather
£
Shetland M
Islands
Don
Thistle gg
Murchison *
Statfjord
Dunlin
Brent
Hutton
N Alwyn
Ninian
Emerald
Orkney
islands cVp
Jy
Highlander
Claymore
Nesy|Lryl
f Crawford
Miller
Chanter
Balmoral
— Maureen
3Sl%Cyrus
SBamis
Forties
/ wui- , s Montrose
Buchan Kittiwake *Arbroati
Ekofisk
Innes
^—-Argyll
Duncan
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
299
Structure of the
Oil Industry
Land-based
Fields
Refineries
Table 32: Oil Statistics
million tonnes
1978 1983 1986 1987 1988
Oil production3
land
offshore
Refinery output
Deliveries of petroleum products
for inland consumption
Exports (including re-exports):
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
Imports:
crude petroleum
refined petroleum products
and process oils
01 0-3 0-5
53-9 114-6 126-5
106-0 70-9 74-1
99-8 64-5 69-2
2-8 68-3 82-1
17-1 15-9 20-2
0-6 0-8
122-7 113-6
74-7
67-7
79-8
71-6
80-6 63-8
18-5 18-6
113-3
22-6
22-8 32-6
17-3 22-9
33-1
20-5
32-8
21-2
Sources: Department of Energy and HM Customs and Excise.
a Crude oil plus condensates and petroleum gases derived at onshore treatment plants.
categories amount to between 570 and 1,190 million tonnes, while the total
remaining reserves of the UKCS could be as high as 5,150 million tonnes. The
Petroleum Act 1987 empowers the Secretary of State to require those responsi¬
ble to draw up programmes for the abandonment of offshore installations when
the first fields cease production in the early 1990s.
About 250 companies, including several large oil companies, operate in Britain
or engage in work in the UKCS. The two leading British oil companies are
British Petroleum (BP) and Shell Transport and Trading, which are the two
largest industrial companies in Britain in terms of turnover. Exploration and
development of the UKCS are carried out by the private sector. From January
1989 the Government has taken all royalty from UKCS oil in cash, instead of
marketing the crude oil received as petroleum royalty taken in kind, and has
announced its intention to end its rights under participation agreements with
the oil companies.
Onshore production of crude oil is much less significant than offshore
production. In 1988 it amounted to 761,000 tonnes, about 60 per cent of which
came from Britain’s largest onshore field at Wytch Farm (Dorset), which started
production in 1979. In addition to minor production from various mining
licensees, other onshore fields include Humbly Grove (Hampshire), Crosby
Warren (Humberside) and Welton (Lincolnshire): fields under development are
Stainton, Nettleham and West Firsby (Lincolnshire), West Beckingham and
Farleys Wood (Nottinghamshire) and Horndean (Hampshire). At the end of 1988,
286 licences for onshore exploration were in force, covering an area of 51,500
sq km (19,900 sq miles).
At the beginning of 1989 the distillation capacity of Britain’s 13 oil refineries
stood at 91 million tonnes a year. Excess capacity has largely been eliminated,
while existing refineries have been adapted to the changing pattern of demand
300
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consumption
and Trade
Oil Pipelines
Research
GAS
by the construction of new upgrading facilities (‘catalytic crackers’), which are
leading to a higher output of unleaded petrol and other lighter products at the
expense of fuel oil.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption (excluding refinery
consumption) in 1988 totalled 71-6 million tonnes, including 23-2 million
tonnes of motor spirit, 8-2 million tonnes of kerosene, 17-8 million tonnes of gas
and diesel oil (including derv fuel used in road vehicles) and 111 million tonnes
of fuel oil.
Exports of crude oil amounted to 63-8 million tonnes in 1988. Virtually all
exports went to Britain’s partners in the European Community and the IEA, the
largest markets being the Netherlands, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Canada and the United States. Some 18-6 million tonnes of petroleum
products were also exported. Though self-sufficient, Britain continues to import
other crude oils, to enable the full range of petroleum products to be made
efficiently and economically. The main sources of crude oil imports in 1988 were
Norway (which supplied about 53 per cent by value), Iran (6-3 per cent), Saudi
Arabia (5-8 per cent) and the Soviet Union (3-4 per cent).
Oil pipelines brought ashore about 75 per cent of offshore oil in 1988. Some
1,733 km (1,077 miles) of major submarine pipeline bring oil ashore from the
North Sea oilfields (see map, p 298). Major crude oil onshore pipelines in
operation from harbours, land terminals or offshore moorings to refineries
include those connecting Finnart to Grangemouth, Tranmere to Stanlow, and
Cruden Bay to Grangemouth. Onshore pipelines also carry refined products to
major marketing areas; for example, a 423-km (263-mile) pipeline runs from
Milford Haven to the Midlands and Manchester.
The leading oil companies have extensive research and development pro¬
grammes in support of oil exploration and production and on new and improved
fuels. There are research centres at Sunbury-on-Thames in Surrey (BP),
Thornton in Cheshire and Sittingbourne in Kent (Shell), and Abingdon in
Oxfordshire (Esso). The main government research and development effort in
offshore technology is undertaken by the Department of Energy. A Petroleum
Science and Technology Institute, to be set up in Edinburgh, and run by
Heriot-Watt and Edinburgh universities, is to be funded by the oil industry and
the Department of Energy. Its activities will concentrate on exploration,
appraisal, development and production. Advice on offshore safety is provided by
the Offshore Safety and Technology Board. The Offshore Industry Advisory
Board is the Government’s principal source of high-level co-ordinated advice on
the development of strategy for the offshore supply industry. Two of its four
committees advise it on issues relating to the European Community and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, research and
development programmes with overseas partners, joint exploitation of export
markets, and the export of British North Sea technical expertise, regarded as
crucial to the offshore supplies industry. The other two advise on the
implementation of research and development and on oil and gas activities in the
UKCS. Funding is available for the development of innovative products and
techniques.
Public supply of manufactured gas in Britain began in the early nineteenth
century in central London. For many years gas was produced from coal but
during the 1960s growing imports of oil brought about production of town gas
from oil-based feedstocks. Following the first commercial natural gas discovery
in the UKCS in 1965 and the start of offshore gas production in 1967, supplies
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
301
Structure
Production
Transmission
and Storage
Consumption
of offshore natural gas grew rapidly and by 1977 natural gas had replaced town
gas in the public supply system in Great Britain.
Under the Gas Act 1986, the gas industry in Great Britain, in state ownership
since 1949, was privatised and the assets of the British Gas Corporation
transferred to the new company, British Gas pic. The Act also established the
Office of Gas Supply, to monitor British Gas’s activities as a public gas supplier,
and the Gas Consumers Council, to look after the interests of consumers.
British Gas has about 2-7 million shareholders. The Government holds
approximately 3-3 per cent of the shares, which were set aside for the share
bonus for private shareholders who retain shares for three years. In 1988-89 the
turnover of British Gas and its subsidiary companies amounted to £7,526
million, of which gas supply accounted for £6,636 million. Current cost
operating profit was £1,120 million. British Gas has some 79,000 employees.
In 1988 indigenous production of natural gas, excluding that flared or vented at
terminals or fields, amounted to 45,751 million cubic metres, of which 3,634
million cubic metres were used for drilling, production and pumping operations
offshore. Supplies of UKCS gas to British Gas (42,000 million cubic metres in
1988) were slightly lower than in 1987 and accounted for 79-8 per cent of its
total natural gas supplies, the remainder coming from Norway. UKCS produc¬
tion comes mainly from eight major gasfields: Leman, Frigg (UK), Indefatigable,
North Alwyn, Viking, Hewett, West Sole and Victor. In addition, gas from the
South Morecambe field in the Irish Sea and from the twin North Sean and South
Sean fields is used to augment supplies to meet peak demand in winter. Among
developments approved in 1988 were Barque, Clipper, Della, Amethyst (East and
West), Camelot, and South-west Indefatigable.
Remaining recoverable gas reserves, including possible gas from existing
discoveries and potential future discoveries, are estimated to be in the range of
950,000 million to 3-17 million million cubic metres. Indigenous offshore
natural gas reserves are likely to meet most of the British demand well into the
1990s.
In 1988 British Gas purchased a number of oil and gas production and
exploration companies, and is exploring for or producing oil and gas in some 15
countries. Revenue from exploration and production activity increased by 59 per
cent (to £357 million) in 1988—89.
The British Gas national high-pressure pipeline system of some 5,330 km
(3,330 miles) provides for the distribution of natural gas. It is supplied by feeder
mains from four North Sea shore terminals, and from a terminal in Barrow-in-
Furness (Cumbria). The whole of the high-pressure transmission system is
regularly inspected.
Various methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions are
used, including salt cavities and storage facilities for liquefied natural gas.
British Gas has also developed the partially depleted Rough field as a major gas
store. This, the first such use of an offshore field, involves the injection into the
Rough reservoir in summer of gas drawn from the national transmission system
for recovery at high rates during periods of peak winter demand.
Sales of gas by the supply industry in Britain totalled 18,046 million therms in
1988-89. About 45 per cent of all gas sold by British Gas to its 17-4 million
consumers is for industrial and commercial purposes, the remainder being for
household use. Gas is used extensively in industries requiring the control of
temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy, such as the pottery industry, and in
certain processes for making iron and steel products. In 1988-89, 5,252 million
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
303
Research
COAL
British Coal
Corporation
Production
Development
therms of gas were sold to industry in Britain, and 2,870 million therms to
commercial and other non-domestic users. An increasingly large part of
domestic demand is for gas for central heating. In 1988-89, 9,924 million
therms were sold to domestic users.
British Gas spends some £80 million a year on its research and development
programme, carried out at five research stations throughout Britain. It has
information exchange and research agreements with a number of overseas gas
companies and carries out research in collaboration with universities and
industry both in Britain and overseas. Its research programme covers engineer¬
ing, design, materials technology and instrumentation, and electronics, related
to all aspects of the gas business, from exploration and production, storage and
transmission, and pipeline inspection to distribution and utilisation.
British Gas’s international consultancy service makes a wide range of
technology, products and processes available for sale overseas.
Coalmining in Britain can be traced back to the thirteenth centuiy. It played a
crucial part in the industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, and in its peak year, 1913, the industry produced 292 million tonnes
of coal, exported 74-2 million tonnes and employed over a million workers. In
1947 the coalmines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal Industry
Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board, subsequently
the British Coal Corporation. The Government has announced its intention, if
elected, of privatising the coal industry in the next Parliament.
British Coal has, with limited exceptions, exclusive rights over the extraction of
coal in Great Britain, but is empowered to license private operators to work
small mines and opencast sites. It also has powers to work other minerals, where
discoveries are made in the course of searching for, or working, coal; and to
engage in certain petrochemicals activities beneficial to the future of the coal
industry. Retail sales are largely in private hands, although British Coal makes
bulk sales to large industrial consumers.
In 1988—89 total output of 103-8 million tonnes comprised 83-5 million tonnes
of deep-mined coal, 16-8 million tonnes from opencast mines and 2-4 million
tonnes from other sources (including licensed collieries and tip coal). At the end
of March 1989 there were 86 British Coal collieries in operation. The main
coal-bearing regions are shown on the map on p 304.
Britain s coal industry is one of the largest in Western Europe, and one of
the world’s most technologically advanced. British Coal has a substantial capital
investment programme, which amounted to £547 million in 1988-89. Techni¬
cal progress has been concentrated on equipment capable of obtaining higher
output from fewer faces. By early 1989 some 55 per cent of all coal faces were
equipped with heavy duty supports available in all seam sections. New designs of
power loader and face conveyor are being brought in whenever they are
cost-effective. Production at the new mining complex at Selby in North Yorkshire
(one of the world’s most advanced deep mines) is planned to build up to 10
million tonnes a year. Total estimated expenditure on the development of a new
mine at Asfordby within the Vale of Belvoir (Leicestershire) is £471 million.
British Coal has also submitted planning applications for a new mine at
Hawkhurst Moor (Warwickshire), which would produce some 4 million tonnes a
year following an initial investment of about £400 million.
The first coal to be discovered on a significant scale in Northern Ireland is
some 1,000 million tonnes of lignite (brown coal) on the eastern shore of Lough
ilasgow
Edinburgh T*.
Carlisle X *
Workington Durham
poncastei
Sheffield |
lanchester
Nottingham
Vale of Belvoir
lingham
London
Bristol
CoalHelds
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 km
i i i i i I—I
I 1 1 1 1
0 20 40 60 80 miles
Coalfields
Potential coalfields
Potential lignite fields
Newcastle
upon Tyne
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
305
Consumption
Research
ELECTRICITY
Structure
Neagh and under the lake bed. Further deposits have been discovered and are
being appraised to determine their size and the feasibility of mining.
In 1988-89 inland consumption of coal was 111-5 million tonnes, of which 74
per cent was by power stations, 10 per cent by coke ovens and 6 per cent by
domestic users. With a substantial proportion of coal being used by power
stations for electricity generation, British Coal sales of coal to them totalled 81
million tonnes in 1988-89. Exports of coal in 1988-89 were 1-8 million tonnes,
while imports amounted to 12 million tonnes.
In 1988—89 British Coal spent £33 million on research. It has two main research
establishments: the Technical Department at Stanhope Bretby (Staffordshire),
for work on mining methods and equipment and developing systems for remote
and automatic control: and the Coal Research Establishment at Stoke Orchard
(near Cheltenham), concentrating on the utilisation of coal, including research
and development on improved combustion and coal and ash handling techni¬
ques, together with new ways of making gaseous, liquid and smokeless fuels
from coal. The Department of Energy is spending £2-6 million to support
additional research on the environment and on clean coal technologies,
including advanced combustion systems for electricity generation, although the
Government considers that those wishing to exploit the technology commercial¬
ly should fund the later stages of development. Britain is responsible through a
British Coal subsidiary for the management of a service providing information
on, and analyses of, coal topics and which is supported by member countries of
the International Energy Agency.
Under the Electricity Act 1947 the electricity supply industry in Great Britain
was brought into public ownership in 1948, although two subsequent Acts
(1954 and 1957) effected a measure of decentralisation. Electricity from the
public supply system is available to all premises in Britain except for some very
remote households. The public supply industry employed some 135,000 people
in 1988-89 and invested £1,589 million in 1987-88. The main transmission
system (national grid) in Great Britain is one of the largest fully interconnected
power networks in the Western world. In 1987-88 the income of the industry in
England and Wales was £11,367 million. In Scotland in 1988-89 the turnover of
the South of Scotland Electricity Board (SSEB) and the North of Scotland
Hydro-Electric Board (NSHEB) was £976 million and £348 million respectively.
The figure for Northern Ireland Electricity was £338 million.
The Electricity Act 1989 provides for the restructuring and offer for sale of the
electricity supply industry in England and Wales and in Scotland. The
Government’s privatisation proposals have incorporated six guiding principles:
decisions about electricity supply should be driven by the needs of the customer;
competition is the best guarantee of the customer’s interest: regulation should
be designed to promote competition, oversee prices and protect customer
interests in areas where natural monopolies remain; security and safety of
supply must be maintained; customers should be given new rights; and all who
work in the industry should be offered a direct stake in their future, with the
companies free to manage their commercial opportunities without interference
from government.
In England and Wales the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB),
responsible for the operation and maintenance of power stations and owner of
the national grid, will be split into three companies: PowerGen, owning 30 per
cent of the CEGB’s generating capacity, all non-nuclear; National Power,
comprising most of the remainder of the CEGB’s generating capacity, fossil-
306
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Consumption
Generation
fuelled and nuclear; and a national grid company, ownership of which will be
transferred to the 12 area electricity boards (each with a statutory duty to supply
electricity). These will be privatised as 12 supply companies, with which existing
and potential private generators will generally establish contracts. The Electric¬
ity Council, the central co-ordinating body of the industry in England and Wales,
is to be abolished, but some of its service functions will be carried on by an
Electricity Association, jointly owned by the privatised electricity companies of
Great Britain. A Director General of Electricity Supply will oversee the protection
and promotion of consumer interests.
In Scotland the NSHEB and the SSEB generate, transmit and distribute
electricity. The boundary separating their areas runs from Loch Long on the
Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of Tay (see map, p 307). Privatisation in
Scotland will involve the creation of two vertically integrated regional com¬
panies, one based on the SSEB, the other on the NSHEB.
The Government has also announced its intention to privatise the electricity
supply industry in Northern Ireland, where generation, transmission and
distribution are at present carried out by Northern Ireland Electricity, a public
corporation.
Sales of electricity in 1988 amounted to 256,317 gigawatt hours (GWh).
Domestic users took 35 per cent of the total, industry 36 per cent and
commercial and other users the remainder. About one-fifth of domestic sales is
for space heating, one-sixth for water heating and one-tenth for cooking.
Electricity is used in industry mainly for motive power, melting, heating and
lighting. It is supplied to almost 25 million consumers, of whom 22 million are
in England and Wales, 1-7 million are supplied by the SSEB, 597,000 by the
NSHEB and 581,000 are in Northern Ireland.
Generation by the public electricity supply industry in Britain amounted to
288,543 GWh in 1988. Conventional steam power stations provided over 77 per
cent of the total, nuclear stations 20-4 per cent and gas turbine, hydro-electric
and diesel plant 21 per cent. Public supply power stations consumed 120
million tonnes of coal equivalent in 1988, of which coal accounted for 69 per
cent and oil 8 per cent. The output capacity of the 167 generating stations of the
electricity boards at the end of March 1989 totalled 66,996 megawatts (MW),
including 55,123 MW run by the CEGB, 7,188 MW by the SSEB, 2,585 MW by
the NSHEB and 2,100 MW by Northern Ireland Electricity. An analysis of
electricity generation by and output capacity of the public supply system is given
in Table 33.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively small
(19,593 GWh in 1988). The major sources outside the fuel industries are the
chemicals, engineering, paper, and iron and steel industries, and the nuclear
power plants of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) and
British Nuclear Fuels pic. In 1988 these nuclear plants supplied 4,589 GWh of
electricity to the public supply system.
The most recent large-scale power stations are based on units of 500 MW and
660 MW. Station capacities have increased and there are 15 stations with a
capacity of 2,000 MW or more each, including Kingsnorth (Kent), Europe’s
largest mixed-fuel station burning either coal or oil. The Drax coal-fired station
(North Yorkshire), which has an output capacity of 4,000 MW, is the largest
coal-fired station in Western Europe. The larger units have a higher thermal
efficiency (the ratio of the net electrical energy output to the heat energy input)
than earlier units, and their introduction, coupled with the closure of less
efficient plant, has resulted in a gradual rise in overall thermal efficiency,
leading to substantial savings in fuel consumption. Average thermal efficiency of
Peterhead ■
Chapelcross
▲ Dinorwig \
A Ffestiniog
• Trawsfynydd
Ratcliffe-on-Soar
Rheidol v
Sizewell A •
Sizewell BO
Tilbury
W. Thurrock | • Bradwell
Pembi
irthaw
Didcot
Oldbury
Dungeness Ba^
Dungeness A
;ley R. A Hinkley R. B
Electricity
Shetland
Islands
Orkney
Islands
Dounreay
Fasnakyle
★
20 40 60 80 100120 km
J I l l l l
A Foyers
60
80 miles
Errochty
^Clunie
lannoch +
rz-. ★ ★
ochay
Conventional power stations
(1,000 MW and over)
Nuclear power stations
Under construction
jperated
)y SSEB from
January 1990
Power-producing reactors of
the UKAEA or BNFL
* Cockenzie
Hunterston A *
★
Hydro-electric power stations
(over 45- MW capacity)
Pumped storage schemes
Boundary of the SSEB
and NSHEB
Blyth B
Hartlepool
Calder Hall
••
I Heysham II
Ferrybridge Ca
Eggborough
■ Fiddler’s
Drax
West B
Cottam
308
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear Power
Nuclear Power
Development
Table 33: Generation by and Capacity of Public Supply Power Stations
Electricity generated (GWh) Output
  Per cent capacity3
1978 1983 1988 1988 (MW)
Nuclear plant
Other steam plant
Gas turbines and
oil engines
Pumped-storage plant
33,339 45,776 58,867
228,193 208,514 222,876
688
1,183
356
1,897
507
2,320
Other hydro-electric plant 3,388 3,892 3,973
20
77
6,973
51,882
2,982
2,788
1,293
Total
266,791 260,436 288,543
100 65,922b
Electricity supplied (net)c 248,003 241,305 266,965
Source: Department of Energy.
aAt 31 December 1988.
b This total Includes 4 MW of wind power.
c Electricity generated less electricity used at power stations (including electricity used for pumping at
pumped-storage stations).
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
conventional steam stations in England and Wales was 33-7 per cent in
1988—89. The Government is considering proposals for future generation in
Northern Ireland, to take effect from the mid-1990s, including a lignite-fired
power station.
To control acid emissions the CEGB plans to fit some coal-fired power stations
with flue gas desulphurisation equipment. The first of these retrofits, at Drax,
was announced in 1989. In addition, the Government has endorsed a ten-year
programme to control nitrogen oxide emissions through the installation of low
nitrogen oxide burners at the CEGB’s 12 largest power stations, at a cost of
£180 million.
The pumped-storage station at Dinorwig (Gwynedd), the largest of its type in
Europe, has an average generated output of 1,728 MW. (In pumped-storage
schemes electricity generated in off-peak periods is used to pump water to
high-level reservoirs from which it descends to drive turbines, rapidly providing
a large supply of electricity at peak periods or to meet sudden increases in
demand.)
The CEGB, together with Electricite de France, has constructed a 2,000-MW
cross-Channel cable link, which started operating in 1986, increasing the
capacity for the transmission of electricity between the two countries.
Britain has been developing nuclear power for several decades and in 1956 the
world’s first industrial-scale nuclear power station, at Calder Hall (Cumbria),
began to supply electricity to the national grid. The Government believes that
nuclear power has a vital role in helping to meet Britain’s long-term energy
requirements. There are 12 nuclear power stations in operation controlled by
the CEGB and three by the SSEB. Four other stations also feed electricity to the
national grid: the two original Magnox stations (both with a net capacity of
about 200 MW) operated by British Nuclear Fuels pic at Calder Hall and
Chapelcross (Dumfries and Galloway); and two prototype stations run by the
UKAEA—at Winfrith (Dorset) and Dounreay (Highland).
Under the first commercial programme, nine Magnox stations with a total gross
capacity of about 4,000 MW were commissioned between 1962 and 1971. The
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
309
Nuclear
Power and
Privatisation
British Nuclear
Fuels
Nuclear
Research
second series of orders was based on the Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor (AGR).
Hinkley Point B (Somerset) and Hunterston B (Strathclyde) began operating in
1976, while three more AGRs began operating in 1984: Dungeness B (Kent),
Hartlepool (Cleveland) and Heysham (Lancashire). Two further AGRs—a second
station at Heysham and a station at Torness (Lothian)—began operating in
1988. All the AGRs are 1,320-MW units except Dungeness B (1,200 MW) and
Torness (1,400 MW). Construction of a pressurised water reactor (PWR) of
1,182 MW at Sizewell (Suffolk) has started and the £1,860 million project should
be completed in 1992. A public inquiry is being held into the CEGB’s plans for a
PWR at Hinkley Point C. It has also applied for permission to build a PWR at
Wylfa (Gwynedd).
The Government considers that security of electricity supply must be based on a
diversity of sources, including nuclear power, which it sees as the least polluting
major electricity source. Each new supply company will be statutorily obliged to
buy a minimum amount of non-fossil-fuelled generating capacity, including
nuclear. The industry will be expected to continue to prepare for all foreseen
nuclear decommissioning, reprocessing and waste management. The Magnox
stations, however, will remain under government control until 2002, when the
last station will have been closed.
British Nuclear Fuels pic provides services covering the whole nuclear fuel cycle:
uranium conversion, uranium enrichment (through its shareholding in Urenco
Ltd), fuel element fabrication, transport and reprocessing of spent fuel, and the
manufacture of specialised fuel element components. All of its shares are held by
the Government. The company, with headquarters at Risley (Cheshire),
conducts operations at four further sites: Springfields (Lancashire), where fuel
is manufactured; Capenhurst (Cheshire), where uranium is enriched to provide
fuel for nuclear reactors; Sellafield (Cumbria), where Calder Hall is located and
where spent fuel is reprocessed; and Chapelcross.
There is a large-scale investment programme in progress involving expendi¬
ture of some £5,000 million over the next ten years. The major part of this
expenditure relates to the Sellafield site and comprises the refurbishment of
facilities for treating spent fuel from Magnox power stations, the construction of
a thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP) which will take spent fuel from
British and overseas oxide reactors, and the construction of facilities to process
and package radioactive waste. Treatment plants worth some £500 million are
being built to further the company’s objective of virtually eliminating the
radioactivity levels of liquid discharges. The remainder of the programme
involves the construction of further centrifuge enrichment plant at Capenhurst,
and refurbishment and construction of new plant at Springfields.
The UKAEA carries out research and development to ensure that nuclear power
is economic, safe and environmentally acceptable. Its work is undertaken by
research establishments at Harwell (Oxfordshire), Risley, Winfrith, Springfields,
Windscale (Cumbria), Dounreay and Culham (Oxfordshire). In addition, safety
research is carried out at the Safety and Reliability Directorate at Culcheth
(Cheshire). The UKAEA operates as a trading fund, which allows it to function
on a commercial basis. Under these arrangements the UKAEA’s research and
development work funded by the Department of Energy is on a customer-
contractor basis. The UKAEA also carries out work for a number of other
customers, including the electricity generating boards, British Nuclear Fuels
pic, other government departments and industry.
Co-operation on nuclear energy between Britain and other countries takes
place within a framework of intergovernmental agreements and membership of
310
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Nuclear
Safety
Emergency
Plans
Research on
Electricity
bodies such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, and through direct
links on research between the UKAEA and equivalent organisations overseas.
Britain takes part in the co-operative research programmes of the European
Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), including one on establishing the
feasibility of achieving controlled thermonuclear fusion. A major component of
this programme is the Joint European Torus (JET) project at Culham, which
started operating in 1983.
The Government and the nuclear industry give high priority to safety at nuclear
installations and the industry has an excellent safety record. Britain has a
rigorous system of nuclear safety regulation. The Health and Safety Executive’s
Nuclear Installations Inspectorate ensures that high standards of safety are
incorporated into the design, construction, operation and maintenance of all
nuclear plant. While the safety of such plant in Britain is the ultimate
responsibility of the nuclear operator, the Inspectorate has extensive powers and
an operator must satisfy it before a licence is granted. The Inspectorate also has
the power to shut down a plant if it is believed to be unsafe and may also require
improvements to an installation if it believes the appropriate safety standards
are not being met. Operators must protect their workers and the public by
complying with the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974, as well as with the
conditions of their nuclear site licences under the Nuclear Installations Act
1965, and by keeping discharges within the limits and conditions set by
authorisations granted under the Radioactive Substances Act 1960. In England
and Wales authorisations are granted jointly by the Secretary of State for the
Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and in
Scotland by the Secretary of State for Scotland. The terms of the authorisations
ensure that those most exposed to the effects of discharges receive less than the
maximum dose limit recommended by the International Commission on
Radiological Protection. Within the limits, operators of nuclear facilities are
required to keep discharges as low as reasonably achievable and failure to do so
makes them liable to prosecution. Compliance with the legislation is overseen by
the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate, by the Inspectorate of Pollution in
England and Wales, and by the Industrial Pollution Inspectorate in Scotland.
Britain plays a major part in international discussions on nuclear safety.
International conventions have been established on the early notification of a
nuclear accident which might have possible transboundary effects, and an
exchange of information concerning the operation and management of nuclear
facilities. Britain also has bilateral agreements with Denmark, France, the
Netherlands, Norway and the Soviet Union on early notification of a nuclear
accident.
The precautions taken in the design and construction of nuclear installations in
Britain and the high safety standards in their operation and maintenance
reduce the chance of accidents which might affect the public to an extremely low
level. However, all operators are required to prepare emergency plans, including
those for dealing with an accidental release of radioactivity, which are regularly
tested under the supervision of the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate.
After privatisation a collective programme of research in England and Wales,
hitherto co-ordinated by the Electricity Council, will be the responsibility of the
industry as a whole. Some of the work is already done in collaboration with the
two Scottish electricity boards and Northern Ireland Electricity, which contri¬
bute towards its cost (£194 million in 1987—88). There is also collaboration
between the supply industry and the plant manufacturers to co-ordinate
research on plant and systems. The research establishments at present run by
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
311
RENEWABLE
SOURCES OF
ENERGY
the CEGB comprise the Central Electricity Research Laboratories at Leather-
head (Surrey), the Berkeley Nuclear Laboratories in Gloucestershire and the
Marchwood Engineering Laboratories on Southampton Water. Research on
distribution technology and electricity utilisation is at present undertaken at
the Electricity Council Research Centre at Capenhurst (Cheshire) and by the
area boards.
The Department of Energy is supporting research and development in the
renewable energy technologies, to stimulate the full economic exploitation of
alternative energy sources and encourage industry to develop internal and
export markets. The present phase of its detailed research programme,
published in 1988 and comprising over 250 projects worth some £60 million,
aims to promote the commercialisation of those renewable technologies which
are economically attractive and to reduce the uncertainty in the economics and
potential contribution of those which are promising but still uncertain. The
Department is providing £17-9 million in funding for 1989-90 and work is
concentrated on the most promising technologies.
Wind power constitutes the most promising renewable energy source for
electricity generation. Three demonstration wind parks, jointly funded by the
Department of Energy and the CEGB, and costing £30 million, are to be built
between 1990 and 1992 at sites in England and Wales. Each park will have an
area of 3 to 4 sq km (1-2 to 1-5 sq miles) and will contain 25 vertical- or
horizontal-axis turbines each 30 m (100 ft) high with 30 m diameter blades and
with an output of 300 to 500 kW. They are expected to provide electricity for
15,000 people. At one of the sites, Capel Cynon (Dyfed), investigations have been
completed. The Department supports three other major projects in progress: a
vertical-axis wind turbine, inaugurated in 1986 at Carmarthen Bay (Dyfed); a
wind turbine, in collaboration with the NSHEB, on Orkney, inaugurated in
1987; and a 1-MW, 55-m (180-ft) diameter turbine at Richborough (Kent), to be
commissioned later in 1989. Approval has also been given for two new
generators at Carmarthen (one vertical-axis to generate 500 kW, the other
horizontal-axis to generate 330 kW) in 1989. The Energy Research Group of the
Science and Engineering Research Council is supporting a number of projects
on the integration of wind and diesel electrical generation, which has particular
relevance to small, isolated communities.
Under its geothermal hot dry rock programme, the Department is investi¬
gating the economic possibilities of extracting heat from rocks at a depth of 2 to
6 km (1-25 to 4 miles). Research involving government expenditure of over £25
million since 1977 has been extended at a cost of £815 million over three years
from 1988. The work is mainly carried out by the Camborne School of Mines in
Cornwall, where a project is being conducted to establish the technology for
creating a suitable deep underground heat exchange zone from which the heat
could be withdrawn, and where a potential resource of between 750 and 3,000
terawatt hours1 has been identified. The project has already made an important
contribution to microseismic technology, and new tools and techniques are now
used commercially by the oil and gas industries.
Tidal power is one of the most promising of the renewable technologies for
large-scale electricity generation. Its exceptionally high tidal range makes the
Severn estuary one of the best potential sites in the world and the Department of
Energy is funding, with the Severn Tidal Power Group, a £4-2 million study into
the economic viability of a Severn tidal barrage. The Government is also making
a 50 per cent contribution to a further phase of studies, costing £1-3 million,
1 1 terawatt hour = 1,000 million kilowatt hours.
312
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Exploration
Production
into an energy barrage on the Mersey estuary, and to generic and environmental
impact studies.
Passive solar design is considered the best way to utilise solar energy in
Britain and has already proved cost-effective in both domestic and non-domestic
buildings, using their form and fabric to admit, store and distribute solar energy
for heating and improving daylight. The Department of Energy has increased
expenditure on its research and development programme, which includes over
30 projects worth some £3-6 million and involves architects, schools of
architecture and developers, while the Department of Trade and Industry has
funded work on photovoltaic cells, which convert sunlight directly to electricity.
A major project initiated in 1987, with European Community backing and
including the British glass manufacturer Pilkingtons pic, was the establishment
of a test centre at Strathclyde University to facilitate experiments on passive
solar design and equipment.
Biofuels offer possibly the largest contribution from the renewable energy
resources in the medium term. The main work of the Department’s programme
is on the combustion of wastes, anaerobic digestion (particularly as applied to
the production and use of landfill gas) and energy forestry.
The Department also has a low-level research and development programme
into wave energy, supporting an inshore project on the island of Islay following a
feasibility study at the Queen’s University of Belfast.
Non-fuel Minerals
Although much of Britain’s requirements of industrial raw materials is met by
imports, non-fuel minerals produced in Britain make an important contribution
to the economy. Output of non-fuel minerals in 1987 totalled 357 million
tonnes, valued at £1,715 million. The total number of employees in the
extraction industry was some 33,000 in 1987. The locations of some of the more
important minerals produced in Britain are shown on the map on p 313.
Exploration for and exploitation of indigenous metalliferous mineral resources
to meet the needs of industry are being encouraged by the Government. The
British Geological Survey is carrying out a long-term programme for the
Department of Trade and Industry aimed at identifying areas with the potential
for economic extraction of minerals.
The tonnage extracted of some of the main non-fuel minerals produced in
Britain is given in Table 34. In terms of value, production of common sand and
gravel was estimated at £466 million in 1987, limestone and dolomite £463
million, clays £257 million, igneous rock £195 million, salt £63 million,
sandstone £61 million, potash £58 million, chalk £33 million, gypsum and
anhydrite £22 million, tin £17 million and fluorspar £12 million. Britain is a
major world producer of several important industrial minerals including china
clay, ball clay, fuller’s earth, celestite and gypsum, and produces significant
amounts of limestone, dolomite, chalk, slate, fluorspar, potash, salt, silica
sands, fireclay, common clay and shale, barytes and talc, mostly for home
consumption. Small amounts of diatomite, calcspar, chert and flint, anhydrite
and china stone are also produced. In 1987 the production of metal in
non-ferrous ores totalled 12,100 tonnes, mainly tin and zinc from Cornwall. The
Cornish mines, the only significant tin mines in the European Community,
produced some 4,000 tonnes in 1987, satisfying about half of Britain’s demand.
Small amounts of copper and silver were produced in association with tin and
zinc, and some lead and zinc with barytes and fluorspar. A little gold came from
'gypsum
| gypsum
silica sand
MARLSTONE r
ROCKBED'W
# fuller's earth
• fuller’s earth
•silica sand
celestite
silica sand
gypsum
Some Minerals Produced in Britain
Orkney
Shetland
Islands
Islands
0 20 40 60 80100120 km
I I I l I 1 l
l 1 1 1 1
60
80 miles
l barytes,
a lead, zinc
a sand •
± barytes jpmttm
gold
f . silica sand •
Major metallic
and industrial
mineral workings
Major mineral deposits
(unworked)
) Currently producing
ironfield
• silica sand
|
v m
fluorspar, leadlm
9^ I NORTHS
C5)0REF|
I gypsum^ « •
jk barytes salT
f 90|d # salt
diatomite i
N PENNINE
san p0t
silica sand
r SOUTHERN •'") FPOniisJ
icasand PENNINE v ^nr^Sm
^ A OREFIELD IRONS^
^ealt • h ^fluorspar, barytes, lead
- • gypsum
copper,
314
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
England and
Wales
Table 34: Production of Some of the Main Non-fuel Minerals
million tonnes
1977
1982
1987
Common sand and gravel
Silica sand
Igneous rock
Limestone and dolomite
Chalk
Sandstone
Gypsum
Salt including salt in brine
Common clay and shale
China clay and ball clay
Fireclay
Iron ore
Potash
Fluorspar
106-9
6-3
35-6
86-4
16-3
12-2
3- 2
8-2
23-5
4- 4
1-5
3-7
0-1
0-2
97-8
4-1
36-1
85-5
11-6a
13-3
2- 7
7-6
20-3£
3- 4
0-9£
0-5
0-4
0-2
117-8
4-0
46-0
113-7
13-4
16-4
n.a.
7-1
18-3
3-7
0-9
0-3
0-7
0-1
Source: United Kingdom Minerals Yearbook 1988.
a Great Britain only.
n.a. = not available.
a mine in north Wales. Planning permission has been granted for a large open
tungsten mine at Hemerdon (near Plymouth).
Production of sand, gravel and crushed rock (from limestone, igneous rock
and sandstone) as aggregates for use in construction constitutes two-thirds, by
value, of Britain’s output of non-fuel minerals. Britain is the world’s second
largest producer of marine-dredged sand and gravel (18-8 million tonnes in
1987).
Water
Britain’s water supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as
mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river
intakes, and partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits and
boreholes. Water for public supply in England and Wales amounted to 16,879
megalitres (Ml) a day in 1987—88 and average daily supply per head was 336
litres. About 99 per cent of the population in Great Britain and 96 per cent in
Northern Ireland are connected to the public water supply system.
In general, householders pay for their domestic water supply, sewerage and
sewage disposal services through charges based on the rateable value of their
property. With the abolition of the domestic rating system in Scotland, and its
forthcoming abolition in England and Wales, the Government has said that it is
for each water undertaking to decide how best to charge, and has given them
until the year 2000 to introduce new methods of charging. Water metering is one
of the options being considered. Since 1981 optional metering for domestic
users has been available throughout England and Wades. Large-scale trials of
compulsory domestic metering in England started in 1989 and will last for about
three years. Industrial users are charged for their water supply according to
actual metered consumption.
In England and Wales the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for Wales
are responsible for policy in relation to the conservation, augmentation,
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
315
Water and
Sewage
Companies
National Rivers
Authority
Statutory Water
Companies
Supplies
Scotland
distribution and proper use of water resources and provision of water supplies;
the provision of sewerage and sewage disposal services; the restoration and
maintenance of the wholesomeness of rivers and other inland waters; and the
use of inland waters for navigation and recreation. The Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Wales are responsible for policy
relating to land drainage, flood protection, sea defence, and the protection and
development of fisheries.
Ten water and sewage companies in England and Wales are responsible for the
management of water services, the development of water resources, water
distribution and supply, the prevention of pollution, sewerage and sewage
treatment.
Under the Water Act 1989 these companies are due to be privatised late in
1989. It is the Government’s view that freedom from government intervention in
management and from public ownership constraints on financing will help to
improve service standards and enable the new companies to attract investment.
It is also envisaged that the companies will have scope for innovation and
diversification into various commercial undertakings.
A system of economic regulation and guaranteed standards of service,
overseen by a Director General of Water Services, has been established, as well as
a new system of safeguarding and improving the quality of water supplies.
A National Rivers Authority has been set up to take over responsibility for the
regulatory and river management functions of the water authorities, including
pollution control and quality regulation of river and coastal water, water
conservation and resource planning, fisheries, land drainage and flood protec¬
tion.
The 29 statutory water companies (private companies restricted to abstracting,
purifying and supplying water on behalf of the water and sewage companies in
whose areas they are) have the powers to operate as water undertakers in their
own right. Should they convert to pic status, they may become sewerage
undertakers by agreement with current undertakers or on sites where no service
exists.
Some 26,847 Ml a day were abstracted in England and Wales in 1987, of which
public water supplies accounted for 17,244 Ml a day. The Central Electricity
Generating Board took some 4,578 Mia day, primarily for cooling in connection
with electricity generation, other industry about 3,712 Ml a day, and the
remainder was used in agriculture and fish farming.
Water and sewage companies have powers to restrict consumption when there
are severe water shortages. Under the Water Act 1989 they can limit or prohibit
the use of water and, if necessary, restrict domestic water supplies.
In Scotland responsibility for public water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal
rests with the nine regional and three islands councils. In addition, the Central
Scotland Water Development Board is primarily responsible for developing large
water sources and supplying water in bulk to its five constituent member
authorities, the regional councils in central Scotland. Water is charged for
according to type of consumer: those paying community water charges;
non-domestic consumers paying by means of non-domestic water rates; and
non-domestic consumers paying through metered charges. Charges and ratpis
are decided by each authority.
Scotland has a relative abundance of unpolluted water from upland sources.
An average of 2,173 Ml a day was supplied in Scotland in 1987-88. The
316
Northern
Ireland
Development
Projects
Research
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for the promotion of the
conservation of water resources and the provision by water authorities of
adequate water supplies, and also has a duty to promote the cleanliness of rivers
and other inland waters and the tidal waters of Scotland. The river purification
authorities also have a statutory responsibility for water pollution control.
The Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland is responsible for
public water supply and sewerage throughout Northern Ireland. The Depart¬
ment is also responsible for the conservation and cleanliness of water resources
and, with the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland, may prepare a
water management programme with respect to water resources in any area.
There is a domestic water charge which is contained in the regional rate, while
agriculture, commerce and industry pay metered charges. There are abundant
potential supplies of water for both domestic and industrial use. An average of
676 Ml of water a day was supplied in 1988.
Investment is taking place to help ensure that there is an adequate water supply
to meet future demand. Thames Water is constructing an 80-km (50-mile)
distribution system to meet the growing demand for water in London. This is
due to be completed in 1994. Another example is North West Water, which has
embarked on a major 25-year programme of investment to clean up the polluted
rivers of the Mersey Basin.
The central research organisation for the water industry in Britain is the Water
Research Centre, which carries out research for water undertakings, consulting
engineers, manufacturers, government departments and overseas organisa¬
tions. It has three main laboratories: at Stevenage (Hertfordshire), which deals
with water and waste water treatment: at Medmenham (Buckinghamshire),
which is concerned with environmental protection (including water quality and
pollution); and at Swindon (Wiltshire), which is concerned with instrumenta¬
tion, water mains and sewers. Other organisations conducting research include
Hydraulics Research Limited, universities, the Meteorological Office, the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and several institutes of the Natural
Environment Research Council.
Land Use
Farming
Agriculture, Fisheries
and Forestry
Agriculture
British agriculture is noted for its high level of efficiency and productivity. About
2-3 per cent of the working population are engaged in agriculture. Self-
sufficiency in food and feed is estimated at 57 per cent of all food and feed, and at
74 per cent of indigenous food and feed. Food and beverages accounted for 10
per cent of Britain’s imports by value in 1988, compared with about a quarter in
the 1960s. The agricultural contribution to gross domestic product was £5,436
million in 1988, about 1 -4 per cent of the total. Britain is also a major exporter of
agricultural produce and food products, agrochemicals and agricultural
machinery.
The Government aims to foster an efficient and competitive agriculture
industry through the provision and sponsorship of research, development and
advisory services, the provision of financial support where appropriate,
measures to control disease, pests and pollution, and improved marketing
arrangements for food and food products. It also encourages the industry to
adopt high standards on animal welfare. The Agriculture Act 1986 gives
agriculture ministers a responsibility to achieve a balance between the interests
of agriculture, the economic and social interests of rural areas, conservation and
recreation, and schemes have been introduced to encourage the planting of new
farm woodlands and the use of farmland for a variety of alternative projects. A
set-aside scheme to reduce the production of surplus arable crops has been
introduced by the European Community.
Some 77 per cent of the land area is used for agriculture, the rest being
mountain, forest or put to urban and other uses. The area of agricultural land
has been declining, although there has been a reduction in the net rate of loss in
recent years. There are 12 million hectares (30 million acres) under crops and
grass. In hill country, where the area of cultivated land is often small, some 6
million hectares (over 15 million acres) are also used for rough grazing. Soils
vary from the thin poor ones of highland Britain to the rich fertile soils of
low-lying areas such as the fenlands of eastern England. The cool temperate
climate and the even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season;
streams rarely dry up and grassland is green throughout the year.
In 1988 there were some 255,400 farm holdings in Britain, of which 72 per cent
in England, Scotland and Wales were wholly or mainly owner-occupied, while
virtually all the farms in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied. The average area
(including rough grazing) of full-time businesses is 107-3 hectares (265 acres). It
is estimated that the 12 per cent of holdings in the largest size group accounted
for 55-8 per cent of activity, while the smallest size of holding (which accounted
for 44 per cent of farms) accounted for only 2-6 per cent of activity. In Wales and
Northern Ireland output from smaller farms is more significant than in the rest
of Britain.
The number of people engaged in agriculture in 1988 was about 664,000.
Labour productivity has improved by over 50 per cent since 1979. Farming
income (of farmers and their spouses) was £1,136 million in 1988, 25 per cent
318
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PRODUCTION
Livestock
Cattle and
Sheep
lower than in 1987, partly because of a cereal harvest adversely affected by the
weather.
There are over 500,000 tractors and some 54,500 combine harvesters in use.
A wide variety of other machines for harvesting and preserving grass are also
employed. Horticultural crops such as blackcurrants and brussels sprouts are
frequently harvested by machine, and milking machines are used on the vast
majority of dairy farms. Most farms have a direct electricity supply, the
remainder having their own generators.
Dairy herd monitoring, account analysis, budgeting and the monitoring of
cash-flow and performance have all benefited in recent years from computer
technology. Computer models of typical farms allow many varieties of crops and
livestock to be considered, as well as demands for labour, land, capital and
buildings.
Home production of the principal foods is shown as a percentage by weight of
total supplies (that is, output plus imports minus exports) in Table 35.
Table 35: British Production as a Percentage of Total Supplies
Food product
1977-79
average
1988
(provisional)
Meat
Eggs
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese
Butter
Sugar (as refined)
Wheat
Potatoes for human consumption
86
102
100
67
39
41
68
93
94
98
100
65
96
58
113
90
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
About three-fifths of full-time farms are devoted mainly to dairying or beef cattle
and sheep. The majority of sheep and cattle are reared in the hill and moorland
areas of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and northern and south-western
England. Beef fattening occurs partly in better grassland areas, as does dairying,
and partly on arable farms. British livestock breeders have developed many of
the cattle, sheep and pig breeds with worldwide reputations, for example, the
Hereford and Aberdeen Angus beef breeds, the Jersey, Guernsey and Ayrshire
dairy breeds, Large White pigs and a number of sheep breeds. Because of
developments in artificial insemination and embryo transfer, Britain is able to
export semen and embryos from high-quality donor animals.
Table 36 shows the number of livestock and output of livestock products.
Most dairy cattle in England and Wales and a significant proportion in Scotland
and Northern Ireland are bred by artificial insemination. In 1988 the average
size of dairy herds in Britain was 61 while the average yield of milk per dairy cow
was 4,927 litres (1,084 gallons). Average household consumption of liquid
(including low-fat) milk per head in 1988 was 2-8 litres (41 pints) per week.
About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from the national dairy
herd, in which the Friesian breed is predominant. The remainder is derived
from suckler herds producing high-quality beef calves in the hills and uplands.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
319
Pigs and
Poultry
Animal Welfare
Table 36: Livestock and Livestock Products
1977-79 1986 1987 1988
average (provisional)
Cattle and calves (’000 head) 13,719
Sheep and lambs (’000 head) 29,302
Pigs (’000 head) 7,783
Poultry ('000 head)3 133,924
Milk (million litres) 15,042
Eggs (million dozen) 1,188
Beef and veal (’000 tonnes) 1,054
Mutton and lamb (’000 tonnes) 235
Pork (’000 tonnes) 660
Bacon and ham (’000 tonnes) 217
Poultry meat (’000 tonnes) 732
12,533 12,158 11,884
37,016 38,701 41,003
7,937 7,942 7,995
120,740 128,628 129,043
15,629 14,801 14,422
1,006 1,033 1,047
1,062 1,118 959
301 311 345
753 780 798
206 197 198
925 995 1,080
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
a Excluding ducks, geese and turkeys. Data for 1986—88 cannot be compared with data for earlier years owing to
changes in coverage of poultry holdings.
where the traditional British beef breeds, such as Hereford and Aberdeen Angus,
continue to be important. Imported breeds which have established themselves
include the Charolais, Limousin, Simmental and Belgian Blue.
Britain has a long tradition of sheep production, with more than 40 breeds
and many crosses between them. Research has provided vaccine and serum
protection against nearly all the epidemic diseases. Although lamb production is
the main source of income for sheep farmers, wool is also important.
Grass supplies 60 to 80 per cent of the feed for cattle and sheep; grass
production has been enhanced by the increased use of fertilisers, irrigation and
methods of grazing control, and improved herbage conservation for winter feed.
Rough grazings are used for extensively grazed sheep and cattle, producing
young animals for fattening elsewhere.
Pig production occurs in most areas but is particularly important in eastern and
northern England. There is an increasing concentration into specialist units
and larger herds.
Output of poultry meat has continued to benefit from better husbandry and
genetic improvements. Since 1977 production has increased by almost a half
and reached over 1 million tonnes in 1988. Production of broilers from holdings
of over 100,000 birds accounts for over a half of total production. In 1988 egg
production remained at over 1,000 million dozen. Over two-thirds of laying birds
are in flocks of 20,000 or more. Britain remains broadly self-sufficient in poultry
meat and eggs.
The welfare of farm animals is protected by regulations and it is an offence to
cause unnecessary pain or distress to commercially reared livestock. For
example, there are regulations controlling such operations as castration and tail
docking, and requiring owners of intensive units to arrange for the daily
inspection of their stock and the equipment on which it depends. There are
advisory codes and recommendations for the welfare of all major species of farm
animals and compliance is monitored by the State Veterinary Service. In 1988
the Government proposed new requirements for the welfare of poultry at
slaughter and in 1989 welfare codes for sheep, goats and deer.
320
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Crops
Horticulture
Organic
Farming
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up by the
Government, keeps under review the welfare of farm animals on agricultural
land, at markets, in transit and at the place of slaughter, and advises on any
legislative changes it considers necessary. The Government is adopting most of
its recommendations for protection of livestock at markets, including tighter
controls on the marketing of calves.
The farms devoted primarily to arable crops are found mainly in eastern
and central southern England and eastern Scotland. In Britain in 1988 cereals
were grown on 3-9 million hectares (9-6 million acres). At 20-9 million tonnes
cereal production was the lowest since 1981 because of adverse weather
conditions, but the quality of the harvest was much improved on 1987,
particularly for wheat. About 30 per cent of the wheat crop is normally used for
flour milling, and some 45 per cent for animal feed. Up to 20 per cent of the
barley crop is used for malting and distilling and some 45 per cent for animal
feed. In 1988 there was a decrease, after years of growth, in the area grown and
the yield of oilseed rape; the seed is crushed to obtain vegetable oil and the solid
matter left is incorporated into animal feed.
Large-scale potato and vegetable production is undertaken in the fens (in
Cambridgeshire and south Lincolnshire), the alluvial areas around the rivers
Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Early potatoes
are an important crop in south-west Wales, Kent and south-west England.
High-grade seed potatoes are grown in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Sugar from home-grown sugar beet provides about 50 per cent of require¬
ments, most of the remainder being refined from raw cane sugar imported from
developing countries under the Lome Convention.
Table 37 gives figures on the area, harvest and yield of the main crops.
In 1988 the land utilised for horticulture was about 204,000 hectares (504,000
acres). Vegetables grown in the open (excluding potatoes) accounted for 67-7 per
cent, orchards for 17-7 per cent, small fruit for 7-4 per cent, hardy nursery stock
for 3-5 per cent and bulbs and flowers grown in the open for 2-2 per cent. Crops
grown in glasshouses accounted for 0-2 per cent. More than one vegetable crop
is, in some cases, taken from the same area of land in a year, so that the
estimated area actually cropped in 1988 was 242,916 hectares (599,800 acres).
Field vegetables account for about 37 per cent of the value of horticultural
output and are widely grown throughout the country. Most horticultural
enterprises are increasing productivity with the help of improved planting
material, new techniques and the widespread use of machinery. Some field
vegetables, for example, are raised in blocks of compressed peat or loose-filled
cells, a technique which reduces root damage and allows plants to establish
themselves more reliably and evenly. There are government grants for replanting
apple and pear trees.
Glasshouses are used for growing tomatoes, cucumbers, sweet peppers,
lettuces, flowers, pot plants and nursery stock. Widespread use is made of
automatic control of heating and ventilation, and semi-automatic control of
watering. Energy-efficient glasshouses use thermal screens, while low-cost
plastic tunnels extend the season for certain crops previously grown in the open.
Preferential rates of government grant are available for replacing heated glass
and heating systems.
Under the European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (see p 322), a
wide range of horticultural produce is subject to common quality standards.
The Government encourages organic farming along with other farming enter¬
prises. The board of the United Kingdom Register of Organic Food Standards, an
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
321
Food Irradiation
EXPORTS
Table 37: Main Crops
1977-79 1986 1987 1988
average (provisional)
Wheat
Area (’000 hectares) 1,236
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 6,354
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 5-14
Barley
Area (’000 hectares) 2,368
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 9,997
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 4-22
Oats
Area (’000 hectares) 170
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 679
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 3-99
Potatoes
Area (’000 hectares) 217
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 6,813
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 31-40
Oilseed Rape
Area (’000 hectares) 64
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 165
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 2-54
Sugar Beet
Area (’000 hectares) 206
Harvest (’000 tonnes) 7,041
Yield (tonnes per hectare) 34-14
1,997 1,994 1,886
13,911 11,941 11,605
6-96 5-99 6-15
1,917 1,831 1,878
10,014 9,226 8,673
5-22 5-04 4-62
97 99 120
503 451 552
5-16 4-58 4-60
179 179 181
6,447 6,760 6,899
36-02 37-77 38-12
299 388 347
951 1,353 1,038
3-18 3-49 2-99
201 200 201
8,118 7,992 8,543
40-35 39-91 42-50
Sources: Agriculture in the United Kingdom: 1988 and Agricultural Census June 1988.
Note: A slight discrepancy in sugar-beet yield figures is due to rounding of area and harvest figures.
independent body set up with government support by Food from Britain in
1987, has drawn up national standards for organic food production. Support is
also provided from the Government’s research and development programme
and, as appropriate, through national grant schemes and by advice from the
agricultural advisory service.
Food irradiation kills or reduces the number of micro-organisms naturally
present in food and provides an effective and efficient preservation treatment
which would result in safe and wholesome food, thus contributing to the
reduction of some food-borne diseases. Following the advice of a working party
and the opinion of the principal international agencies, the Government
proposes to allow it in Britain, subject to strict government controls and the
clear labelling of all goods treated.
The Government is keen to encourage the growth of exports related to agricul¬
ture and their volume increased in the ten years up to 1987, although in 1988
the volume fell. The value of these exports amounted to £6,506 million in 1988,
of which exports of food and drink accounted for £5,280 million, with the main
markets being Western Europe, North America and the Middle East. Exports
322
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
MARKETING
Co-operatives
ROLE OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Common
Agricultural
Policy
include speciality products such as fresh salmon, Scotch whisky, biscuits, jams
and conserves, as well as beef and lamb carcasses and cheese. Food from Britain
is a national organisation which promotes the marketing of food and agricul¬
tural produce in the domestic and overseas markets. It receives support for its
export activity from the British Food Export Council, while the British Agri¬
cultural Export Committee of the London Chamber of Commerce represents
exporters of technology, expertise and equipment. In 1988 Britain exported
£776 million of farm machinery.
One of the world’s largest agricultural events, the annual Royal International
Agricultural Show, held at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire, provides an opportunity
for overseas visitors to see the latest techniques and improvements in British
agriculture. Over 227,000 visitors attended in 1988, of whom more than 20,000
were from overseas. Virtually every British agricultural machinery manufacturer
is represented at the show, which is also the most important pedigree livestock
event in the country. Other major agricultural displays include the annual Royal
Smithfield Show, held in London, which exhibits agricultural machinery,
livestock and carcasses, the Royal Highland Show, the Royal Welsh Show, and
the Royal Ulster Agricultural Show. There are also important regional shows.
Agricultural products are marketed by private traders, producers’ co-operatives
and marketing boards, the latter being producers’ organisations (each including
a minority of independent members appointed by agriculture ministers) with
certain statutory powers to regulate the marketing of milk, wool and potatoes.
For the most part the boards buy from producers or control contracts between
producers and first-hand buyers; the Potato Marketing Board, however, main¬
tains only a broad control over marketing conditions, leaving producers free to
deal individually with buyers. For home-grown cereals, meat and livestock,
apples and pears, there are marketing organisations representing producer,
distributor and independent interests.
Food from Britain is responsible for improving the marketing of food and
agricultural products, both in the domestic market and abroad. It has intro¬
duced a ‘Foodmark’ symbol under which producers are able to guarantee the
quality of fresh and lightly processed foods to the consumer.
A substantial amount of agricultural and horticultural produce is handled by
marketing co-operatives, whose turnover is around £1,500 million a year. Since
the late 1970s a number of central co-operative grain stores have been estab¬
lished, and new vegetable groups and fruit-marketing co-operatives have been
formed to meet the demand from retailers for a continuous supply of fresh,
quality produce. Food from Britain provides a full range of advisory services for
co-operatives and the Government may assist their development with grants.
Four government departments have joint responsibility—the Ministry of Agri¬
culture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for
Scotland, the Welsh Office and the Department of Agriculture for Northern
Ireland.
The European Community’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) accounts for
about two-thirds of the Community’s budget and aims to ensure stable agri¬
cultural markets and a fair standard of living for agricultural producers, and to
guarantee regular supplies of food at reasonable prices. For many commodities
minimum prices are set annually at which agencies of the member states will
purchase products and there are levies on imports to maintain internal support
prices. Intervention stocks can be disposed of within the Community where this
can be done without disrupting internal markets. Exports are facilitated by the
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
323
Price
Guarantees,
Grants and
Subsidies
provision of export refunds to bridge any gap between Community and world
prices. In some cases, in particular in the beef and sheep sectors, there are also
direct payments to producers.
The support prices, as well as rates of levy, export refunds and other aids, are
set in European Currency Units and are converted into the currencies of the
member states at fixed rates of exchange—‘green rates’—which can be out of line
with the market rate of exchange between each currency and the European
Currency Unit. Monetary compensatory amounts, based on the percentage
difference between the green and market rates of each currency, are applied to
prevent distortions in trade. They operate as import subsidies and export levies
for countries whose currencies’ market rates are below the green rates, and as
import levies and export subsidies in the opposite case.
Agricultural production under the CAP has increased considerably in recent
years, partly in response to rapid technical progress and farming efficiency, but
also reflecting the high level of price support under the CAP. As consumption
has remained relatively stable, this has resulted in the emergence of surpluses.
Britain has consistently pressed for CAP reform, to bring supply and demand
into better balance and to increase the role of market forces in agriculture, and
considerable progress has been made. Average effective Community support
levels have been reduced in real terms each year since 1984. The most notable
step towards achieving these objectives was the package of reforms agreed by the
European Council of Ministers in 1988, which introduced a legally binding limit
on CAP market support and brought in or extended stabilisers for most CAP
commodities. Stabilisers ensure that maximum CAP support is only available if
production is kept to specified quantities. Should these quantities be exceeded,
support is cut. Significant price cuts of up to 20 per cent have already been made
in a number of sectors. Further reforms, restricting intervention in the beef
regime, were agreed in 1989.
Price-fixing settlements in 1988—89, whose cost was within the guidelines
established by the Council and which did not weaken the stabiliser mechan¬
isms, also helped to improve the competitive position of British farmers. Green
pound devaluations were agreed which represent a significant step in the
process of meeting the Community’s commitment to phase out the differences
between ‘green’ and market rates of exchange by 1992.
Reform has helped significantly to reduce Community intervention stocks. By
March 1989 stocks of butter had fallen by over 90 per cent since 1986 and of
cereals by about 60 per cent since 1985. Skimmed milk powder stocks (over 1
million tonnes in 1986) have been virtually eliminated.
The Community’s agricultural expenditure (£19,000 million in 1988) is
channelled through the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund.
The Fund’s guarantee section finances market support arrangements, while the
guidance section provides funds for structural reform—for example, farm
modernisation and investment—and payments to assist certain farmers to
change to alternative enterprises.
Expenditure in Britain in 1988-89 on price guarantees, grants and subsidies
and on CAP market regulations was estimated to be £253 million and £1,240
million respectively. About £1,127 million was reimbursed from the Community
budget.
Potatoes and wool are not covered by the CAP; potato market support
measures are operated through the Potato Marketing Board and the Department
of Agriculture for Northern Ireland, and a price stabilisation fund for wool is
administered by the British Wool Marketing Board.
Producers also receive support through certain capital and production grants,
some based on Community decisions. Grants are available to assist farmers and
324
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Smallholdings
and Crofts
Tenancy
Legislation
Agriculture and
Protection of
the Countryside
horticulturists with farm improvement plans, and there is special financial help
for hill and upland farmers in the form of headage payments on cattle and sheep
(known as compensatory allowances). Community assistance may also be made
to help to improve facilities for the marketing and processing of agricultural
products and to provide a premium payment to specialised beef producers, while
launching aid is available to production and marketing groups in the horticul¬
tural sector.
Local authorities provide some 5,900 statutory smallholdings in England and
950 in Wales. They make loans of up to 75 per cent of required working capital to
their tenants. Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the
Government, which, while now seeking to dispose of holdings to sitting tenants,
still owns and maintains about 116,600 hectares (228,150 acres) of land
settlement estates, comprising some 1,525 crofts and holdings.
Within the crofting areas of Scotland (in Strathclyde, Highland, Western Isles,
Orkney and Shetland) much of the land is held by tenants known as crofters.
Crofting is administered by the Crofters Commission, and benefits from
government grants for land improvements and some other agricultural work.
The agricultural holdings legislation protects the interests and rights of land¬
lords and tenants, with provision for arbitration in the event of a dispute. Most
agricultural tenants have the right to contest a notice to quit, which is then
ineffective unless the landlord obtains consent to its operation from an indepen¬
dent body (in England and Wales, the Agricultural Land Tribunal and in
Scotland, the Scottish Land Court). On termination of tenancy, the tenant is
entitled to compensation in accordance with a special code. Practically all farms
in Northern Ireland are owner-occupied, but, under a practice known as
‘conacre’, occupiers not wishing to farm all their land let it annually to others.
About one-fifth of agricultural land is so let, and is used mainly for grazing.
Agriculture ministers have a general duty, under the Agriculture Act 1986, to
seek to achieve a reasonable balance between the needs of an efficient and stable
agriculture industry and other interests in the countryside, including the
conservation of its natural beauty and amenity and the promotion of its
enjoyment by the public. In addition, they are required to further conservation of
the countryside in the administration of farm capital grant schemes both in
national parks and in sites of special scientific interest designated by the Nature
Conservancy Council.
The Government has introduced the Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs)
Scheme, under which 19 areas in Britain—ten in England, five in Scotland, two
in Wales and two in Northern Ireland—have been designated. They are identified
as important for their landscape, wildlife and historic features, and as particu¬
larly under threat from agricultural change. The areas are diverse in character
and include, for example, the Broads, Pennine Dales and Shropshire Borders in
England; Breadalbane and the Machair Lands of the Uists and Benbecula in
Scotland; the Lleyn Peninsula in Wales; and Mourne and Slieve Croob in
Northern Ireland. The scheme is voluntary and farmers in ESAs are offered
agreements under which they receive payments for farming along environmen¬
tally beneficial lines intended to conserve the special character of the area.
Government grant schemes to increase the opportunities open to farmers to
develop new sources of income as an alternative to surplus production and to
enhance environmental protection were introduced in 1988-89. The Farm
Diversification Scheme encourages new business enterprises on farms and
attracted over 1,200 applications in 1988. The Farm Woodland Scheme assists
the planting of up to 36,000 additional hectares (88,960 acres) over three years,
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
325
Professional,
Scientific and
Technical
Services
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
with incentives for broadleaved trees. The Farm and Conservation Grant
Scheme focuses assistance on measures to contain farm pollution and to
improve conservation. The European Community set-aside scheme offers com¬
pensation to farmers willing to take at least 20 per cent of their arable land out of
production for a period of five years. Additional payments are offered by the
Countryside Commission to help farmers to enhance the landscape, wildlife or
recreational value of their fallowed land.
In England and Wales the Government’s Agricultural Development and Advisory
Service (ADAS) provides a wide range of professional, scientific, technical and
veterinary services for agriculture and its ancillary industries. Most types of
advice and servicing are on a fee-paying basis, although advice to farmers on
conservation, rural diversification and animal welfare is available free. Similar
services are provided in Scotland by the Department of Agriculture and Fisher¬
ies, the Scottish Agricultural Colleges and a section of the State Veterinary
Service. In Northern Ireland these services are available from the Department of
Agriculture’s advisory and scientific services.
These organisations also advise the Government on the scientific, technical
and business implications of policy proposals and assist in implementing
policies concerning animal and plant health, disease and pest eradication, food
hygiene, animal welfare, land drainage and other capital grant schemes, and
safeguarding agricultural land in relation to other land uses.
ADAS carries out research and development work under commission from the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and works under contract directly
for others and for levy-funded bodies. These undertakings can be carried out at
the Central Science Laboratory and the Central Veterinary Laboratory; at a range
of husbandry farms and horticulture stations across England and Wales; and
through regional centres or on clients’ own holdings or premises. A diagnostic
service for the practising veterinary surgeon is provided at 19 veterinary
investigation centres.
Britain is free from many serious animal diseases. If they were to occur, diseases
such as foot-and-mouth disease and classical swine fever would be combated by
a slaughter policy applied to all animals infected or exposed to infection, and by
control over animal movements during the outbreaks. Significant progress has
been made towards the eradication of Aujeszky’s disease in pigs. The Govern¬
ment has taken various steps to tackle the new cattle disease, bovine spongiform
encephalopathy. It set up a working party to advise on its implications, banned
the feeding of ruminant protein to ruminants, which was the likely cause of
infection, and ordered the destruction of the milk and carcasses of affected
animals as a precautionary measure to protect human health. It has also decided
that certain types of offal from all animals should be rejected as unfit meat.
In the light of the increase in salmonella enteritidis in humans arising from
food poisoning incidents, the Government is introducing a comprehensive
package of measures to combat salmonella in eggs and poultry, including the
compulsory monitoring of poultry flocks and slaughter with compensation of
salmonella-infected flocks. Government proposals to strengthen Britain’s food
safety laws—including tighter controls on unfit food and new enforcement
measures—have been set out in a White Paper.
Strict controls are exercised on the import of animals, poultry meat and meat
products so as to prevent the introduction of animal or poultry diseases. Special
measures apply to prevent the introduction of rabies, and dogs, cats and certain
other mammals are subject to import licence and six months’ quarantine. There
are severe penalties for breaking the law. There have been no cases of rabies
outside quarantine in Britain since 1970.
326
Plants
Pesticides
Veterinary
Medicinal
Products
AGRICULTURAL
AND FOOD
RESEARCH
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Professional advice and action on the control of animal disease and the welfare
of farm livestock are the responsibility of the government veterinary services,
which have laboratory facilities and investigation centres performing specialist
research work and advising private practitioners responsible for treating
animals on the farm.
The agriculture departments are responsible for limiting the spread of plant
pests and diseases and for preventing the introduction of new ones. They also
issue the health certificates required by other countries to accompany plant
material exported from Britain. Certification schemes are operated to encourage
the development of healthy, vigorous and true-to-type planting stocks.
The supply and use of pesticides, and their maximum residue levels, are
controlled under the Food and Environment Protection Act 1985 and the Control
of Pesticides Regulations 1986 made under it. All pesticides supplied for use in
Britain must have been approved under statutory arrangements for their safety,
efficacy and, where appropriate, humaneness in use. The Government has
instituted a review of those pesticides which have been widely used over the past
25 years.
The manufacture, sale and supply of veterinaiy medicinal products are prohi¬
bited except under licence. Licences are issued by the agriculture ministers, who
are advised on safety, quality and efficacy by the Veterinary Products Committee,
which comprises independent experts.
The agriculture departments, the Agricultural and Food Research Council
(AFRC) and private industry share responsibility for research, which is carried
out in a network of research institutes, specialist laboratories and experimental
farms, and in university departments.
The total government-funded programme of research and development in
agriculture and food amounts to some £200 million a year and aims to maintain
an efficient and competitive industry in Britain consistent with high stan¬
dards of animal welfare and care for the environment. The work of the AFRC
and the agriculture departments is co-ordinated into national programmes,
primarily on the recommendations of the Priorities Board for Research and
Development in Agriculture and Food, which advises on the research needs of
the industries and the allocation of available resources between and within areas
of research.
The AFRC, an autonomous body, receives funds from the science budget
through the Department of Education and Science and income from work
commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, by industry
and by other outside bodies. The Council supports research at its eight
institutes, which specialise in animal health, animal physiology and genetics,
grassland and animal production, arable crops, horticulture, plant science, food
and engineering. The Council also funds a number of groups or departments in
universities and, through its research grants scheme, supports many projects in
universities, polytechnics and colleges. In addition to commissioning research
with the AFRC and other organisations, the Ministry carries out research and
development work in the laboratories, experimental husbandry farms and
horticulture stations of ADAS and in its food science laboratories. The five
Scottish Agricultural Research Institutes, funded by the Department of Agricul¬
ture and Fisheries for Scotland, cover areas of research complementary to those
of the AFRC institutes, while including work relevant to the soils, crops and
livestock of northern Britain. Development work in Scotland is carried out by
three agricultural colleges. Research in Northern Ireland is carried out by the
INVISIBLE EXPORTS
The satellite earth station at
Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall.
The telecommunications industry
earns revenue from maintenance
contracts, fees for implementing
systems and from returns on
investments.
Studying welding techniques at
Cranfield Institute of Technology.
Overseas students contributed
£783 million to the balance of
payments in 1988.
—
i
OVERSEAS CONSTRUCTION AND AID
A road project in Oman undertaken by
Balfour Beatty-Oman Building and
Contracting: 78 km of hairpin bends on a
500 m escarpment.
The Commonwealth Development
Corporation contributed £19-25 million to
the Jamaica Telephone Company in a joint
venture with Cable & Wireless in the wake
of Hurricane Gilbert in 1988.
Jt—
In 1989 Voluntary Service Overseas
celebrated its 30th anniversary.
Here volunteers at the Intermediate
Technology Group instruction centre
are taught practical tool-making
skills and given a background in
rural woodworking practices.
Consulting engineers Sir Alexander
Gibb & Partners are involved in the
construction of the £225 million
Samanalawewa hydro-electric
scheme in Sri Lanka.
THE CITY
The Baltic Exchange is the only
international shipping exchange in the
world and a major earner of foreign
currency for Britain.
The Bank of England in Threadneedle
Street stands at the heart of the ‘Square
Mile’, London’s financial centre.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
327
Fish Caught
Department of Agriculture in association with the Queen’s University of Belfast.
Research in crop and animal husbandry is carried out at the Agricultural
Research Institute of Northern Ireland and in agricultural science and food
technology at three agricultural colleges.
Agricultural research is also conducted or sponsored by private industry,
in particular by related industries such as agrochemicals and agricultural
machinery.
The food industry also funds or undertakes relevant research. The Govern¬
ment will continue to fund strategic research essential for the public good, for
example, into food safety, human health, animal welfare and flood protection,
but plans to withdraw funding from near-market research—research which
promises commercial application or exploitation within a reasonable time
scale—for which it looks to industry to take on a greater degree of funding.
Planned reductions in government expenditure on such research and develop¬
ment will amount to some £30 million by 1991—92.
New initiatives include government-funded research into spongiform en¬
cephalopathies affecting both animals and humans, and an extensive pro¬
gramme relevant to the control of salmonella. The Government also sponsors a
continuing programme on crops, which includes plant physiology, nutritional
needs and the control of pests and diseases. Through the AFRC the Government
is participating in a study of farming, wildlife and the environment in the light of
changes in agriculture, including the effect of less intensive farming. It is also
planning to double its support for research and research training in universities
and other higher education institutions over the next five years.
Fisheries
Britain, one of the European Community’s leading fishing nations, plays an
active role in the implementation and development of the Community’s Common
Fisheries Policy (CFP), which was agreed in 1983. The CFP covers access to
coastal waters, the conservation and management of fish stocks, fisheries
arrangements with third countries, the allocation of catch quotas among
member states, the trade in and marketing of fish and fish products, and
financial aid to promote the adaptation and development of the Community’s
fishing fleet.
The fishing industry provides about 66 per cent of British fish supplies, and is
an important source of employment and income in a number of ports. Cod,
haddock, whiting, herring, plaice and sole are found in the North Sea off the east
coasts of Scotland and England; mackerel, together with hake and other
demersal fish, off the west coast of Scotland; sole, plaice, cod and whiting in the
Irish Sea; and mackerel, sole and plaice off the south-west coast of England.
Nephrops, crabs, lobsters and other shellfish are found in the inshore waters all
around the coast. At the end of 1987 there were 17,000 fishermen in regular
employment and over 5,000 occasionally employed. The Government aims to
encourage the development of a viable, efficient and market-oriented fisheries
industry within the framework of the CFP.
In 1988 demersal fish (caught on or near the bottom of the sea) accounted for
about 49 per cent by weight of total British landings, pelagic fish (caught near
the surface) for 39 per cent and shellfish for 12 per cent. Landings of all types of
fish (excluding salmon and trout) by British fishing vessels totalled 733,000
tonnes. Cod and haddock represented 24 and 22 per cent respectively of the total
value of demersal and pelagic fish landed, while whiting (7 per cent), plaice (7 per
cent), mackerel (7 per cent), anglerfish (6 per cent) and sole (5 per cent) were the
other most important sources of earnings to the industry.
328
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Fishing
Fleet
Fish Farming
Administration
Fishery Limits
Common
Fisheries Policy
Imports of fresh, frozen, cured and canned fish and shellfish in 1988 totalled
403,000 tonnes, those of fish meal 206,000 tonnes and those of fish oils
164,000 tonnes. Exports and re-exports of fish and fish products amounted to
320,000 tonnes. The European Community has banned the import of primary
whale products in order to help to conserve whale populations.
In 1988 the British fishing fleet consisted of some 8,000 inshore vessels under
24-4 m (80 ft) in length and 273 deep-sea vessels longer than 24-4 m. Among
the main ports from which the fishing fleet operates are Aberdeen, Peterhead,
Fraserburgh (Grampian), Lerwick (Shetland), Kinlochbervie, Ullapool (High¬
land), North Shields (Tyne and Wear), Grimsby (Humberside), Lowestoft (Suf¬
folk), Brixham (Devon), Newlyn (Cornwall), and Kilkeel and Portavogie (Northern
Ireland). Britain’s distant water fleet was considerably reduced following the loss
of access, for example around Iceland, due to the extension of fishery limits to
200 miles in 1976. A small part of the fleet, however, has continued to maintain
its activities in distant waters.
The fish farming industry has maintained considerable growth, with produc¬
tion increasing tenfold during the 1980s. Rainbow trout and Atlantic salmon are
by far the most commonly farmed, followed by oysters and mussels. The industry
makes an important contribution to the rural infrastructure, especially in the
highlands and islands of Scotland. The Government has provided some £25
million in aid to the industry in Scotland through the Highlands and Islands
Development Board.
Fish farming in Britain has an estimated annual turnover of £120 million.
About 18,000 tonnes of salmon and more than 16,000 tonnes of trout were
produced in 1988. Some 1,000 fish and shellfish farming businesses operated
from some 1,600 sites and employed about 5,000 people. During 1988 the
Government’s fisheries departments allocated £3 million to research and de¬
velopment into fish cultivation and disease.
Improvements in technology and expertise give good prospects for the develop¬
ment of shellfish farming, particularly in mussel, scallop, clam and Pacific oyster
cultivation. It is also hoped that turbot and warm water prawns will be
transferred for continued growing in the Mediterranean and elsewhere overseas.
The fisheries departments are responsible for the administration of legislation
concerning the fishing industry and for fisheries research. The safety and
welfare of crews of fishing vessels and other matters common to shipping
generally are provided for under legislation administered by the Department of
Transport.
The Sea Fish Industry Authority is concerned with all aspects of the industry,
including consumer interests. It undertakes research and development, pro¬
vides training, and encourages efficient marketing. It also administers a
government grant scheme for fishing vessels, to promote a safe, efficient and
modern fleet.
Only British vessels may fish within 6 miles of the mainland; certain other
Community member states have traditional fishing rights between 6 and 12
miles, as British vessels have in other member states’ coastal waters. Outside 12
miles the only non-Community countries whose vessels may fish in Community
waters are those (for example, Norway) with which the Community has recipro¬
cal fisheries agreements.
The CFP’s system for the conservation and management of the Community’s
fishing resources means that total allowable catches—their levels decided on
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
329
Fisheries
Research
Freshwater
Fisheries
independent scientific advice—are set each year in order to conserve stocks.
These catches are then allocated between member states, whose traditional
fishing patterns are recognised. Activity is also regulated by a number of
technical conservation measures, including minimum landing sizes, minimum
mesh sizes and closed areas. Each member state is responsible for ensuring that
its fishermen abide by the various fisheries regulations and their performances
are monitored by the Community’s inspectors.
The 1983 settlement also covered the common organisation of the market in
fish and fish products, and a policy for the restructuring of the Community fleet
during 1987—97, designed to address the current problem of over-capacity. The
measures include financial assistance for the building and modernisation of
fishing vessels.
Fishery relations between the European Community and other countries are
extensive and are governed by different agreements. Those of most importance
to Britain are with Norway, Greenland, the Faroe Islands and Sweden. Annual
Community quotas have also been established in international waters in the
north-west Atlantic and around Svalbard.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has a research directorate
comprising laboratories dealing with marine and freshwater fisheries, shellfish,
marine pollution, fish farming and diseases. There are two seagoing research
vessels. In Scotland the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
provides a similar range of research and has three seagoing vessels. Work on the
utilisation of fish is undertaken by a research station at Torry, Aberdeen.
Department of Agriculture laboratories in Northern Ireland monitor marine and
freshwater fisheries, and have a seagoing research vessel.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout. Sea fishing for
salmon is prohibited in waters outside a limit of 6 miles from the coasts of the
British Isles. In Scotland salmon fishing is a private right. In England and Wales
licences are required for rod or net fishing. In Northern Ireland over 60 public
angling waters provide game and coarse fishing, and salmon rivers are access¬
ible to Department of Agriculture permit holders.
Forestry
Woodland covers an estimated 2-36 million hectares (5-83 million acres) in
Britain: about 7-3 per cent of England, 14-6 per cent of Scotland, 11-9 per cent
of Wales and 5-2 per cent of Northern Ireland. The Government supports the
continued expansion of forestry in order to reduce dependence on imports of
timber and to provide employment in forestry and related industries.
The area of productive forest in Great Britain is 21 million hectares (5-2
million acres), 44 per cent of which is managed by the Forestry Commission and
the rest by private owners. The rate of new planting in 1987-88 was 4,952
hectares (12,237 acres) by the Commission and 23,821 hectares (58,864 acres)
by private woodland owners, mainly in Scotland. Most planting is of conifers in
upland areas though the planting of broadleaved trees is encouraged on suitable
sites. An increasing proportion of new planting is by private owners. During
1987—88 the Commission grant-aided 2,495 hectares (6,165 acres) of new
broadleaved planting under its various schemes, an increase of 85 per cent over
the previous year. In 1988 the Commission introduced the Woodland Grant
Scheme. Grants for broadleaved planting, including planting as a component of
mixed woodland, were increased to three to four times those offered for
conifers—depending on the area covered.
330
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Forestry
Commission and
Forestry Policy
Replanting
after Storm
Damage
Forestry
Research
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
Total employment in state and private forests in Great Britain was estimated
at 22,050 in 1987—88, with a further 9,550 people engaged in processing
home-grown timber.
British woodlands meet only 12 per cent of the nation’s consumption of wood
and wood products. At present only just over half of the Commission’s wood¬
lands are in production. Home timber production, however, is expected to
double over the next 20 years.
The Forestry Commission is the national forestry authority in Great Britain. The
Commissioners give advice on forestry matters and are responsible to the
Secretary of State for Scotland, the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
and the Secretary of State for Wales. In pursuing timber production, forestry
policy also takes into account amenity, environmental and employment criteria.
The Commission’s activities also include wildlife and flora conservation, plant
health research, and the provision of facilities for recreation. As part of a
rationalisation programme to achieve greater efficiency and commercial effec¬
tiveness, the Commission has sold 72,000 hectares (178,000 acres) of planta¬
tion and plantable land since 1981 and has been asked by the Government to
dispose of a further 100,000 hectares (247,000 acres) by the end of the century.
The Commission is financed partly by the Government and partly by receipts
from sales of timber and other produce and from rents.
Under the European Community’s Forestry Action Programme, agreed in
1989 to increase Community wood production, aid will be directed at the
afforestation of agricultural land, the promotion of forestry’s place in rural
development, the primary processing of timber products, and the protection of
forests against atmospheric pollution and fire.
Government compensation arrangements after the great storm of 1987—which
blew down some 15 million trees in southern England and badly damaged
16,000 hectares (39,500 acres) of woodlands, resulting in 3-7 million cubic
metres (130-5 million cubic feet) of woodland timber being felled—include £9
million towards replanting under Commission grant schemes. Additional grants
have been made by agencies to assist replacement of shelter belts, hedges and
windbreaks.
The Forestry Commission maintains two principal research stations, at Alice
Holt Lodge near Farnham (Surrey) and at Bush Estate near Edinburgh, for basic
and applied research into all aspects of forestry. Aid is also given for research
work in universities and other institutions, including the Commonwealth
Forestry Institute in Oxford.
The Forestry Commission conducts an annual forest health survey which
monitors the effects of air pollution and other stress factors on a growing range
of broadleaves and conifers. It has also increased research into wildlife conserva¬
tion and is evaluating agroforestry systems combining wide-spaced conifers and
broadleaves with sheep grazing.
The Department of Agriculture may acquire land for afforestation and give
financial and technical assistance for private planting. The state forest area has
grown steadily since 1945. By 1989, 60,000 hectares (148,350 acres) of
plantable land had been acquired, of which 58,300 hectares (144,100 acres)
were planted. There were 14,400 hectares (35,600 acres) of privately owned
forest. Some 440 professional and industrial staff work in state forests.
ROADS
Transport and
Communications
Major improvements in the nation’s infrastructure have resulted from the
construction of a network of motorways, the extension of fast inter-city rail
services (such as those operated by high-speed trains), and expansion schemes
at many airports. Further improvements are in progress and the Channel
Tunnel will have a significant impact on travel between Britain and the
continent of Europe when it starts operation in 1993.
Transport policy rests on the fundamental aims of promoting economic
growth and higher national prosperity, and ensuring a reasonable level of
personal mobility, while improving safety, minimising damage to the environ¬
ment and using energy economically. Britain is taking an active part in the
development of a common transport policy by the European Community, this
being seen as essential for the application of the Treaty of Rome’s competition
rules and the completion of the single European market by 1992. Measures to
increase competition have been taken in sectors such as the bus industry and
airline services, with the aim of ensuring value for money in transport services.
These include privatisation of the Government’s shareholdings in a number of
publicly owned transport undertakings, including road haulage, airline ser¬
vices, airports and most of its interest in bus operations.
Inland Transport
There has been a considerable increase in passenger travel in recent years.
Travel in Great Britain rose by 30 per cent between 1977 and 1987, with travel
by car and taxi (which rose by 40 per cent) and by air rising particularly rapidly,
although travel by bus and coach, motor cycle and pedal cycle has been declining
recently. Car and taxi travel accounts for 83 per cent of passenger mileage within
Great Britain, buses and coaches for about 8 per cent, rail for 7 per cent and air
less than 1 per cent.
Car ownership has also risen substantially, and 64 per cent of households
have the regular use of one or more cars, with 19 per cent having the use of two
or more cars. At the end of 1988 there were 23-3 million vehicles licensed for use
on the roads of Great Britain, of which 20-4 million were private cars and light
goods vehicles (including over 2 million cars registered with a company address);
648,000 other goods vehicles; 912,000 motor cycles, scooters and mopeds; and
132,000 public transport vehicles (including taxis).
Road haulage has a dominant position in the movement of inland freight,
accounting for about 80 per cent of tonnage carried and for nearly three-fifths of
tonne-km. Railways, inland waterways, coastal shipping and pipelines are
important in carrying certain types of freight, particularly bulk goods.
Motor vehicle traffic in Great Britain is continuing to grow, having risen by 5 per
cent in 1988 to some 332,500 million vehicle-km. In 1988 the road network in
Britain totalled some 378,150 km (234,970 miles), of which 3,000 km (1,860
miles) were trunk motorways (see Table 38). Although motorways and trunk
roads account for 4 per cent of road mileage in Great Britain, they carry 34 per
cent of road traffic, including nearly 61 per cent of heavy goods vehicle traffic,
and traffic on these roads has been growing at a much higher rate than on other
roads.
332
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Developments
Administration
Table 38: Road Length (as at April 1988)
km
Trunk roads
Public (including
roads motorways)
Trunk
motorways3
England
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
270,265
51,206
32,842
23,838
10,625
3,143
1,701
242
2,537
233
119
111
Britain
378,151
15,711
3,000
Sources: Department of Transport, Northern Ireland Department of the Environment, Scottish Development
Department and Welsh Office.
aIn addition, there were 77 km (48 miles) of local authority motorway in England and 24 km (15 miles) in
Scotland. In April 1989, 304 km (189 miles) of trunk motorway were under construction in England.
New and improved roads have resulted in much shorter travelling times,
particularly for long-distance journeys and those between cities, and have
brought considerable benefits to industry, commerce and road haulage opera¬
tors, and increased personal mobility. The Government’s programme to improve
motorways and other trunk roads (which form a network linking major centres
of population, industrial areas and ports) is intended to assist economic growth
by reducing transport costs, removing through traffic (especially lorries) from
unsuitable roads in towns and villages, and enhancing road safety.
There are some 530 schemes in the motorway and trunk road programme in
England, worth some £12,000 million. Bypasses and relief roads account for
nearly 33 per cent of the programme, which also includes projects intended to
increase the traffic capacity of major through routes and to improve junctions on
heavily used roads. In 1989—90 the Department of Transport is supporting 361
major local authority road schemes, the majority of which are bypasses. Work on
a privately financed project costing £86 million to provide a new bridge across
the Thames between Dartford and Thurrock began in 1988 and should be
completed by 1991. The Department of Transport is investigating with the
private sector other possibilities for using private finance for road projects.
In Wales the priorities are improvements to the coast road in north Wales
(including the construction under the Conwy estuary of the first immersed tube
road tunnel to be built in Britain) and the upgrading of roads which are
important for industrial redevelopment. A second crossing of the Severn is
planned by the mid-1990s.
The programme in Scotland includes planned extensions to the M74, M8 and
M80 motorways, the improvement of strategic routes beyond central Scotland to
areas such as the north east and some of the west-coast routes, and the
construction of more bypasses.
In Northern Ireland the emphasis is on improving arterial routes, construct¬
ing more bypasses, and improving roads in the Belfast area, including the
construction of a new cross-harbour link planned for the mid-1990s.
Responsibility for trunk road motorways and other trunk roads in Great Britain
rests in England with the Secretary of State for Transport, in Scotland with the
Secretary of State for Scotland and in Wales with the Secretary of State for Wales.
The costs of construction, improvement and maintenance are paid for by central
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
333
Road Safety
government. The highway authorities for non-trunk roads in England are the
county councils, the metropolitan district councils, the London borough coun¬
cils and the Common Council of the City of London. In Wales the authorities are
the county councils, and in Scotland the regional or islands councils. In
Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Department of the Environment is
responsible for the construction, improvement and maintenance of public
roads.
Research into road construction, traffic engineering and safety, and into
problems associated with transport, is carried out by the Transport and Road
Research Laboratory, the research arm of the Department of Transport.
Although Great Britain has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the
world, it has a good record on road safety, with one of the lowest road accident
death rates in the European Community. In 1988 some 5,050 people were killed
on the roads, about 63,500 seriously injured and 253,800 slightly injured.
Following a major review of road safety policy completed in 1987, the Govern¬
ment is seeking to reduce road casualties by one-third by the end of the century.
To achieve this, resources are being concentrated initially on measures which
are demonstrably cost-effective in terms of casualty reduction, with priority
being given to reducing casualties among vulnerable road-users (pedestrians,
cyclists and motor cyclists), particularly in urban areas, where some 70 per cent
of road accidents occur. The other principal areas for achieving lower casualties
are improvements in highway design and measures to combat drinking and
driving; the statutory limit of breath alcohol concentration for drivers is 35
microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of breath.
In February 1989 the Government announced proposals for a major reform of
road traffic law to improve road safety, including changes in a wide range of
driving offences and a new offence of dangerous driving. Tougher measures to
deal with drinking and driving offenders are proposed, while new technology is
to be utilised to improve the detection of speeding and traffic light offences.
A number of factors, such as developments in vehicle safety standards and
improvements in infrastructure (including motorways, bypasses and pedes-
trianisation of city centres), have contributed to the long-term decline in
casualty rates. The most significant recent reduction in casualties has come
from the compulsory wearing of seat belts for front-seat passengers of cars and
light vans. This reduction has been estimated at a minimum of 200 deaths and
7,000 serious injuries a year. Regulations now require rear seat belts or child
restraints to be fitted to new cars and in September 1989 regulations came into
effect to provide for compulsory wearing of belts by children in the rear seats of
cars in which belts are fitted.
Comprehensive regulations govern the design of vehicles, their use on the
roads, and the maintenance and testing of their mechanical condition. Under a
national ‘type approval’ scheme in Great Britain, all new cars and goods vehicles
must be of a type that has been certified as meeting the required standards.
Private cars and light goods vehicles which are three or more years old must be
tested annually at private garages authorised as test stations. (In Northern
Ireland private cars five or more years old are tested at official vehicle inspection
centres.) Heavy goods vehicles are subject to annual tests carried out at special
testing stations.
Minimum ages are laid down for driving: 16 for riders of mopeds and disabled
drivers of specially adapted vehicles; 17 for drivers of cars and other passenger
vehicles with nine or fewer seats (including that of the driver), motor cycles and
goods vehicles not over 3-5 tonnes permissible maximum weight; 18 for goods
vehicles over 3-5 but not over 7-5 tonnes; and 21 for passenger vehicles with over
nine seats and goods vehicles over 7-5 tonnes. All drivers of motor vehicles,
334
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Traffic in
Towns
ROAD
HAULAGE
Structure of
the Industry
except new residents holding certain non-British licences, are required to pass
the driving test before being granted a full licence to drive. Provisional licence
holders must display ‘L’ plates on their vehicle. Those learning to drive a car
must be accompanied while driving by a qualified driver, while learner motor
cyclists are restricted to riding machines up to 125 cc with a limited power
output. There are national speed limits of 60 mph (97 km/h) on single carriage¬
way roads and 70 mph (113 km/h) on dual carriageway roads (including motor¬
ways), unless a lower limit is indicated. In built-up areas there is a general limit
of 30 mph (48 km/h).
Traffic management schemes have been introduced in most urban areas to
minimise congestion, create a better environment and improve road safety. They
may include computerised traffic control systems, one-way systems, bus priority
measures, parking controls and pedestrian and cyclist facilities. Many towns
have shopping precincts which are specially designed for pedestrians and from
which motor vehicles are excluded for all or part of the day. In most town centres
on-street parking is controlled and waiting limits apply. City centres often have
zones where payment is required for on-street parking. In parts of central
London wheel clamps are used to immobilise illegally parked vehicles.
Urban traffic control systems, with traffic signals controlled by a central
computer, are in operation in many urban areas in Britain. Systems developed
by the Department of Transport and British firms have achieved international
repute and are the most commonly used in the world. A recent enhancement of
these systems, which continuously measures and responds to the flow of traffic,
is being introduced into the majority of urban traffic control schemes.
Road haulage traffic by heavy goods vehicles amounted to 108,600 million
tonne-km in 1987. There has been a move towards larger and more efficient
vehicles carrying heavier loads—about 76 per cent of the traffic, in terms of
tonne-km, is carried in vehicles of over 25 tonnes gross laden weight. Much of
the traffic is moved over short distances, with 77 per cent of the tonnage being
carried on hauls of 100 km (62 miles) or less, although the growth in road
haulage has been concentrated on long-distance traffic. Public haulage (private
road hauliers carrying other firms’ goods) accounts for 71 per cent of freight
carried in Great Britain in terms of tonne-km. In 1987 the main commodities
handled by heavy goods vehicles were crude minerals (297 million tonnes); food,
drink and tobacco (280 million tonnes); and building materials (158 million
tonnes).
The Government has introduced a number of measures to alleviate the
environmental problems caused by lorries. Safeguards on the design of lorries
include restrictions on their dimensions, while measures have been taken to
improve the enforcement of lorry weights and safety. More bypasses are being
built to keep lorries away from residential areas. Work has virtually been
completed on a collaborative programme, involving vehicle and engine manufac¬
turers, to reduce the noise from heavy lorries to less than half the 1981 level and
produce a quiet heavy vehicle for the 1990s. To encourage the use of railways
and inland waterways for the carriage of freight, grants of up to 60 per cent are
available towards the cost of construction or modernisation of privately owned
facilities where there are significant environmental benefits from the removal of
heavy goods vehicle traffic from the roads.
Road haulage is predominantly an industry of small, privately owned
businesses. Many of the 130,000 holders of an operator’s licence in 1987 had
only one vehicle and about half the heavy goods vehicles are in fleets of ten
or fewer vehicles. The biggest operators in Great Britain are Transport
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
335
Licensing and
Other Controls
International
Road Haulage
PASSENGER
SERVICES
Structure
Development Group, the National Freight Consortium, United Transport Inter¬
national and P and O European Transport Systems.
Those operating goods vehicles over 3-5 tonnes gross weight (with certain
special exemptions) require an operator’s licence. Licences are divided into
restricted licences for firms carrying their own goods and standard licences,
subdivided into ‘national only’ and international’, for hauliers operating for hire
or reward. (In Northern Ireland operators carrying their own goods do not
require a licence.) Proof of professional competence, financial standing and good
repute is needed to obtain a standard licence. Regulations lay down limits on the
hours worked by drivers of goods vehicles and minimum rest periods. Tacho¬
graphs (which automatically record speed and distance covered, driving time
and stopping periods) must be fitted and used in most goods vehicles over 3-5
tonnes gross weight in Great Britain.
International road haulage has grown rapidly and about 7 million tonnes a year
are carried in road vehicles to and from the continent of Europe and the Irish
Republic by British registered vehicles. Over 1 • 1 million road goods vehicles were
conveyed by ferry to the continent in 1987, of which nearly half were unaccom¬
panied trailers. The average length of haul for British registered vehicles is some
1,095 km (680 miles) in each direction, compared with 75 km (47 miles) for
internal road haulage. International road haulage is governed mainly by bilateral
agreements with 28 other countries. Many place no restriction on the number of
British lorries entering the country concerned, although some agreements
specify an annual quota. The European Community (which also has a quota of
permits allowing haulage anywhere within the Community) has agreed to full
liberalisation of international road haulage within the Community, abolishing
all permits from 31 December 1992.
There has been a long-term decline in the use of local bus services, mainly
because of the growth in ownership of private cars. In 1987—88 buses or coaches
carried some 4,133 million passengers on local services in Great Britain, 22 per
cent fewer than in 1978. However, the Transport Act 1985 contains a number of
measures which are stimulating competition in local bus services.
These measures follow the reforms enacted in the Transport Act 1980, which
removed restrictions on operating long-distance express coach services and
excursions, allowing free competition between operators. This had a noticeable
effect on long-distance express coach services, bringing about reductions in
fares, the provision of more services and an increase in passengers.
Major changes in the structure of the passenger transport industry have
occurred as a result of the Transport Act 1985. Privatisation of the National Bus
Company (which was the largest single bus and coach operator in Britain,
operating through some 70 subsidiaries in England and Wales) was completed
in 1988. Each subsidiary was sold separately, and encouragement was given for
a buy-out by the local management or employees. The Transport (Scotland) Act
1989 provides for the privatisation of the Scottish Bus Group (the largest
operator of bus services in Scotland), which operates the main bus services
outside the major cities and has some 3,000 buses.
The 1985 Act also contains measures to encourage competition in services
formerly run directly by municipal authorities and by passenger transport
executives in metropolitan areas. About 50 local authorities own public trans¬
port companies established under the Act, providing about 30 per cent of bus
services. By May 1989 six authorities had sold their companies and a number of
other authorities were considering privatisation.
336
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Deregulation of
Bus Services
Taxis
RAILWAYS
London Regional Transport (LRT) is a nationalised industry, established
under the London Regional Transport Act 1984, with its board members
appointed by the Secretary of State for Transport. Within LRT the main wholly
owned operating subsidiaries are London Underground Ltd, London Buses Ltd
and Docklands Light Railway Ltd. Financial support is provided by central
government with a contribution from London’s ratepayers. LRT is required to
involve the private sector in the provision of services where this is more efficient,
and has been set targets for reductions in operating costs and revenue support.
In Northern Ireland almost all road passenger services are provided by
subsidiaries of the publicly owned Northern Ireland Transport Holding Com¬
pany. Citybus Ltd operates services in the city of Belfast and Ulsterbus Ltd
operates most of the services in the rest of Northern Ireland. These companies
have some 320 and 1,030 vehicles respectively.
As well as the major bus operators, there are also a large number of small
privately owned undertakings, often operating fewer than five vehicles.
Although double-deck buses are the main type of vehicle used for urban road
passenger transport in Britain, with some 24,000 in operation, there has been a
substantial increase in the use of minibuses in recent years. Nearly 400 areas
are served by a total of some 5,000 minibuses. In addition, there are some
39,000 other single-deck buses and coaches. Blackpool and Llandudno have
Britain’s only remaining tramway systems.
Local bus services in Great Britain (except in London) were deregulated in 1986
by the Transport Act 1985. Bus operators are now able to run services wherever
they see a commercial opportunity, and local authorities can subsidise the
provision of additional socially necessary services after competitive tendering.
All services, whether commercial or subsidised, have to be registered with the
appropriate traffic commissioner (one for each of the nine traffic areas of Great
Britain) six weeks before the commencement of the service. Similar notice is
required when a service is varied or cancelled.
Deregulation has led to a significant increase in bus mileage, with some 85
per cent of services operated without subsidy, although the decline in the
number of passengers has continued. In addition, there has been a substantial
increase in the number of private operators and in the number of minibus
services.
There are about 50,000 licensed taxis in Great Britain, mainly in urban areas;
London has some 16,000. In London and a number of other cities taxis must be
purpose-built to conform to very strict requirements and drivers must have
passed a test of their knowledge of the area. Hire cars with drivers may be booked
only through the operator and not hired on the street; in most areas outside
London hire cars are licensed.
The Transport Act 1985 provides for new arrangements for the operation of
taxis and hire cars, with the intention of increasing their role in public
transport. Restrictions by local authorities on granting taxi licences have been
relaxed so that a licence can be refused only if a local authority is satisfied that
there is no unfulfilled demand for taxis in its area. Taxi operators are able to run
regular local services and can tender in competition with bus operators for
services subsidised by local authorities. In addition, they may apply for a
restricted’ bus operator’s licence, allowing them to run one or two minibuses
without having to obtain a full bus operator’s licence.
Railways were pioneered in Britain, and the Stockton and Darlington Railway,
opened in 1825, was the first passenger public railway in the world to be worked
by steam power. Under the Transport Act 1947 the four large railway companies
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
337
Organisation
Private
Sector
Involvement
Operations,
Financial
Support and
Investment
Passenger
Services
in Great Britain were brought under public ownership, and in 1962 the British
Railways Board was set up to manage railway affairs and subsidiary activities. In
Northern Ireland the Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd, a subsidiary of
the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company, operates the railway service
on some 320 km (200 miles) of track.
The British Railways Board controls most of the railway network in Great
Britain (apart from the underground railway systems in London and Glasgow,
the Tyne and Wear Metro and a few stretches of private railway). It has five
business sectors responsible for the main markets: InterCity, Network South-
East and Provincial services being responsible for the passenger services, while
the other two sectors are Railfreight and Parcels. Other subsidiary businesses
are British Rail Maintenance Ltd, which is responsible for maintenance and
light repair of British Rail stock; and Transmark, which provides consultancy
services overseas on railway and associated operations.
In order to concentrate its resources on running the main railway business,
British Rail has sold a number of its subsidiary businesses. Recent sales have
included its engineering subsidiary, British Rail Engineering Ltd, which was
sold in 1989 to a consortium of its management and employees and two private
sector companies; and its station catering business, Travellers Fare Ltd.
The Government has initiated a study to explore the long-term options for
British Rail, including the possibility of privatisation. Among the options being
examined are a single privatised company, a number of independent regional
companies, a number of companies based on British Rail’s business sectors,
and a split between a track authority and independent operating companies
which would run the trains.
In 1988—89 the Board’s turnover, including financial support and income from
other activities but excluding internal transactions, was £3,396 million, of
which £2,576 million was derived from rail passenger services and £807 million
from freight services. Statistics of the Board’s operations are given in Table 39.
In 1988-89 British Rail received £549 million in grants towards its operations
as compensation for the public service obligation to operate parts of the rail
passenger system (in the Provincial sector and in Network SouthEast) which
would not otherwise cover their costs. Financial support has been substantially
reduced, reflecting the benefits of investment and of higher passenger traffic,
and is to be further reduced.
Investment has been increased considerably, and over the five years from
1989—90 British Rail is planning to invest over £4,000 million. Major areas of
expenditure will include completion of the electrification scheme for the east-
coast main line between London and Edinburgh, new rolling stock and other
improvements in Network SouthEast and investment in new diesel multiple-
unit trains in the Provincial sector.
The passenger network (see map, p 338) comprises a fast inter-city network,
linking the main centres of Great Britain; local stopping services; and commuter
services in and around the large conurbations, especially London and south-east
England. British Rail runs over 700 InterCity expresses each weekday, serving
about 90 business and leisure centres. Journey times on inter-city routes have
been reduced substantially as more track has been made suitable for high-speed
operations and as a result of faster trains, notably the InterCity 125s, operated
by diesel trains, travelling at maximum sustained speeds of 125 mph (201
km/h). InterCity 125 trains provide over half of InterCity train mileage and are
the world’s fastest diesel trains. They operate from London to the west of
Inverness
srdeen
Dundee
Edinburgh
Londonderry
.Carlisle
irough
,Scarborough
larlington
iHarrogate
Bradfon
Holyheai
Shrewsl
ihguard
Taunton
lamptoi
Exeter
lewton Abbot
irtsmouth
Orkney
Islands
Shetland
Islands
Milford
Main Railway Passenger Routes
Other routes
castle upon Tyne
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 km
I—I—I—1 I I I
I I I I I
0 20 40 60 80 miles
•+++++ Electrified Intercity
and Express routes
■■■ Other Intercity
and Express routes
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
339
Freight
Table 39: Railway Operations
1980 1986-87 1987-88 1988-89
Passenger journeys (million)
Passenger-km (million)
Freight train traffic (million tonnes)
Trainload and wagonload traffic
(million net tonne-km)
Assets (at end of period):
Locomotives
High Speed Train power units
Other coaching vehicles
Freight vehicles3
Passenger stations
Freight depots b
Route open for traffic (km)
760
30,300
153
17,640
3,379
142
21,074
119,507
2,366
409
17,645
689
31,105
138
16,565
2,441
197
15,336
33,649
2,405
125
16,670
727
33,141
144
17,466
2,270
197
14,648
28,884
2,426
115
16,633
764
34,321
149
18,103
2,180
197
14,258
24,922
2,435
126
16,598
Source: British Railways Board.
a In addition, a number of privately owned wagons and locomotives are operated on the railway network for
customers of British Rail; some 23,750 wagons and six locomotives were authorised for working on the network at
the end of March 1989.
b1988—89 figures include freightliner terminals.
England and south Wales; to the East Midlands; to Yorkshire, north-east
England and eastern Scotland; and on cross-country services through the West
Midlands, linking south-west England or south Wales with north-west England
or north-east England and Edinburgh.
About 26 per cent of route-mileage is electrified, including British Rail’s
busiest Intercity route, linking London, the West Midlands, the North West and
Glasgow. The most significant electrification scheme is that for the east-coast
main line between London and Edinburgh (including the line from Doncaster to
Leeds), involving electrification of some 636 km (395 miles). Electric trains are
already in operation between King’s Cross and Doncaster and Leeds. Electric
services will be extended to Newcastle upon Tyne and Edinburgh in 1991.
Two new types of diesel multiple-unit trains—the lightweight ‘Pacer’ and the
medium-weight ‘Sprinter’—are being introduced as replacements for old diesel
rolling stock. Many of the older electric multiple units used for commuting
services in London and south-east England are being replaced by new, more
efficient rolling stock. The first of a new generation of‘Networker’ trains is due to
enter service in Kent in 1990-91 and in Essex in 1993, and two fleets of
Networker trains totalling 1,300 coaches are envisaged; a diesel version has been
ordered for non-electrified lines to the west of London. Three major new rail links
to airports are planned: a new link under construction between Stans ted airport
and London, a joint venture with BAA pic for a £190 million project (to be
financed largely by the private sector) between Heathrow airport and Paddington
(London), and a link to connect Manchester airport to the Manchester to
Wilmslow (Cheshire) line.
The most important freight commodities handled are coal, coke, iron and steel,
building materials and petroleum. Over 90 per cent of rail freight traffic is of
bulk commodities, most of it in trainloads.
Greater efficiency is being obtained with the introduction of new types of
wagon with larger capacities and capable of higher speeds, and of more powerful
locomotives. Orders have been placed for 100 heavy duty diesel locomotives.
340
Railways
in London
Other Urban
Railways
Private
Railways
Channel
Tunnel
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which will be able to haul loads of up to 4,000 tonnes at speeds of up to 100 km/h
(60 mph). A network of daily scheduled high-speed freight services has been
established between the major industrial centres. Other developments, such as
the concentration of freight traffic at fewer but better-equipped terminals and a
computer-based total operations processing system, which monitors all con¬
signments and freight train and wagon movements in Great Britain, have
contributed to a significant increase in productivity and competitiveness.
London Underground Ltd operates Underground trains on 408 km (254 miles) of
railway, of which about 167 km (104 miles) are underground, and serves 273
stations, with some 470 trains operating in the peak period. Some 815 million
passenger journeys were made on London Underground trains in 1988-89.
Since 1982 the number of passengers entering central London in the morning
peak period has increased by over 60 per cent, and the Government is
considering a study which recommended two alternative major investment
schemes, both involving new railway lines across London and costing about
£2,000 million.
There is a substantial programme to improve rail transport in London’s
Docklands. The Docklands Light Railway, a 12-km (7-5-mile) route with 16
stations, which was jointly financed by London Regional Transport and the
London Docklands Development Corporation and began operating in 1987, is
being upgraded. A westward extension to the City of London is under construc¬
tion, an eastward extension to Beckton is planned, and the Government is
considering the results of a major study of additional rail links from central
London to the Docklands area.
Other urban railways in Great Britain are the Glasgow Underground and the
Tyne and Wear Metro, a 56-km (35-mile) light rapid transit system with over 40
stations. In the West Midlands an £800 million light rail scheme is being
considered. Tenders are being sought for the first phase of a light rail system in
Greater Manchester to be designed, built and operated by private sector firms.
Light rail systems are also being considered in a number of other areas,
including Bristol, Leeds, Sheffield and Southampton.
There are over 70 small privately owned passenger-carrying railways in Great
Britain, mostly operated on a voluntary basis and providing limited services for
tourists and railway enthusiasts. The main aim of most of these railways, such
as the Severn Valley Railway, is the preservation of steam traction.
Construction work is in progress on the Channel Tunnel project to provide twin
single-track rail tunnels between Britain and France in the largest civil engineer-
ing project in Europe to be financed by the private sector. The project, with a
total financing requirement of £6,000 million, is being undertaken by Eurotun¬
nel, the joint name of the Channel Tunnel Group/France Manche. Ten major
British and French contractors are involved in the project through the contrac¬
tor Transmanche Link. Services are due to start in 1993, and the Channel
Tunnel is expected to bring substantial benefits to industry and to travellers
throughout Britain from the quicker and more reliable carriage of passengers
and freight.
The Channel Link Treaty contains provisions to safeguard the public interest
of Britain and France in matters such as safety and the environment, deals with
matters of national jurisdiction, provides arrangements for arbitration in the
event of disputes over interpretation of the Treaty between the governments and
the concessionaires, sets out the private sector nature of the scheme, and
provides for compensation to the promoter in the event of political interference
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
341
Eurotunnel
Services
Through
Rail
Services
INLAND
WATERWAYS
or cancellation by the governments. The Channel Tunnel Act 1987 authorised
construction, in accordance with the Treaty, and allowed the ratification of the
Treaty and the implementation of the concession agreement between the British
and French governments and the Channel Tunnel Group/France Manche (which
gives the concessionaires the right to build and operate the tunnel for 55 years).
Eurotunnel will operate shuttle trains through the 50-km (31-mile) tunnel
between the two terminals near Folkestone and Coquelles (near Calais), with the
journey taking less than 35 minutes. Shuttle trains will provide a no-booking,
drive-on, drive-off service, with separate passenger and freight shuttles. Euro¬
tunnel is planning to order 18 trains initially—nine passenger shuttles and nine
freight shuttles—for delivery by 1993, while further orders are envisaged. On the
opening of the tunnel a peak of some 200 movements a day in each direction is
expected (including through rail services).
Half of the capacity of the Channel Tunnel has been allocated to through rail
passenger and freight services. High-speed passenger services are planned to
run at least every hour between London and Paris, and London and Brussels,
and through services to other European destinations and from the Midlands,
northern England and Scotland to the continent are under consideration.
British Rail plans investment in new passenger and freight rolling stock, track
and signalling improvements, and terminal facilities.
To meet the envisaged growth in demand for through rail services, British Rail
is proposing the construction of a new high-speed rail link from London to
Folkestone. It would almost halve the journey time between London and
Folkestone to 40 minutes, with trains reaching a maximum speed of 225 km/h
(140 mph). About one-third of the 109 km (68 miles) of track would be in tunnels
and a significant proportion of the cost of building the new line would be for
environmental protection measures. The Government is planning that the
private sector should be involved in the construction and possible management
of the new rail link, and British Rail is negotiating with various private sector
consortia for a partner in the venture.
The inland waterways of Great Britain are popular for recreation, make a
valuable contribution to the environment and play an important part in land
drainage and water supply. They are also used to a limited extent for freight¬
carrying. An official survey of inland waterway freight traffic reported that in
1987, 63-6 million tonnes of freight were carried on inland waterways and
estuaries, covering some 2,300 million tonne-km (1-2 per cent of freight traffic
by tonne-km in Great Britain). About 46 per cent (in tonne-km) was carried in
south-east England, mainly on the River Thames. The publicly owned British
Waterways Board is responsible for some 3,200 km (2,000 miles) of waterways in
Great Britain which are maintained primarily for leisure use, with freight in
some areas. About 550 km (340 miles) are maintained as commercial waterways
for private sector traffic. In 1988-89 the Board’s turnover amounted to £20-8
million and it received a government grant of £44-6 million to maintain its
waterways to statutory standards, since costs substantially exceeded income
generated by leisure, estates and freight activities.
Ports
There are about 80 ports of commercial significance in Great Britain, but in
addition there are many small harbours which handle small amounts of cargo or
mainly serve fishing or recreational interests. Port authorities are of three broad
342
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Port Traffic
Table 40: Traffic through the Principal Ports of Great Britain3
million tonnes
1965 1975 1980 1986 1987 1988
London
Sullom Voe
Tees and Hartlepool
Grimsby and Immingham
Milford Haven
Southampton
Forth
Liverpool
Felixstowe
Medway
Dover
Clyde
Manchester
Flotta
64-6 50-3 54-2
— — 28-5
12 1 20-2 39-4
8-3 220 22-2
24-8 44-9 39-3
24-4 25-3 23-9
6 1 8-4 28-8
31-7 23-4 12-3
— 4-1 5-4
22-3 21-7 17-2
1-4 3-7 6-7
15-3 13-6 8-8
15-8 14-5 12-7
— 0-4 15-4
53-6 48-9 53-7
57-2 500 50-6
30-7 33-9 37-4
32-0 32-2 350
290 32-7 33-4
25-7 27-2 31-5
28-8 300 290
10-7 10-2 19-6
10-8 13-3 13-8
10-4 11-6 12-7
9-9 10-6 10-4
9-7 8-7 9-3
9-8 9-2 8-3
15-8 171 80
Source: Department of Transport.
a Belfast and Lame are the main ports In Northern Ireland and handled 7-3 million tonnes and 3-8 million tonnes
respectively in 1988.
types—trusts, local authorities and companies—and most operate with statu¬
tory powers under private Acts of Parliament.
Major ports controlled by trusts include Clyde, Dover, Forth, London, Medway,
Milford Haven, and Tees and Hartlepool. Local authorities own many small ports
but also the much larger ports of Bristol and Portsmouth, and the oil ports in
Orkney and Shetland.
Associated British Ports Holdings PLC (a private sector company) owns and
operates 21 ports, including Southampton, Grimsby and Immingham, Hull,
Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. Other major ports owned by companies include
Felixstowe, Liverpool and Manchester, and a group of ferry ports, including
Harwich (Parkeston Quay) and Stranraer, owned by Sealink.
In 1988 traffic through the ports of Great Britain amounted to 472 million
tonnes, comprising 140 million tonnes of exports, 165 million tonnes of imports
and 167 million tonnes of domestic traffic (which included offshore traffic,
landings of sea-dredged aggregates and material shipped for dumping at sea).
About 57 per cent of the traffic was in fuels, mainly petroleum and petroleum
products. Traffic through Northern Ireland ports totalled 15 million tonnes.
Britain’s main ports, in terms of total tonnage handled, are given in Table 40.
Sullom Voe (Shetland), Milford Haven, Forth, and Flotta (Orkney) mostly handle
oil, while the main ports for non-fuel traffic are London, Tees and Hartlepool,
Grimsby and Immingham, Felixstowe and Dover. Ports on the south and east
coasts have increasingly gained traffic at the expense of those on the west coast
as the emphasis of Britain s trade has switched towards the continent of
Europe, and with the changing patterns of shipping which have accompanied
the worldwide switch from conventional handling methods to container and
roll-on modes. Dover and Felixstowe are the main ports to have benefited, while
the growth of roll-on traffic has also favoured many small ports (such as
Ramsgate, Ipswich, Poole and Great Yarmouth).
Container and roll-on traffic has quadrupled since 1970 to 70 million tonnes
in 1988 and now accounts for about 70 per cent of non-bulk traffic. The leading
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
343
Development
Services
Cargo Services
ports for container traffic are Felixstowe, London and Southampton, and those
for roll-on traffic are Dover (Britain’s leading seaport in terms of the value of
trade handled), Felixstowe, Grimsby and Immingham, and Harwich. Other
traffics that have expanded in recent years are minerals, vehicles and forest
products.
Most recent major port developments have been at east- and south-coast ports.
For example, at Felixstowe a £42 million container terminal, completed in 1986,
raised the port’s container-handling capacity by about 50 per cent. The terminal
is being expanded substantially, raising the port’s container-handling capacity
by a quarter by the end of 1989. Extra capacity for ferry services has recently
been provided at a number of other ports, including Dartford, Dover, Hull,
Portsmouth and Ramsgate. New facilities are being developed for bulk and
containerised cargoes on the Medway, and there are plans for bulk and roll-on
cargoes on the Humber.
Purpose-built terminals for oil from the British sector of the North Sea have
been built at Hound Point on the Forth, on the Tees, at Flotta and at Sullom Voe
(one of the largest oil terminals in the world). A £54 million terminal at Braefoot
Bay in the Firth of Forth handles tankers carrying natural gas liquids brought by
pipeline from the plant at Mossmorran (Fife). Supply bases for offshore oil and
gas installations have been built at a number of ports, notably Aberdeen, Great
Yarmouth and Heysham.
Shipping
The British fleet experienced a substantial reduction in tonnage during the
recent world recession in shipping, although the rate of decrease has fallen
significantly in the last two years. In December 1988 British companies owned
over 16 million deadweight tonnes of trading vessels of 100 gross tonnes and
over. These included 232 vessels totalling over 9-9 million deadweight tonnes
used as oil, chemical or gas carriers and 609 vessels totalling over 6-7 million
tonnes employed as dry bulk, liner or container cargo ships. The great majority
of these ships are registered in Britain or British dependent territories such as
Bermuda.
About 94 per cent by weight (77 per cent by value) of Britain’s overseas trade is
carried by sea, while the proportion of passengers travelling to or from Britain by
sea is more than 30 per cent, compared with about one-half in the early 1960s.
In 1988 British seaborne trade amounted to 290 million tonnes (valued at
£141,620 million) or 1 million million tonne-km (666,000 million tonne-miles).
Ships registered in Britain carried 21 per cent by weight and 32 per cent by
value. Tanker cargoes accounted for nearly half of this trade by weight, but only
7 per cent by value, and foodstuffs and manufactured goods accounted for
four-fifths by value.
British cargo liner tonnage is dominated by a relatively small number of large
private sector groups and container consortia. Many of the deep-sea liner
services from Britain are operated by container ships. There are many roll-on,
roll-off services accommodating passengers and their cars and, in some cases,
commercial vehicles, between Britain and the continent of Europe and several
freight-only roll-on, roll-off services to the Irish Republic, the continent of
Europe, and to some more distant countries.
British shipping companies operating liner services have associated with each
other and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in
344
Passenger
Services
Merchant
Shipping
Legislation
Safety at
Sea
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
a series of‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of rates,
and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. Conferences serve all the
major trades to and from Britain. In 1985 Britain acceded to the United Nations
Convention for Liner Conferences, a code of conduct governing relations among
shipping companies that are members of conferences.
Almost all of the 25 million passengers who arrived at or departed from British
ports in 1988 travelled to or from the continent of Europe or the Irish Republic.
Remaining long-distance passenger ships are used for cruising and in 1988
some 65,000 passengers embarked on pleasure cruises from British ports.
Traffic from the southern and south-eastern ports accounts for a substantial
proportion of traffic to the continent of Europe. The main British operators are
Sealink UK Ltd and P and O. Hovercraft carry about 15 per cent of the traffic on
the short sea crossings to France and services are provided by Hoverspeed Ltd
(owned by Sealink), which operates five hovercraft on routes between Dover and
Boulogne, and Dover and Calais.
Passenger and freight ferry services are also operated to many of the offshore
islands, such as the Isle of Wight, the Orkney and Shetland islands, and the
islands off the west coast of Scotland.
The Government’s policy is one of minimum intervention and the encourage¬
ment of free and fair competition. However, under the Merchant Shipping Acts
there are regulations, administered by the Department of Transport, for marine
safety and welfare, and for preventing and cleaning up pollution from ships. The
Acts also contain certain reserve powers for protecting shipping and trading
interests from measures adopted or proposed by overseas governments.
The Merchant Shipping Act 1988 contains provisions to improve standards of
marine safety, update the law on ship registration and ensure that Britain’s
strategic maritime requirements are met. The Government has made funds
available for Merchant Navy officer training and is setting up a Reserve of
ex-seafarers willing to serve in the Merchant Navy in an emergency. Among the
measures to improve the safety of roll-on, roll-off ferries, following the sinking of
the Herald of Free Enterprise in 1987 with the loss of 189 lives, are a new duty on
shipowners to ensure the safe operation of their vessels, while other provisions
have tightened the duties of masters and their crews. Other regulations to
improve maritime safety have included the introduction of boarding cards for
the control of passenger numbers on roll-on, roll-off ferries, and the requirement
for vehicle deck doors to be closed before a roll-on, roll-off ferry leaves its berth.
The majority of measures introduced by Britain have been incorporated in the
relevant international maritime safety convention.
The first stage of a European Community shipping policy involved agreement
by the Community’s transport ministers in 1986 on four regulations. These will
liberalise the Community’s international trade, establish a competitive regime
for shipping, and enable the Community to take action to combat protectionism
from other countries and to counter unfair pricing practices.
The Coastguard Service, administered by the Department of Transport, is
responsible for co-ordinating civil maritime search and rescue operations
around the coastline of Britain. In a maritime emergency the Coastguard calls
on and co-ordinates the appropriate facilities, such as lifeboats of the Royal
National Lifeboat Institution (a voluntary body), and Ministry of Defence
aircraft, helicopters and ships, as well as merchant shipping, commercial
aircraft and ferries. The Coastguard has three long-range civil helicopters for
search and rescue work, which are based at Sumburgh (Shetland), Stornoway
(Lewis) and Lee-on-the-Solent (Hampshire). In 1988 the Coastguard Service
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
345
Role of the
Government
Civil Aviation
Authority
Air Traffic
co-ordinated action in nearly 6,300 incidents (including cliff rescues), in which
11,100 people were assisted.
The lighthouse authorities (for England and Wales the Corporation of Trinity
House, for Scotland the Northern Lighthouse Board and for Ireland the Commis¬
sioners of Irish Lights) control about 370 lighthouses, many minor lights and
buoys. Responsibility for pilotage rests with harbour authorities under the
Pilotage Act 1987.
Compliance with traffic separation schemes around the shores of Britain is
mandatory for all vessels of countries party to the Convention on the Interna¬
tional Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea 1972. The most important
scheme affecting British waters is in the Dover Strait, the world’s busiest
seaway. Britain and France jointly operate the Channel Navigation Information
Service, which provides navigational information and also monitors the move¬
ment of vessels in the strait.
Civil Aviation
Britain’s substantial civil air transport industry is continuing to develop to meet
the increasing demand for air travel, particularly international travel. Airlines
are re-equipping their fleets with the most modern aircraft, many airports are
being modernised and expanded, and investment is helping to improve air
traffic control capacity.
The Secretary of State for Transport is responsible for international matters
(including negotiation of air service agreements with more than 100 other
countries, the licensing and control of public transport operations into Britain
by overseas operators and British participation in the activities of international
aviation bodies), airports policy, amenity matters (such as aircraft noise),
aviation security policy and investigation of accidents.
The Government s civil aviation policy aims to encourage a sound and
competitive multi-airline industry in Britain, to promote competition in interna¬
tional and internal services, and to maintain high standards of safety. It has
liberalised airline services within Britain, and in its negotiations with other
countries on bilateral air service agreements it is proposing the adoption of more
liberal measures. New agreements with a number of other members of the
European Community have already resulted in greater competition, leading to
increased traffic and lower fares. The Government has taken the lead in
encouraging airline competition within the Community, as a first step towards
meeting the Community’s objective that by 1992 air transport should be part of
a single internal market. As a result, airlines have greater freedom in setting
fares and determining the number and capacity of services provided.
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent statutory body, responsible
for the economic, technical and operational regulation of the industry and,
jointly with the Ministry of Defence, for the provision of air navigation services.
Members of the CAA board are appointed by the Secretary of State for Transport.
Under the Civil Aviation Act 1982 the CAA’s primary objectives are to ensure
that British airlines provide air services to satisfy all substantial categories of
public demand at the lowest charges consistent with a high standard of safety
and an economic return for efficient operators, and to further the reasonable
interests of air transport users.
Total capacity offered on all services by British airlines amounted to 17,225
million available-tonne-km in 1988: 12,405 million tonne-km on scheduled
services and 4,820 million tonne-km on non-scheduled services. The airlines
346
Structure
of the
Airline
Industry
British Airways
Other Airlines
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
carry 31-4 million passengers a year on scheduled services and 24-6 million on
charter flights. In 1988 some 71-4 million passengers travelled by air (interna¬
tional terminal passengers) to or from Britain, 7-3 per cent more than in 1987.
In 1988 the value of Britain's overseas trade carried by air was some £35,800
million and the proportions carried by air amounted to approximately 20 per
cent of the value of exports and 17 per cent of imports. Air freight is important
for the carriage of goods with a high value-to-weight ratio, especially where speed
of movement is essential. Precious stones, live animals, medicinal and pharma¬
ceutical products, clothing, leather and skins, and scientific instruments are
major categories in which a relatively high proportion of exports is sent by air.
Major changes in the structure of the airline industry have occurred. With the
sale by the Government of its shares in British Airways in 1987, the civil airline
industry is entirely in the private sector. In 1988 British Airways acquired
control of British Caledonian Group Pic, the holding company for a group of
which British Caledonian Airways (then the second largest British scheduled
airline) was the principal subsidiary. The merger took place after the proposed
acquisition had been investigated by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission,
which concluded that it would not be expected to operate against the public
interest provided that various undertakings by British Airways to the Commis¬
sion were carried out.
British Airways Pic is one of the world’s leading airlines. In terms of internation¬
al scheduled services it is the largest in the world. During 1988—89 British
Airways' turnover was £4,257 million (including £4,132 million from airline
operations) and the British Airways group carried nearly 25 million passengers
on scheduled and charter flights.
The British Airways scheduled route network serves over 160 destinations in
some 75 countries. During summer 1989 it operated an average of 180 flights a
day from its main operating base at London’s Heathrow airport and 520 flights a
day from other bases in Britain, at Gatwick and major regional centres such as
Manchester, Glasgow and Birmingham. Scheduled Concorde supersonic ser¬
vices are operated from London (Heathrow) to New York, Washington and
Miami, crossing the Atlantic in about half the time taken by subsonic aircraft. In
mid-1989 British Airways had a fleet of more than 200 aircraft, the largest fleet
in Western Europe, comprising 7 Concordes, 40 Boeing 747s, 8 McDonnell-
Douglas DC 10s, 17 Lockheed TriStars, 36 Boeing 757s, 7 Airbus A320s, 49
Boeing 737s, 34 BAG One-Elevens, 8 British Aerospace Advanced Turboprops
and 8 British Aerospace 748s. The first of 19 Boeing 747-400s and of 17 Boeing
767s entered service in the second half of 1989, while 24 Boeing 737s have been
ordered.
About 470 aircraft are operated by other airlines. Dan-Air Services is a major
operator of both scheduled and charter services, and had a fleet of over 50
aircraft in mid-1989. British Midland and Air UK are both major domestic
airlines and also operate a number of international and charter services. Air
Europe has greatly expanded its scheduled services to Europe (which include
some former British Caledonian routes) and is also a major charter operator. It
operates 19 aircraft. Virgin Atlantic began scheduled services between Gatwick
and New York (Newark) in 1984 and is also extending its services to other routes.
Britannia Airways (which carried over 6 million passengers in 1988 and is one
of the largest charter operators in the world) has charter flights from 16 airports
to 80 destinations in Europe and elsewhere, mostly operated for its associated
company Thomson Holidays. In 1988 it acquired another major charter oper¬
ator, Orion Airways, and now has over 40 aircraft, with a further eight on order.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
347
Helicopters
Air
Safety
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Airports
Ownership and
Control
Other leading airlines operating charter services include Monarch Airlines and
Novair International.
Helicopters are engaged on a variety of work, but are mainly employed on the
large-scale operations connected with the development of Britain’s offshore oil
and gas resources. Light aircraft and helicopters are also involved in other
activities, such as charter operations, search and rescue services, crop¬
spraying, and aerial survey and photography. The two main helicopter operators
in Britain are Bristow Helicopters and British International Helicopters, with 62
and 31 helicopters respectively.
The CAA is responsible for both airworthiness and operational safety. Its
Operations Division deals with the preparation and application of safety require¬
ments concerning airline and private aviation operations, flight crew licensing
and training, aerodromes, and fire and rescue services. The Airworthiness
Division is responsible for the airworthiness standards of aircraft registered in
Britain, the licensing of aircraft maintenance engineers and the approval of
work schedules to which British transport aircraft are maintained.
Every company operating aircraft used for public transport must possess an
Air Operator’s Certificate, which is granted by the CAA when it is satisfied that
the operator is competent to secure the safe operation of its aircraft. The CAA’s
flight operations inspectors (who are experienced airline pilots) check that
satisfactory operating standards are maintained.
Each member of the flight crew of a British registered aircraft must hold the
appropriate official licence issued by the CAA. Except for pilots with acceptable
military or other qualifying experience, all applicants for a first professional
pilot’s licence must have undertaken a full-time course of ground and flying
instruction which has been approved by the CAA.
Responsibility for civil and military air traffic control over Britain and the
surrounding seas rests with the National Air Traffic Services (NATS), jointly
operated by the CAA and the Ministry of Defence. At 19 civil aerodromes,
including most of the major British airports, the NATS provides the navigation
services necessary for the operation of aircraft taking off and landing, and
integrates them into the flow of traffic within British airspace. To accommodate
the rapid growth in air traffic, the CAA is planning investment in the air traffic
control network of about £600 million in the 1990s. Traffic control arrange¬
ments will be improved in the congested south-east England sector, so that
capacity should be increased by 30 per cent by the mid-1990s. A new air traffic
control centre for England and Wales is planned.
Of the 137 licensed civil aerodromes in Britain, about one-fifth handle more
than 100,000 passengers a year each. Eleven handle over 1 million passengers a
year each and these are shown in Table 41. In 1988 Britain’s civil airports
handled a total of 94-6 million passengers (93-2 million terminal passengers and
nearly 1 -5 million in transit), and 1 • 1 million tonnes of freight. Heathrow airport
is the world’s busiest airport for international travel and is Britain’s most
important airport for passengers and air freight, handling 37-8 million passen¬
gers (including transit passengers) and 642,000 tonnes of freight in 1988.
Gatwick is the world’s second busiest international airport.
Seven airports—Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted in south-east England, and
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Prestwick and Aberdeen in Scotland—are owned and
managed by BAA pic, the successor company to the statutory British Airports
Authority. Together they handle about 72 per cent of air passengers and 83 per
348
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Development
Table 41: Passenger Traffic at Britain’s Main Airports
1978
1983
1986
million passengers
1987
1988
London (Heathrow) 26-5 26-8 31-3 34-7
London (Gatwick) 7-8 12-5 16-3 19-4
Manchester 3-4 5 1 7-5 8-6
Glasgow 2-2 2-4 3 1 3-4
Birmingham 1-3 1-6 21 2-6
Luton 2 1 1-7 20 2-6
Belfast (Aldergrove) 1-2 1-4 1-9 21
Edinburgh 11 1-3 1-6 1-8
Aberdeen 1-2 1-7 1-5 1-5
Newcastle upon Tyne 0-8 1-0 1-2 1-3
East Midlands 0-5 10 11 1-3
37-5
20-7
9-5
3-6
2-8
2-8
2-2
21
1-6
1-4
1-3
Source: Civil Aviation Authority.
Note: Statistics relate to terminal passengers only and exclude those in transit.
cent of air cargo traffic in Britain. The Government’s shares in BAA pic were sold
in 1987.
Many of the other public airports are controlled by local authorities, and the
Airports Act 1986 provides for the larger airports—those with a turnover
exceeding £1 million in at least two of the previous three years—to be formed
into companies. By mid-1989, 16 major local authority airports were operating
as companies under the Companies Act 1985. The Government is encouraging
the introduction of private capital into the new companies.
Under the Airports Act 1986 the CAA has responsibility for the economic
regulation of major airport companies. These powers enable the CAA to take
appropriate steps to remedy practices considered to be against the public
interest, in particular any abuse of an airport’s monopoly position.
All airports used for public transport and training flights must be licensed by
the CAA. Stringent requirements, such as the provision of adequate fire¬
fighting, medical and rescue services, suitable physical characteristics and
visual aids, must be satisfied before a licence is granted. Strict aviation security
measures are in force.
The Government’s policy is to promote a strong and competitive British airline
industry by providing airport capacity where it is needed and by making effective
use of existing capacity, including regional airports.
A fourth major terminal at Heathrow was opened in 1986 and the first phase
of a second major terminal at Gatwick was completed in 1988. These two
airports should eventually be able to accommodate 45 million and 30 million
passengers a year respectively. Following a public inquiry, planning permission
was granted in 1985 for the expansion of Stansted airport to an eventual
capacity of 15 million passengers a year; a new terminal is expected to open in
1991, initially with a capacity of 4 million to 5 million passengers a year, rising
to 8 million on completion of the first phase of the project. London City airport, a
£30 million airport designed for short take-off and landing aircraft and primarily
catering for business travellers, was opened in 1987 and is one of only a few
airports in the world located in an inner city area.
Facilities have also been improved at regional airports, with major terminal or
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
349
Licensing
Office of
Telecommuni¬
cations
British
Telecom
runway improvements undertaken at Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds/Bradford
and Newcastle upon Tyne airports.
Communications
The telecommunications services sector is one of the most rapidly growing in the
economy. Major changes have occurred in the 1980s with the privatisation of
British Telecom (formerly a public corporation) and the abolition of British
Telecom’s monopoly on the main telecommunications services with the entry
into operation of a second major telecommunications carrier, Mercuiy Com¬
munications. The British Telecommunications Act 1981 and the Telecom¬
munications Act 1984 were the main Acts implementing the Government’s
policy of establishing a more competitive industry which is more responsive to
consumer demand.
The 1984 Act instituted new arrangements requiring those running telecom¬
munications systems (including British Telecom) to be licensed by the Secretary
of State for Trade and Industry. For British Telecom its obligations on providing
services are to ensure that there will continue to be a universal telecommunica¬
tions service throughout the country to meet all reasonable demands and that
certain essential services, such as public emergency services, public callbox
services, maritime emergency services and services in rural areas, continue to be
provided.
There has been a wide range of other liberalisation measures, the most recent
being a new version of the branch systems general licence issued in August
1989. This licence covers most private domestic and business use of telecom¬
munications. It sets out the arrangements by which private users may connect
their systems (including payphones) to the public systems, install their own
wiring and take advantage of private lines leased from the public operators. The
new version contains further significant liberalisation and will also simplify
regulatory procedures. For the first time the resale of capacity of British circuits
leased from the public telecommunications operators will be permitted, while
other changes will allow greater flexibility in installing, maintaining and using
call routing apparatus. The licence also covers the licensing of value added and
data services, previously covered by a separate class licence. The Government
will also increase competition in the provision of specialised satellite services by
licensing a further six operators (in addition to British Telecom, Mercury and, in
the Hull area, Kingston Communications) to provide specialised services to third
parties via satellite in late 1989.
Other areas in which competition has been increased include mobile com¬
munications (see p 352), the supply of telephone apparatus and the provision of
public payphones.
The Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL), a non-ministerial government
department established under the Telecommunications Act 1984, is the inde¬
pendent regulatory body for the telecommunications industry. It is headed by
the Director General of Telecommunications, among whose functions are to
ensure that licensees comply with the conditions of their licences; to promote
effective competition in the telecommunications industry; to provide advice to
the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on telecommunications matters;
and to investigate complaints. The Director General also has a duty to promote
the interests of consumers in respect of prices, quality and variety in telecom¬
munications services.
Under the Telecommunications Act 1984 British Telecom was reconstituted as a
public limited company and a majority of the ordinary voting shares were sold to
350
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Network
Modernisa tion
General
Services
private investors in 1984. It has over 1-2 million registered shareholders and
over 98 per cent of its 244,400 employees are also shareholders.
British Telecom operates some 18-7 million residential lines and 5-2 million
business lines. It runs one of the world’s largest public telecommunications
networks, including 109,000 telex connections, 85,500 public payphones, and a
wide range of specialised voice, data, text and visual services. The inland
telephone and telex networks are fully automatic. International services are also
highly developed, and international direct dialling is available from any tele¬
phone line in Britain to 190 countries, representing over 90 per cent of the
world’s telephones. Automatic telex service is available to over 200 countries.
In 1988-89 the company made a pre-tax profit of £2,437 million on a turnover
of £11,071 million. Expenditure on capital equipment and other assets totalled
£2,900 million, of which £711 million went on modernising exchanges with
digital equipment. About £214 million was spent on research and development.
British Telecom is investing over £2,500 million a year in the modernisation and
expansion of its network to meet the increasing demand for basic telephone
services and for more specialised services. The company has about 610,000 km
(379,000 miles) of optical fibre laid in its network in Britain, accounting for
two-thirds of its trunk network, a higher proportion than any other world
operator. There are more than 2,000 digital exchanges in service and half of its
customers are served by modern local exchanges of various types. The combina¬
tion of digital exchange switching and digital transmission techniques, using
optical fibre cable and microwave radio links, is substantially improving the
quality of telephone service for residential and business customers, as well as
making possible a wider range of services through the company’s main network.
British Telecom provides numerous services, including a free facility for
emergency calls to the police, fire, ambulance, coastguard, lifeboat and air-sea
rescue services; a free directory inquiries service; and various other chargeable
operator-connected services, such as transfer charge and alarm calls. The
operator-handled Freefone service and automatic ‘LinkLine’ facilities enable
callers to contact organisations anywhere in Britain, either free or at local call
rates. Timeline (formerly known as the Speaking Clock) gives callers the time.
British Telecom also provides a Callstream service, which allows callers to obtain
information by paying a premium call rate. The information is made available by
independent service providers using the British Telecom network. In 1988 the
company opened a £70 million optical fibre flexible access system, for intensive
voice and data traffic, to serve the financial organisations of the City of London.
Under a public payphone service modernisation programme, costing some
£160 million, all its public payphones have been equipped with push-button
equipment. A number of cashless call developments are being carried out,
including the Phonecard service, using prepaid encoded cards; Phonecard
payphones account for 17,000 of the total of 85,500 payphones. There are about
320,000 rented payphones on premises to which the public has access and these
are also being upgraded with modern push-button equipment.
Prestel, British Telecom’s videotex service, and Telecom Gold (an electronic
mail and information service) form part of the company’s data services division,
Dialcom Group. Prestel was the first service of its kind to enable a wide variety of
computer-stored information to be called up on a special television receiver via
the telephone. Some 95,000 terminals are attached to Prestel, 57 per cent in
businesses and 43 per cent in homes. Through its ‘Gateway’ links with other
databases, a wide range of other services, such as home shopping and banking
services and holiday booking and reservation facilities, is available; and its first
link with a cable television network has been opened.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
351
International
Services
Mercury
There has been rapid growth in British Telecom’s mobile communications
services, including its radiopaging service, which, with 470,000 customers, is
the largest of its kind in the world.
British Telecom International is the company’s division handling international
networks and services. It is the second largest shareholder in the International
Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (of which 117 countries are
members) and in the International Maritime Satellite Organisation, with in¬
terests in a number of other consortia.
A substantial proportion of the intercontinental telephone traffic to or from
Britain is carried by satellite. British Telecom operates satellite earth stations at
Goonhilly Downs (Cornwall), Madley (near Hereford), London Docklands and
Aberdeen. The Docklands earth station has three 13 m (43 ft) dish aerials and
five smaller aerials and, using the latest digital techniques, handles advanced
business data and videoconferencing services to the continent of Europe and
North America as well as cable television channels. British Telecom’s range of
digital transmission services includes a number available overseas, including
’Satstream’ private circuit digital links covering North America and Western
Europe using small-dish aerials, and an ‘International Kilostream’ private
circuit service available to the United States, Australia and most major business
centres in Asia and the rest of Europe.
Digital transmission techniques have been introduced for services to the
United States, Japan, Hong Kong and Australia via the Madley station. The
London-Tokyo link, set up in 1986, includes the first all-digital telephone link
between two continents, giving faster connections and clearer speech.
Extensive direct-dial maritime satellite services are available for vessels world¬
wide, and limited in-flight operator-controlled telephone call facilities are avail¬
able via Portishead radio station near Bristol.
Recent improvements in submarine cable design (including the use of optical
fibre technology) have helped to increase capacity and reduce pressure on
satellite systems. The world’s first international undersea optical fibre cable,
between Britain and Belgium, began operating in 1986 and the first transatlan¬
tic optical fibre cable (TAT 8) entered service in December 1988. A further
high-capacity transatlantic optical fibre cable (TAT 9), which will cost about
£250 million and be able to carry about 75,000 telephone calls simultaneously,
is expected to be in operation by 1991.
British Telecom’s overseas consultancy service, Telconsult, is engaged on a
large number of projects in up to 60 countries.
Mercury Communications Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Cable and Wireless
pic, operates under licence as the competing telecommunications carrier in
Britain, enabling the company to offer a wide range of services, both nationally
and internationally. Its wholly digital trunk network, covering over 10,000
fibre-km (6,200 miles), is centred on Birmingham and links over 75 towns and
cities, including Edinburgh, Glasgow and Cardiff. National and international
switched telephone services for business customers began in 1986, and services
for small businesses and residential customers are being expanded. Mercury
also provides an extensive range of enhanced services, including national and
international telex and packet data services, electronic messaging, nationwide
radiopaging and voice message services. Mercury’s ‘Centrex’ service, the first in
Europe, provides business customers with all the advanced facilities (such as
inward direct dialling and call forwarding) available on a modern switchboard
from equipment located at Mercury’s public exchanges, so that customers do not
have to purchase their own system. In 1988 Mercuiy introduced its first public
352
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mobile
Communications
Other
Services
Cable and
Wireless
payphone service, in London, and this was extended to a number of other cities
during 1989.
International services are provided by two satellite communications centres in
London’s Docklands and Oxfordshire, serving North America, Europe, the
Middle East, the Far East and Australia. Mercury has been developing new
optical fibre submarine cable links, and agreements have been reached with the
majority of European telecommunications authorities to provide Mercury with
direct links with Europe. Mercury is the British operator involved in the first
private transatlantic optical fibre cable (see p 353).
The Government has taken a number of measures to encourage the expansion of
mobile radio telecommunications services. It has licensed Racal-Vodafone Ltd
(part of the Racal Electronics Group) and Telecom Securicor Cellular Radio Ltd
(a joint venture between British Telecom and Securicor) to run competing
national cellular radio telephone systems. Considerable investment has been
made in establishing their networks to provide increased capacity for the
growing number of cellular radio telephone users, estimated at over 600,000 in
June 1989.
In January 1989 the Government announced an increase in the spectrum
available for cellular radio and the issue of licences for ‘Telepoint’ systems.
Telepoint will allow subscribers to make outgoing telephone calls from public
places and other locations where Telepoint base stations have been established,
using their own portable digital cordless handsets. Licences were granted to
Ferranti; a consortium of Philips, Barclays and Shell; Phonepoint; and Mercury
Callpoint. The first services are due to start by the end of 1989. The Government
has announced its intention to license at least two or three other public mobile
telecommunications operators to start operations in the early 1990s, based on
digital personal communications and linking the cellular and Telepoint
concepts.
Two national operators (GEC National One and Band 3 Radio Ltd) have been
licensed to offer a nationwide trunked mobile radio service, while a number of
licences have been awarded for regional services.
The Department of Trade and Industry has licensed 15 companies which have
been awarded franchises by the cable authorities to run local broadband cable
telecommunications systems. These systems may carry television and a full
range of telecommunications services. At present they mainly provide television
programmes, but some are already offering interactive services, including voice
telephony (which may only be provided in conjunction with British Telecom or
Mercury Communications).
Home banking services, accessed by multi-frequency telephone, are expand¬
ing. They are being developed by a variety of banks, for example, the TSB
through its Speedlink service.
Cable and Wireless pic provides or manages a wide range of telecommunications
activities, mostly overseas in some 40 countries. Its main business is the
provision and operation of public telecommunications services in 36 countries
and territories under franchises granted by the governments concerned, while it
also provides and manages telecommunications services and facilities for public
and private sector customers, and undertakes consultancy work. It owns,
operates or has been a consultant on over 40 satellite earth stations, and has a
fleet of nine cableships and two submersible vehicle systems for laying and
maintaining submarine telecommunications cables. The company’s strategic
objective is the construction of an alternative broadband digital network linking
major world economic and financial centres: London, New York, Tokyo and Hong
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
353
Postal
Services
Post Office
Specialist
Services
Private
Courier
Services
Kong. The first leg, the private transatlantic optical fibre cable linking Britain,
the Irish Republic, the United States and Bermuda, entered service in August
1989, and the ‘Global Digital Highway’ will be completed in 1990.
The Post Office, founded in 1635, pioneered postal services and was the first to
issue adhesive postage stamps as proof of advance payment for mail. The Royal
Mail provides deliveries to nearly 24 million addresses and handles over 50
million letters and parcels each working day (over 13,000 million items a year).
Mail is collected from over 100,000 posting boxes, as well as from post offices
and large postal users. The Post Office has a monopoly on the conveyance of
letters, but under the British Telecommunications Act 1981 the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry has the power to suspend the monopoly in certain
areas or for certain categories of mail and to license others to provide competing
services. The Secretary of State has relaxed the monopoly on letters subject to a
minimum fee of £1, and has issued general licences enabling mail to be
transferred between document exchanges and allowing charitable organisations
to carry Christmas and New Year cards.
All of the Post Office’s 80 offices equipped with mechanical handling equip¬
ment are in operation and are gradually taking over the work of hundreds of
sorting offices handling letters manually. Each address in Britain has a postcode
and the British system is the most sophisticated in the world, allowing
mechanised sorting down to part of a street on a postman’s round and, in some
cases, to an individual address. There are 27 large parcel centres, each serving a
group of counties, which have taken over the work of 1,200 offices which
handled parcels manually. Some £30 million is being invested in a premium
parcel service for business.
As well as postal and Girobank services, post offices handle a wide range of
transactions. In much of its counter service the Post Office acts as agent for
government departments and local authorities. The Post Office is introducing
new technology into its counter services to reduce costs and raise productivity,
while providing an improved range of services to customers. There are nearly
21,000 post offices, of which some 1,500 are operated directly by the Post Office
and the remainder on an agency basis by sub-postmasters.
The Post Office provides a range of specialist services. ‘Datapost’, a door-to-door
delivery service, has overnight links throughout Britain and provides an
international service to 122 countries. ‘Datapost Sameday’ provides a rapid
delivery within or between more than 100 cities and towns in Britain and
between London and Amsterdam, Paris and Dublin. ‘The Royal Mail Facsimile
Service’, the world’s first international public facsimile transmission service
sending letters and other documents electronically, provides high-speed mail
links between more than 100 post offices in Britain as well as to and from some
40 other countries. The Philatelic Bureau in Edinburgh handles about one-third
of the Post Office’s philatelic business, much of it involving sales to overseas
collectors or dealers. The British Postal Consultancy Service offers advice and
assistance on all aspects of postal business to overseas postal administrations,
and nearly 40 countries have used its services since 1965.
Private sector couriers are able to handle time-sensitive and valuable mail,
subject to a minimum fee of £1. The courier industry has grown rapidly, by
about 20 per cent a year, and the value of the items handled is estimated at over
£200 million a year. Britain is one of the main providers of high-speed mail
services in Europe, with London an important centre for air courier traffic.
TRENDS IN
THE LABOUR
MARKET
Patterns of
Employment
Unemploy¬
ment
Employment
Employment in Britain has risen substantially in the second half of the 1980s,
with the workforce in employment having increased by 2-9 million between
March 1983 and March 1989, when it totalled a record 26-5 million. This
represented a larger rise than in any other European country. It has been
accompanied by a considerable decline in unemployment, which has fallen
continuously since the peak of mid-1986, representing the longest period of
falling unemployment since the second world war.
The Government has taken a number of steps to improve the operation of the
labour market, with the aim of creating the most suitable economic climate in
which business can flourish and create more jobs. These include increasing the
flexibility of the labour market, removing burdens on employers and making
training more relevant to the economy’s needs.
The total workforce in June 1988 was 28-6 million, of whom nearly 22-6 million
(12-2 million men and 10-3 million women) were classed as employees in
employment (see Table 42). Major trends have included the growth in the
proportion of the workforce accounted for by women, as more married women
have sought work, especially in part-time employment; and a substantial
increase in self-employment. Between 1980 and 1988 the number of self-
employed people is estimated to have risen by 48 per cent to 3 million,
representing nearly 10-5 per cent of the workforce.
There have been substantial changes in the nature and location of employment,
with a marked shift, as in other industrialised countries, from manufacturing to
service industries. Between 1955 and 1988 the proportion of employees in
employment engaged in service industries rose from 45 per cent to 69 per cent as
higher living standards and technological developments stimulated the growth
of many service industries. During the period 1980 to 1988 the number of
employees in service industries rose by 1-8 million (13 per cent) to 15-5 million
(see Table 43). Employment in most service industries, with some exceptions
such as transport, has grown considerably. The largest rise in this period was in
the banking, finance and insurance sector (by 49 per cent to 2-5 million), while
there was also a substantial increase in hotels and catering (21 per cent).
Manufacturing industry accounted for 40 per cent of employees in employment
in 1955, but by 1988 the proportion had fallen to 23 per cent. Nearly all
manufacturing industries experienced a decline in employment as markets for
manufactured goods changed and as new technology brought greater efficiency.
However, there were small increases in employment in manufacturing in 1987
and 1988, reflecting the improved economic performance.
Unemployment reached its peak in 1986 when, on a seasonally adjusted basis
(excluding school-leavers), it totalled over 3-1 million in June, 11-2 per cent of
the workforce. Subsequently it has declined significantly and by August 1989 it
had fallen to 1 -8 million, 6-1 per cent of the workforce, well below the European
Community average. Unemployment has fallen in all regions, with recent
356
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
EMPLOYMENT
STRATEGY
TRAINING
reductions being greatest in some of the regions with above-average unemploy¬
ment (such as the West Midlands and the North West). There was a fall of 29 per
cent in long-term unemployment (those unemployed for a year or more) to
675,000 in the year to July 1989. Unemployment remains high in some areas,
particularly those with the greatest dependence on traditional manufacturing
industries and in inner cities.
Table 42: Manpower in Britain 1978—88
Thousands (as at June), seasonally adjusted
1978 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987
1988
Employees in
employment3
Self-employed
Unemployedb
Armed forces
Work-related
government
training
programmesc
Workforce d
22,762
1,907
1,153
318
26,311
21,053
2,221
2,807
322
16
26,634
21,227
2,496
2,901
326
175
27,307
21,496
2,610
3,028
326
176
27,821
21,570
2,627
3,130
322
226
28,063
21,878
2,860
2,857
319
311
28,360
22,558
2,986
2,324
316
343
28,627
Sources: Department of Employment and Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development.
a Part-time workers are counted as full units.
6 Figures are adjusted for discontinuities and exclude school-leavers.
r Not seasonally adjusted.
d Comprises employees in employment, the self-employed, the armed forces, participants in work-related
government training programmes and the unemployed (including school-leavers).
The Government’s employment strategy is to maintain an economic, financial
and industrial climate in which businesses can operate successfully and create
jobs. It is taking action to improve the labour market by encouraging better
training, removing regulatory barriers which hinder recruitment by firms, and
providing an extensive range of measures for those most affected by unemploy¬
ment (particularly the long-term unemployed and the young) to help them into
productive work. In Great Britain responsibility for employment policy and
for the payment of unemployment benefit rests with the Department of
Employment.
The Government has adopted a number of objectives in connection with
helping people who have been unemployed for six months or more and other
unemployed people who experience difficulties in entering the labour market
(such as people with disabilities and those from ethnic minorities). Help
includes an offer of training, a place in a Jobclub or, through the Enterprise
Allowance Scheme (see p 359), help in setting up in self-employment.
A substantial amount of training is undertaken. A study by the Training Agency
estimated that in 1986—87 employers spent some £18,000 million on training,
while some £3,000 million was also spent on government programmes.
However, there have been some skill shortages. In 1988 the Government set out
its policy of promoting, in partnership with employers, the establishment of a
training system which will contribute more effectively to Britain’s international
competitive position. The main principles of the new training framework are
that training and vocational education will be designed to contribute to
EMPLOYMENT
357
Training
Agency
Table 43: Employees in Employment3
Industry or service
(1980 Standard Industrial
Classification)
Thousands (as at June)
1980
1983
1987
1988
Per cent
(1988)
998
350
648
5,525
1,044
820
321
499
5,167
1,013
784
313
471
5,239
1,045
13,712 13,501 14,889 15,500
Primary sector 1,099
Agriculture, forestry and fishing 373
Energy and water supply 727
Manufacturing6 6,937
Construction 1,243
Services
Wholesale distribution
and repairs 1,173 1,150 1,240 1,292
Retail distribution 2,177 2,005 2,123 2,161
Hotels and catering 972 963 1,113 1,173
Transport 1,049 912 902 938
Postal services and
communications 437 433 448 471
Banking, finance and insurance 1,695 1,875 2,337 2,528
Public administration 1,980 1,918 2,046 2,115
Education 1,642 1,592 1,708 1,761
Health 1,258 1,294 1,315 1,344
Other services 1,327 1,359 1,657 1,714
3- 5
1-4
21
23-2
4- 6
68-7
5- 7
9-6
5-2
4-2
21
11-2
9-4
7-8
60
7-6
Total
22,991 21,067 21,889 22,567 1000
Sources: Department of Employment and Northern Ireland Department of Economic Development.
a Figures are not seasonally adjusted.
b In June 1988 employment In the main sectors of manufacturing industry included 757,000 In office machinery,
electrical engineering and instruments: 727,000 in mechanical engineering: 564,000 in food, drink and tobacco;
564,000 in textiles, leather, footwear and clothing; 497,000 in paper products, printing and publishing; 450,000
in timber, wooden furniture, rubber and plastics; 356,000 in chemicals and man-made fibres; and 245,000 in
motor vehicles and parts.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
business success and economic growth; employers and individuals will have a
greater share of responsibility for training and its finance, with this responsibil¬
ity being devolved as much as possible to local areas; and that recognised
national standards of competence will cover all sectors and occupations, with
training available so that people can secure qualifications based on these
standards.
The Training Agency within the Department of Employment is responsible for
the Government’s vocational education and training programmes. Expenditure
of about £2,700 million is planned for 1989—90. Its aims are to encourage
employers to develop the skills and experience of their employees of all ages; to
provide and encourage appropriate training for young people when they leave
full-time education; to help the long-term unemployed to acquire the skills and
experience that will help them to obtain regular employment; to help the
education system to become more relevant to working life and more responsive
to changes in the labour market; and to ensure that the needs of the
self-employed and of small firms are met.
358
Training and
Enterprise
Councils
National
Training
Task Force
Scottish
Enterprise
Northern
Ireland
Employment
Training
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In England and Wales responsibility for overseeing the Government’s employ¬
ment, training and enterprise programmes will rest with a network of Training
and Enterprise Councils. The first is expected to be in operation by the end of
1989 or early 1990, and about 100 councils and local Scottish agencies are to be
established over the next three to four years. Each council will cover an area with
a working population averaging about 250,000. Councils will have the task of
developing the quality, effectiveness and relevance to the local labour market of
the training, employment and enterprise programmes. New projects and
activities will be developed to increase the effectiveness of training and
enterprise markets. Councils will work with schools and colleges to raise skill
levels and smooth the transition from education to work.
Each council will be an independent company, operating under a performance
contract with the Government. Two-thirds of the board of directors will be
private sector employers, at chief executive or managing director level. They are
expected to reflect broadly the local pattern of commerce and industry and to
include executives with experience of running small businesses as well as major
employers. The balance of the board may be drawn from leaders of education,
economic development, trade unions, voluntary organisations and the public
sector.
In January 1989 the National Training Task Force was established to advise the
Secretary of State for Employment and to assist in carrying out his training
responsibilities throughout Britain. Its main purpose is to help with the
formation and development of the Training and Enterprise Councils. It has up
to 12 members, of whom two-thirds are leaders of industry and commerce.
In Scotland the Government has proposed that the functions of the Scottish
Development Agency and the Training Agency should be integrated in a new
body, Scottish Enterprise, which would contract with a network of local
agencies for the delivery of training and economic functions. Local agencies
would have wider powers than training and enterprise councils, reflecting the
incorporation of functions previously undertaken by the Scottish Development
Agency.
In Northern Ireland the Government intends to establish a new Training and
Employment Agency as an executive agency within the Department of Economic
Development, bringing it into operation not later than 1 April 1990. Its
operation will cover the services administered within the Department’s labour
market group (including its Employment Service) as well as the statutory
functions of the eight industrial training boards in Northern Ireland and the
Northern Ireland Training Authority. The Agency will implement government
policy in the labour market and maximise the contribution of employment and
training services towards strengthening the Northern Ireland economy.
Employment Training, a new training programme which began operating in
1988, replaced a number of programmes. It represents Britain’s largest-ever
adult training programme, with an annual budget of some £1,400 million.
During 1989—90 it is expected to provide training for up to 560,000 people.
The programme is intended for anyone unemployed for over six months,
together with some other special groups, and aims to provide a broad range of
training, from very basic skills to skills needed in high-technology industries; to
encourage employers to increase their involvement in adult training; and to
encourage people to take a much greater interest in their own development.
Training is a mixture of directed and practical training on projects and with an
employer. Trainees start with a ‘training agent’, who carries out an initial
EMPLOYMENT
359
Business
Growth
Training
Enterprise
Allowance
Scheme
Youth
Training
Education
Initiatives
assessment to identify training needs and draw up a personal action plan, and
then move on to a ‘training manager’, who is responsible for implementing the
action plan. Trainees are able to progress from one form of training to another,
with the aim that, wherever possible, no one should leave the programme
without a period of employer-based training.
Entry to the programme is through a variety of routes, including a Restart
interview or by application at a jobcentre. The emphasis of the programme is on
quality training. Accordingly, training agents and managers are required to gain
approved status as a demonstration of the quality of the training provided.
Trainees receive an allowance giving a premium over their benefit entitlement,
and they also receive help towards fares and some other expenses. As trainees
approach the end of their period on the programme, training managers help
them to find a job or further training.
In April 1989 Business Growth Training was introduced to assist employers in
the training and development of their employees. It replaced a range of similar
initiatives and has an annual budget of £55 million. Help for employers includes
up to half the costs of training consultancy for firms with fewer than 500
employees, up to a maximum of £15,000; up to half the cost towards the funding
of certain demonstration projects in firms with innovative training methods,
subject to a maximum of £60,000; and training for owners and managers of new
and small businesses to develop their business skills.
The Enterprise Allowance Scheme helps unemployed people wishing to start
their own business, but who would be deterred by the prospect of losing benefit
once they began. Entrants, who must have access to at least £1,000 to invest in
the business, receive an allowance of £40 a week for a year while they start the
business. Over 400,000 people have benefited from the scheme since 1982.
Places for some 90,000 new entrants are available in 1989—90. Surveys have
shown that, of those receiving the allowance for a year, 65 per cent remain in
business two years after the allowance has ceased. Furthermore, for every 100
businesses still trading, 114 additional jobs have been created.
The Youth Training Scheme, introduced in Great Britain in 1983, was expanded
in 1986 to offer two years of training for 16-year-old school-leavers and one year
for 17-year-old school-leavers. The scheme is primarily employer-based and is
open to both employed and unemployed young people. All those aged 16 or 17
who are not in employment or full-time education are guaranteed a place on the
scheme. Trainees have the opportunity to obtain a vocational qualification or a
credit towards such a qualification, and receive a certificate recording their
training experience and any qualifications gained while on the scheme. Nearly
80 per cent of those leaving the scheme take jobs or enter further education or
training. In 1988—89 some 310,000 people entered the programme and
government funding totalled £1,071 million.
In Northern Ireland the equivalent programme is the Youth Training
Programme (YTP), launched in 1982 and administered jointly by the Depart¬
ment of Economic Development and the Department of Education for Northern
Ireland. It also offers a two-year programme to eligible 16-year-olds, the second
year being spent in employment with training (under the ‘YTP Workscheme’) or
in more specialised, project-based full-time training; 17-year-olds may partici¬
pate for one year in either the YTP Workscheme or a full-time training scheme. In
1989—90 the YTP is providing some 13,680 training places.
The Technical and Vocational Education Initiative is administered in Great
Britain by the Department of Employment in co-operation with local education
360
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Vocational
Qualifications
Other
Training
Measures
authorities. It is intended to ensure that the education of 14- to 18-year-olds
provides young people with learning opportunities which will equip them for
working life. This is implemented by ensuring that the school curriculum relates
to the working environment, making sure that young people have the
appropriate skills and qualifications for a technological society, giving them
direct opportunities in industry and commerce, encouraging them to be
effective and enterprising, and providing guidance and counselling for career
development. All local education authorities are participating in the initiative,
either through pilot projects or as part of the initiative’s national extension. By
the early 1990s all schools and colleges will have the opportunity to participate
in the initiative.
The ‘Compacts’ initiative in designated inner city areas was launched in 1988
and extended in March 1989. Compacts are local agreements between em¬
ployers, local education authorities and training providers in which young
people, supported by their school or college, work to reach agreed targets, and
employers undertake to provide further training or jobs for those attaining the
targets. Annual expenditure on the scheme is expected to be about £4-25 million
to support the development and operation of 40 compacts. A number of other
education projects are in operation, including the Enterprise in Higher
Education Initiative, designed to lead to greater qualities of enterprise in people
seeking higher education qualifications.
The National Council for Vocational Qualifications (NCVQ) was set up in 1986 to
reform and rationalise the vocational qualifications system. It aims to make
qualifications more relevant by basing them on standards of competence set by
industry, and to establish a national framework based on defined levels of
achievement to which qualifications in all sectors can be assigned or credited.
The aim is to have the framework for levels 1 to 4 (from the most basic level to the
management supervisory level) fully operational in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland by 1991.
Scotland is not covered by NCVQ as it has recently developed its own modular
qualifications system.
Statutory industrial training boards operate in seven industries to provide
training by raising a levy from employers and offering grants for approved
training. However, the Government’s view is that the boards have not succeeded
in raising the standard of training sufficiently, and it is seeking proposals from
them to become independent non-statutory training organisations supported by
employers in their sectors.
The Skills Training Agency, with a network of 60 skillcentres, trains
unemployed people in craft skills and also provides training for unemployed
people through contacts with employers. In March 1989 the Government
announced that the Agency would be sold by private tender.
The availability of open learning opportunities has been extended with the
Open College, an independent company which promotes the widespread
acquisition of skills using open learning. Over 60,000 people have taken its
courses since 1987. Further funds were announced in March 1989; a maximum
of £12 million is being provided for its commercial activities over the next three
years, and a further £6 million for its broadcasting activities. The Government’s
aim is for the College to be self-financing within three years.
In 1988 the Department of Employment, in partnership with three major
banks, made career development loans available nationally following a pilot
initiative. The loans help individuals to pay for vocational training by offering
deferred payments on loans until after the training period and for up to a further
three months; interest on the loans is paid by the Department.
EMPLOYMENT
361
EMPLOYMENT
SERVICES
Counselling
Other
Functions
Incentives
to Work
For people with disabilities the Training Agency operates an Employment
Rehabilitation service designed to help people overcome the obstacles that might
prevent them from obtaining jobs. It operates through 26 Employment
Rehabilitation Centres, four ASSET (Assistance towards Employment) Centres
and mobile teams operating out of these centres.
The main priorities of the Employment Service, which is to become an executive
agency of the Department of Employment, are to provide help for people
unemployed for over six months and for other unemployed people who may need
help, such as the disabled or disadvantaged, and to maintain the accurate and
prompt payment of benefit to unemployed people, while ensuring that payment
is made only to those entitled. The Employment Service has two main ways of
helping the unemployed to find work: by placing people directly into jobs or by
offering guidance and counselling so that people can find the best route to
return to employment, for example, by training.
The jobcentre network handles about one-third of vacancies in the economy,
and 80 per cent of the 1 -9 million people whom it placed in jobs in 1988—89 were
unemployed.
The counselling services of the Employment Service have been developed to
tackle the loss of contact with the labour market experienced by the long-term
unemployed and to regenerate their motivation to seek work. Client advisers in
unemployment benefit offices interview every newly unemployed person and
offer advice on the financial help and on the jobs and training opportunities
available.
If a person’s unemployment lasts for six months or longer, he or she is invited
to an interview with a Restart counsellor every six months to discuss problems
which may be hindering the search for employment, with the aim of agreeing a
course of action to help in returning to work. This could include direct
placement in a job, enrolment on a training programme or a Restart course (a
five-day course designed to rebuild self-confidence and motivation, and includ¬
ing help with job-hunting techniques), a place in a Jobclub (where participants
are given training sessions in job-hunting skills and then have access to a
resource centre where facilities are available to help on intensive jobsearch), or
help towards self-employment through the Enterprise Allowance Scheme (see
p 359).
A further group of counsellors, claimant advisers, work closely with the
Restart counsellors and concentrate on giving the unemployed advice on
benefits, especially those which can be claimed while in employment.
The Employment Service also aims to help people with disabilities to find work.
All Employment Service programmes make provision for people with disabilities.
Disablement Resettlement Officers offer practical help and counselling, and a
wide range of programmes, such as one offering sheltered employment
opportunities, is available. In 1987—88, 78,000 people with disabilities were
helped by these special programmes.
The Employment Service plays a full role within the Government’s inner city
initiative, modifying its national schemes to meet the special needs and
circumstances of its inner city users.
The Government has taken action to improve incentives to work (such as raising
personal tax allowances and reducing the standard rate of income tax to 25 per
cent, while improving benefits for people in work). These measures, together
with reforms in the social security system implemented in 1988, have helped to
ensure that people are better off in work than remaining unemployed.
362
Northern
Ireland
Careers
Service
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
Collective
Bargaining
and Joint
Consultation
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Jobstart Allowance of £20 a week is available for up to six months to
eligible long-term unemployed applicants who accept a full-time job with gross
pay of less than £90 a week. Its purpose is to encourage long-term unemployed
people, particularly those on high levels of benefit, to take jobs which they might
not otherwise have considered. In 1988-89 some 10,700 applications were
received.
In Northern Ireland the Department of Economic Development’s Employment
Service, through its network of 28 jobmarkets’, provides a guidance and
placement service for all age groups, offering a range of services for employers
and employees, as in Great Britain. Its facilities include Jobclubs and Restart
courses. Assistance for the long-term unemployed is provided through the
Action for Community Employment Scheme and Enterprise Ulster, which
together provided an average of some 9,600 jobs throughout 1988-89 at a cost
of some £56 million. Responsibility for administering the Department’s
Employment Service will be transferred to the Northern Ireland Training and
Employment Agency, which is to be established by April 1990 (see p 358).
Under the Employment and Training Act 1973 local education authorities must
provide a careers service for people attending educational institutions other
than universities (which normally have their own careers service) and an
employment service for those leaving them. The careers services in Wales and
Scotland are the responsibility of the respective Secretaries of State. In Northern
Ireland responsibility rests with the Department of Economic Development,
although it will be transferred to the new Northern Ireland Training and
Employment Agency.
The structure of industrial relations in Britain has been established mainly on a
voluntary basis. The system is based chiefly on the organisation of employees
and employers into trade unions and employers’ associations, and on freely
conducted negotiations at all levels.
In many industries terms and conditions of employment and procedures for the
conduct of industrial relations have traditionally been settled by negotiation and
agreement between employers or employers’ associations and trade unions. For
collective bargaining and other purposes trade unions are widely recognised,
especially in the public sector (including nationalised industries) and in large
firms and establishments. Agreements may be industry-wide, as has generally
been the case in the public sector, but they are often supplemented by local
agreements in companies or factories (plant bargaining), while individual
companies may have their own agreements, either for the whole company or for
each plant.
In some industries, companies and factories, negotiations are conducted by
meetings held when necessary, while in others joint negotiating councils or
committees have been established on a permanent basis. Joint committees are
fairly widespread, especially in large firms. The scope of the various bodies (from
national joint industrial councils for whole industries to works councils and
committees in individual workplaces) varies widely, and can cover such
additional matters as production plans, training, education, welfare and safety.
Day-to-day negotiations on various aspects of pay (such as bonuses or
performance pay) are normally handled at plant level. Arrangements for
collective bargaining normally suffice to settle all questions which are raised,
but there is often provision for matters which cannot be settled in this way to be
referred to independent conciliation or arbitration. The Employment Protection
EMPLOYMENT
363
Developments
Trade Unions
Act 1975, as amended by the Employment Act 1980, makes provision for
information needed for collective bargaining purposes to be disclosed by
employers to trade unions, subject to certain safeguards.
In recent years there have been a number of developments which have affected
Britain’s industrial relations system. An important labour market development
has been the continuing growth in part-time, temporary and sub-contracting
employment. Together with the growth of self employment, this has encouraged
greater labour market flexibility. Many employers have sought greater flexibility
through a closer relationship between pay and performance, particularly
through performance-related pay schemes (such as merit pay). In many sectors
job demarcation (for example, between manual, technical and clerical skills) has
been relaxed.
Other developments have included the introduction of new technology and
related organisational changes. There has been a trend away from national
bargaining machinery towards bargaining at a more local level; the proportion of
the workforce covered by multi-employer national agreements declined from 60
per cent in 1978 to 35 per cent in 1989. The Government has favoured moves
away from national pay bargaining towards systems where pay increases are
dependent primarily on performance, merit, company profitability, and demand
and supply in the local labour market. Areas in which national industry-wide
pay bargaining has recently been ended include merchant shipping, the
printing of national newspapers, commercial broadcasting and the London
clearing banks. Where industry-wide bargaining remains important, employers
often seek a degree of flexibility to permit modifications to national agreements.
Another recent feature has been the development of‘new style’ agreements, often
associated with overseas-owned (particularly Japanese) companies, although
they are also found in British-owned firms. These agreements often involve the
recognition of a single union for all of a company’s employees (particularly for
companies recognising unions for the first time), ‘single status’ (involving the
elimination of the traditional distinction between managers, supervisors and
other employees), a greater emphasis on employee participation, and flexibility
in working practices.
Trade unions have members in nearly all occupations. As well as negotiating pay
and other terms and conditions of employment with employers, they provide
certain benefits and services such as educational facilities, legal advice and aid
in work-related cases. Trade unions vary widely in the composition of their
membership, and may be organised either by occupation (for example, they may
recruit clerical staff or managers wherever employed) or by industry, while some
are based on a combination of both.
During the 1980s there has been a decline in trade union membership, and by
the end of 1987 total union membership was about 10-5 million, of whom 81 per
cent were in the 24 largest unions. The decline reflects the moves away from
manufacturing and public services (both of which have a relatively high level of
membership).
The number of unions has also fallen, reflecting an increase in merger activity
and the absorption by larger unions of small unions and of long-established
craft unions. For example, in March 1989 the General, Municipal, Boilermakers
and Allied Trades Union (the third largest union) merged with the Association of
Professional, Executive, Clerical and Computer Staff and was renamed the GMB.
Several other unions are discussing possible mergers. At the end of 1988 there
were 354 trade unions on the list maintained by the Certification Officer. To be
eligible for entry on the list a trade union must show that it consists wholly or
364
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Trades Union
Congress
Scotland and
Northern
Ireland
mainly of workers and that its principal purposes include the regulation of
relations between workers and employers or between workers and employers’
associations.
Five unions had over 500,000 members at the end of 1987: the Transport and
General Workers’ Union (1-3 million), the Amalgamated Engineering Union
(815,000), the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union
(803,000), the National and Local Government Officers’ Association (759,000)
and the National Union of Public Employees (651,000). In early 1988 two unions
merged to form the Manufacturing, Science and Finance Union, with a total
membership of 653,000.
Trade union organisation varies widely, but the central governing body
usually consists of a national executive council or committee, elected by a secret
ballot of the individual members and responsible to the conference of delegates
from local branches, normally held annually. Many unions also have regional
and district organisations. At the level of the individual member there are local
branches, covering one or more workplaces. The organising of members in
individual places of work and the negotiation of local pay agreements with
management at the workplace may be done by full-time district officials of the
union or, in many cases, by elected workplace representatives (sometimes called
‘shop stewards’). Where two or more unions have members in the same
workplace, representatives’ or shop stewards’ committees may be formed to
discuss matters of common concern.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the Trades Union
Congress (TUG), founded in 1868. Its affiliated membership comprises 78 trade
unions which together represent 8-7 million people, or some 83 per cent of all
trade unionists in Britain. It has more members than any other trade union
centre in Western Europe. The TUC’s objectives are to promote the interests of
its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and social conditions of
working people, and it exercises power through influence rather than through
sanctions. It deals with all general questions which concern trade unions, both
nationally and internationally, and provides a forum in which affiliated unions
can collectively determine policy. There are eight TUC regional councils for
England and a Wales Trades Union Council.
The annual Congress convenes in September to discuss matters of concern to
trade unionists. A General Council represents the TUC between annual
meetings by carrying out Congress decisions, watching economic and social
developments, providing educational and advisory services to unions, and
presenting in national debate the trade union viewpoint on economic, social and
industrial issues. The TUC organises extensive education services relating to
many aspects of trade unionism and other subjects, such as health and safety.
In recent years several unions have extended considerably their range of
services, particularly financial services, and in 1988 the TUC agreed on the
establishment of a major initial package of member services available to all its
constituent unions: the decision on whether to provide a particular service rests
with individual unions.
The TUC plays an active part in international trade union activity, through its
affiliation to the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
European Trade Union Confederation. It also nominates the British workers’
delegation to the annual International Labour Conference.
Trade unions in Scotland also have their own national central body, the Scottish
Trades Union Congress, which in many respects is similar in constitution and
function to the TUC. Trade unions in Northern Ireland are represented by the
Northern Ireland Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU). Most
EMPLOYMENT
365
Legal
Framework
Legal
Immunities
Closed Shop
Elections
trade unionists in Northern Ireland are members of organisations affiliated to
the ICTU, while the majority also belong to unions based in Great Britain which
are also affiliated to the TUC. The Northern Ireland Committee of the ICTU
enjoys a high degree of autonomy.
Major changes to trade union legislation in Great Britain have been introduced
by the Government through four main Acts—the Employment Acts 1980 and
1982, the Trade Union Act 1984 and the Employment Act 1988—with the
intention of obtaining a better balance between trade unions and employers
with regard to rights and responsibilities within industrial relations and
increasing democracy in trade unions. Similar legislation applies or is being
enacted in Northern Ireland.
For most of the twentieth century trade unions, their officials and members
enjoyed immunity from legal action when they organised certain industrial
activity which might otherwise have been actionable by law. However, the
Employment Act 1980 removed civil law immunity from those organising
certain forms of secondary action (such as ‘sympathetic’ strikes) and limited
lawful picketing to peaceful picketing at the picket’s own workplace. The 1982
Act ended the situation which provided trade unions with almost complete
immunity from all civil actions by bringing their position into line with that of
their individual officials and members. Trade unions now have immunity only
for organising industrial action in furtherance or contemplation of a lawful
trade dispute. The Trade Union Act 1984 removed legal immunity from trade
unions which call a strike without first holding a properly conducted secret
ballot of members concerned and securing a majority vote for this action.
The Employment Act 1988 provided for the removal of the remaining statutory
support for the closed shop (where there is an agreement between an employer
and one or more unions that union membership is a condition of employment).
The Act made it unlawful to organise or threaten industrial action to establish or
maintain any sort of closed shop practice. Dismissal of an employee for
non-membership of a union is now unfair in all circumstances.
However, the Government has been particularly concerned about the opera¬
tion of the pre-entry closed shop, where, in order to obtain employment, an
individual must belong to, or be willing to join, a union, as it believes that this
can raise labour costs significantly and have adverse effects on profitability and
jobs. About 1 -3 million people were estimated to be in pre-entry closed shops in
early 1989. The Government is consulting on its proposal to provide a right of
complaint to an industrial tribunal for any individual whom an employer refuses
to engage on the grounds of non-membership of any union or of a particular
union, or on the grounds of refusal to agree that he or she will become a member
after the start of employment.
Under the Trade Union Act 1984 all voting members of a principal executive
committee were required to be elected by a secret ballot of the members at least
once every five years. There was provision for voting to be by post or held during
working hours at the workplace, subject to strict conditions being met. Trade
unions were also required to compile and maintain a register of members’
names and addresses.
In July 1989 the statutory election requirement was extended, under the
Employment Act 1988, to cover trade union general secretaries, presidents and
all those who participate in decisions taken by principal executive committees
(including non-voting members), subject to certain exemptions and transitional
arrangements. Balloting arrangements have been changed so that elections for
366
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Members ’
Rights
Political
Funds
Employers’
Organisations
Confederation
of British
Industry
all those covered by the statutory election requirement or for political funds
must now be conducted by post. These ballots must also be independently
scrutinised.
Trade union legislation has also given members various other statutory rights.
For example, under the Employment Act 1988 a union member has the right to
restrain his or her trade union from inducing the member and others to take
any kind of industrial action unless the action is supported by a properly
conducted secret ballot, while he or she also has the right not to be disciplined
unjustifiably by the union if, for example, he or she chooses to go to work or
cross a picket line rather than take industrial action. Other rights include the
right of members to inspect their union’s accounting records and the right for
‘check-off arrangements (the automatic deduction of union subscriptions) to be
stopped if members inform their employer that they are leaving the union.
To help trade union members in enforcing their statutory rights, the 1988 Act
has established a Commissioner for the Rights of Trade Union Members. The
Commissioner is empowered to grant assistance to a union member contemplat¬
ing or taking court proceedings against his or her union where such
proceedings are necessary to enforce certain statutory rights.
A trade union is legally permitted to engage in party political activity provided
that a majority of its membership has voted in favour in a ballot and that all such
activity is financed by a separate contribution which any individual member can
opt out of paying without prejudicing his or her ordinary benefits and rights. At
the end of 1987, 45 unions maintained a political fund. The Trade Union Act
1984 requires trade unions with political funds to ballot their members at
regular intervals to decide whether the funds should be retained.
Many employers in Britain are members of employers’ organisations, some of
which are wholly concerned with labour matters, although others are also
concerned with commercial matters or trade associations. The primary aims of
such organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of
employment, including a sound wage structure and proper standards of safety,
health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the efficient
use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which may
arise. Combined employers’ organisations and trade associations may also
represent members’ points of view as manufacturers or traders to the
Government on commercial matters.
Employers organisations are usually organised on an industry basis rather
than a product basis, for example, the Engineering Employers’ Federation. A few
are purely local in character or deal with a section of an industry or, for example,
with small businesses; most are national and are concerned with the whole
of an industry. In some of the main industries there are local or regional
organisations combined into national federations, while in others, within which
different firms are engaged in making different principal products, there is a
complex structure with national and regional federations for parts of an
industry as well as for the industry as a whole. At the end of 1988, 140 listed and
186 unlisted employers’ associations were known to the Certification Officer.
Those which are national organisations negotiate the national collective
agreements for their industry with the trade unions concerned; most of these
national organisations belong to the Confederation of British Industry.
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) is the largest central employers’
organisation in Britain, representing directly or indirectly some 250,000
businesses which together employ about half the working population. It aims
EMPLOYMENT
367
Terms and
Conditions of
Employment
Earnings
Employee Share
Schemes
Other Benefits
primarily to ensure that Government, national and international institutions
and the public understand the needs, intentions and problems of business.
Membership ranges from the smallest to the largest companies, private sector
and nationalised, and covers a broad spectrum which includes manufacturing,
agriculture, construction, distribution, mining, finance, retailing and insur¬
ance. Most national employers’ organisations, trade associations and some
chambers of commerce are members. Policy is determined by a council of 400
members, and there is a permanent staff of 295; there are 13 regional offices and
an office in Brussels. The CBI is the British member of the Union of Industries of
the European Community.
Basic rates of pay vary widely, and in private industry rates paid locally often
exceed the rates specified in national agreements. Higher rates are usually paid
for overtime and shift work, and weekly earnings may be further increased by
incentive bonus schemes.
According to the latest available information from the Department of Employ¬
ment’s New Earnings Survey, the average weekly earnings (including overtime
payments) in April 1988 of full-time employees on adult rates were £218-40
(£245-80 for men and £164-20 for women). Earnings were higher for non-
manual employees (£240-70) than for manual employees (£187-20). Some 52
per cent of manual employees and 20 per cent of non-manual employees received
overtime payments. Women’s earnings are markedly lower than those of men,
partly because on average they work shorter hours, with less overtime paid at
premium rates, and partly because they tend to be concentrated in the less
well-paid jobs. In the year to June 1989 the underlying average increase in
earnings was about 9 per cent.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally
by annual salary paid monthly, often on a scale carrying annual increments.
Many of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service
command salaries in the range of £25,000 to £50,000 a year gross before tax.
The posts with salaries above £50,000 a year include those of Cabinet ministers,
top-ranking judicial appointments, the highest positions in government
departments and the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers,
leading members of professions and the higher managerial posts in banking and
other financial services and in industry. A number of company directors have
salaries exceeding £100,000 a year and some other people, such as leading pop
musicians and other star entertainers, may receive similar amounts through
fees, royalties or fixed contracts.
There has been a move towards performance-related pay, which has been
encouraged by the Government (see p 363). In 1987 the Government announced
an income tax relief for employees receiving profit-related pay under schemes
registered by the Inland Revenue, and changes introduced in the 1989 Budget
were designed to make schemes more attractive. By April 1989, 899 schemes
had been registered, covering 126,000 employees.
The Government has taken a number of steps to encourage direct ownership by
employees of shares in the businesses for which they work. The number of
profit-sharing and savings-related share option schemes, which must be open to
all eligible employees in a company, has risen from 30 in 1979 to over 1,600 in
1989, benefiting over 1-75 million employees.
Additional benefits exist in varying degrees. About half of employees in
employment are covered by pension schemes provided by their employers. Many
employees are also covered by occupational sick pay schemes which are
368
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay
Office of
Manpower
Economics
Wages
Councils
Employment
Protection
additional or complementary to the state schemes, and by schemes to provide
private medical treatment. Such benefits are more usual among clerical and
professional employees than among manual workers. The provision of low-
priced meals at the place of employment is usual in large undertakings and quite
common in smaller ones. Many offices and shops which are unable to provide
canteen facilities for their staff have adopted luncheon voucher schemes.
Company cars are provided for directors and employees in a wide variety of
circumstances. Other fringe benefits available include life assurance, telephone
allowances and low-interest loans.
The basic working week in Great Britain is in the range 37-5 to 40 hours for
manual work and 35 to 38 for non-manual work; a five-day week is usually
worked. Actual hours worked differ from basic hours; in April 1988 for full-time
employees the average was 42-1 for men, compared with 37-6 for women. Men
and women in non-manual occupations generally work less overtime than
manual employees.
Legislation limits the permissible hours of work for young people in most
occupations and for adults in a few occupations. The Sex Discrimination Act
1986 repealed restrictions on women, who are now able to work the same hours
as men.
There are no general statutory entitlements to holidays, and holiday entitle¬
ments are frequently determined by collective agreements. These generally
provide for at least four weeks’ paid holiday a year, and nearly all manual
employees covered by national collective agreements have entitlements of four
weeks or more, with nearly 25 per cent having five weeks or more. Non-manual
workers tend to have longer holidays than manual workers. Holiday entitle¬
ments may also be dependent upon length of service.
The Office of Manpower Economics is an independent non-statutory organisa¬
tion responsible for servicing independent review bodies which advise on the
pay of various public-sector groups. These are the Top Salaries Review Body,
the Armed Forces’ Pay Review Body, the Doctors’ and Dentists’ Review Body, and
the Review Body for Nurses and other National Health Service professions. The
Office also provides services for the Pharmacists’ Review Panel, the Police
Negotiating Board and the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal. It is responsible
for research into pay and associated matters as requested by the Government.
Wages councils fix statutory minimum pay for 2-5 million workers aged 21 and
over, primarily in service industries such as retailing, catering and hairdress¬
ing. There are 26 councils in Great Britain, each consisting of equal numbers of
representatives of employers and employees in the relevant industry and up to
five independent members. The Wages Act 1986 empowers each council to fix a
minimum hourly rate, an overtime rate and a limit on the amount an employer
can charge for accommodation provided. However, the Government has doubts
on whether a statutory system is relevant for pay determination in the 1990s. In
December 1988 it issued a consultation document inviting comments on a
proposal to abolish the councils, and it is considering comments.
In Northern Ireland nine wages councils fix statutory minimum pay for some
36,000 workers.
Employment protection legislation provides a number of safeguards for em¬
ployees. For example, most employees are entitled to receive from their
employers written information on their terms and conditions of employment,
while minimum periods of notice when employment is to be terminated are laid
EMPLOYMENT
369
Equal
Opportunities
Employment
Bill
down for both employers and employees. Employees with a minimum period of
service of two years are entitled to lump-sum redundancy payments if their jobs
cease to exist (for example, because of technological improvements or a fall in
demand) and their employers cannot offer suitable alternative work, the cost
being partly met from a fund subscribed to by both sides of industry. Protection
against unfair dismissal is provided by machinery under which an employee
who has been in continuous employment, normally for two years or more, may
complain against an employer for unfair dismissal, and, if successful, obtain
reinstatement, re-engagement or compensation.
Legislation forbids any employment of children under 13 years of age, and
employment in any industrial undertaking of children who have not reached the
statutory minimum school-leaving age, with some exceptions for family
undertakings. The Government is keeping under review the legislation affecting
terms and conditions of employment. Its aim is to ensure that the obligations
placed on employers do not involve significant costs which discourage
recruitment.
The Employment Bill (see below) contains a number of provisions designed to
reduce burdens on employers. For example, employers with fewer than 20
employees would be exempt from the requirement to provide employees with a
note of disciplinary procedures in the written statement of their main terms and
conditions of employment.
The Race Relations Act 1976 makes it unlawful to discriminate on grounds of
colour, race, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin, in
employment, training and related matters. The Department of Employment
operates a nationwide Race Relations Employment Advisory Service which
operates from five main areas of ethnic minority settlement. Its objective is to
promote the Government’s policies aimed at eliminating racial discrimination in
employment and promoting fair treatment and equality of opportunity in
employment. Advisers provide employers with advice and practical help in
developing and implementing effective equal opportunity strategies, including
awareness training for senior managers and personnel staff, and the introduc¬
tion of ethnic monitoring.
The Sex Discrimination Act 1975 makes it unlawful to discriminate in
employment, training and related matters in Great Britain on the grounds of sex
or against married people. The employment provisions were amended by the Sex
Discrimination Act 1986 to bring legislation into line with a European
Community directive on equal treatment. The Equal Pay Act 1970, as amended
in 1984, requires that a woman doing the same or broadly similar work as a
man, or work which has an equal value, should receive equal pay and conditions
of employment.
Practical advice To employers and others on the best arrangements for
implementing equal opportunities policies in Great Britain is given in codes of
practice from the Commission for Racial Equality for policies to eliminate racial
discrimination and from the Equal Opportunities Commission to eliminate
discrimination on grounds of sex.
The Employment Bill, currently before Parliament, is designed to promote
equality of opportunity in employment and vocational training, and to meet
European Community obligations by amending or repealing most legislation
that discriminates in employment between women and men. The Bill would
remove certain differences in the treatment of male and female employees under
protective legislation, and repeal restrictions on women working in mines and
quarries and cleaning machinery in factories.
370
Northern
Ireland
Advisory,
Conciliation
and
Arbitration
Service
Central
Arbitration
Committee
HEALTH AND
SAFETY AT
WORK
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Similar legislation to that in Great Britain on equal pay and sex discrimination
applies in Northern Ireland, but there is no legislation on race relations. The Fair
Employment (Northern Ireland) Act 1989 is designed to strengthen an earlier
Act of 1976 which made unlawful discrimination in employment on grounds of
religious belief or political opinion. The 1989 Act provides for the establishment
of two new bodies: a Fair Employment Commission, due to succeed the Fair
Employment Agency, which will have the task of promoting equality of
opportunity and investigating employment practices, with powers to issue
legally enforceable directions; and a Fair Employment Tribunal to adjudicate on
individual complaints of religious or political discrimination and to enforce the
Commission’s directions. The Act also requires all major employers to provide
equality of opportunity by annual monitoring of workforces and periodic
reviewing of employment practices to see if ‘affirmative action’ is required to
rectify under-representation of either the Protestant or Roman Catholic
community. Indirect discrimination is also made illegal.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) is an independent
statutory body with the general duty of promoting the improvement of industrial
relations. ACAS is directed by a council consisting of a full-time chairman and
employer, trade union and independent members experienced in industrial
relations. The Service conciliates in industrial disputes in both the public and
private sectors. ACAS assistance was sought in nearly 1,200 disputes in 1988.
In addition, there were 138 further requests for ACAS to provide arbitration,
which it may do either by appointing single arbitrators or boards of arbitration
or by referring cases to the Central Arbitration Committee (see below). Although
ACAS has prime responsibility for helping to resolve disputes, and has also set
up major committees of inquiry, the Secretary of State for Employment retains
powers to appoint a court of inquiry or committee of investigation into a
dispute, but these are rarely used.
ACAS gives advice on all aspects of industrial relations and employment
policies to employers, managers, trade unions, employee representatives and
individuals, and it handled over 320,000 inquiries in 1988. Specialist staff
made nearly 8,000 advisory visits. ACAS also carries particular responsibility for
attempting conciliation on complaints of infringement of individual employee
rights (such as individual complaints of unfair dismissal; complaints under the
Equal Pay Act 1970, including claims for equal pay for work of equal value; and
complaints on employment matters under the Sex Discrimination Acts 1975
and 1986 and the Race Relations Act 1976). There were over 44,000 such cases
in 1988. Its Work Research Unit aims to encourage industry and commerce to
adopt measures that can lead to improvements in the quality of working life and
so to improvements in economic performance.
In Northern Ireland the Labour Relations Agency, an independent statutory
body, provides services similar to those provided by ACAS in Great Britain.
The Central Arbitration Committee is an independent standing arbitration
body. It provides boards of arbitration for the settlement of trade disputes
referred to it with the consent of the parties concerned and adjudicates on
claims made under the disclosure of information provisions of the Employment
Protection Act 1975.
Employers have a duty at civil and criminal law to take reasonable care of their
employees, and others affected by their work activities, and to provide a safe
system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards each other and
also to take care of their own safety. The principal legislation is the Health
and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. Its purpose is to secure the health, safety and
EMPLOYMENT
371
The Health
and Safety
Commission
The Health
and Safety
Executive
welfare of people at work and to provide for the protection of the public whose
health and safety might be affected by work activities. The Act places general
duties on everyone concerned with work activities, including employers, the
self-employed, employees, manufacturers and suppliers.
The 1974 Act is superimposed on earlier health and safety legislation, such as
the Mines and Quarries Act 1954, the Factories Act 1961 and the Offices, Shops
and Railway Premises Act 1963 and the various regulations made under them.
The earlier legislation imposes specific obligations and standards on, for
example, occupiers of particular types of premises or employers engaged in
particular activities, and covers such matters as the fencing of machinery,
precautions against the exposure of people to toxic dusts and gases, precautions
against fire, the safe condition of premises, and cleanliness, lighting, tempera¬
ture and ventilation.
Some of the earlier legislation was replaced immediately by the 1974 Act, but
the remainder continues in force pending its progressive replacement by
regulations and codes of practice. Regulations made under the Act govern the
establishment of first-aid facilities, the control of work with lead and the control
of major accident hazards in industry, each set being supported by either an
approved code of practice or other guidance material. Regulations introduced in
1988 have provided a comprehensive approach to the control of exposure to
virtually all substances hazardous to health in all types of work and workplace.
They represent the most significant change in health and safety legislation since
the 1974 Act.
A basic principle underlying the 1974 Act is that employers, in consultation
with their employees, should have the responsibility of working out health and
safety arrangements, within the broad obligations of the law, to suit their own
workplaces. Employers with five or more employees must draw up a written
policy for safety and health, and must inform their employees of the policy and of
the arrangements for its implementation. In workplaces where negotiations take
place with a trade union, the union may appoint safety representatives to be the
employees’ official channel for representation and consultation over safety
matters.
Accident statistics indicate a long-term reduction in the rate of fatal injuries to
employees, although there has also been an increase in the reported rate of
major injuries, especially in construction and manufacturing.
The Health and Safety Commission, established by the 1974 Act and account¬
able to Parliament through the Secretary of State for Employment, has
responsibility for developing policies, including guidance, codes of practice, or
proposals for regulations. In the case of proposals for changes in legislation, the
Commission consults the people who will be affected by them and makes
recommendations to the Secretary of State concerned. The Commission has an
independent chairman, three members appointed after consultation with
employers’ organisations, three after consultation with the trade unions, and
two after consultation with local authority associations. The Commission has
seven subject advisory committees (on toxic substances, on dangerous sub¬
stances, on dangerous pathogens, on genetic manipulation, on the safety of
nuclear installations, on the safe transport of radioactive materials and on
medical matters), and 11 industry advisory committees, for agriculture,
ceramics, construction, education, foundries, health services, oil, paper and
board, printing, railways and rubber.
The 1974 Act also set up the Health and Safety Executive, which includes
government inspectorates covering a range of work activities: the Factory
Inspectorate (which also deals with a large number of activities outside factories.
372
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
such as hospitals and educational establishments) and inspectorates for mines
and quarries, agriculture, nuclear installations and explosives. It also includes
the Medical Division, the Technology Division and the Research and Laboratory
Services Division. The inspectors, who have powers of entry and enforcement,
seek compliance with health and safety legislation in individual workplaces and
give advice. The Medical Division, through the Employment Medical Advisory
Service, provides a nationwide service of advice on the medical aspects of
employment problems to employers, employees, trade unions, doctors and
others.
The Technology Division provides technical advice on industrial health and
safety matters. The Research and Laboratory Services Division provides
scientific and medical support and testing services, and carries out research
both in its own laboratories and through universities and other institutions on
a contract basis, often jointly funded by industry. Areas of study include
explosion risks, fires, protective equipment, methods for monitoring airborne
contaminants, occupational medicine and hygiene, and the safety of engineer¬
ing systems.
In some premises, mostly offices, shops, warehouses, restaurants and hotels,
health and safety legislation is enforced by inspectors appointed by local
authorities, working under guidance from the Health and Safety Commission.
Some other official bodies work under agency agreement with the Health and
Safety Commission, for example, the Railway Inspectorate (concerned with
worker safety on railways) and the Department of Energy (concerned with health
and safety in the oil industry).
Northern Ireland In Northern Ireland the Health and Safety Agency, roughly corresponding to the
Health and Safety Commission, and an Employment Medical Advisory Service
were set up by the Health and Safety at Work (NI) Order 1978. The Northern
Ireland Department of Economic Development, through its Health and Safety
Inspectorate, is responsible for ensuring compliance with health and safety
legislation, which is broadly similar to that for Great Britain.
PLANNING
PUBLIC
FINANCE
The Planning
Cycle
Public Finance
Public finance is concerned with taxation, expenditure and borrowing by central
and local government and the financing of public corporations. Central govern¬
ment raises money from individuals and companies by direct and indirect
taxation and from National Insurance contributions. It spends money on goods
and services, such as health and defence, and in payments to people, such as
social security and pensions. Local government receives substantial grants from
central government and raises revenue mainly through rates (local property
taxes) and the community charge. From these resources it provides services
such as education, police and fire services, and refuse collection. The external
finance of the nationalised industries and other public corporations also has to
be included in the Government’s expenditure plans. The diagram (see p 380)
shows the relative importance of the various items of receipts (including
borrowing) and expenditure for general government.
The government department responsible for broad control of public finance
and expenditure is HM Treasury. The Bank of England (the central bank)
advises the Government on financial matters, executes monetary policy and acts
as banker to the Government.
The background to the present Government’s planning of public finance is the
medium-term financial strategy, introduced in 1980. The Government’s aim is
to maintain a firm financial framework in order to maintain downward pressure
on inflation with the ultimate goal of price stability and to ensure the continua¬
tion of the conditions for sustainable growth. With commitments also to reduce
taxation and curb the role of the state, the Government has therefore sought to
reduce public expenditure as a proportion of national output as well. By the late
1980s total taxation (including local authority rates, the community charge and
National Insurance contributions) amounted to around 37 per cent of gross
domestic product. General government expenditure (excluding privatisation
proceeds) as a proportion of gross domestic product fell from over 46 per cent in
the early 1980s to under 40 per cent by 1988-89. The Financial Statement and
Budget Report 1989—90 implies a continued steady decline, to 38 per cent by
1992-93.
Table 44 shows the public expenditure planning totals and projections for the
public sector debt repayment to 1992—93.
Each year the Government conducts a review of its expenditure plans for the
forthcoming three years (the ‘public expenditure survey’) and publishes the
resulting totals, together with any changes in National Insurance, in the
Autumn Statement in November. Details of these plans are published each
January. Since 1988 the Autumn Statement has been expanded to include some
of the key material previously contained in the annual public expenditure White
Paper. Details of departments’ spending plans are now published as separate
booklets. The Government is proposing that these should in future be published
at the same time as the Supply Estimates, that is, on or shortly before Budget
day. The switch to publishing departmental reports alongside the Supply
Estimates (see p 376) is expected to be completed after the 1990 public
374
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE
expenditure survey. The new system is designed to improve the basis for
parliamentary scrutiny of expenditure by linking detailed departmental expendi¬
ture plans more closely to the Supply Estimates.
The Government’s updating of the medium-term financial strategy and
consequent plans for the public finances over the following year, including any
tax changes, are set out in the Financial Statement and Budget Report,
published with the Budget around the end of the financial year (31 March).
Details are announced subsequently in the Finance Bill, which is presented to
Parliament shortly after the Budget and becomes law during the summer.
The public expenditure planning total for 1989-90 has been set at £167,100
million. Of this, £123,700 million is allocated to central government, £44,000
million to local authorities and £800 million to nationalised industries and
other public corporations. The reserve (see pp 375-6) accounts for £3,500
million. Proceeds from privatisation, projected at £5,000 million, count as
negative public expenditure and are therefore deducted from the planning total.
Central government spending is largely voted by Parliament through the
annual Supply Estimates (see p 376). The rest consists mainly of those social
security payments which are made out of the National Insurance Fund (see
p 377). The largest departmental programmes are those on social security
payments (31 per cent of the 1989-90 planning total), health (14 percent),
defence (12 per cent), and education and science (12 per cent)—see Table 45.
About half of local authority spending is financed by grants from central
government. The rest is met from rates and the community charge, surpluses on
trading, rents and borrowing. Education accounts for over one-third of local
authority spending; law and order, housing and other environmental services,
personal social services and transport account for most of the remainder.
Of planned expenditure in 1989-90, cash payments to the personal sector—
for example, pensions and other social security benefits—comprise over one-
Table 44: Projected Public Expenditure, Receipts and Debt Repayment
£ thousand million
1989-90 1990-91 1991-92 1992-93
General government expenditure 194 205 216
of which: public expenditure
planning total 167 179 192
General government receipts 206 214 225
of which: taxes 157 164 1 72
National Insurance
and other contributions 34 35 37
Fiscal adjustments3 — 13
Market and overseas debt repayment
of public corporations 2 2 0
Public sector debt repayment (PSDR)
14
10
224
200
233
179
39
6
PSDR as percentage of
gross domestic product
2-75
1-75
0-5
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1989-90.
These imply lower taxes or higher expenditure than assumed in the figures for general government expenditure
and receipts.
PUBLIC FINANCE
375
Reserve
third; pay (other than that included in departmental running costs) and
purchases of assets, goods and services each about one-quarter; and departmen¬
tal running costs a little under one-tenth. The breakdown of each department’s
spending varies. Capital spending in 1989—90 by central and local government
is planned to be £20,400 million and that by nationalised industries and other
public corporations £6,700 million.
The Government proposes a new coverage for the public expenditure planning
total from 1 April 1990, when the community charge will be in operation
throughout Great Britain. This will include, among other things, central
government grants to local authorities but exclude spending that local author¬
ities finance from their own resources. The new definition, by including only
expenditure for which central government is responsible, is expected to make
the planning total more effective as an instrument for planning and controlling
public expenditure.
Planned expenditure includes an unallocated reserve for each year of the plans to
cover all additions to departmental spending, whether arising from policy
changes, new initiatives or revisions to the estimated costs of demand-led
programmes. For the current year the reserve is used as a control mechanism.
Table 45: Planned Expenditure by Centred Government Departments and
Local Authorities 1989—90
£ million
Central
government
Local
authorities
Defence
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
European Community
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
Trade and Industry
Energy
Employment
Transport
Environment—housing
Environment—other environmental
services
Home Office and legal departments
Education and Science
Arts and Libraries
Health
Social Security
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Chancellor’s departments
Other departments
20,143
2.277
1,970
1,708
1,516
493
3,877
1,777
1,445
637
2,512
4.277
439
19,731
46,287
3,980
1,874
4,378
4,115
281
218
100
141
2.752
304
3.752
5,465
15,294
537
3,425
4,698
4,637
1,790
897
Totals
123,718
44,011
Source: The Government's Expenditure Plans 1989-90 to 1991-92 (the public expenditure White Paper).
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Note: Expenditures on certain services (such as education) are made under the programmes for Scotland, Wales
and Northern Ireland in addition to other departmental programmes.
376
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cash Limits
The Estimates
Examination
and Audit
of Public
Expenditure
Comptroller and
Auditor General
For 1989-90 the reserve is £3,500 million. The reserve has been set at higher
levels for each of the next two years but some will normally be allocated to
departments as spending plans are made firmer within the public expenditure
planning total. The balance will be retained for contingencies which might arise
during the current year.
Some 40 per cent of public expenditure is subject to control by cash limits
(external financing limits in the case of nationalised industries). Another 40 per
cent consists of demand-led services (for example, social security benefits) on
which, once policy and rates of payment have been determined, expenditure in
the short run depends on the number of eligible recipients. The remaining 20
per cent is current expenditure of local authorities, which central government
does not directly control; however, the major part of the contribution by central
government to such expenditure, rate support or revenue support grant, is
subject to cash limits.
Once fixed, cash limits are not usually revised during the course of the year.
There is, however, a limited facility for carrying forward underspending on the
capital and running costs components of cash limits. If any overspending of
cash limits occurs, a corresponding deduction is normally made from the limits
for the following year.
The annual public expenditure survey conducted by HM Treasury provides the
basis for the Estimates which each government department submits to HM
Treasury in December, giving details of its cash requirements for the financial
year beginning in the following April. After Treasury approval, these Supply
Estimates are presented to Parliament in March, usually at the same time as the
Budget (see pp 377-8). Parliament approves them in July as part of the Annual
Appropriation Act, expenditure between 1 April and this date being covered by
Votes on Account approved before the start of the financial year. Supplementary
Estimates may also be presented to Parliament during the course of the year. If
any Supply Estimate is overspent, the Public Accounts Committee (see p 377)
will investigate fully before Parliament is asked to approve any Excess Vote to
balance the account. In each parliamentary session, up to three ‘Estimates days’
are available for debates on the Supply Estimates, following scrutiny by select
committees of the House of Commons.
For 1989-90 the Supply Estimates provided for total expenditure of £116,500
million, of which three-quarters was to be direct spending by central govern¬
ment and the remainder mainly grants to local authorities. Some items of
central government expenditure—for example, the salaries and pensions of
judges—are paid directly out of the Consolidated Fund (see p 377) as standing
services and are not subject to annual approval by Parliament.
Examination of public expenditure is carried out by select committees of the
House of Commons, which study in detail the activities of particular government
departments and require the attendance of ministers and officials for cross-
examination. The audit of the Government’s spending which follows up the
control inherent in parliamentary approval of the Estimates is exercised through
the functions of the Comptroller and Auditor General and the Public Accounts
Committee.
The Comptroller and Auditor General, an officer of the House of Commons
appointed by the Crown, has two distinct functions. As Comptroller General, he
has the duty to ensure that all revenue and other public money payable to the
Consolidated Fund and the National Loans Fund (see p 377) is duly paid and
that all payments out of these funds are authorised by statute. As Auditor
PUBLIC FINANCE
377
Public
Accounts
Committee
Central
Government
Financial
Funds
THE BUDGET
General, his duties are to certify the accounts of all government departments
and those of a wide range of other public sector bodies; to examine revenue
accounts and inventories; and to report the results of his examinations to
Parliament. He also has wide statutory powers to carry out, and report to
Parliament on, examinations of economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the use
of resources by those bodies he audits or to which he has right of access.
The Public Accounts Committee considers the appropriation and other accounts
of government departments and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s reports
on them and on the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of departments’ use of
their resources. The Committee takes evidence from the official heads of
departments and relevant public sector bodies and submits to Parliament
reports which carry considerable weight; its recommendations are taken very
seriously by the departments and organisations that it examines. The Govern¬
ment’s formal reply to the reports is presented to Parliament by HM Treasury in
the form of Treasury minutes and the reports and minutes are usually debated
annually in the House of Commons.
The Government’s sterling expenditure is largely met out of the Consolidated
Fund, an account at the Bank of England into which tax receipts and other
revenues are paid. This is also known as the Exchequer. Any excess of
expenditure over receipts is met by the National Loans Fund, which is another
official sterling account at the Bank of England and is the repository for funds
borrowed by the Government. The National Insurance Fund, into which con¬
tributions are paid by all employers and employed people, is used mainly to pay
for social security benefits; a small proportion of National Insurance contribu¬
tions is paid direct to the Consolidated Fund in order to help finance the
National Health Service.
The Budget—usually in March or April—sets out the Government’s proposals for
changes in taxation and is the main occasion for an annual review of economic
policy. The proposals are announced to the House of Commons by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Budget statement and are published in the
Financial Statement and Budget Report. This report also contains a review of
recent developments in the economy, together with an economic forecast—one
of two which the Government is required to publish each year (the other being
contained in the Autumn Statement)—and sets out the fiscal and monetary
framework within which economic policy operates. This is the medium-term
financial strategy (see p 373).
The Budget statement is followed by the moving of a set of Budget resolutions
in which the proposals are embodied. These resolutions are the foundation of
the Finance Bill, in which the proposals are set out for detailed consideration by
Parliament, becoming law as the Finance Act, usually in the following July.
Some of the resolutions give temporary effect, under the Provisional Collection of
Taxes Act 1968, to certain of the tax proposals in the Budget, thus enabling the
Government to collect certain taxes provisionally, at the levels provided by the
Budget proposals, pending enactment of the Finance Bill.
The bulk of the tax proposals are concerned with changes in the rates or
coverage of taxes, the introduction of new taxes or the abolition of existing ones
and changes in the administrative machineiy. These changes are made not only
with regard to the revenue required but also with regard to their effect on the
way the economy performs.
For two taxes—income tax and corporation tax—annual Ways and Means
resolutions followed by Finance Act clauses are required to maintain their
existence, since they are annual rather than permanent taxes. Thus, a Budget
378
TAX
REVENUE
Taxes on
Income
Income Tax
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and a Finance Act are necessary at or about the beginning of each financial year.
Tax changes can be made at other times of the year, however, either by specific
legislation or by the use of the regulator, which permits limited changes between
Budgets in value added tax (by up to 25 per cent) and the main excise duties (by
up to 10 per cent).
The principal sources of tax revenue are: taxes on income, which include
personal income tax, corporation tax on profits and petroleum revenue tax;
taxes on capital, which comprise inheritance tax and capital gains tax; and taxes
on expenditure, which include value added tax (VAT), customs and excise
duties, car tax and stamp duty. Other sources of revenue are National Insurance
contributions, which give entitlement to a range of benefits, and the community
charge, which, following the abolition of rates (see p 382), is set and collected by
local authorities to help meet their expenditure.
Taxes on individual incomes are progressive in that larger incomes bear a
proportionately greater amount of tax. Thresholds and rate bands for income
tax, inheritance tax and capital gains tax are raised automatically each year in
line with the rise in retail prices over the previous calendar year unless
Parliament decides otherwise. The Inland Revenue assesses and collects the
taxes on income and capital and stamp duty. HM Customs and Excise collects
the most important taxes on expenditure (VAT, most duties and car tax). Vehicle
excise duty is the responsibility of the Department of Transport, National
Insurance contributions that of the Department of Social Security and the
community charge that of the Department of the Environment and the Scottish
Office.
Income tax is imposed for the year of assessment beginning on 6 April. For
1989-90 the basic rate of 25 per cent applies to the first £20,700 of taxable
income. A rate of 40 per cent applies to income above this level. These rates apply
to total income including both earned and investment income.
A number of personal allowances and reliefs reduce the amount of a person’s
taxable income compared with gross income. The main allowances are £2,785
for the income of a single person or the earned income of a wife and £4,375 for
the income of a married man. Among the most important of the reliefs is that for
mortgage interest payments on borrowing for house purchase. Relief at the basic
rate is usually given ‘at source’ (that is, repayments which the borrower makes to
the lender are reduced to take account of tax at the basic rate and the tax refund
is then passed directly by the tax authorities to the building society or bank
making the loan rather than to the individual taxpayer). Another relief is that
under the business expansion scheme, whereby certain investors in trading
companies without a stock market quotation (usually small companies) are able
to obtain relief on up to £40,000 invested in any one year.
Assuming only the basic personal allowances, a single person with an income
of £10,000 a year in 1989—90 pays £1,804 in income tax, while a married man
with the same income pays £ 1,406. The amount of tax payable by a single person
varies from, for example, £554 on an annual income of £5,000 to £23,781 on
one of £70,000.
At present, the income of married couples is usually taxed as if it all belonged
to the husband. A couple may, however, choose to have the wife’s earnings
charged separately for tax on condition that the husband receives the single
instead of the married personal allowance. Any investment income, whether
paid to the husband or the wife, is, however, taxed as part of the husband’s
income. From April 1990 there is to be a new system of independent taxation for
husbands and wives. All taxpayers, irrespective of sex or marital status, will be
entitled to a personal allowance against income from all sources. Married women
PUBLIC FINANCE
379
will pay their own tax on the basis of their own income. In addition, there will be
a married couple’s allowance, equal to the difference between the present single
and married allowances. This will go, in the first instance, to the husband so as
to prevent a fall in his total tax allowances. However, if his income is not high
enough to use it in full, he will be able to transfer the unused portion to his wife,
to set against her income.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a Pay-As-You-Earn
(PAYE) system whereby tax is deducted (and accounted for to the Inland
Revenue) by the employer, thus enabling them to keep as up to date as possible
with their tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in Britain
(although some forms of income—such as certain social security benefits—are
exempt) and on all income arising abroad of people resident in Britain. Interest
on certain British government securities belonging to people not ordinarily
resident in Britain is exempt. Britain has entered into agreements with many
countries providing for relief from double taxation; where such agreements are
not in force unilateral relief is often allowed. British residents working abroad
for the whole year benefit from 100 per cent tax relief.
Company taxation in Britain is at a lower rate than in most other industrialised
countries. Companies pay corporation tax on their profits remaining after
deduction of certain allowances. A company which distributes profits to its
shareholders is required to make to the Inland Revenue an advance payment of
corporation tax. In general, this payment is set against a company’s liability to
corporation tax on its income and capital gains and the recipient of the
distribution (if resident in Britain) is entitled to a tax credit, which satisfies his
or her liability to income tax at the basic rate.
The main rate of corporation tax is 35 per cent, with a reduced rate of 25 per
cent for small companies (those with profits below £150,000 in a year). Marginal
relief between the main rate and the small companies’ rate is allowed for
companies with profits between £150,000 and £750,000.
Expenditure on plant and machinery qualifies for annual allowances of 25 per
cent. These are given on a ‘reducing balance’ basis, which is to say that 25 per
cent of the total cost may be offset in the first year, 25 per cent of the remaining
75 per cent in the second year and so on. Special arrangements exist for plant
and machinery treated as a short-life asset. There is a 100 per cent allowance for
expenditure on scientific research. Annual allowances on a ‘straight-line’ basis
are given for capital expenditure on the construction of industrial and certain
other buildings based on a 25-year life (that is, 4 per cent of the cost per year for
25 years). If taxable profits are insufficient to absorb the available allowances,
the excess can be carried forward and set against future profits for an indefinite
period.
Petroleum revenue tax (deductible in computing profits for corporation tax) is
charged on profits from the production, as opposed to the refining or other
forms of processing, of oil and gas under licence in Britain and on its
Continental Shelf. The rate of tax is 75 per cent. Each licensee of an oilfield is
charged on the profits from that field after deduction of certain allowances and
reliefs which, among other things, encourage exploration, appraisal and future
field development. The tax is computed at half-yearly intervals and the bulk of it
is collected in monthly instalments.
Inheritance tax applies to transfers of personal wealth made on, or up to seven
years before, the donor’s death. Subject to certain exemptions and reliefs, the
first £118,000 of the cumulative total of chargeable transfers is not liable to tax;
higher amounts are taxed at a single rate of 40 per cent. A tapered system of
Planned Receipts and Expenditure of General
Government 1989-90
Pence in every pound
Receipts
Expenditure
Income tax
Corporation tax
t  
1
Defence
Foreign and
Commonwealth Office
Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food
Trade and Industry
Employment
Capital gains tax
1
Inheritance tax
1
Value added tax
Local authority rates
and community charge
Duties on petrol, alcoholic
drinks and tobacco
Petroleum revenue tax and
oil royalties
1
National Insurance and
other contributions
Transport
Environment-housing
Environment-other
environmental services
Home Office and
legal departments
Education and Science
Health
Social Security
Scotland
Interest and dividends
Wales
Northern Ireland
Gross trading surpluses
and rent
Other duties, taxes,
levies and royalties
Chancellor’s
departments
Other departments
Reserve
Cash totals £194,300 million
Sources: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1989-90 and The Government’s Expenditure Plans
1989-90 to 1991-92.
Note: Differences between totals and the sum of their component parts are due to rounding.
PUBLIC FINANCE
381
Capital Gains
Tax
Taxes on
Expenditure
Value Added
Tax
Customs Duties
Excise Duties
relief reduces the tax on transfers made between three and seven years before the
donor’s death. Relief ranges from 20 per cent of the tax payable on transfers
made between three and four years prior to death to 80 per cent on those made
between six and seven years prior to death.
Capital gains realised on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax or,
in the case of companies, to corporation tax. Individuals are exempt from tax in
respect of total net gains of up to £5,000 in any one year and most trusts on
gains of up to £2,500. Gains are taxed at the appropriate rate of income tax (for
individuals) or corporation tax (for companies). Only gains arising since March
1982 are subject to tax and the effects of inflation are allowed for when
measuring gains. The tax on certain types of gift and certain deemed disposals of
assets may be deferred until the assets are sold. Some assets, including the
principal private residence, chattels worth less than £6,000 (and any chattels
with a predictable life of less than 50 years except those on which the
expenditure qualifies for a capital allowance), private motor cars, and National
Savings Certificates and Bonds are normally exempt. Gains on government
securities and certain corporate bonds are exempt from the tax, as are gains on
shares owned under the Personal Equity Plan (designed to encourage wider
share ownership).
Value added tax (VAT) is a broadly based tax, chargeable at 15 per cent. It is
collected at each stage in the production and distribution of goods and services
by taxable persons (generally those whose business has a turnover of more than
£23,600 a year). The final tax is borne by the consumer. When a taxable person
purchases taxable goods or services, the supplier charges VAT (the taxable
person’s input tax). When the taxable person supplies taxable goods or services
to customers, then they in turn are charged VAT (the taxable person’s output
tax). The difference between the output tax and the input tax is paid to, or repaid
by, HM Customs and Excise.
There are two methods by which certain goods and services are relieved from
VAT: one is by charging VAT at a zero rate (a taxable person does not charge tax
to a customer but reclaims any input tax paid to suppliers); the other is by
exemption (a taxable person does not charge a customer any output tax and is
not entitled to deduct or reclaim the input tax). Zero-rating applies to exports
and to most food; books, newspapers and periodicals; fuel (except for petrol and
other fuels for road use) and power for domestic users; construction of new
residential buildings; certain international services; public transport fares;
caravans and houseboats; young children’s clothing and footwear; drugs and
medicines supplied on prescription; specified aids for handicapped people; and
certain supplies by or to charities. Exemption applies to land (including rents),
insurance, postal services, betting, gaming (other than by gaming machines and
lotteries), finance, education, health, burial and cremation, and supplies by
trade unions and professional bodies to their members.
Customs duties are chargeable in accordance with the Common Customs Tariff
of the European Community (no such duties are chargeable on goods which
qualify as Community goods). Special customs import and export procedures
are operated under the Common Agricultural Policy and Community levies are
chargeable on a wide range of agricultural products from non-Community
countries. Customs duties and agricultural levies are accountable to the Euro¬
pean Community as ‘own resources’.
Hydrocarbon oils used as road fuel bear higher rates of duty than those used for
other purposes. Kerosene, most lubricating oils and other oils used for certain
382
Car Tax
Stamp Duty
OTHER
REVENUE
National
Insurance
Contributions
The
Community
Charge and
National
Non-domestic
Rate
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industrial processes are free of duty. There are duties on spirits, beer, wine,
made-wine, cider and perry, based on alcoholic strength and volume. Spirits
used for scientific, medical, research and industrial processes are generally free
of duty. The cigarette duty is based partly on a charge per 1,000 cigarettes and
partly on a percentage of retail price. Duty on other tobacco products is based on
weight. Duties are charged on off-course betting, pool betting, gaming in
casinos, bingo and gaming machines. The rates vary with the particular form of
gambling; duty is charged either as a percentage of gross or net stakes or, in the
case of gaming machines, as a fixed amount per machine according to the cost of
playing it and its prize level.
Vehicle excise duty on a private motor car or light van is £100 a year; for motor
cycles it is £10, £20 or £40 a year according to engine capacity. The duty on
goods vehicles is levied on the basis of gross weight and, if over 12 tonnes,
according to the number of axles; the duty is designed to ensure that such
vehicles cover at least their road costs through the tax paid (licence duty and fuel
duty). The duty on taxis and buses varies according to seating capacity.
Cars, motor cycles, scooters, mopeds and some motor caravans, whether British
made or imported, are chargeable with car tax at 10 per cent of the wholesale
value (motor caravans are charged at 10 per cent of 60 per cent of the wholesale
value). VAT is charged on the price including car tax.
Certain kinds of transfer are subject to stamp duty. These include sales of
houses (1 per cent on the whole of the price if this exceeds £30,000); stocks and
shares other than government stocks (broadly 0-5 per cent of the value of the
transaction); and instruments such as declarations of trust (usually 50p).
Transfers by gift and transfers to charities are exempt.
There are four classes of National Insurance contribution: Class 1—paid by
employees and their employers; Class 2—paid by the self-employed; Class
3—paid voluntarily for pension purposes; and Class 4—paid by the self-
employed on their taxable profits over a set lower limit, currently £5,050 a year,
and up to a set upper limit, currently £16,900 (in addition to their Class 2
contribution).
Employees with earnings no higher than £43 a week do not pay Class 1
contributions. Contributions on earnings above this threshold are at the rate of
2 per cent of the first £43 of total earnings and 9 per cent of the balance, up to
the upper earnings limit of £325 a week. Employers’ contributions are subject to
the same threshold. On earnings above the threshold, contributions rise in
stages from 5 per cent of total earnings up to a maximum of 10-45 per cent when
earnings are £165 or more a week; there is no upper earnings limit.
Class 2 and Class 3 contributions are at a flat rate—£4-25 and £4-15 a week
respectively. The self-employed may claim exemption from payment of Class 2
contributions if their profits are expected to be below £2,350 for the 1989-90
tax year.
Class 4 contributions are payable at the rate of 6-3 per cent.
The system of local government finance has been reformed. The Government felt
that the old system, under which revenue had been raised by rates, did not
provide adequate accountability of elected councils to their electors and was
unfair; in addition, many who benefited from locally provided services paid
nothing towards them. The new system, which aims to increase the responsive¬
ness and accountability of councils to their electorates, replaces domestic rates
with a community charge; reforms the system of central government grants to
local authorities; and (in England and Wales) establishes a national non-
PUBLIC FINANCE
383
PUBLIC
SECTOR
FINANCE
domestic rate, the proceeds of which are to be paid into a national pool and
redistributed to local authorities in proportion to the number of adults. The
community charge, set at a level reflecting spending decisions reached by a
council on behalf of its electors, is payable by almost all resident adults. The new
system was introduced in Scotland in April 1989. It will be introduced in
England and Wales in April 1990 to coincide with a revaluation of non-domestic
properties.
Control of the public sector finances is a central part of the Government’s
medium-term financial strategy. Since 1987-88 the public sector has been in
surplus, so that the Government has repaid debt. In 1988-89 the public sector
debt repayment (PSDR) amounted to some £14,400 million, equal to about 3 per
cent of gross domestic product (GDP). A figure of £14,000 million has been set as
the PSDR for 1989—90 (see Table 45). Even without privatisation proceeds
(which count as negative expenditure) these amounts represent substantial
surpluses. The intention thereafter is for a return to balance over a period of
years. The Government sees balanced public finances as a firm buttress for
monetary policy in the defeat of inflation. They also ensure that public debt and
debt interest fall steadily in relation to GDP.
The major government debt instrument is known as gilt-edged stock as there
is no risk of default. Gilt-edged stock is marketable and is traded on the stock
market. Individuals may also make transactions through post offices in stocks
included on the Department for National Savings’ Stock Register. Pension funds
and life insurance companies have the largest holdings. The Bank of England on
behalf of the Government issues both conventional and indexed stock (on which
principal and interest are linked to the movement in the retail prices index).
The existence of a sizeable PSDR has made necessary some buying in by the
Bank of England of gilt-edged stock. One method of doing so is by reverse
auctions, the first of which was held in January 1989.
An important additional source of government finance is the range of National
Savings products, which are non-marketable and are designed to attract
personal savings. The chief products are Income Bonds, National Savings
Certificates (which may be index-linked), the Investment Account and Capital
Bonds. In 1988—89 the main net additions to the amounts held in National
Savings came from Income Bonds (£784 million), index-linked Savings Certifi¬
cates (£410 million) and the Investment Account (£344 million). Net accrued
interest from National Savings (interest added less that paid out) was £166
million in the same period.
The other principal debt instruments of central government are Treasury bills
and certificates of tax deposit. Sterling Treasury bills are sold at a weekly tender
and usually have a maturity of three months, although longer-dated bills have
also been issued. The Government has also issued bills denominated in
European Currency Units (ECUs) since October 1988 but the proceeds have
been added to the official foreign exchange reserves as opposed to being used to
finance public expenditure. Certificates of tax deposit may be purchased by
individuals or corporate bodies to be tendered in settlement of a range of taxes
and are non-marketable.
The bulk of public corporations’ borrowing is met by central government
through the National Loans Fund, although their temporary borrowing needs
are met largely from the market, usually under Treasury guarantee. That part of
local authority borrowing met by central government is supplied by authorisa¬
tion of Parliament through the Public Works Loan Board from the National
Loans Fund. (The Board remains an independent body even though it is merged
for administrative purposes with the former National Debt Office, forming the
National Investment and Loans Office.) The local authorities also borrow directly
384
Net Public
Sector Debt
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
from the market, both short-term and long-term, through a range of instru¬
ments. Some public corporations and local authorities also borrow on occasion,
under special statutory power and with Treasury consent, in foreign currencies.
Public sector debt repayment (or borrowing) each year represents a subtraction
from (or an addition to) the net debt of the public sector. This debt is the
consolidated debt of the public sector less its holdings of liquid assets. At the end
of March 1988 net debt stood at £171,000 million, 39 per cent of GDP. Central
government accounted for 97 per cent of net public sector debt, with the rest
roughly divided equally between local authorities and public corporations. At the
same date the consolidated debt of the public sector was £213,000 million and
its liquid assets £42,000 million. Central government accounted for 94 per cent
of public sector consolidated debt and for 82 per cent of public sector liquid
assets.
GTj
Banking and
Financial Institutions
Britain is a major financial centre providing a wide range of specialised services.
Historically the industry was located in the famous ‘Square Mile’ in the City of
London. This remains broadly the case, even though the markets for financial
and related services have grown and diversified greatly. ‘The City’ refers to a
collection of markets and institutions in and around the Square Mile. This area
has the greatest concentration of banks in the world (responsible for about a
quarter of total international bank lending), the world’s biggest insurance
industry (with about one-fifth of the international market) and one of the world’s
largest stock exchanges, and remains the principal international centre for
transactions in a large number of commodities.
Banking, finance, insurance, business services and leasing accounted for
12-2 per cent of Britain’s total output in 1987, a share which has risen sharply
over the past decade. Banking, finance and insurance accounted for 4 per cent of
employment in December 1988. The net identified overseas earnings of British
financial institutions in 1988 were £7,350 million.
Development of The increase in the rate of international movements of capital in the 1960s and
Financial 1970s mainly took the form of increased bank lending and foreign exchange
Services trading. London became the international centre of this activity, particularly in
the eurocurrency markets (see p 395), and the number of overseas banks
represented in London is larger than in any other financial centre. In the 1980s,
with increasing international competition in financial services and with de¬
velopments in technology, a rapid growth in the international markets for
securities has also taken place. London has again played an important role,
especially in the market for eurobonds, in a variety of currencies (see p 396). The
International Stock Exchange (see p 394) has reorganised itself, partly in order
to adapt to this situation, and has changed its membership rules, with the
result that numerous financial institutions in London, both British and
foreign-based, have formed new alliances with each other.
Supervision Three pieces of legislation have helped Britain’s financial services industry to
respond to the new competitive climate, while at the same time maintaining
adequate safeguards for the investing public: the Financial Services Act 1986,
the Building Societies Act 1986 (see p 390) and the Banking Act 1987 (see
p 387). Under the Financial Services Act a new supervisory framework has been
built up. Investment businesses (those effecting transactions in, managing or
giving advice on investments taking the form of securities of all kinds, financial
and commodity futures, life assurance, options contracts and certain other
instruments—but not wholesale money-market instruments, for which see
p 395) require authorisation and have to obey rules of conduct based on
principles set out in the legislation. Supervision is in the hands of the Securities
and Investment Board (SIB), which is empowered to recognise self-regulating
organisations (SROs) provided that they offer investors protection equivalent to
that provided by the SIB. Both the SIB and the SROs are practitioner-based
bodies. Most investment businesses have opted to achieve authorisation by
386
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
THE BANK
OF ENGLAND
obtaining membership of an SRO. The SROs are the Association of Futures
Brokers and Dealers (AFBD); the Financial Intermediaries, Managers and
Brokers Regulatory Association (FIMBRA) which covers firms such as insurance
brokers; the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) for con¬
cerns such as merchant banks and pension fund managers with mainly
corporate clients; the Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation
(LAUTRO); and The Securities Association (TSA) for member firms of the
International Stock Exchange.
In each of the three pieces of legislation referred to above, there is provision for
improved co-operation and information-sharing between supervisors in differ¬
ent financial sectors. The Bank of England, the Building Societies Commission
(see p 391), the Department of Trade and Industry, the Securities and Invest¬
ment Board and the SROs have statutory responsibility for financial supervision
in the sectors to which these Acts apply. There are strengthened government
powers to investigate insider dealing, and a department, the Serious Fraud
Office, to deal with cases of serious or complex fraud. The Government is helping
to extend international co-operation in investigating suspected breaches of rules
or requirements in the field of investment business: agreements about exchange
of information are in place with the United States and Japan.
Changes within the financial services sector as a whole have been eroding
traditional distinctions between financial institutions, with single firms provid¬
ing a broader range of services, both in domestic and international markets.
The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and Royal
Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by the
Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. The Bank’s main functions
are to execute monetary policy, to act as banker to the Government, to act as a
note-issuing authority and to exercise prudential supervision over and to
provide banking facilities for the banking system. As agent for the Government,
the Bank of England is responsible for arranging government borrowing and for
managing the National Debt. It also manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (see p 387) and maintains the register of holdings of government
securities on behalf of the Treasury. More generally the Bank has a responsibility
for overseeing the soundness of the financial system as a whole.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales to issue
banknotes. The note issue is fiduciary, that is to say, it is no longer backed by
gold but by government and other securities. The Scottish and Northern Ireland
banks have limited rights to issue notes; these issues, apart from a small
amount specified by legislation for each bank, must be fully covered by holdings
of Bank of England notes. Responsibility for the provision of coin lies with the
Royal Mint, a government trading fund.
The Bank is able to influence money-market conditions through its dealings
with the discount houses (see p 390), which developed in the nineteenth century
as bill brokers for industrialists. The discount houses hold mainly Treasury,
local authority and commercial bills, and negotiable certificates of deposit
financed by short-term loans from the banks. If on a particular day there is a
shortage of cash in the banking system as a result, for example, of large tax
payments, the Bank relieves the shortage either by buying bills from the
discount houses or by lending directly to them. This permits the banks to
replenish their cash balances at the Bank by recalling some of their short-term
loans to the discount houses.
Under the Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 385) the Bank is responsible for
the supervision of the main wholesale markets in London for money, foreign
exchange and gold bullion. (The markets are wholesale in the sense that the
participants are professional operators dealing in large amounts of money.)
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
387
Under the Banking Act 1987 deposit-taking organisations require authorisa¬
tion from the Bank of England (unless they are specifically exempted) and are
subject to the Bank of England’s supervision. The Act created a Board of
Banking Supervision and increased the Bank’s powers to modify the conduct of
banking institutions, to investigate cases of illegal deposit-talking, to block bank
mergers and takeovers on prudential grounds and to require information to be
supplied to it by banks. The Act also enables information to be shared, in strictly
controlled ways, among supervisors in different financial services, and permits
auditors to make reports to the Bank of England about a bank if the circum¬
stances justify it.
On behalf of the Treasury, the Bank manages the Exchange Equalisation
Account (EEA), which holds Britain’s official reserves of gold, foreign exchange,
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs, which are claims on the International Monetary
Fund) and European Currency Units (ECUs). Using the resources of the EEA,
the Bank may intervene in the foreign exchange markets to check undue
fluctuations in the exchange value of sterling.
Deposit-taking institutions may be divided into those which are authorised as
banks under the Banking Act 1987 and are supervised by the Bank of England;
and other institutions which offer banking services, of which the most impor¬
tant are the building societies and the National Savings Bank.
Another useful distinction is that between ‘retail’ banking and ‘wholesale’
banking. Retail banking is primarily for personal customers and small
businesses. Its main services are cash withdrawal facilities and systems for
transferring funds, notably by cheque. Competition between the banks and the
building societies in the provision of money transmission services to individuals
has increased during the last two decades and is expected to increase further
(see p 390). Building societies can now also offer money transmission services to
companies. Wholesale business involves the taking of large deposits at higher
rates of interest, the deployment of funds in money-market instruments (see
p 395) and the making of large loans and investments. Nearly all the banks in
Britain engage in some wholesale activities and some, such as the merchant and
overseas banks, centre their business on them. Many such wholesale dealings
are conducted on the inter-bank market, that is, between banks themselves.
In April 1989 there were 552 institutions authorised under the Banking Act
1987, including retail banks, merchant banks, branches of overseas banks,
discount houses and banking subsidiaries of both banking and non-banking
institutions from Britain and overseas. Of these, 400 were members of the
British Bankers’ Association.
The major retail banks are those with a significant branch network, offering a
full range of financial services to both individuals and companies. They provide
current accounts including, generally, interest-bearing current accounts, de¬
posit accounts and various kinds of loan arrangements, together with a full
range of money transmission facilities increasingly featuring plastic card
technology.
The dominant banks in England and Wales are Barclays, Lloyds, Midland,
National Westminster and the TSB Group, which was formed out of the former
Trustee Savings Bank in 1986; and in Scotland the Bank of Scotland and The
Royal Bank of Scotland. Together with the Standard Chartered Bank (see p 390)
these make up the Committee of London and Scottish Bankers, which repre¬
sents its members to the Government. Other important retail banks are the
Clydesdale Bank, the Co-operative Bank, the Yorkshire Bank and Girobank,
which is at present a subsidiary of the Post Office but which has been offered for
sale to the private sector and is being purchased by the Alliance and Leicester
388
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Deposits
and Assets
Branches
and
Accounts
Payment
Systems and
Services
Building Society. Northern Ireland is served by branch networks of five banks.
With the growth of the financial services sector since the 1970s, and with a
relaxation of restrictions on competition among financial institutions, the
major banks have increasingly diversified the services they provide. They have
lent more money for house purchases, and have established or acquired
substantial interests in finance houses, leasing and factoring companies,
merchant banks, securities dealers, insurance companies, unit trust companies
and estate agencies.
The banks provide loan facilities to industrial companies and, since the
1970s, have provided more medium- and long-term loans than they did formerly.
They have also become important providers of finance for small firms: they have
supported a loan guarantee scheme under which 70 per cent of the value of loans
to small companies is guaranteed by the Government, and some banks have set
up special subsidiaries to provide equity finance for companies (see p 394).
Most retail banks also conduct extensive international operations which
account for a substantial proportion of their business. In addition to maintain¬
ing overseas subsidiaries they are very active in eurocurrency markets (see
p 395).
The total liabilities/assets of the retail banks amounted to £309,000 million at
the end of March 1989. Of the liabilities, 66 per cent was sterling deposits, 17
per cent other currency deposits, and the remainder items in suspense or
transmission, and capital and other funds. The £203,000 million of sterling
deposits was divided approximately equally between sight deposits (which can
be withdrawn on demand) and time deposits (which can be withdrawn only on
some period of notice). The banks’ main liquid assets consist of money at call
(mainly short-term loans to discount houses), their holdings of Treasury and
some other bills, short-dated British government securities and balances at
the Bank of England. They also hold a proportion of their assets as port¬
folio investments (mainly longer-dated British government securities) or trade
investments.
At the end of 1988 the retail banks in Great Britain operated through some
13,700 branches and sub-branches. National Westminster had the largest
number (3,086), followed by Barclays (2,712), Lloyds (2,189), Midland (2,090),
TSB (1,546), The Royal Bank of Scotland (829) and Bank of Scotland (540).
Some 70 per cent of all adults in Britain have a current account and over
one-third a deposit account.
The London-based inter-bank clearing systems are administered by three
separate companies operating under an umbrella organisation, the Association
for Payment Clearing Services. The three clearing companies cover bulk paper
clearings (cheques and credit transfers); high-value clearings for same-day
settlement (the electronic nationwide service CHAPS [Clearing House Automated
Payment System] and the paper Town Clearing, which operates only in the City
of London); and bulk electronic clearings (through Bankers Automated Clearing
Services, comprising standing orders and direct debits). Membership of each of
these clearing companies is open to any bank or financial institution that meets
criteria for appropriate supervision and accounts for 0-5 per cent of transactions
in that clearing.
All the major retail banks have substantial networks of automated teller
machines or cash dispensers with, in all, about 11,300 machines in 1989. These
give customers access to cash and other services up to 24 hours a day. Many
banks and building societies offer home banking services to their customers
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
389
Merchant
Banks
Overseas
Banks
whereby they can use telephone access devices to obtain account information,
make transfers and pay bills.
The banks also offer their customers cheque guarantee cards which entitle
holders to reciprocal encashment facilities up to, generally, £50 a day. The cards
will also guarantee transactions with retailers up to the same amount. Uniform
eurocheques supported by a eurocheque card are available from all major banks.
These standard-format, high-security cheques may be used to obtain cash or
make payments in Britain, elsewhere in Europe and in a few other overseas
countries. The cheques are made out in the currency of the country in which
they are being used, with a guarantee limit of approximately £100 per cheque,
but without limit on the number of cheques that may be drawn in respect of a
single transaction.
Credit cards associated with major retail banks are also a popular means of
payment. The earliest, Barclaycard, was launched in 1966 and is part of the Visa
world system. At the end of 1988 Visa cards were issued by 32 financial
institutions in Britain, with a total of some 17 million cardholders. Access,
which operates within the MasterCard world system and is owned by four retail
banks, had about 13 million cardholders; each organisation had about 320,000
retail outlets; and 43 per cent of adults in Britain had at least one card. The
major banks now all issue cards under both international systems.
A charge card, like a credit card, enables the holder to make retail payments,
but there is either no credit limit or a very high limit, and the balance must be
settled in full on receipt of a monthly statement. An annual fee is generally
payable. The main examples are American Express, Diners Club and bank gold
cards. Gold cards are issued by some banks to higher-income customers.
Debit cards, which allow payments to be deducted directly from the pur¬
chaser’s bank account, have been introduced by Barclays (Connect), Lloyds (Visa
payment card), and a joint venture of Midland, National Westminster and The
Royal Bank of Scotland (Switch).
EFTPOS’ (electronic funds transfer at point of sale) is a system which enables
shoppers to pay for goods using a debit or credit card to transfer funds
electronically via terminals in retail premises. Several major EFTPOS schemes
are well established, with altogether more than 30,000 terminals, a number that
is growing quickly. Plans for a single nationwide scheme initially involving 2,000
terminals in Leeds, Southampton and Edinburgh are under way. It is envisaged
that in due course existing networks will be encompassed by the national
scheme and adopt its rules, standards and procedures.
Merchant banks have traditionally been concerned primarily with the accepting
(or guaranteeing) of commercial bills and with the sponsoring of capital issues
on behalf of their customers. Today they have a widely diversified and complex
range of activities, with important roles in international finance and the
short-term capital markets; the provision of expert advice and financial services
to British industrial companies, especially where mergers, takeovers and other
forms of corporate reorganisation are involved; and in the management of
investment holdings, including trusts, pensions and other funds. A number of
merchant banks have become part of financial conglomerates, offering an even
wider range of financial services than hitherto. The four largest retail banks all
have merchant banking subsidiaries. The British branches of some overseas
banks also engage in merchant banking.
Some 360 overseas banks were represented in Britain in February 1989. Of
these, 46 were from the United States and 29 from Japan. They provide a
comprehensive banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the
financing of trade not only between Britain and other countries but also between
390
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British
Overseas
Banks
The Discount
Houses
Building
Societies
third-party countries. Citibank of the United States is expanding its activities in
the retail banking market in Britain and has joined the high-value clearing
system (see p 388).
A number of banks have their head offices in Britain but operate mainly abroad,
often specialising in particular regions such as Latin America or East Asia
through extensive branch networks. The major bank in this sector is Standard
Chartered.
The discount houses are an institution unique to the City of London. They act as
intermediaries between the Bank of England and the rest of the banking sector,
promote an orderly flow of short-term funds between the Government and the
banks, and lend to the Government by guaranteeing to subscribe for the whole of
the weekly offer of Treasury bills (which are three-month instruments). In return
for acting as intermediaries, the discount houses have privileged daily access to
the Bank of England as ‘lender of last resort’. Assets of the discount houses
consist mainly of Treasury and commercial bills, government and local authority
securities and negotiable certificates of deposit denominated in both sterling
and United States dollars. Following an invitation from the Bank of England
two firms applied successfully to join the existing eight discount houses in
1989.
Building societies are mutual institutions, owned by their savers and borrowers.
They raise short-term deposits from savers, who are generally able to withdraw
their money on demand or at short notice. The societies provide long-term loans,
mostly at variable rates of interest, against the security of property—usually
private dwellings purchased for owner-occupation.
Building societies are the major lenders for house purchase in Britain and are
the principal repository for the personal sector’s liquid assets (although banks’
shares have increased in both areas since 1985). Some 70 per cent of adults have
building society accounts. Competition among the building societies and
between building societies and other financial institutions has increased in the
last decade. A variety of savings schemes has been established, and a growing
number of societies provide current account facilities such as cheque books and
automatic teller machines. In 1989 there were over 2,300 building society
automated teller machines, about 17 per cent of the total. Three building
societies issue Visa credit cards (see p 389).
At the end of 1988 there were 131 registered societies, of which 110 were
members of the Building Societies Association, with assets totalling £192,000
million; about £50,000 million was advanced in new mortgages in the course of
the year. The three largest societies (the Halifax, Nationwide Anglia and
Woolwich) account for nearly 50 per cent of the total assets of the movement and
the 20 largest for some 90 per cent.
The Building Societies Act 1986 and subsequent regulations allowed the
societies to diversify their services. As a result, from January 1990 up to 17-5 per
cent of a society’s commercial assets may be used for purposes other than loans
on first mortgage of owner-occupied houses, including up to 7-5 per cent in new
types of asset such as unsecured loans. These limits have increased under
the regulations and are projected to increase to 23 per cent and 15 per
cent respectively in 1993. Directly or through subsidiaries societies may now
offer services within the general areas of banking, investment, insurance,
trusteeship, executorship and estate agency. Societies may also now operate
throughout the European Community. However, their main business will
continue to be the provision of financial and housing-related services to
individuals.
CHANGES IN ‘FLEET STREET
Like all other national newspapers, the
Observer, Britain’s oldest Sunday
newspaper, has moved its operations away
from the Fleet Street area and now
occupies the new Marco Polo building in
Battersea, south London.
With the computer terminal system at
News International journalists can key
their copy into a video terminal and
transform it into computer-set columns of
type at the touch of a button.
SPORT
Virginia Leng wins the 1989 Badminton Trials on her
horse Beneficial.
Nick Faldo, the second British winner of the United
States Masters golf tournament in Augusta, Georgia.
Sandy Lyle won the tournament in 1988.
Britain’s Olympic gold
medal hockey team at
Seoul, Korea, in
September 1988.
One of 56 entrants in
the wheelchair mini¬
marathon, which forms
part of the London
Marathon.
PERFORMING ARTS
The Exchange Building in
Manchester, once the centre of
Lancashire’s cotton trade, houses
the Royal Exchange Theatre
Company, whose ‘module’ is the
venue for performances of both
classic and contemporary plays.
The zebra from the Royal Ballet’s
‘Still Life’ at the Penguin Cafe, a work
on the theme of nature conservation
choreographed by David Bintley.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
391
National
Savings
Bank
INVESTING
INSTITUTIONS
Insurance
Institutions
The 1986 Act established the Building Societies Commission for the pruden¬
tial supervision of the industry. It also allowed a society to convert into a public
limited company, but only with the approval of its savers and borrowers. The
society would then be required to become an authorised institution under the
Banking Act 1987 (see p 387). Abbey National has successfully pursued this
course.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders is a trade body established in 1989 for all
mortgage lending institutions, including building societies, insurance com¬
panies, finance houses and banks.
The National Savings Bank is run by the Department for National Savings,
based in Glasgow, and provides a system for depositing and withdrawing
savings at 20,000 post offices around the country or by post.
There are about 20 million accounts. Ordinary Accounts earn interest at a rate
which depends on the balance maintained; the first £70 of annual interest is tax
free. Investment Accounts earn a higher variable rate of interest, which is
taxable. At the end of August 1989 the sum of the two accounts totalled £9,400
million. Other National Savings instruments include tax-free Savings Certificates,
which either pay a fixed rate of interest alone or a (lower) fixed rate of interest
combined with index-linking, and Premium Bonds, where interest is paid in the
form of prizes chosen by lottery; and taxable Income and Capital Bonds.
All National Savings interest is paid without deduction of tax at source,
making the National Savings Bank a home for the savings of non-taxpayers, and
the instruments encourage savers to leave their savings untouched for a period
of years. The National Savings Bank does not offer lending facilities. At the end
of August 1989 the total amount of money invested in National Savings was
£36,900 million, and this forms a part of government borrowing.
The investing institutions are those which collect savings and invest them in
securities and other assets. The main investing institutions are insurance
companies, pension funds, unit trusts and investment trusts.
The British insurance industry provides a comprehensive and competitive
service domestically and internationally. It falls broadly into two parts: general
insurance, including accident and short-term life insurance, where contracts
are for a year or less; and long-term life insurance, where contracts may be for
periods of many years. The London market is the world’s leading centre for
insurance and for the placement of international reinsurance. It has been
estimated that it handles some 20 per cent of general insurance business placed
on the international market.
In addition to the British companies and Lloyd’s, a large number of overseas
companies are represented, with which many British companies have formed
close relationships. Some British companies confine their activities to domestic
business but most large companies undertaking general business transact a
substantial amount overseas through branches and agencies or affiliated local
companies. Over half the non-life premium of British insurance companies and
Lloyd’s is derived from overseas.
Insurance companies carrying on business in Britain are supervised by the
Department of Trade and Industry under the Insurance Companies Act 1982.
Marketing of life insurance is regulated by the Securities and Investments Board
(see p 385). Some 840 companies are authorised to carry on one or more classes
of insurance business in Britain, of which 7 per cent are European Community
companies with their head office outside Britain, and a further 11 per cent
companies established outside the European Community. The total assets of
these companies were £208,000 million at the end of 1987. Long-term insur-
392
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Lloyd’s
Insurance
Brokers
European
Community
Directives
Pension Funds
ance is handled by some 280 companies, some of which are mutual institutions,
owned by their policy holders.
Some 440 companies belong to the Association of British Insurers. These
account for 90 per cent of British insurance business and 95 per cent of life
business.
Insurance is also available from some friendly societies, mutual institutions
administered by trustees.
Lloyd’s, the origins of which go back to the seventeenth century, is an
incorporated society of private insurers in London. Although its activities were
originally confined to the conduct of marine insurance, a very considerable
world-wide market for the transaction of other classes of insurance business
(such as aviation and motor) has been built up. Long-term life and financial
guarantee business is not covered.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a market for insurance administered by the
Council of Lloyd’s. Business is carried out for individual elected underwriting
members, or ‘names’, who must show sufficient available wealth and lodge a
deposit. Insurance is transacted for them with unlimited liability, in competi¬
tion with each other and with insurance companies. At the beginning of 1989
there were 31,300 members, grouped into 401 syndicates. Each syndicate is
managed by an underwriting agent responsible for appointing a professional
underwriter to accept insurance risks and settle claims on the syndicate
members’ behalf. Insurance may only be placed through accredited Lloyd’s
brokers, who negotiate with Lloyd’s syndicates on behalf of the insured.
Lloyd s is self-regulating under private Acts of Parliament dating from 1871 to
1982. The Council has introduced measures to ensure that members 
particularly those not active in the market as brokers or with underwriting
agencies—should enjoy a level of protection comparable with that provided for
the general investor under the Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 389).
Insurance brokers, acting on behalf of the insured, are a valuable part of the
company market and an essential part of the Lloyd’s market. Many brokers
specialise in reinsurance business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of
contracts between companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as
London representatives of the latter. The Insurance Brokers (Registration) Act
1977 provides for the registration and regulation of insurance brokers by the
Insurance Brokers Registration Council, and only those so registered can use
the title broker. In June 1989 over 17,000 individuals were registered with the
Council, through 1,530 partnerships or sole traderships and 3,147 limited
companies.
In accordance with the Treaty of Rome, insurance and reinsurance in the
European Community are regulated by directives addressed to the governments
of member states and intended to harmonise the legislation of the various
member countries. Directives cover reinsurance, compulsory motor insurance,
freedom of establishment for life and non-life insurers, Community co-
insurance and insurance intermediaries. A directive regulating trade in non-life
insurance services will come into force in July 1990, and a directive on life
insurance services is under discussion. Britain strongly supports the removal of
unnecessary national regulations and exchange controls that restrict the crea¬
tion of a full common market in services, particularly financial services.
Virtually all occupational pension schemes are based on trust funds managed so
as to protect the interests of the members. Pension contributions are invested
either directly in the securities and other investment markets or through
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
393
Investment
and Unit
Trusts
SPECIALISED
INSTITUTIONS
Finance
Houses
Leasing
Companies
intermediaries such as insurance companies. The funds are a dominant force in
securities markets. The Government has introduced legislation to allow people
more choice in opting out of occupational pension schemes and setting up
personal pension arrangements. The market value of assets held directly by
pension funds rose from £2,000 million in 1957 to about £196,000 million at
the end of 1987, when 15 per cent was in British government securities and 67
per cent in company securities.
Investment and unit trusts enable investors in securities to spread their risks
and obtain the benefit of skilled management. Investment trusts are companies
which observe certain requirements of the International Stock Exchange and
the tax authorities and invest in securities for the benefit of their shareholders.
The net asset value of the 156 members of the Association of Investment Trust
Companies at the end of 1988 was some £19,200 million.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company
and a trustee company which holds the assets. Normally, the managers sell units
to the public and also repurchase them on demand. The sums held must be
invested in securities. The costs of running the trust are met partly by an initial
charge which forms part of the price of a unit and partly by a periodic service
charge which is usually taken out of the trust’s income. Authorisation by the
Department of Trade and Industry is needed before units can be offered to the
public; this is granted only if the trust deed meets the Department’s require¬
ments. Trusts are allowed to hold up to 25 per cent of their assets in shares
traded on the Unlisted Securities Market (see p 395) and certain other secondary
markets; within this total up to 5 per cent may be held in the form of other
unlisted securities. Under the Financial Services Act 1986 (see p 385), author¬
ised unit trusts can invest in a wider range of assets in order to allow a greater
variety of investment opportunities to be offered to the public. In March 1989
there were 4-8 million unit trust holdings with a total value of nearly £50,000
million.
The specialised institutions are agencies created to meet the needs of specific
groups of borrowers—mostly industrial and commercial—which were not ade¬
quately covered by other institutions. They are to be found in both the public
and the private sectors. Some of the latter were set up with official support, but
with financing from banks and other financial institutions. They may offer loan
finance or equity capital.
The main private sector institutions are described below. Among public sector
agencies are the British Technology Group, the Scottish and Welsh Development
Agencies, the Industrial Development Board in Northern Ireland, the Co¬
operative Development Agency and ECGD (previously the Export Credits
Guarantee Department), Britain’s official export credit insurer.
Finance houses are major providers of instalment credit facilities for the
personal sector and of both loan and leasing finance (see below) to the corporate
sector. Forty-seven firms constitute the Finance Houses Association (FHA); at
the end of 1988 loan and leasing credit outstanding to the members of the FHA
was over £34,000 million. Many of the finance houses are owned by banks, and
most of them are institutions authorised under the Banking Act.
Leasing companies buy and own plant or equipment required and chosen by
businesses and lease it at an agreed rental. This form of finance grew quickly in
importance in the 1970s, partly because the leasing companies were able to take
advantage of investment incentives to the benefit of customers whose tax
position would otherwise have made them unavailable. In 1988 the 74 members
394
Factoring
Companies
Venture
Capital
Companies
FINANCIAL
MARKETS
The
International
Stock
Exchange
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of the Equipment Leasing Association acquired assets in Britain valued at some
£7,800 million, which represented over 20 per cent of all investment in plant
and machinery.
Factoring is a range of financial services providing growing companies with a
flexible source of finance in exchange for the outstanding invoices due to them.
Since the early 1960s factoring has developed as a major financial service,
covering international activities as well as domestic trade. In 1988 member
companies of the Association of British Factors handled business of £8,800
million (representing about 90 per cent of all factoring business in Britain) and
some 7,000 companies made use of the Association’s services.
Venture capital companies meet the need for medium- and long-term capital
when such funds are not easily or directly available from traditional sources
such as the stock market or the banks.
There are well over 100 British venture capital companies which take equity
stakes in small and medium-sized firms. Many of these companies are sub¬
sidiaries of other financial institutions, including banks, insurance companies
and pension funds. The 107 full members of the British Venture Capital
Association invested a total of nearly £1,400 million in Britain, elsewhere in
Europe, and the United States in 1988, an increase of 35 per cent on the
previous year. (Approximately 28 per cent of this sum represented the venture
capital element of 3i investment.)
3i, formerly Investors in Industry, supports investment programmes over a
whole range of industries. During the year ended 31 March 1989 the corporation
invested £581 million. Within the last few years it has become increasingly
prominent in financing management ‘buy-outs’, which involve the purchase of
businesses by their management and other staff from their owners. The shares
in 3i are owned by the Bank of England (15 per cent) and six of the major retail
banks.
The City of London has a wide range of organised financial markets, the
International Stock Exchange, the foreign exchange market, the financial
futures market, the eurobond and eurocurrency markets, the Lloyd’s insurance
market (see p 392), and the gold bullion and commodity markets.
The International Stock Exchange of the United Kingdom and the Republic of
Ireland has its main administrative centre in London. There are also centres in
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham and Dublin.
The Exchange has changed radically in recent years. Its rules on membership
were altered to allow corporate ownership of member firms; the system under
which dealers charged fixed minimum scales of commission to the investing
public was abolished in favour of negotiated commissions; dealers were permit¬
ted to trade in securities both on their own behalf, as principals, and on behalf of
clients, as agents, these two roles having been kept distinct formerly; and a
screen-based dealing system came into operation, which has been so successful
that the trading floor has been closed (except for dealing in traded options).
These changes were popularly known as ‘Big Bang’.
The number and variety of securities (stocks and shares) officially listed on the
International Stock Exchange are greater than in any other market in the world
and its turnover of equities is equivalent to that of all the other European
exchanges combined. Some 7,100 securities are quoted; at the end of June 1989
these had a market value of £2,070,000 million. More than 5,000 securities of
companies are quoted, including a number of leading overseas companies, with
a value of some £1,770,000 million. The remainder is made up of British and
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
395
overseas government and corporation stocks as well as eurobonds (see p 396).
In recent years the largest market for new issues has been that for companies’
securities, including issues of shares resulting from the Government’s privatisa¬
tion programme. Trading in British government securities (‘gilt-edged stocks’)
in the first three months of 1989 accounted for about two-thirds of transactions
by value (excluding traded options). New issues are made on the Government’s
behalf by the Bank of England.
Other The Unlisted Securities Market, which generally deals in the securities of smaller
Domestic companies which may not qualify for a full International Stock Exchange listing.
Securities but which have traded for at least three years, was opened in 1980 under the
Markets auspices of the Exchange, since when the number of companies quoted has
risen from about a dozen to more than 400. The Exchange also set up a ‘Third
Market’ for securities in small unlisted companies in 1987. This provides a
formal structure for dealing in a number of securities, especially those of
companies which have traded for at least a year and are trying to raise risk
capital. The Third Market numbers 60 securities.
The London Traded Options Market enables investors not only to buy options
to purchase or sell shares in the future at pre-fixed prices but also to trade in the
options themselves. There is trading in the shares of 66 prominent British and
overseas companies and in a stock index option. The market has become the
largest equity options market in Europe.
The London money markets channel wholesale funds (mainly short-term) from
lenders to borrowers. They consist of a series of integrated groups of financial
institutions conducting negotiations primarily by telephone, telex and auto¬
mated dealing systems, there being no physical market-place. Under the Finan¬
cial Services Act 1986 (see p 385) the Bank of England approves market
participants and ensures that they adhere to codes of conduct. The discount
houses (see p 390) play an important role. The main financial instruments dealt
in are bills (issued by the Treasury, local authorities or companies), certificates
of deposit (CDs) and short-term deposits. The bill markets and the markets on
which the discount houses borrow from the rest of the banking system are often
referred to as the ‘traditional’ markets. Newer markets, known as ‘parallel’
markets, emerged in the 1960s, and include the inter-bank market and the
market in CDs. Since a large proportion of the latter are held by banks the CD
market is effectively an extension of the inter-bank market.
Capital markets have been undergoing continuous transformation since the
1960s (see p 385). In the 1980s a trend towards the ‘securitisation of debt’ has
developed: that is to say, major borrowers have increasingly raised funds by
issuing securities instead of seeking bank loans. In 1986 large companies were
permitted to develop a sterling commercial paper market: this consists essen¬
tially of issues of short-term debt with a maturity of up to one year. In 1989 the
sterling commercial paper and the short-term corporate bond markets were
consolidated. The range of issuers has been broadened to include, for example,
banks and building societies, unquoted companies and overseas sovereign
states. The market is a way for such bodies to issue short-term debt of up to five
years' maturity and to borrow directly from the money market.
The Euromarkets The eurocurrency market enables banks to deal in deposits and loans denomi¬
nated in a currency other than that of the country in which the bank is
situated. Transactions can thus be carried out in eurodollars, eurodeutsch-
marks, euroyen and so on. While Paris is the main centre for the eurosterling
market, London and Tokyo are the main world centres for eurocurrencies.
The eurobond market performs a similar service in transferring funds from
The Money
Markets
396
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
Financial
Futures
The London
Gold Market
Commodity,
Shipping and
Freight
Markets
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
lenders to borrowers but over a longer period by means of bonds issued in
currencies other than that of the issuing country. Transactions in both markets
tend to be in large denominations. The markets developed in the late 1950s
following the restoration of convertibility between the major currencies, partly in
order to avoid incurring the costs of exchange control and other regulations. The
participants in the markets include multinational corporations, nationalised
industries, and central and local governments as well as the international
banking community.
^ the 1980s there has been considerable growth in the euro-commercial
paper market. As with the establishment of the sterling commercial paper
market (see p 395) this represents a further movement towards the securitisa¬
tion of debt.
The market has no physical centre, but consists of telephone links between the
participants, which include banks, other financial institutions and several
firms of foreign exchange brokers which act as intermediaries between the
banks. It provides those engaged in international trade and investment with
foreign currencies for their transactions. The banks are in close contact with
financial centres abroad and are able to quote buying and selling rates for both
spot and forward delivery in a wide range of currencies and maturities. The
forward market enables traders and dealers who, at a given date in the future,
wish to receive or make a specific foreign currency payment, to contract in
advance to sell or buy the foreign currency involved for sterling at a fixed
exchange rate. A Bank of England survey in April 1989 showed that average daily
turnover on London’s foreign exchange market was about £110,000 million,
making it the largest such market in the world.
The London International Financial Futures Exchange trades on the floor of the
Royal Exchange building. About 190 banks and other financial institutions are
members of the market, which allows parties that could be affected by move¬
ments in prices, interest rates or exchange rates to reduce their vulnerability or
to speculate on the possibility of making a gain. Financial futures contracts are
legally binding documents for the purchase or sale of a fixed amount of a
financial commodity, at a price agreed in the present, on a specified future date.
They facilitate the transfer of risk from those that do not wish to bear it to those
that are prepared to bear it. In August 1989 the average number of futures and
futures options contracts traded daily was about 88,000, with a turnover of
some £21,000 million.
Over 60 banks, securities and trading companies comprise the London Gold
Market which, like the foreign exchange market, trades by telephone and telex
links. Five of the members meet twice daily to establish a London fixing price for
gold which provides a reference point for world-wide dealings. Although much
interest centres upon the fixings, active dealing takes place throughout the day.
London and Zurich are the main world centres for gold dealings.
Britain remains the principal international centre for transactions in a large
number of commodities, although most of the sales negotiated in London relate
to consignments which never pass through the ports of Britain. The need for
close links with sources of finance and with shipping and insurance services
often determined the location of these markets in the City of London. There are
also futures markets in cocoa, coffee, grains (wheat and barley), rubber, soya
bean meal, sugar, pigmeat, non-ferrous metals (aluminium, copper, lead,
nickel, silver and zinc), potatoes, gas oil (heating oil) and crude petroleum oil.
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
397
The markets are collaborating in the development of new arrangements to
safeguard participants.
In ship brokerage, London’s Baltic Exchange is responsible for a substantial
proportion of the world’s tramp fixtures. A freight futures market is in operation
there. All Britain’s agricultural futures markets are operated from the Baltic
Exchange and physical commodity trading is also carried out there.
Overseas Trade
Overseas trade has been of vital importance to the British economy for hundreds
of years, and especially since the mid-nineteenth century, when the rapid
growth of industry, commerce and shipping was accompanied by Britain’s
development as an international trading centre. Today, although small in area
and accounting for only about 1 per cent of the world’s population, Britain is the
fifth largest trading nation in the world—and, as a member of the European
Community, part of the world’s largest trading area, which accounts for about
one-third of all trade.
Exports of goods and services in 1988 were equivalent to over one-quarter of
gross domestic product. Britain is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles,
aerospace products, electrical and electronic equipment and chemicals, and a
significant oil exporter. It relies upon imports for about one-third of total
consumption of foodstuffs, and for many of the basic materials needed for its
industries. Trade in invisibles is also of great significance to the economy: in
1988 overseas earnings from services were equivalent to over one-third of those
from total visible exports.
VISIBLE In 1988 Britain’s exports of goods were valued at about £80,600 million and its
TRADE imports of goods at some £101,400 million on a balance-of-payments basis (see
Table 46). Between 1987 and 1988 exports rose by 1-5 per cent in terms of
volume and by 0-2 per cent in terms of unit value, leading to an increase in the
total value of exports of 1-5 per cent. Import volume rose by 13-1 per cent, unit
value fell by 0-9 per cent and total value rose by 12-3 per cent.
Commodity Britain has traditionally been an exporter of manufactured goods (both semi-
Composition manufactures and finished manufactures) and an importer of food and basic
Table 46: Exports and Imports 1985—88 (balance-of-payments basis)
1985 1986 1987 1988
Value (£ million)
Exports f.o.b.a
Imports f.o.b.a
Volume index (1985 = 100)
Exports
Imports
Unit value index (1985 = 100)
Exports
Imports
Terms of trade (1985 = 100)b
77,988
80,334
1000
1000
1000
1000
1000
72,656
81,356
103-6
106-9
91-8
96-0
95-7
76,421
89,594
109-0
114-4
95- 5
98-5
96- 9
80,157
100,714
108-4
129-0
97- 1
98- 8
98-3
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
a f.o.b. = free on board, that is, all costs accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board the exporting vessel
having been paid by the seller.
b Export unit value index as a percentage of import unit value index.
400
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
materials. In 1970 manufactures accounted for as much as 85 per cent of total
exports. The proportion fell sharply in the early 1980s—to around 67 per cent by
the middle of the decade—as fuels increased their share; it has since risen, to 81
per cent in 1988. The share of finished manufactures in total imports rose from
25 per cent in 1970 to 51 per cent in 1988. Machinery and transport equipment
account for a little over one-third of exports and a similar proportion of imports.
Export sectors that have declined in relative importance include textiles and
vehicles. Textiles accounted for 5 per cent of total exports in 1970 but only 2 per
cent in 1988; the corresponding figures for vehicles were 11 per cent and 6 per
cent. Over the same period, the share of food, beverages and tobacco in total
imports fell from 22 per cent to 10 per cent and that of basic materials from 15
per cent to 6 per cent.
Since the mid-1970s North Sea oil has made a significant contribution to
Britain’s overseas trade both in terms of exports and in terms of import
substitution. In 1988 exports of fuels in volume terms were around four and a
half times their 1975 level; imports were less than two-thirds their 1975 level.
Over this period the share of fuels in total exports changed from 4 per cent to 7
Table 47: Commodity Composition of Trade 1988a
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (c.i.f.)b
£ million per cent £ million per cent
Non-manufactures 13,475
Food, beverages and tobacco 5,537
Basic materials 2,121
Fuels 5,818
Manufactures 66,013
Semi-manufactures 24,041
of which: Chemicals 11,333
Textiles 1,935
Iron and steel 2,391
Non-ferrous metals 1,649
Metal manufactures 1,560
Other 5,173
Finished manufactures 41,971
of which: Machinery 22,929
Road vehicles 4,992
Clothing and footwear 1,625
Scientific instruments
and photographic
apparatus 3,536
Other 8,889
Miscellaneous 1,988
16-5
6-8
2-6
71
810
29-5
13-9
2-4
2-9
20
1-9
6-3
51-5
28-1
61
20
4-3
10-9
2-4
21,636
10,586
5,992
5,058
83,327
28,899
9,313
3,636
2,367
2,504
2,146
8,933
54,428
26,138
11,248
4,016
3,490
9,536
1,450
20-3
9-9
5-6
4-8
78-3
27-2
8-8
3-4
2-2
2- 4
20
8-4
511
24-6
10-6
3- 8
3-3
90
1-4
Total
81,476
1000 106,413
1000
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
On an overseas trade statistics basis. (This differs from a balance of payments basis because, for imports, it
includes the cost of insurance and freight and, for both exports and imports, includes returned goods.)
c.i.f. = cost, insurance and freight, that is, including shipping, insurance and other expenses incurred in the
delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in Britain. Some of these expenses represent earnings by
companies resident in Britain and are more appropriate to the invisibles account.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
OVERSEAS TRADE
401
Geographical
Distribution
per cent and in imports from 17 per cent to 5 per cent. North Sea oil production
has now passed its peak of the mid-1980s, when exports of fuels had accounted
for over 20 per cent of total exports. The surplus on trade in oil declined sharply
in 1988, partly because of a fall in the price and an increase in domestic demand.
A further decline in 1989 is forecast.
Since the early 1960s Britain’s imports of semi-manufactures have exceeded
those of basic materials; they are now almost five times as high. This reflects the
increasing tendency for producing countries to carry out the processing of
primary products up to the semi-finished and, on occasions, the finished stage.
The fall in the share of food imports (from around 35 per cent of total imports in
the 1950s to 9 per cent by 1988) is a result both of the increasing extent to which
food demand has been met from domestic agriculture and the decline in the
proportion of total expenditure devoted to food.
Britain’s overseas trade is mainly—and increasingly—with other developed
countries. In 1970 these accounted for 73 per cent of Britain’s exports and a
similar proportion of Britain’s imports; by 1988 the shares were 80 per cent and
86 per cent respectively. In 1970 non-oil developing countries accounted for 17
per cent of Britain’s exports and for 15 per cent of Britain’s imports; by 1988 the
proportions had fallen to 11 per cent and 10 per cent respectively. In 1972 (the
year before Britain joined the European Community) around one-third of
Britain’s trade was with the other 11 countries which now make up the
Community; the proportion is now about one-half, a figure which can be
expected to increase with the completion of the single European market in
1992 (see p 404). Trade with other Commonwealth countries has declined in
importance.
Geographical Distribution of Trade 1988
DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
CENTRALLY
PLANNED ECONOMIES
Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
402
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INVISIBLE
TRANSACTIONS
European Community countries accounted for seven of the top ten export
markets and for six of the ten leading suppliers of goods to Britain in 1988 (see
Table 48). Since 1981 the United States has been Britain’s largest single market
and the Federal Republic of Germany Britain’s largest single supplier; in 1988
the United States accounted for nearly 13 per cent of Britain’s exports while the
Federal Republic of Germany supplied almost 17 per cent of Britain’s imports.
There have been a number of changes in the trends of Britain’s overseas trade in
recent years. The increase in wealth of the oil-exporting countries during the
1970s led to a sharp increase in their imports from all sources; by the early
1980s they were taking some 12 per cent of Britain’s exports. There was then a
fall in the capacity of these countries to absorb imports so that, by 1988, their
share of Britain’s exports had fallen to 6 per cent. In 1973 the oil-exporting
countries supplied 10 per cent of Britain’s imports but, with Britain achieving
self-sufficiency in oil, the proportion had fallen below 2 per cent by 1988. Japan
now accounts for over 6 per cent of Britain’s imports, almost twice the
proportion of ten years previously.
Table 48: Britain’s Main Markets and Suppliers 1988£
Value
(£ million)
Share
(per cent)
Main markets
United States
Federal Republic of Germany
France
Netherlands
Belgium/Luxembourg
Italy
Irish Republic
Spain
Sweden
Canada
Main suppliers
Federal Republic of Germany
United States
France
Netherlands
Japan
Italy
Belgium/Luxembourg
Irish Republic
Switzerland
Sweden
10,544
9,522
8,270
5,583
4,252
4,106
4,057
2,692
2,195
2,038
17,667
10,768
9,390
8,280
6,509
5,817
4,956
3,879
3,841
3,367
12-9
11-7
10-2
6-9
5-2
50
50
3-3
2-7
2-5
16-6
101
8-8
7-8
61
5-5
4-7
3-6
3-6
3-2
Source: Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics.
3 On an overseas trade statistics basis. Exports are f.o.b.; imports c.i.f.
Transactions on invisible trade fall into three main groups: services (receipts
and payments arising from services, as distinct from goods, supplied to and
received from overseas residents); interest, profits and dividends (income
arising from outward and inward investment, loans and other capital transac¬
tions); and transfers between Britain and other countries.
OVERSEAS TRADE
403
Invisible trade is of fundamental importance to Britain’s economy; overseas
earnings from invisibles amounted to £87,000 million in 1988—over one-half of
Britain’s total overseas earnings. Britain’s share of world invisible trade is some
15 per cent and earnings are second only to those of the United States. In 1988
Britain’s invisibles surplus was the largest in the world. Services have been in
surplus for over 20 years while interest, profits and dividends have rarely been in
deficit; transfers, however, have almost always been in deficit. For invisible trade
as a whole, the deficit of general government is more than offset by the
substantial surplus of the private sector (including public corporations), to give
an overall surplus. General government transactions are relatively unimportant
in either the services or the interest, profits and dividends accounts but they
form the greater part of the transfers account. In 1988 the private sector had a
surplus of £12,100 million on invisible trade while government had a deficit of
£5,900 million. The British Invisible Exports Council, which is financed almost
entirely by contributions from the private sector, promotes measures to encour¬
age invisible trade.
Earnings from private sector services rose in value by 1 per cent in 1988 to
£27,400 million; debits, at £21,400 million, were 8 per cent higher than a year
previously and the surplus was 18 per cent less than in 1987. The deficits on sea
transport, civil aviation and travel were outweighed by the surplus on financial
and other services.
The surplus on private sector interest, profits and dividends was £6,500
million in 1988—slightly higher than in 1987. Earnings on portfolio investment
(investment in overseas securities) remained high—at £5,900 million—
reflecting in part the substantial volume of overseas investment following the
abolition of exchange controls in 1979 and changes in the method of foreign
currency lending by banks located in Britain.
The deficit on private sector transfers in 1988 was £300 million while that on
government transfers was £3,300 million, mainly as a result of contributions
Table 49: Britain’s Invisible Transactions 1988
£ Inillion
Credits
Debits
Balance
Private sector and public corporations 83,136
27,411
3,551
3,192
6,085
Services
of which: Sea transport
Civil aviation
Travel
Financial and
other services
Interest, profits and dividends
Transfers
14,583
54,068
1,657
70,988
21,413
4.127
4,054
8.127
5,105
47,612
1,963
12,148
5,998
-576
-862
-2,042
9,478
6,456
-306
General government
Services
Interest, profits and dividends
Transfers
4,097
520
1,458
2,119
10,037
2,353
2,296
5,388
5,939
■1,833
-837
-3,269
Toted invisible transactions
87,233
81,024
6,209
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1989 Edition.
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
404
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
Single
European
Market
General
Agreement on
Tariffs and
Trade
European
Community
Agreements
and subscriptions to the European Community and other international organ¬
isations, and bilateral aid.
Britain remains committed to the open multilateral trading system and to the
further liberalisation of world trade. To this end it has taken a leading part in the
activities of such organisations as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT), the International Monetary Fund, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, and has given full support to the new round of
multilateral trade negotiations (see below). Since joining the European Com¬
munity in 1973, Britain has conducted its external commercial policy through
the Community, which has legal competence in this area. The Community’s
common customs tariff is, at a trade-weighted average of 2-5 per cent, at a low
level, similar to the tariffs of most major non-Community industrialised coun¬
tries.
Britain strongly supports the drive to complete the single European market by
the end of 1992. The single market programme is designed to eliminate the
remaining trade barriers within the Community and is expected to provide
substantial opportunities for business and benefits for consumers.
Tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade have been considerably reduced in the
seven rounds of multilateral trade negotiations completed since 1947 under the
auspices of GATT, the most recent being the Tokyo Round (1973-79). Britain
participates in these negotiations as a member of the European Community.
The eighth round of GATT multilateral trade negotiations (the Uruguay
Round) was launched in September 1986. it is expected to be completed by the
end of 1990 and aims to achieve further liberalisation and expansion of world
trade. Fifteen issues are the subject of negotiation. The mid-term review
meetings in Montreal in December 1988 and in Geneva in April 1989 agreed
negotiating frameworks for the remainder of the Round on each subject.
Britain’s objectives are to strengthen GATT; to extend GATT principles to trade
in agricultural products and services, intellectual property rights and overseas
investment; and to secure the fullest possible participation of developing
countries in the GATT system.
Britain applies the common customs tariff to all countries neither belonging to,
nor having any special arrangement with, the European Community. There is
duty-free trade between those member states that joined before 1986. Portugal
and Spain joined at the beginning of that year. Their trade with the rest of the
Community is in a transitional stage: tariffs on industrial products are due to be
phased out by the start of 1993, but those on certain agricultural products will
be dismantled over a longer period.
The Community has reciprocal agreements with the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) countries (Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland), which allow for industrial products to be traded free of duty.
Following the Luxembourg Declaration of 1984, the Community and EFTA are
working towards closer economic co-operation; the two groupings wish to
strengthen and expand their relations.
The Community also has reciprocal preferential trading agreements with
Cyprus, Israel, Malta and Turkey and non-reciprocal agreements with Algeria,
Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Jordan, the Occupied Territories, Lebanon, Syria and
Yugoslavia and, under the third Lome Convention, a group of 66 African,
Caribbean and Pacific developing countries. The Lome Convention gives these
countries free access (subject to certain safeguards) to the Community for
OVERSEAS TRADE
405
CONTROLS ON
TRADE
Import Controls
Export Controls
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES
industrial goods and most agricultural products. Negotiations for a fourth
Convention began in late 1988. Britain feels there is scope for further improve¬
ments in the arrangements.
Tariff preference is also given to developing countries (under the Generalised
Scheme of Preferences), the Faroe Islands and the overseas dependencies and
territories of member states.
The Community also has economic co-operation agreements with a number of
Latin American countries, with the People’s Republic of China and with the six
members of the Association of South East Asian Nations.
Britain maintains few restrictions on its international trade. Most goods may be
imported freely and only a narrow range of goods is subject to any sort of export
control.
In accordance with its international obligations under GATT and to the
European Community, Britain has progressively removed almost all quantita¬
tive import restrictions imposed on economic grounds. The few remaining
quantitative restrictions mainly affect textile goods (in view of the rapid
contraction of the domestic textile industry) and stem primarily from the
Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA), under which there exists a series of agreements
covering international trade in textiles, designed to balance the interests of both
exporting and importing countries. The present MFA is due to expire in 1991. A
small number of quantitative restrictions are also maintained against non-
GATT countries. Britain, in accordance with European Community directives,
operates a ban on the import from North Korea and South Africa of certain iron
and steel products and from South Africa of gold coins. Quantitative restrictions
have been removed from imports of goods of Community origin. However, there
are exceptions: Britain continues to apply internationally recognised restric¬
tions on non-economic grounds on imports from all countries of products such
as firearms, ammunition and nuclear materials. Other government depart¬
ments apply similar non-economic restrictions on goods such as meat and
poultry, animals, birds, bees, fish and plants and some of their derivatives,
controlled drugs, explosives, fireworks, certain offensive weapons, certain
citizens’ band radios, indecent or obscene articles and products derived from
endangered species.
The great majority of British exports are not subject to any government control
or direction except for presentation and declaration to HM Customs and Excise
on export for the purpose of collecting the overseas trade statistics. However,
there are controls governing exports of military equipment and industrial goods
of strategic significance as well as nuclear products, certain metals and metal
scrap, and cocoa and cocoa products. There are also controls, for health
certification purposes, on horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, certain meat
exported to another member of the European Community, salmon and trout:
endangered species of animals and plants and some of their derivatives, in
accordance with international agreements: photographic material over 50 years
old and valued at £500 or more per item and most other articles over 50 years old
(including works of art) valued at £20,000 or more (£5,000 or more in the case of
textiles and British historical portraits) and documents, manuscripts and
archaeological items; controlled drugs; British spirits (beverages) in casks of less
than 40 litres; and Common Agricultural Policy products.
The Government assists exporters by creating conditions favourable to the
export trade and by providing information and advice about opportunities for
406
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Export
Promotion
Services
ECGD
BALANCE OF
PAYMENTS
trade in other countries, services designed to help exporters and improve
exporting practices, and credit insurance facilities.
The British Overseas Trade Board (the export arm of the Department of Trade
and Industry—DTI) guides and directs the Government’s export promotion
efforts, including the provision of export services. Among these services are the
dissemination of export intelligence, assistance to British exporters in appoint¬
ing agents and researching potential markets overseas, help at trade fairs and
other promotional events overseas and support for firms participating in trade
missions. The Board comprises mainly representatives of commerce and indus¬
try with personal involvement in exporting, but also includes representatives of
the DTI, ECGD (the Export Credits Guarantee Department) and the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office; it operates under the general authority of the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry, who is the President.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can initially consult the export
section of the regional offices of the DTI throughout Britain and, through these
offices, the DTI’s overseas trade divisions in London and the commercial posts of
the British Diplomatic Service overseas. The Scottish Export Office (Industiy
Department for Scotland), the Welsh Office and the Industrial Development
Board for Northern Ireland (Department of Economic Development) also act as
the equivalent of the DTI’s regional offices.
ECGD (the Export Credits Guarantee Department) is Britain’s official export
credit insurer. It is a government department responsible to the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry. ECGD provides credit insurance for about
one-fifth of the country’s export trade and insures exporters of both goods and
services against non-payment by overseas buyers. The main risks covered
include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer, governmental action which
stops the British exporter receiving payment, new import restrictions, and war
or civil disturbance in the buyer’s country. Cover may commence from the date
of shipment or from the date of contract (at higher premiums).
This insurance may be supplemented by guarantees of repayment given direct
to banks financing exports sold on credit of two years or more, whether in
sterling or in a range of foreign currencies. Alternatively, for larger contracts
(from around £5 million), ECGD can guarantee loans direct to overseas buyers,
enabling exporters to be paid on cash terms, or can arrange ‘lines of credit’ to
cover an agreed buying programme of an overseas country. The banks provide
finance against these guarantees and ECGD’s fixed-rate export finance scheme
enables such finance to be given at an internationally agreed minimum fixea
rate. ECGD can also support the issue of performance bonds in the commercial
market in respect of cash or near-cash contracts worth over £250,000. Invest¬
ment insurance is provided for new British investment overseas against exprop¬
riation, war damage and restrictions on remittances.
Under the Aid and Trade Provision, aid combined with export credits may be
provided to developing countries to support projects which promise opportuni¬
ties to British exporters.
The balance-of-payments statistics record transactions between residents of
Britain and non-residents. The transactions are classified into two groups:
current account (visibles and invisibles) and transactions in assets and liabili¬
ties. The balance on current account shows whether Britain has had a surplus of
income over expenditure.
Traditionally Britain has had a deficit on visible trade and a surplus on trade
in invisibles and this was again the case in 1988. Since that year the deficit on
visible trade has been substantial. The increase in the degree of integration in
OVERSEAS TRADE
407
Capital Flows
Table 50: Britain’s Balance of Payments 1984-88
£ million
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988
Current account
Visible trade balance —5,169 —3,132 —9,364 —10,929 —20,826
Invisible transactions
balance 7,054 6,335 9,430 7,258 6,209
Current balance 1,885 3,203 66 —3,671 —14,617
Financial account
Transactions in assets
and liabilities
British external assets -32,068 -53,279 -92,462 -83,922 -50,073
British external liabilities 24,289 43,782 81,369 76,255 52,408
Balancing item 5,895 6,294 11,025 11,338 12,283
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1989 Edition.
the international economy has enhanced differences in the pattern of invest¬
ment and savings opportunities. With the British economy expanding rapidly,
there has been a marked increase in investment unmatched by a corresponding
rise in savings; Britain has thus been importing capital. Since the balance of
payments must balance, a deficit on current account has been the inevitable
result. The deficit has arisen from private sector behaviour; in the same way, it
is likely to fall as the gap between private sector investment and savings
narrows.
The surplus on invisibles fell from £7,300 million in 1987 to £6,200 million in
1988. The surplus on services fell and that on interest, profits and dividends
increased, with a rise in earnings from British direct investment overseas. The
deficit on transfers changed little.
A description of visible trade and invisible transactions is given on pp 399—
403.
Britain has no exchange controls; residents are free to acquire foreign currency
for any purpose, including direct and portfolio investment overseas. There are
also no controls on the lending of sterling abroad and non-residents may freely
acquire sterling for any purpose. Gold may be freely bought and sold. The
abolition of exchange controls in 1979 means that Britain meets its full
obligations on capital movements under the OECD Code on Capital Movements
and under European Community directives. The Government welcomes both
outward and inward investment. Outward investment helps to develop markets
for British exports, while providing earnings in the form of interest, profits and
dividends. Foreign investment in Britain creates employment directly; intro¬
duces new technology, products, management styles and attitudes; and pro¬
vides an opportunity to increase exports or substitute imports. Inward invest¬
ment is particularly encouraged by the DTI’s Invest in Britain Bureau.
In 1988 direct investment overseas by British residents was £15,200 million.
The corresponding figure for portfolio investment was £9,700 million. The
inflow of direct and portfolio investment into Britain amounted to £12,000
million. An analysis of transactions in Britain’s external assets and liabilities is
given in Table 51.
408
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
External Assets
and Liabilities
At the end of 1988 Britain’s identified external assets exceeded identified
external liabilities by £94,000 million; only Japan had higher net external
assets. Net assets of the private sector and public corporations amounted to
£82,000 million and those of general government £12,000 million.1
Direct investment overseas by British residents (investment in branches,
subsidiaries and associated companies) totalled £102,000 million at the end of
1988 and portfolio investment £148,000 million. At the end of 1984 (the latest
year for which data are available) over 82 per cent of direct investment was in
developed countries, with 35 per cent in the United States and 21 per cent in the
European Community. In terms of industries, manufacturing accounted for 28
per cent of direct investment holdings. By type of company, oil companies were
responsible for 32 per cent, insurance companies for 7 per cent and banks for 1
per cent.
Table 51: Summary of Transactions in External Assets3
and Liabilities1* 1986—88
£ million
1986
1987
1988
Overseas direct investment in Britain 4,846 8,108
Overseas portfolio investment
in Britain 8,135 10,440
British direct investment overseas -11,304 -18,615
British portfolio investment overseas -23,068 2,702
Borrowing from overseas 68,210 56,136
Deposits and lending overseas -54,689 -55,200
Official reserves3 —2,891 -12,012
Other external liabilities of general
government 178 1,570
Other external assets of central
government -509 -796
7,346
4,639
-15,219
-9,718
39,522
-21,484
-2,761
902
-891
Total
-11,091
-7,667
2,334
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1989 Edition.
a Increase - / decrease +.
b Increase + / decrease
Note: Differences between totals and the sums of their component parts are due to rounding.
Direct investment in Britain by overseas residents amounted to £66,000
million at the end of 1988 and portfolio investment to £58,000 million. At the
end of 1984 investment from developed countries accounted for 95 per cent of
overseas direct investment in Britain: 51 per cent originated in the United
States and 30 per cent in the European Community; 41 per cent was in
manufacturing. Oil companies were responsible for 34 per cent, insurance
companies for 2 per cent and banks for 8 per cent.
Another type of overseas transaction is company cross-border acquisitions
and mergers. In 1988 overseas acquisitions and mergers less disposals carried
out by British companies were valued at £13,200 million while the correspond-
Fhe significance of any inventory of Britain's aggregate external assets and liabilities is limited
because a variety of claims and obligations are included that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree
of liquidity and in method of valuation.
OVERSEAS TRADE
409
ing figure for operations in Britain by overseas companies was £5,000 million.
The United States accounted for 80 per cent of the value of acquisitions and
mergers by British companies; the European Community accounted for 22 per
cent of the value of acquisitions and mergers by overseas companies and the
United States for 16 per cent.
$§*m£
.
Research and
Development
Expenditure
Expenditure
in Industry
Expenditure
by Government
Promotion of Science
and Technology
Britain has for centuries been in the forefront of innovation in science and
technology, and its record of achievement in relation to the size of its population
is in many respects unsurpassed. Recent important work includes that of
Professor Michael Green on superstring theories, which may lead to an under¬
standing of the ultimate nature of matter, and Professor Alec Jeffreys’s invention
in 1985 of genetic fingerprinting. The first combined heart, lungs and liver
transplant was carried out at Papworth Hospital in 1986, and agricultural
research in Britain has produced the first environmentally benign microbial
pesticides.
Nobel prizes for science have been won by 70 British citizens, a number
exceeded only by the United States, and Table 52 lists British laureates
(excluding those in economic sciences) since 1970.
International comparisons of expenditure on research and development (R & D)
are based on definitions agreed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development. According to these, total expenditure in Britain on scientific
research and development in 1987 was about £9,500 million, 2-3 per cent of
gross national product. About 50 per cent of this was provided by industry and
39 per cent by government. Significant contributions were also made by
overseas sources, private endowments, trusts and charities.
The pattern of research activity is as diverse as the pattern of research
funding. Government finance for R & D goes to its own research establish¬
ments, to institutions of higher education and to private industry. In many
cases nationalised and private-sector industries finance their own research and
run their own laboratories. Industry also funds university research and spends
money in contracts to government establishments. Charities may have their
own laboratories in addition to offering research grants for outside work.
According to a sample survey, expenditure on R & D in industry in 1987
amounted to £6,337 million, of which £1,229 million came from government,
£784 million from overseas, and the remaining £4,324 million mainly from
industry’s own funds. The most important areas of expenditure were electronics
(£1,855 million), chemicals (£1,303 million) and aerospace (£871 million).
Government figures for its R & D expenditure differ somewhat from those used
in international comparisons and those resulting from industrial surveys
because they include expenditure on social science and the humanities, and also
expenditure overseas. In addition, survey methods tend to produce an under¬
statement of government funding of research in industry. Total government
R & D expenditure in 1987—88 was some £4,600 million, the largest departmen¬
tal budget being that of the Ministry of Defence. The main civil departments
involved are the Department of Education and Science, which supports the
research councils and the universities (see pp 417 and 420); the Department of
Trade and Industry (see p 414); the Department of Energy (see p 416); and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (see p 416).
412
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Table 52: Recent British Winners of Nobel Prizes for Science
Year of
award
Category
Subject
Sir Bernard
Katz
Professor
Dennis Gabor
Professor
Rodney Porter
1970
1971
1972
Professor Brian 1973
Josephson
Professor 1973
Nikolaas
Tinbergen
Professor Sir 1973
Geoffrey
Wilkinson
Sir Martin Ryle 1974
and Professor
Anthony
Hewish
Sir Nevill Mott
Sir Godfrey 1979
Hounsfield
Dr Frederick 1980
Sanger
Dr Aaron King 1982
Sir John Vane 1982
Dr Cesar 1984
Milstein
Sir James Black 1988
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physics
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physics
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
The role of neural transmitter
substances
Invention of holography
Discoveries concerning the
chemical structure of
antibodies
Work on superconductivity
(abnormally high conductivity
at low temperatures)
The organisation of individual
and social behaviour patterns
Chemistry (jointly) Work on organometallic
compounds
Physics
1977 Physics (jointly)
Dr Peter Mitchell 1978 Chemistry
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Chemistry (jointly)
Chemistry
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Physiology or
Medicine (jointly)
Development of new types of
radio telescopes
Theoretical investigations of
the electronic structure of
magnetic systems
Contributions to the
understanding of biological
energy transfer
Computer-assisted assembly of
X-ray information in three
dimensions
Determination of base
sequences in nucleic acids
Work on the structure of
viruses and genetic material
in cells
Clarification of the pathways of
prostaglandin metabolism in
the body
Production of monoclonal
antibodies
Discovery of therapeutic drugs,
especially for heart disease
and stomach ulcers
Government
and Scientific
Research
The main objectives of the Government’s expenditure on research and develop¬
ment are to advance scientific knowledge and develop technology in Britain as
well as to support its own activities. Generally the Government seeks to enhance
the contribution of both public and private research and development expendi¬
ture to improving the efficiency and competitiveness of the British economy. Its
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
413
The Ministry
of Defence
view is that government should finance the pursuit of basic scientific know¬
ledge, but that the commercial development of scientific principles should
mainly be the task of industry.
Science and technology policy is decided by collective ministerial considera¬
tion under the leadership of the Prime Minister. The Government is advised by
the Chief Scientific Adviser, Cabinet Office, and by the Advisory Council on
Science and Technology (ACOST), which absorbed the former Advisory Council
for Applied Research and Development (ACARD). The remit of ACOST covers
defence as well as civil research and both academic science and industrial
research and development. ACOST is composed of industrialists and scientists
covering all areas of science and technology and selected for their personal
eminence in their field, who are appointed by the Prime Minister. In addition,
there are two ex officio members, the chairmen of the Advisory Board for the
Research Councils (ABRC) and of the Universities Funding Council (UFC).
ACOST advises on national priorities in science and technology, on the applica¬
tion of the results of scientific research, on the co-ordination of government
policy for science and technology, and on Britain s participation in international
scientific projects.
The Centre for Exploitation of Science and Technology (CEST), based at
Manchester Science Park, was set up in 1988. By studying the evolution of
markets it aims to identify the science and technologies needed to improve
competitive performance in particular industries. CEST is supported by indus¬
try and by the Government. It works with ACOST, the Cabinet Office and the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) on science and technology priorities.
Responsibility for basic civil science rests with the Secretary of State for
Education and Science, who is advised by the ABRC; that for technology' rests
mainly with the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. Other departments
with a substantial involvement in science and technology have a departmental
advisory body; these bodies work closely with ACOST. A committee of Depart¬
mental Chief Scientists, under the chairmanship of the Chief Scientific Adviser,
is responsible for co-ordination among departments. A Science and Technology
Assessment Office, responsible to the Chief Scientific Adviser, evaluates the
impact of government-funded research on the efficiency and competitiveness of
the economy.
The expenditure of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) on research and development
in 1987-88 was some £2,200 million. The Government is committed to
achieving a gradual reduction in real terms in future years. About £400 million
of this was medium- and long-term applied research relevant to known military
needs, much of it carried out in the MoD’s Defence Research Establishments.
Some £150 million of this research was carried out under contract in industry
and the academic sector.
An increasing emphasis is placed on research funded jointly with industry,
and initiatives have also been taken to encourage ‘spin-off from defence
technology to the civil market. For example, Defence Technology Enterprises Ltd
was set up in 1985 by private sponsors with government co-operation to identify
and promote civil applications of defence research.
Examples of technological innovations at research establishments include the
pioneering work of the Royal Signals and Radar Establishment on liquid crystal
displays, now widely used in the civil sector; its current development of a new,
simpler type of‘supercomputer’; and the development of infra-red detectors now
widely used by fire services. The Government announced in March 1989 that the
four principal non-nuclear Research Establishments were to be set up as a
separate organisation, with the intention that this should become an executive
agency by spring 1991.
414
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Department
of Trade and
Industry
General
Industrial
Innovation
Aeronautics
Research
Es tablishmen ts
The major part of MoD R & D expenditure (some £1,760 million in 1987-88)
is on the development of individual items of equipment. Most of this takes place
in industry, and represents the bulk of government expenditure on R & D in
industry.
Although most industrial research and development is financed by industry
itself, the Department of Trade and Industry provides support where there is a
sound case. Following a review in 1988, it was decided that, in general,
near-market R & D should not be supported. Instead, there should be greater
emphasis on collaborative programmes of pre-competitive research between
companies and on encouraging collaboration between companies and higher
education institutions. Technology transfer should also be given greater
emphasis. The DTI spent £324 million on R & D in 1987-88 on general
industrial innovation, aeronautics, space (see p 424) and its own research
establishments; and £93 million on technology transfer and related activities.
There are four main schemes of collaborative R & D: LINK, Eureka (see p 423),
Advanced Technology Programmes and general industrial collaborative projects.
They complement the European Community R & D programmes (see p 423).
The LINK scheme aims at encouraging firms to work jointly with higher
education institutions on pre-competitive research relevant to industrial needs.
By August 1989, 18 LINK programmes had been approved, involving total
government funding of some £130 million, and mainly falling under the general
headings of biotechnology, advanced materials, advanced manufacturing and
electronics.
Advanced Technology Programmes encourage pre-competitive research in
new technologies. Eight programmes had been approved by early 1989, in
high-temperature superconductivity, marine exploitation and several aspects of
electronics and information technology.
General industrial collaborative projects are those projects supported by the
DTI which do not fall under the other collaborative schemes. They include
industry-led projects undertaken by research associations, non-nuclear labor¬
atories of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (see p 416) and other
government research establishments. Particular emphasis is given to encourag¬
ing the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in all these
programmes.
Following the 1988 policy review, new single-company projects are not nor¬
mally supported. However, the Small Firms Merit Award for Research and
Technology (SMART), a competitive scheme designed to support innovation by
small companies, is an exception. In the 1988 competition 140 awards were
made.
In aeronautics the DTI funds programmes on research and on the demonstra¬
tion of technology prior to its commitment to specific products. Nearly half of the
work supported is in industry and in universities, and half in Ministry of
Defence establishments, where DTI funding allows the maximum civil benefit to
be derived. A significant proportion of DTI support is now being spent on the
European Wind Tunnel. Launch Aid is a form of assistance provided under the
Civil Aviation Act 1982 for specific development projects in the aerospace
industry.
The DTI has four research establishments, which accounted for £30 million of
its R&D expenditure in 1987-88. Most of their work serves to underpin
regulatory, statutory and policy work. In addition it contributes directly to
programmes under the various collaborative schemes. The laboratories are also
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
415
Technology
Transfer
The
Department of
Education and
Science
involved in a variety of international activities. They provide technological
services to industry which are not available commercially, run a number of
industrial ‘clubs’ and also undertake a limited amount of research sponsored by
industry.
The Laboratory of the Government Chemist carries out research in support of
scientific departmental policies and the statutory role of the Government
Chemist. The National Engineering Laboratory carries out R & D in a wide
range of engineering and related disciplines and maintains the British stan¬
dards of flow measurement, of especial importance in the oil and gas industries.
The National Physical Laboratory provides the national measurement system,
furnishes data for the engineering properties of materials and carries out R & D
in the field of information technology. The Warren Spring Laboratory is devoted
to environmental research and process technology. The laboratories support
industrial innovation through sponsored research and industrial ‘club’ projects.
The Warren Spring Laboratory is now an executive agency within the public
sector. The Government plans agency status for the other three, and, in
addition, in the long term to privatise the National Engineering Laboratory,
where roughly three-quarters of the work is for the benefit of industry.
The DTI has introduced several programmes specifically to encourage tech¬
nology transfer. They tend to be more concerned with promoting the use of
best-practice techniques and modern technology than with exploiting the most
recent research. Examples are the ‘Open Systems' information technology
standards programme and the ‘Materials Matter’ programme, concerned with
modern materials and associated manufacturing methods. Each programme
comprises an integrated package of activities which may include seminars,
conferences and demonstration activities, as well as the production of case study
material and other practical literature.
There are also general technology transfer programmes not related to specific
technology areas. For example, the foundation of Regional Technology Centres
across the country has been supported, in association with the Department of
Education and Science and the Training Agency, to provide a technology
transfer and training focus for small and medium-sized enterprises and to help
promote the expertise of higher education institutions.
The DTI maintains close contact with the British Technology Group, a
self-financing public organisation which negotiates patent protection and
commercial licensing for scientific and technological inventions, especially
those emanating from universities and other public-sector research organisa¬
tions.
The Department of Education and Science discharges its responsibilities for
basic and applied civil science mainly through the five research councils (see
p 417), to which it allocates funds from its science budget. This is planned to be
£826 million in 1989—90. The councils, along with their 1987—88 expenditure
figures, are: the Science and Engineering Research Council (£335 million), the
Medical Research Council (£139 million), the Natural Environment Research
Council (£71 million), the Agricultural and Food Research Council (£49 million)
and the Economic and Social Research Council (£22 million). Science budget
grants are also made to the Royal Society and the Fellowship of Engineering for
science policy studies commissioned by the Advisory Board for the Research
Councils and to the Centre for Exploitation of Science and Technology (see
p 413). The allocations provide support for research in the form of grants and
contracts to universities, polytechnics, research units and other establishments
of the research councils, postgraduate support and subscriptions to interna¬
tional scientific organisations. In addition the Department funds the Computer
416
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Advisory
Board for the
Research
Councils
Other
Government
Departments
Board for Universities and Research Councils, which helps to provide centrally
managed computer services for the support of research in universities.
The Department is also responsible for some aspects of international scientific
relations and helps to co-ordinate government policy regarding scientific and
technical information. Together with the Scottish Education Department, it
funds various schemes for training both students and those working in industry
in the latest technology. For example, under the Professional, Industrial and
Commercial Updating Programme (PICKUP), a network of nine New Technology
Centres was established in 1987-88; in these, scientists from higher education
institutions will train employees of private companies in recent developments in
their fields. The Department is also encouraging, through a variety of initiatives,
the teaching in schools of technical and scientific subjects, such as craft, design
and technology, and computing.
The Department is also the main source of funding for the universities, whose
individual allocations are determined by the Universities Funding Council (see
p 420). At present each university decides on the division of its resources
between teaching and research. The overall proportion committed to research is
generally believed to be about 40 per cent. Research funding will be identified
separately by the UFC from the academic year 1990—91.
The Advisory Board for the Research Councils advises the Secretary of State on
civil science, particularly with regard to the research council system, on the
support of postgraduate students, on the proper balance between national and
international scientific activities, and on the allocation of the science budget
between research councils and other bodies. It also promotes close liaison
between the councils and industrial users of their research. Its members are
drawn from the research councils, government departments, industry and the
academic world.
Interdisciplinary Research Centres (IRCs) have been proposed by the Board
and agreed by the Government as a new mode of support for scientific research,
providing for the management within universities of coherent programmes
pursuing important scientific opportunities arising in interdisciplinary areas.
Seventeen IRCs have been, or are in the course of being, set up.
The Department of Energy funds research in support of offshore oil and gas
technology, energy efficiency and the development and exploitation of British
renewable energy sources. The major part of its R & D is on nuclear energy
(£141 million in 1987—88), most of which is carried out by the United Kingdom
Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA), a public corporation that performs a large
amount of contract research, under the name AEA Technology, in both nuclear
and non-nuclear fields, and manages a variety of research ‘clubs’.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food co-ordinates its research
programme with the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, the
Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland and the Agricultural and Food
Research Council (AFRC—see p 419). As part of the Government’s reordering of
its research priorities support is being withdrawn from R & D which is close to
commercial exploitation. Emphasis will move increasingly towards the support
of statutory responsibilities and policy or public interest objectives such as
alternative enterprises and land use, animal welfare, enhancement and con¬
servation of the environment, micro-organisms in food, the safety assessment of
chemicals in food and objective methods of determining food quality. Expendi¬
ture in 1987—88 was £114 million, about half of which was in the Ministry’s own
establishments. Most of the rest was in contracts to the AFRC.
The Department of Health manages health-related R & D programmes directly
and in addition funds non-departmental bodies which carry out research in
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
417
THE RESEARCH
COUNCILS
Science and
Engineering
Research
Council
Nuclear
Physics
support of their statutory duties. The National Biological Standards Board,
through the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, is responsi¬
ble for preparing, holding and distributing standard preparations, the control
testing of biological substances and associated research and development.
The National Computing Centre promotes best practice in software engineer¬
ing in industry and the Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency,
part of HM Treasury, encourages the establishment of standards of computer
compatibility and the best use of information technology in the public sector.
Each of the four research councils engaged in scientific research is an auton¬
omous body established under Royal Charter, with membership drawn from the
universities, professions, industry and the Government. They conduct research
through their own establishments and by supporting selected research, study
and training in universities and other higher education establishments. In
addition to funding from the Department of Education and Science (see p 415),
they also receive income for research commissioned by departments under the
customer—contractor principle and from the private sector. Income from com¬
missioned research is particularly important for the Agricultural and Food
Research Council and the Natural Environment Research Council.
The rights and responsibility for the commercial exploitation of research
carried out with the support of research council grants rest with the institution
receiving the grant, subject to the existence of procedures agreed with the
sponsoring research council. Universities and research institutes may make use
of the expertise of the British Technology Group (see p 415) to patent and license
their inventions, but are not obliged to do so.
The Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) is responsible for the
support of research and postgraduate training in pure and applied science
(including engineering) outside the areas of agriculture, medicine and the
environment. Expenditure is divided among contributions to international
organisations (£87 million in 1987-88, see p 423), research grants, chiefly to
higher education institutions (£121 million), and the Council’s own establish¬
ments (£95 million). The SERC also funds postgraduate training (£54 million).
The Council has initiated plans for Interdisciplinary Research Centres in the
fields of high-temperature superconductivity, engineering design, surface
science, molecular sciences, semiconductor materials, high performance
materials, polymer science and technology, process simulation integration and
control, and optical and laser-related science and technology. It encourages
collaboration between higher education and industry, partly by sponsoring
co-ordinated research programmes in areas of special industrial concern.
The SERC maintains four research establishments: the Rutherford Appleton
Laboratory at Chilton (Oxfordshire), the Daresbury Laboratory at Warrington
(Cheshire), the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux (East Sussex),
which is moving to Cambridge, and the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. They are
centres of specialised research and provide experimental facilities beyond the
resources of individual academic institutions, and in addition undertake
contract research.
SERC research support is organised under four boards, covering astronomy
and planetary science (£58 million in 1987—88); nuclear physics (£88 million);
science (£92 million); and engineering (£100 million). In recent years the
SERC’s policy has been to transfer funds from the first two of these, represent¬
ing largely ‘big’ science and basic research, to the second two, representing
largely strategic research on a smaller scale.
The Nuclear Physics Board supports particle physics and nuclear structure
physics. The Rutherford Appleton Laboratory co-ordinates Britain’s
418
Astronomy
and
Planetary
Science
Science
Engineering
Medical
Research
Council
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
experimental particle physics research programme and links university
researchers with overseas centres such as CERN (see p 423). The nuclear
structure physics programme is concentrated largely at Daresbuiy, where the
20-million volt tandem accelerator is being made increasingly powerful.
The Astronomy and Planetary Science Board supports space science, including
contributions to international programmes (see p 424), ground-based astro¬
nomy and geophysics. In optical astronomy the SERC is a principal partner in
the international observatory on the island of La Palma in the Canary Islands.
This contains four telescopes, including the 4-2 m William Herschel. Opened in
1987, it is the third largest single-mirror optical telescope in the world. On
Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the SERC has a 3-8 m infra-red telescope, the largest
telescope in the world designed specifically for infra-red observations, and the
15 m James Clerk Maxwell radio telescope (built in collaboration with the
Netherlands and Canada).
The Science Board supports academic research in chemistry, mainstream
physics, mathematics, the biological sciences and science-based archaeology. Its
top priority is the provision of research grants to universities and polytechnics.
About 50 per cent of these are awarded as part of co-ordinated programmes of
interdisciplinary strategic research falling within the areas of materials; molecu¬
lar sciences; and mathematics, computational and cognitive science. They may
be part of a LINK programme (see p 414) or associated with an Interdisciplinary
Research Centre (see p 416). The Daresbury Laboratory operates a synchrotron
radiation facility which provides high-intensity electromagnetic radiation used
in a wide range of experiments in protein crystallography, surface physics,
chemical structure and materials science. Other special facilities include, at the
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, the spallation neutron source (called ‘ISIS’),
the world’s leading pulsed neutron facility; and a high-power laser facility which
is used to study plasmas.
The Engineering Board, whose funding has increased greatly in recent years,
supports strategic research underpinned by work in the core sciences. It tries to
identify areas of promising national strategic importance and initiates co¬
ordinated programmes of research which will generate knowledge of specific
benefit to British industry and sustain the introduction of advanced technology.
Some of the areas that have been identified for priority action are training,
information technology in engineering, computer software research, materials
research, biotechnology (where a special directorate funded jointly with the
Science Board has been in operation) and supercomputing in engineering. The
Teaching Company scheme, jointly sponsored by the SERC, the Economic and
Social Research Council, the DTI and the Northern Ireland Department of
Economic Development, supports some 350 collaborative ventures between
academic engineering departments and industrial companies to improve their
manufacturing and management methods and performance.
The Medical Research Council (MRC) is the main government agency for the
support of biomedical research, both at its own centres and units, which
together account for about three-quarters of its budget, and by means of grants
to research workers at higher education institutions and hospitals. Its major
research establishments are the National Institute for Medical Research at Mill
Hill, London; the Clinical Research Centre at Northwick Park Hospital, London;
and the Laboratory of Molecular Biology at Cambridge. The Council also has
more than 50 other research units, located in universities and medical schools
throughout Britain. Two Interdisciplinary Research Centres are being set up, in
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
419
toxicology and molecular medicine, and two more are planned, in cell biology
and protein engineering.
The MRC’s scientists and doctors have pioneered developments in molecular
biology, therapeutic clinical trials, applied psychology, and methods of imaging
the body such as magnetic resonance and ultrasound. The Council’s larger
research programmes include those into neurological (including Alzheimer’s)
and psychiatric disease, heart and respiratory ailments, infectious diseases,
tropical medicine, and antenatal screening for cystic fibrosis and muscular
dystrophy. Major new projects are specially funded work on all aspects of AIDS,
research on vaccines for meningitis and whooping cough, and the mapping of
the human genome, the complete sequence of genes in a human cell. Recent
achievements include the determination, at the Virology Unit in Glasgow and
the Laboratory of Molecular Biology, of the DNA sequences of three of the
disease-causing herpes viruses.
The Council’s policy is to foster collaboration between its establishments and
industry in order to promote the transfer of industrially relevant skills and
technologies, the exploitation of Council discoveries, and the development of
new products in the health care field. A Centre for Collaborative Research at Mill
Hill provides a consultancy service for the analysis of problems, acts as an
information source for channelling advice to industrial, academic and clinical
partners, and also undertakes collaborative projects with industry and the
universities.
Natural
Environment
Research
Council
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) aims to advance scientific
understanding of the relationship between human populations and their
surroundings through research in the physical and biological sciences at its own
institutes, at grant-aided institutions and in universities and polytechnics. The
NERC’s three directorates cover terrestrial and freshwater, earth, and marine
sciences. They are responsible for the Council’s 11 institutes, three grant-aided
associations and four units in universities. The institutes include the British
Antarctic Survey, the British Geological Survey and the Institute of Oceano¬
graphic Sciences’ Deacon Laboratory in Surrey. The associations include the
Dunstaffnage Marine Laboratory in Argyllshire, Scotland. The NERC is taking
the lead in establishing an Interdisciplinary Research Centre in population
biology at Imperial College, London.
Examples of work include GLORIA, a unique side-scan sonar, developed by
geophysicists and now being used to map the ocean floor off the United States;
the North Sea Project to develop a prognostic water quality model; and a study to
discover how carbon dioxide is absorbed by the oceans and buried in the
sea-floor sediments, helping to balance the ‘greenhouse effect’. British Antarctic
Survey scientists were the first to identify the hole in the ozone layer above
Antarctica.
Research commissioned by public authorities and industry in Britain and
overseas accounts for nearly one-third of the NERC’s income. Applied projects in
progress overseas include those on biological pest control, regeneration of
tropical hardwoods and drip irrigation techniques for tropical crops. The NERC
also offers specialist data services providing information on various subjects,
including biology and ecology, from satellite and aircraft surveys and its
research vessels, as well as through its various centres and units in Britain.
Agricultural
and Food
Research
Council
The Agricultural and Food Research Council (AFRC) supports research under¬
pinning agriculture, food and the non-medical biologically based industries,
having regard to social needs and environmental consequences. Work is carried
out at the eight AFRC institutes (Animal Health, Animal Physiology and
Genetics, Arable Crops, Engineering, Food, Grassland and Animal Production,
420
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
UNIVERSITY
RESEARCH
Horticulture, Plant Science) and in universities and polytechnics, and is
co-ordinated with that of the Scottish Agricultural Research Institutes, funded
by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland. The Council plans
to double its support for higher education institutions over the next five years to
30 per cent of its core science budget funding and is taking the lead in
establishing an Interdisciplinary Research Centre in transgenic animal biology
at Edinburgh University.
The AFRC at present draws approximately 55 per cent of its funding from the
science budget, about a third from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food (MAFF) for commissioned research and an increasing proportion from
industry. In the light of a decline in commissioned research from the MAFF (see
p 416), the Council aims at raising 25 per cent of its institute funding from
commercial and other sources by 1993-94.
Recent achievements include: identification of the molecular genetics of the
production in wheat grains of the proteins which determine bread-making
qualities; progress in understanding the genetic and biochemical control of
ripening in fruits; exploitation of the bacterium Streptomyces coelicolar for the
industrial production of new antibiotics; a grain-stripping harvester which
increases efficiency by 60-90 per cent compared with cutter bar machines;
demonstration of the transmissibility of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and
its link with scrapie in sheep; identification of single gene control of infectious
bronchitis virus and coccidia in chickens; development of new ways of genetical¬
ly engineering lactic acid bacteria, including a prototype food grade marker
system based on lactose genes; design of rapid methods of detecting food
poisoning organisms.
The Universities Funding Council provides support for scientific research in
universities in the form of salaries, equipment and general running costs.
Scientific research in the universities and other institutions of higher educa¬
tion is also supported through the research councils, in two ways. First, between
a quarter and a third of postgraduate students in science and technology receive
maintenance awards from the research councils. Secondly, grants and contracts
are given to the universities and other institutions by the research councils for
specified projects, particularly in new or developing areas of research.
The other main channels of support for scientific research in the universities
are various government departments, the Royal Society, industry and the
independent foundations. Universities are currently being encouraged to direct
their resources into those areas where they have existing research strength or
where they see a prospect of establishing strong groups in new and promising
spheres of science and technology.
Increasingly close relationships are being fostered between the universities,
industry and the Government in numerous joint projects. For example, in June
1987 a new information technology institute, sponsored jointly by industry and
the Cranfield Institute of Technology, was opened to link academic and commer¬
cial spheres. British universities’ earnings from industry and other outside
agencies were £344 million in 1987-88, and are still rising rapidly. The money
comes from research contracts and royalties on the exploitation of university
innovations. Many universities now operate industrial liaison service units,
which are linked together by university directors of industrial liaison.
Technological breakthroughs in the university sector in the 1980s include
optoelectronic devices for future super-fast optical computers at Heriot-Watt
University, Edinburgh, and techniques for the active cancellation of sound and
other vibrations pioneered at the universities of Cambridge and Essex. Impor¬
tant research on optical fibres is being carried out at Southampton, Exeter and
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
421
Science
Parks
OTHER
RESEARCH
ORGANISATIONS
Charitable
Foundations
Industrial
Research
Organisations
Professional
Institutions
Essex universities, on liquid crystal displays at Hull and Manchester, and on
pharmaceutical products and biotechnology at Strathclyde.
Science parks provide an environment for both existing and new businesses
using high technology in which they have easy access to the research expertise of
higher education institutions. By January 1989 there were 38 such parks in
operation at or near universities and similar organisations, with a further 20
under construction or planned. One of the first to be established (in 1972), and
still the largest, is the Cambridge Science Park, where some 70 companies
occupy most of a 53-hectare (130-acre) site, with room for further companies.
Britain’s science parks now provide accommodation for nearly 850 com¬
panies, employing over 11,000 people. They range from subsidiaries of large
corporations, such as the British Oxygen Company, Olivetti, British Petroleum
and 3M, to a wide variety of new and recently formed businesses. A survey
conducted for the United Kingdom Science Park Association showed that
companies on parks tended to exhibit high growth and low failure rates. The
main areas in which science park companies are involved are computing,
electronics, instrumentation, robotics, electrical engineering, chemicals and
biotechnology, with the emphasis on research, design, development, consultan¬
cy, testing and training activities rather than large-scale manufacturing.
Charitable foundations sponsoring research in Britain include the Cancer
Research Campaign, the Chester Beatty Institute for Cancer Research, the Ciba
Foundation, the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the Institute for Cancer
Research, the Leverhulme Foundation, the Nuffield Foundation, the Wellcome
Trust and the Wolfson Foundation. In 1988 the largest spenders on medical
research were the Wellcome Trust at £33 million and the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund at £38 million.
The Association of Independent Research and Technology Organisations links
45 such institutions employing about 9,300 people with a turnover of about
£280 million in 1988. These are limited companies undertaking research
contracts and providing consultancy and training services to 20,000 companies
in particular branches of industry. In addition to payment for this work, many
are supported by membership fees from firms in their sectors and government
grants.
The British Technology Group (see p 415) also finances new technology
projects within the private sector, as do a number of venture capital companies.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many
of which promote their own disciplines or are interested in the education and
professional well-being of their members. The Council of Science and Tech¬
nology Institutes has 15 member institutes representing, among others, en¬
gineers, biologists, chemists, mathematicians, metallurgists, physicists and
geologists.
The Engineering Council, established in 1981, actively promotes the study of
all types of engineering in schools and other organisations, in co-operation with
its 240 industrial affiliates, including large private companies and government
departments. Together with 47 professional engineering institutions, the Coun¬
cil accredits courses in higher education institutions. It also maintains a
register of about 300,000 engineers with varying levels of qualifications. The
Engineering Council advises the Government on a range of academic, industrial
and professional issues.
The national academy of engineering in Britain is the Fellowship of Engineer¬
ing, set up in 1976, which promotes the discipline and advises the Government
on related policy issues. Its membership consists of distinguished engineers.
422
The Learned
Societies
Royal Society
Other Societies
Zoological
Gardens
Botanical
Gardens
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
More than 300 learned societies in Britain play an important part in the
promotion of science and technology through meetings, publications and
sponsorship.
The most prestigious of the learned societies is the Royal Society, or, more fully,
the Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660,
which is equivalent to national academies of science in other countries. It is the
oldest such academy in the world to have enjoyed continuous existence. The
Society has over 1,000 Fellows, many of whom serve on the governmental
advisory councils and committees concerned with research. The Society
administers a grant-in-aid from the Department of Education and Science
(£12 million in 1989-90) which represents some 75 per cent of its annual
expenditure. The remainder is derived from private funds.
The Royal Society recognises scientific and technological achievements
through the award of fellowships, medals and endowed lectureships. It adminis¬
ters over 180 research appointments, mostly at British universities and research
institutes, at all levels from post-doctoral to professorial. A new scheme, begun
in 1983, will, by 1990, be providing 200 posts in universities for particularly able
young scientists for whom positions are not currently available. The Society
funds specific research projects and encourages the dissemination of scientific
knowledge through a programme of discussion meetings and through its
publications. In 1986 it established, jointly with the Fellowship of Engineering
(see p 421), a unit to undertake statistical analyses of issues in science policy.
The Society provides advice on such issues to government and others, and is
particularly active in promoting the public understanding of science through
the Committee on the Public Understanding of Science, run jointly with the
British Association and the Royal Institution (see below).
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. As the national
academy of science, it represents Britain in a number of international non¬
governmental organisations and is involved in a variety of international scien¬
tific programmes. It has bilateral arrangements with academies and research
councils throughout the world, under which a large number of exchange visits
by scientists and collaborative research projects are supported.
Three other major institutions publicise scientific developments through lec¬
tures and publications for specialists and for schoolchildren. Of these, the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, founded in 1831, is mainly
concerned with science, while the Royal Society of Arts, dating from 1754, deals
with the arts and commerce as well as science. The Royal Institution, founded in
1799, also performs these functions and in addition runs its own research
laboratories.
The Zoological Society of London, an independent scientific body, runs the
world-famous London Zoo, which occupies some 15 hectares (36 acres) of
Regent s Park, London. The Society also runs Whipsnade Wild Animal Park near
Dunstable (Bedfordshire), and is responsible for the Institute of Zoology, which
carries out research in conservation and comparative medicine. It also organises
scientific meetings and symposia, publishes scientific journals and maintains
one of the largest zoological libraries in the world. Other well-known zoos include
those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester, Dudley, Chessington and Marwell (near
Winchester).
The Royal Botanic Gardens, founded in 1759, cover 121 hectares (300 acres) at
Kew (west London) and a 187-hectare (462-acre) estate at Wakehurst Place,
Ardingly (West Sussex). They contain the largest collections of living and dried
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
423
plants in the world. Research is conducted into all aspects of plant life, including
physiology, biochemistry, genetics, economic botany and the conservation of
rare species.
The Royal Botanic Garden at Edinburgh, founded in 1670, is a centre for
research into taxonomy, for the conservation and study of living plants and for
horticultural education.
Scientific
Museums
INTER¬
NATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
European
Community
Non-EC
Activities
The Natural History Museum is one of the world’s principal centres for the
general study of natural history, and has a large collection of fossils and
minerals. The Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and applied
science in all countries, but chiefly in Britain. The geology of Britain is probably
known in more exact detail than that of any other country in the world, and
there is an outstanding collection of exhibits in the Geological Museum. These
three museums are in South Kensington, London. Other important collections
include the Museum of Science and Industry in Birmingham, the Museum of the
History of Science at Oxford, and the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh.
British researchers, companies and higher education institutions take part in
European Community (EC) programmes for research and development. The
Community’s aim in R & D is to strengthen the scientific and technological
basis of European industry and to encourage it to become more competitive at
an international level. The current Framework Programme (1987—91), which
provides the overall research strategy, has Community funding of some £3,600
million and covers eight areas: health and environment, information technology
and telecommunications, industry, biological resources, energy, development,
marine resources, and European science and technology co-operation. Overall,
British researchers have won more of the contract funding than Britain’s
proportional contribution to the R & D budget.
Major specific programmes related to industrial competitiveness are the
European Strategic Programme for Research and Development in Information
Technology (ESPRIT), with a total budget of about £1,100 million (British
organisations are involved in 123 out of the 159 projects): Basic Research in
Industrial Technologies for Europe/European Research in Advanced Materials
(BRITE/EURAM), with a budget of some £300 million; and Research and
Development in Advanced Communications Technologies in Europe (RACE),
with a budget of some £380 million (there is British participation in 69 of the 80
contracts announced so far).
Britain participates in the Joint European Torus nuclear fusion project, JET,
which is based at Culham, Oxfordshire, and which is part of the European
Community’s collaborative research effort.
British companies are actively involved in over 70 projects in Eureka, the
European framework for promoting collaboration in the commercial exploita¬
tion of advanced technology. (The members of Eureka are the 12 countries of the
European Community, the six countries of the European Free Trade Associa¬
tion, Turkey, and the European Commission.)
Britain is a member of the European Organisation for Nuclear Research
(CERN) in Geneva. Britain’s contributions to CERN, to the high-flux neutron
source at the Institut Laue-Langevin and to the European Synchrotron Radia¬
tion Facility, both at Grenoble, are paid through the SERC. The SERC is also a
partner in the European Incoherent Scatter radar facilities in Northern Scandi¬
navia, which are used for atmospheric research. Through the NERC Britain is a
member of the Ocean Drilling Program led by the United States, and through the
MRC of the European Molecular Biology Organisation.
Britain is also a member of the science and technology committees of
424
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Space
Activities
international organisations such as the Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (OECD) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(NATO), and various specialised agencies of the United Nations.
Britain has concluded a number of inter-governmental and inter-agency
agreements with other countries for co-operation in science and technology.
Among non-governmental organisations, the five research councils, the Royal
Society and the British Academy were founder members of the European
Science Foundation in 1974. The research councils also maintain a joint office
in Brussels to further European co-operation in research.
Staff in British Embassies and High Commissions promote contacts in
science and technology between Britain and the countries in which they are
accredited. The British Council promotes better understanding and knowledge
of Britain and its scientific and technological achievements by encouraging
exchanges of specialists; by the provision of specialised information; by foster¬
ing co-operation in research, training and education; and—in the newly indus¬
trialising countries and developing countries—by identifying and managing
developmental projects in the technological, scientific and educational sectors.
Many British companies are involved in commercial co-operative research
projects with overseas manufacturers.
Britain’s involvement in civil space research is co-ordinated by the British
National Space Centre. The Government spent about £130 million on all space
activities in 1987—88, chiefly through the DTI and the SERC. Of this 70 per cent
went towards the work of the European Space Agency (ESA). The remainder
supported a programme of research and development in government establish¬
ments, universities and companies. British industry has led the consortia which
have developed all the communications satellites for the ESA and the main user
organisations. The largest ever communications satellite, Olympus, was
launched in 1989. Britain is also developing the main microwave instrument for
an earth observation satellite, ERS-1, to be launched in 1990. A new £20 million
Earth Observation Data Centre is being established at Farnborough
(Hampshire) to process and sell ERS data to users.
Britain is contributing £250 million to the development and use of Columbus,
Europe’s contribution to the space station project (led by the United States) for
the 1990s, including the leading role in constructing the Columbus polar-
orbiting platform, which will be used mainly for earth observation.
British groups have been selected to participate in almost all of the ESA’s
science missions, including the 1986 launch of the British-built Giotto
spacecraft, which investigated Halley’s Comet, and the Infrared Space Observa¬
tory. Britain will contribute £76 million to the Cluster and SOHO missions to be
launched in 1995 to study the Sun, the Earth’s magnetosphere and the solar
wind and also expects to have a substantial involvement in the ESA’s X-ray
spectroscopy mission due for launch in 1998.
Participation in ESA missions is complemented by bilateral arrangements for
space research with other countries, notably the United States through its
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Soviet Union and
China. British groups have participated in several NASA space science missions,
and are currently developing a payload for NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research
Satellite. Other collaborations include the development of the wide field camera
for the Federal Republic of Germany’s X-ray satellite ROSAT, to be launched by
the United States, and the X-ray sensor for the Japanese-built Ginga satellite.
British scientists also hope to be involved in the Soviet Union’s Spectrum-X-
Gamma X-ray mission due for launch in 1993 and are taking part in studies
relating to the Soviet mission to Mars and one of its satellites, Phobos.
Promotion of the Arts
Artistic and cultural activity in Britain ranges from the highest standards of
professional performance to the enthusiastic support and participation of
amateurs. London is one of the leading world centres for drama, music, opera
and dance, and festivals held in towns and cities throughout the country attract
much interest. Glasgow, which has developed into an important artistic centre,
has been chosen as European City of Culture for 1990. Many British
playwrights, composers, film-makers, sculptors, painters, writers, actors,
singers, choreographers and dancers enjoy international reputations. Television
and radio play an important role in bringing a wide range of artistic events to a
large audience. At an amateur level, activities which make use of local talent and
resources take many forms: choral, orchestral, operatic, dramatic and other
societies for the arts abound, and increasing numbers of people take an interest
in such crafts as spinning, lace-making and wood-carving. Arts activities
introduced and developed by the ethnic minorities are also flourishing.
The general aim of the Government’s policies for the arts is to encourage public
access to, and enjoyment and appreciation of, artistic activity and the cultural
heritage. This is achieved by assisting the provision and development of the
performing and visual arts; encouraging arts and heritage bodies to increase
their income through better marketing and by attracting contributions from the
private sector; maintaining and enhancing the national museums and galleries;
helping to preserve objects of importance to the national heritage; and
sustaining and developing national collections of literary material, archive and
information stores. Because it believes in the importance of the arts to national
life, the Government is maintaining its existing levels of support for arts
activities. At the same time, it considers that the private sector ought to play a
larger role in arts funding and is encouraging the arts to secure private funding
from all available sources, including business sponsorship. National museums
and galleries are encouraged and given an incentive to increase their resources,
for example, through trading activities. An important concept in its funding
policy is the ‘arm’s length’ principle, by which government funds are distributed
to arts organisations indirectly, through bodies such as the Arts Councils and
the British Film Institute; this helps safeguard against political interference in
arts activities.
Promotion and patronage of the arts are the concern of both official and
unofficial bodies. The Government and local authorities play an active part, and
a substantial and increasing amount of help also comes from private sources,
including trusts and commercial concerns.
The Minister for the Arts, a Minister of State at the Privy Council Office, is
responsible for general arts policy and heads the Office of Arts and Libraries,
which administers government expenditure on national museums and art
galleries in England, the Arts Council, the British Library and other national
arts and heritage bodies. Responsibility for the upkeep of ancient monuments
and historic buildings is exercised by the Department of the Environment; the
Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England (known as English
Heritage) manages 400 ancient monuments and buildings on behalf of the
Secretary of State for the Environment. The regulation of the film industry and
of broadcasting is conducted by the Department of Trade and Industry and the
Home Office, respectively. The Secretaries of State for Wales and Scotland are
426
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Finance
responsible for the national museums, galleries and libraries in their countries,
and for other cultural matters. In Northern Ireland the Department of Education
has responsibility for these affairs.
Local authorities support a wide variety of artistic and cultural activities. They
maintain more than 1,000 local museums and art galleries and some 4,000
public libraries. Additionally, they provide grant aid for professional and
voluntary organisations, including orchestras and theatre, opera and dance
companies; and undertake direct promotions through local arts councils. Local
authorities also contribute to the cost of new or converted buildings for the arts.
Arts education in schools, colleges, polytechnics, evening institutes and
community centres is the responsibility of central government education
departments, in partnership with local education authorities and voluntary
bodies.
Since April 1988 the Government has set the arts budget for a three-year period
in order to give recipient arts bodies a base on which to plan future activities and
to encourage greater self-reliance and diversification in their sources of funding.
It considers that this strategy is already proving successful in encouraging arts
bodies to plan their own fund-raising and income-generation, and to match
their plans and priorities to a realistic view of the total resources likely to be
available over the three-year period. The three-year settlement applies to the
larger part of the central government arts programme. Planned central
government expenditure through the Office of Arts and Libraries amounts to
£976 million in 1989—90. About one-third of expenditure is devoted to 11
national galleries and museums in England, about a fifth on library and related
services and a third channelled through the Arts Council to support the
performing and visual arts throughout Britain. Grants are also made to bodies
such as the British Film Institute, the Crafts Council, certain other museums,
and to the National Heritage Memorial Fund. The Fund provides assistance to
organisations wishing to acquire, for the public benefit, land, buildings, works
of art and other objects associated with the national heritage. Additional central
government expenditure on arts and libraries in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland amounts to £169 million.
Planned spending on the arts and libraries by local authorities in England and
Wales in 1989—90 is about £546 million. About 80 per cent of current
expenditure by the authorities in England is on the public library service, and
the remainder on local museums and art galleries.
Industrial and commercial concerns offer a vital and growing source of
sponsorship and patronage to a wide range of arts, including exhibitions,
concerts and opera seasons. The Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme was
launched by the Office of Arts and Libraries in co-operation with the Association
for Business Sponsorship of the Arts in Great Britain in 1984, with the aim of
raising the overall level of business sponsorship; it is designed to attract new
sponsors and encourage existing ones to increase spending on the arts. In its
first four years the scheme attracted over £21 million of new money into the arts.
An estimated 70 per cent of the awards have been made to arts organisations
outside London. In 1989-90 the scheme made available £3-2 million to match
new sponsorships (a similar scheme was set up in Northern Ireland in 1987).
The value of business sponsorship is currently some £30 million a year. Further
support is encouraged by tax concessions which allow companies and indi¬
viduals to obtain tax relief on donations to arts charities. Two new arts
marketing schemes were introduced in 1989 with funds of £150,000, aimed at
helping organisations find ways of increasing their audiences, in particular
those of young people, multi-cultural groups and the retired.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
427
Arts Councils
Regional Arts
Associations
Community
Arts
The independent Arts Council of Great Britain, established in 1946, is the main
channel for government aid to the performing and visual arts. Its principal
objects are to develop and improve the knowledge, understanding and practice
of the performing and visual arts, increase their accessibility to the public, and
advise and co-operate with government departments, local authorities and other
organisations. The Council gives financial help and advice to organisations
ranging from the major opera, dance and drama companies, orchestras and
festivals, to small touring theatres and experimental groups. It encourages
contemporary dance, mime, jazz, literature, photography and art films, and
helps professional creative writers, choreographers, composers, artists and
photographers through a variety of schemes. It also promotes art exhibitions
and tours by opera, dance and drama companies and contemporary music
groups, and makes available funds for some specialist training courses in the
arts. In 1988 the Council allocated £T5 million for increased touring; one new
initiative is the funding of a three-year touring programme by the four leading
London symphony orchestras.
Under a development programme for the next decade launched in 1984, the
Council is increasing its funding of the arts in the regions. In the first five years
support for new activities has been concentrated in five main areas—art, dance,
drama, music and education—focusing on 13 main centres of population
throughout England. Greater emphasis is being placed on obtaining funds
through partnership arrangements with local authorities and other agencies
and from commercial sources. Greater funding and responsibilities are being
given to the regional arts associations (see below).
In 1988 the Council launched a campaign to promote recognition of the
importance of the arts and cultural industries in city life; one example of this is
seen in Newcastle upon Tyne, where the new arts centre and restored Tyne
Theatre have had a marked effect on the neighbourhood, and attracted
customers and businesses into the area.
Organisations in Scotland and Wales receive their subsidies through the
Scottish and Welsh Arts Councils, which are committees of the Arts Council of
Great Britain with a large measure of autonomy. Northern Ireland has am
independent Arts Council with aims and functions similar to those of the Arts
Council of Great Britain.
Regional co-operation in development of the arts is promoted by 15 regional arts
associations in England and Wales, bringing together all those in a region, from
local authorities and private companies to local artists, with an interest in
improving the artistic life of their area. Their aim is to ensure that the arts are
more widely available and that artists receive support at regional as well as
national level. They offer financial assistance to artists and arts organisations,
and advise on, and in some cases promote, activities. The associations are
financed mainly by the Arts Council, with smaller sums from the British Film
Institute, the Crafts Council and local authorities, and these interests are
represented on their governing bodies. Business sponsorship is also an
increasingly important source of regional funds.
The community arts movement has grown rapidly over the last decade, the
primary concern of community artists being their impact on a community and
their relationship with it. Using many techniques and performing in a variety of
places, their aim is to make people more aware of their circumstances and to
help them develop their creative powers in order to enrich both their own lives
and that of the community.
428
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Arts of
Ethnic
Minorities
Arts Centres
Local Arts
Councils
British Council
Broadcasting
Organisations
Festivals
A wide range of arts activities is undertaken by ethnic minorities, embracing
both the traditional and new forms of artistic expression. In its strategy for
developing the arts over the next decade published in 1984, the Arts Council
identified black and Asian dance and drama as areas that would receive extra
support. The Commonwealth Institute arranges a varied programme of artistic
events and festivals, and the Minority Arts Advisory Service is a national
information and resource centre for the arts of the ethnic minority' communi¬
ties.
More than 300 arts centres in Britain provide opportunities for enjoyment of
and participation in a range of activities in both the performing and visual arts,
with educational projects becoming increasingly important. All are profession¬
ally managed and most are supported by volunteer groups. The centres are
assisted mainly by regional arts associations and local authorities, with some
help from the Arts Council and other organisations. Many theatres and art
galleries also provide a focal point for the community by making available
facilities for other arts.
Local arts councils in towns and communities throughout Britain, some of them
founded and supported by local authorities, seek to develop and co-ordinate arts
activities in their localities. Industrial and commercial interests also give
financial help.
The British Council promotes knowledge of British culture and literature
overseas and maintains libraries in many of the 85 or so countries in which it is
represented. The Council initiates or supports overseas tours by British theatre
companies, orchestras, choirs, and opera and dance companies, as well as by
individual actors, musicians and artists. It supports fine arts and other
exhibitions overseas and organises British participation in international
exhibitions and film festivals. The Council also maintains film libraries in many
of the countries in which it works, and encourages professional interchange
between Britain and other countries in all cultural fields.
Both BBC radio and television and the independent television companies
broadcast a wide variety of drama (including adaptations of novels and stage
plays), opera, ballet, and music, and general arts magazine programmes and
documentaries. These have won many international awards at festivals such as
the Prix Italia and Montreux International Television Festivals. Independent
television companies also make grants for arts promotion in their regions.
The BBC has orchestras employing many of Britain’s full-time professional
musicians, and each week it broadcasts nearly 100 hours of classical and other
music (both live and recorded) on its Radio 3 channel. Radios 1 and 2 broad¬
cast popular and light music. The BBC regularly commissions new music, par¬
ticularly by British composers, and sponsors concerts, competitions and
festivals. Each summer it presents and broadcasts the BBC Promenade
Concerts at the Royal Albert Hall.
Considerable interest and enthusiasm is shown for the 400 or so professional
arts festivals taking place in Britain each year. The Edinburgh International
Festival, featuring a wide range of arts, is the largest of its kind in the world.
Other annual festivals held in the Scottish capital include International Folk and
Jazz Festivals and the Film and Television Festival, while the Mayfest, the
second largest festival in Britain, takes place in Glasgow. Some well-known
festivals concentrating on music are the Three Choirs Festival, which has taken
place annually for 260 years in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford; the
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
429
DRAMA
Professional
Theatre
Theatre for
Young People
Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to contemporary British music; and the
Aldeburgh and Bath festivals. Among others catering for a number of art forms
are the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales, the Llangollen International Musical
Eisteddfod, the National Gaelic Mod in Scotland, and the festivals in Belfast,
Buxton, Malvern, Chichester, Harrogate, Salisbury, Windsor and York.
Britain is one of the world’s foremost countries for theatre, and has a long and
rich dramatic tradition. There are many companies based in London and other
major cities and towns, as well as numerous touring companies which visit a
wide range of theatres, festivals and other venues throughout Britain, including
arts and sports centres and working men’s clubs; 25 such companies receive
subsidies from the Arts Council. Contemporaiy British playwrights who have
received international recognition include Harold Pinter, Tom Stoppard, Alan
Ayckbourn, Caryl Churchill and David Edgar. The musicals of Andrew Lloyd
Webber have enjoyed considerable success both in Britain and overseas. Among
the best-known directors are Sir Peter Hall, Trevor Nunn, Peter Brook, Richard
Eyre, John Schlesinger and Terry Hands, while the many British performers
who enjoy international reputations include Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Sir John
Gielgud, Sir Alec Guinness, Vanessa Redgrave, Ian McKellen, Derek Jacobi,
Jeremy Irons, Glenda Jackson and Diana Rigg. British designers such as John
Bury, Ralph Koltai and Carl Toms are internationally recognised.
Britain has about 300 theatres intended for professional use which can seat
between 200 and 2,300 people. Some are privately owned, but most are owned
either municipally or by non-profit-distributing organisations. Over 30 of these
house resident theatre companies receiving subsidies from the Arts Council.
London is the main focus, with a hundred or so West End and suburban
theatres, 15 of which are permanently occupied by subsidised companies. These
include the Royal National Theatre, which stages a wide range of modern and
classical plays in its three auditoriums in the South Bank Centre; the Royal
Shakespeare Company, which, while performing in Stratford upon Avon, also
presents plays mainly by Shakespeare and his contemporaries, as well as
modern work, in two auditoriums in the City’s Barbican Centre; and the English
Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre, which stages the work of the most
talented new playwrights. Among new theatre projects is one to reconstruct
Shakespeare’s Globe Theatre on its original Thames-side site. This is planned to
open in 1992.
Outside London most cities and many large towns have at least one theatre;
some, like the Palace Theatre, Manchester, and the Theatre Royal, Nottingham,
date from the nineteenth century and have been handsomely restored. Others,
like the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, and the Theatre Royal, Plymouth, have been
built to the latest designs. Universities such as those in Aberystwyth, Exeter and
Southampton have theatres which house professional companies playing to the
general public. Most regional repertory companies mount about eight to ten
productions a year; several have studio theatres in addition to the main
auditorium, where they present new or experimental drama and plays of
specialist interest. Repertory theatres also frequently serve the function of a
social centre and meeting place by offering events such as concerts, poetry
readings and exhibitions, and by providing restaurants, bars and theatre shops.
Successful productions from regional theatre companies often transfer to
London’s West End, while the largest regional theatres receive visits from the
Royal National Theatre or the Royal Shakespeare Company.
A number of companies provide theatre for young audiences. Unicorn Theatre
for Young People and Polka Children’s Theatre, both in London, present plays
specially written for children, and the Whirligig Theatre tours throughout the
430
Dramatic
Training
Amateur
Theatre
MUSIC, OPERA
AND DANCE
Music
Orchestral and
Choral
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
country. The Young Vic Company in London and Contact Theatre Company in
Manchester stage plays for young people. There are numerous Theatre-in-
Education companies which perform in schools for all age ranges and abilities.
Some of these companies operate independently (Theatre Centre, for example,
plays in London and tours further afield), while others are attached to regional
repertory theatres such as the Belgrade in Coventry and the Playhouse in Leeds.
Most regional repertory theatres also mount occasional productions aimed at
younger audiences, and concessionary ticket prices are generally available for
those at school, college or university. There are also a number of puppet
companies.
There has been a marked growth in youth theatres, which now number more
than 500 in England alone; both the National Youth Theatre in London and the
Scottish Youth Theatre in Edinburgh offer early acting opportunities to young
people.
Training for actors, directors and stage managers is provided mainly in drama
schools, among which the best known are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art,
the Central School of Speech and Drama, the London Academy of Music and
Drama, and the Drama Centre (all in London), and the Bristol Old Vic School,
the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama (Glasgow) and the Manchester
Polytechnic School of Drama. Theatre design courses, often based in art schools,
are available for people wanting to train as stage designers. A number of
universities, polytechnics and other colleges offer courses in drama.
There are several thousand amateur dramatic societies throughout Britain.
Their work is encouraged by a number of bodies, such as the British Theatre
Association, the Central Council for Amateur Theatre, the National Drama
Conference, the Scottish Community Drama Association and the Association of
Ulster Drama Festivals. Amateur companies sometimes receive financial sup¬
port from local government, regional arts associations and other bodies.
The widespread interest in classical music in Britain is reflected in the large
audiences at choral and orchestral concerts, at the opera, which is enjoying
increasing popularity, and at performances of dance and chamber music. Rock
and pop music are extremely popular, especially among younger people, while
folk music, jazz, light music and brass band music also have substantial
followings.
Seasons of orchestral and choral concerts are promoted every year in many of the
large towns and cities. The principal concert-halls in central London are the
Royal Festival Hall in the South Bank Centre, next to which are the Queen
Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room, accommodating smaller-scale perform¬
ances; the Barbican Hall (part of the Barbican Centre for Arts and Conferences);
the Royal Albert Hall; the Wigmore Hall, a recital centre; and St John’s, Smith
Square.
The leading symphony orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the London
Symphony (resident at the Barbican Centre), the Philharmonia, the Royal
Philharmonic, the BBC Symphony, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle
(Manchester), the City of Birmingham Symphony, the Bournemouth Sym¬
phony, and the Ulster and the Scottish National Orchestras. The BBC’s six
orchestras provide broadcast concerts which are often open to the public. There
are also specialised string and chamber orchestras such as the English
Chamber Orchestra, the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields, the Academy of
Ancient Music, the Bournemouth Sinfonietta, the Northern Sinfonia (Newcastle
upon Tyne), the Scottish Ensemble and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
431
Choirs
Pop and
Rock Music
Jazz
Opera and
Dance
The London Sinfonietta specialises in performing contemporary music which,
in its various forms, appeals to growing audiences, especially of younger people.
Groups playing early instruments attract interest throughout the country.
British conductors such as Sir Colin Davis, Jane Glover, Sir Neville Marriner,
Simon Rattle and Jeffrey Tate reach a wide audience through their recordings as
well as by their performances, and the works of living composers such as Sir
Michael Tippett and Sir Peter Maxwell Davies enjoy international acclaim. The
Master of the Queen’s Music, Malcolm Williamson, holds an office within the
Royal Household with responsibility for organising and writing music for state
occasions.
The principal choral societies include the Bach Choir, the Royal Choral Society,
the Cardiff Polyphonic Choir, the Edinburgh Choral Union and the Belfast
Philharmonic Society. Almost all the leading orchestras have close links with
particular choirs. The English tradition of church singing is represented by
choirs such as those of King’s College Chapel, Cambridge, and Christ Church
Cathedral, Oxford. There are many male-voice choirs in Wales and in certain
parts of England.
Among the characteristics of modern pop and rock music are the diversity of
styles, the frequency with which new styles and stars emerge, and the short
lifespan of many groups. Electric guitars and drums usually provide the
instrumental basis, but there has been an increasing use of brass instruments,
while many groups have adopted synthesisers. In the 1960s and 1970s groups
such as The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, The Who, Led Zeppelin and Pink Floyd
achieved international success. British groups continue to have enormous
appeal to audiences throughout the world and often set new trends in music;
some of the more recent groups to have achieved renown are Dire Straits, the
Eurythmics and Five Star. Well-known performers include Van Morrison, Billy
Ocean, George Michael, Phil Collins and Paul McCartney. In recent years black
British musicians have made a large contribution to the development of popular
music.
Jazz has an enthusiastic following in Britain and is played in numerous clubs
and public houses. British musicians such as Barbara Thompson, Stan Tracey,
John Surman and Courtney Pine have established strong reputations through¬
out Europe. Festivals of jazz music are held annually at Camden (London),
Glasgow and Crawley (West Sussex) and at a number of other places. Jazz
Services provides a national touring network.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are held at the Royal Opera House, Covent
Garden, London. The Royal Opera and Royal Ballet, which rank among the
world’s finest companies, are supported by a permanent orchestra. Seasons of
opera in English are given by the English National Opera at the London
Coliseum and their broad range of productions receive much critical acclaim.
Sadler’s Wells Theatre is at present the home of Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet and
stages many of the London performances of visiting dance companies (the
company plans to move to Birmingham in 1990). Scottish Opera (which
celebrated its Silver Jubilee in 1987) has regular winter seasons at the Theatre
Royal in Glasgow, and tours mainly in Scotland and northern England. Welsh
National Opera puts on seasons in Cardiff and other cities and, with Kent Opera
and Opera 80, provides most of the touring productions in England. Opera
North, based in Leeds, undertakes tours in the north of England and Opera
Factory stages experimental work in opera and music drama. Opera in Northern
Ireland is promoted by Opera, Northern Ireland.
432
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Dance and Mime
Companies
Training in
Music, Opera
and Dance
FILMS
An opera season for which international casts are specially assembled is held
every summer at Glyndebourne in Sussex; this is followed by an autumn tour by
Glyndebourne Touring Opera using different casts.
Subsidised dance companies include: English National Ballet, which divides its
performances almost equally between London and the regions; Rambert Dance
(Britain’s oldest ballet company, which re-formed in 1966 as a leading modern
dance company); Scottish Ballet, based in Glasgow; London Contemporary
Dance Theatre (providing regular seasons of contemporary dance in London
besides touring extensively); and Northern Ballet Theatre, based in Manchester,
which also tours widely throughout England. A number of modern dance groups
are funded by the Arts Council and the regional arts associations. The three Arts
Councils also support individuals and offer project grants to several small
groups.
Professional training in music is given mainly at colleges of music. The leading
London colleges are the Royal Academy of Music, the Royal College of Music, the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama and Trinity College of Music. Outside
London the main centres are the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in
Glasgow, the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester, the Welsh College
of Music and Drama, Cardiff, and the Birmingham School of Music. The
National Opera Studio provides advanced training courses. Leading dance
schools include the Royal Ballet School, the Ballet Rambert School and the
London School of Contemporary Dance which, with many private schools, have
helped in raising British dance to its present high standard. Dance is now a
subject for degree studies at the Laban Centre, the University of Surrey and
Dartington College. Courses for students intending to work with community
groups are available at three institutions.
A publicly funded technological college offering studies in drama, music and
dance to pupils aged from 13 to 18, with the emphasis on the application of
technology to the performing arts, is due to open in London in September 1990.
Youth and Music, an organisation affiliated to the international Jeunesses
Musicales, encourages attendance by young people at opera, dance and concert
performances. Special performances of orchestral music for children include the
Robert Mayer Concerts, held in London on Saturday mornings. Ludus Dance in
Education Company and Outreach (in the north of England) work mainly
with young people. Scottish Ballet Steps Out works in schools throughout
Scotland.
Many children learn to play musical instruments at school, and some take the
examinations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music. The
National Youth Orchestras of Great Britain, of Scotland and of Wales and other
youth orchestras are noted for their high standards. Nearly a third of the players
in the European Community Youth Orchestra come from Britain. There is also a
National Youth Jazz Orchestra.
The British film industry continues to enjoy considerable success. British films,
actors and the creative and technical services supporting them are widely
acclaimed in international film festivals and other events. Besides feature films,
including co-productions with other countries, the industry produces films for
television as well as promotional, advertising, industrial, scientific, educational
and training films.
There are approximately 1,300 cinema screens in Britain and estimated
attendances in 1988 amounted to about 83-5 million. Cinema attendance
figures declined rapidly between the mid-1950s and the early 1980s, the main
reason being competition from television. However, cinema-going started to rise
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
433
in 1985, partly as a result of British Film Year, which was successful in
promoting the cinema and British films, in spite of the rising number of
households with video recorders and the greater availability of films on video.
There has also been a growth in recent years in the number of grant-aided
regional film theatres and film societies offering alternative programmes to
those of the commercial cinema chains.
Following a wide-ranging review of the film industry, measures were taken by
the Government in 1985 to remove certain statutory controls on cinemas which
had become outdated and were no longer contributing to the industry’s
development. British Screen Finance, a private sector company whose share¬
holders have been drawn from the film and television industries, was set up in
1986 to provide a source of finance for new film-makers in commercially viable
productions who have difficulty in attracting funding elsewhere. The company,
investing its own money, together with contributions from the Government
amounting to £10 million over five years, part-finances the production of low-
and medium-budget films involving largely British talent and encourages the
early stages of film project development and the production of short films.
An annual government grant of £10 million is made to the British Film
Institute and one of over £600,000 to the Scottish Film Council and the Scottish
Film Production Fund.
The development of film, video and television as an art form is promoted by the
British Film Institute, founded in 1933, and in Scotland by the Scottish Film
Council. The Institute offers direct financial and technical help through its Film
Production Board to new and experienced film-makers who cannot find support
elsewhere, and helps to fund film and video workshops in liaison with the
Channel Four Television Company. It administers the National Film Theatre in
London and the National Film Archive, and has a library from which films and
video-cassettes may be hired. The Institute’s Information Division holds
extensive international collections of books, periodicals, scripts, stills and
posters. It offers an information service on all aspects of film and television, and
its publications include the British National Film and Video Catalogue, which
records films and video-cassettes available in Britain, and a quarterly journal.
Sight and Sound. The Education Department produces study materials and
offers an advisory service to the growing number of teachers of film and
television at all levels of formal education and in adult education.
The National Film Archive contains over 90,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, and over 20,000 television programmes. BFI
South Bank comprises the Museum of the Moving Image, which opened in 1988
(see p 436), and the National Film Theatre, which has two cinemas showing
films of historical, artistic or technical interest, and is unique in offering regular
programmes unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or country
of origin of the films. Each autumn the National Film Theatre mounts the
London Film Festival, at which some 150 of the finest new films from all over the
world are screened.
The British Film Institute has promoted and helps to fund the development of
some 40 regional film theatres, and is involved in establishing film and
television centres with a range of activities and facilities in a number of major
cities. It also co-operates with the regional arts associations and grant-aids their
film activities. The Welsh Arts Council acts as the Institute’s agent in Wales. In
Scotland the Scottish Film Council supports regional film theatres, administers
the Scottish Film Archive, and promotes and provides material for media
education. Together with the Scottish Arts Council, it set up the Scottish Film
Production Fund, which makes grants towards film production in Scotland.
434
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Children’s
Films
Training in Film
Production
Cinema
Licensing
and Film
Classification
Videos
VISUAL ARTS
Grants in Northern Ireland are made by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland. An
annual festival of film and television in the Celtic countries is held in rotation in
Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France.
The Children’s Film and Television Foundation produces and distributes
entertainment films specially designed for children. These are shown largely
through the medium of video and television.
The National Film and Television School, financed jointly by the Government
and the film and television industry, offers courses for writers, directors,
producers and camera technicians. Training in film production is also given at
the London International Film School, the Royal College of Art, and at some
polytechnics and other institutions.
Cinemas showing films to the public must be licensed by local authorities,
which have a legal duty to prohibit the admission of children under 16 to
unsuitable films, and may prevent the showing of any film. In assessing the
suitability of films the authorities normally rely on the judgment of an
independent non-statutory body, the British Board of Film Classification, to
which films offered to the public must be submitted. The Board was set up on
the initiative of the cinema industry to ensure a proper standard is maintained
in films shown to the public. It does not use any written code of censorship, but
can require cuts to be made before granting a certificate; very rarely, it refuses a
certificate. Films passed by the Board are put into one of six categories: U
meaning universal—suitable for all; PG, meaning parental guidance, in which
some scenes may be unsuitable for young children; 12, 15 and 18, for people of
not less than 12, 15 and 18 years of age respectively; and Restricted 18, for
restricted showing only at segregated premises to which no one under 18 is
admitted—for example, licensed cinema clubs.
The British Board of Film Classification is also legally responsible for the
classification of videos. The system of classification is similar to that for films. It
is an offence to supply commercially a video which has not been classified or to
supply it in contravention of its classification—for example, to sell or hire a video
classified 18 to a person under the age of 18.
State support for the visual arts mainly takes the form of maintenance and
purchase grants for the national museums and galleries, purchase grants for
municipal museums and galleries, funding for living artists channelled through
the Arts Councils, the Crafts Council and the regional arts associations, and
grants towards the cost of art education. The Government also encourages high
standards of industrial design and craftsmanship through grants to the Design
Council.
All national museums and galleries are financed chiefly from government
funds. They are free to levy entrance charges to their permanent collections,
special exhibitions and outstations at their discretion. Government policy is to
give priority to the conservation of the buildings and collections of the national
institutions rather than to increasing purchase grants for acquisitions. All the
national collections in England, Scotland and Wales are managed by indepen¬
dent trustees. Museums and art galleries maintained by local authorities,
universities and private benefactions may receive help in building up their
collections through annual government grants administered by the Museums
and Galleries Commission (for England and Wales) and the National Museums of
Scotland. Financial and practical assistance to both national and local
museums and galleries is also given by the Arts Council and by trusts and
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
435
Museums and
Art Galleries
Museums
Association
voluntaiy bodies, including the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, the National
Art-Collections Fund and the Contemporary Art Society. Pre-eminent works of
art accepted by the Government in place of inheritance tax are allocated to public
galleries. Financial help may be available from the National Heritage Memorial
Fund, which was allocated £3 million by the Government in 1989—90. In recent
years, the Fund has made important contributions towards pictures bought by
the Birmingham, Leeds and Manchester City Art Galleries, and by the national
galleries and museums.
Support given by the Arts Council in co-operation with regional arts
associations comprises grants towards the public presentation of the visual
arts, especially contemporary and experimental works, publication of books and
magazines, and the encouragement of the commissioning of works of art in
public places. The South Bank Board maintains a collection of contemporary
British art and organises touring exhibitions throughout the country on behalf
of the Arts Council. The Council supports a number of art and photography
galleries in London, including the Hayward Gallery, Serpentine Gallery,
Photographers’ Gallery and Whitechapel Art Gallery, and in the regions, such as
the Arnolfini in Bristol and the Museum of Modern Art in Oxford. It also provides
support for artists and photographers through purchasing and commissioning
fellowships and residences. Similar support is given by the Scottish Arts Council
to galleries in Scotland such as the Fruitmarket Gallery in Edinburgh. The
Welsh and Northern Ireland Arts Councils have galleries in Cardiff and Belfast
respectively.
A number of modern British sculptors and painters have high international
reputations, and have received many international prizes and commissions for
major works in foreign cities. Among the best known are Elisabeth Frink,
Francis Bacon, David Hockney and Lucien Freud.
A major expansion in the number of museums is taking place and many are
introducing new display techniques that attract increasing numbers of visitors.
Over 80 million people a year attend the 2,400 or so museums and galleries open
to the public, which include the major national collections and a wide variety of
municipally and independently or privately owned institutions. Government
provision for museums and galleries will rise from £161 million in 1990—91 to
£174 million in 1991—92, an increase of over 8 per cent.
The Government is advised on policy matters by the Museums and Galleries
Commission, which also promotes co-operation between national and provincial
institutions. Nine area museum councils supply technical services and advice
on conservation, display, documentation and publicity.
The Government aims to encourage the loan of objects from national and
provincial museums and gallery collections so that works of art can be seen by as
wide a public as possible and it provides funds for promoting the provision and
use of travelling exhibitions and for facilitating loans of items between
institutions.
The independent Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries
and their staffs belong and which has many overseas members, is a focus for the
collection of information and discussion of matters relating to museums and
galleries, and an examining body for professional qualifications. It operates
training, seminar, research and publishing programmes. Its subsidiary,
Museum Enterprises, provides high-quality consultancy services to museums
and galleries in the fields of planning, trading and recruitment.
Proposals were announced in early 1989 to establish a Museums Training
Institute to develop training standards and programmes.
436
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National
Collections
Other
Collections
The national museums and art galleries, most of which are located in London,
contain some of the world’s most comprehensive collections of objects of artistic,
archaeological, scientific, historical and general interest. They are the British
Museum (including the Museum of Mankind), the Natural History Museum, the
Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science Museum, the National Gallery, the Tate
Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the Imperial War Museum, the National
Army Museum, the Royal Air Force Museum, the National Maritime Museum,
the Wallace Collection, the Geological Museum and a group of museums and
galleries on Merseyside. Some of the museums in London have branches in the
regions, examples being the National Railway Museum (York) and the National
Museum of Photography, Film and Television (Bradford), which are part of the
Science Museum. Plans are in progress for the Victoria and Albert Museum to
open a branch in Bradford which will house part of its collection of Indian art.
New developments at the Tate Gallery have included the opening in 1987 of the
Clore Gallery to house the paintings bequeathed to the nation by J. M. W.
Turner, and the opening of the Tate Gallery of the North in Liverpool in 1988. An
extension to the National Gallery, which is being financed by the Sainsbury
family, is under construction. A national theatre museum opened in 1987 in
Covent Garden, London.
In Scotland the national collections are the National Museums of Scotland
(formed by the bringing together in 1985 of the Royal Scottish Museum and the
National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, and embracing the Scottish United
Services Museum in Edinburgh Castle) and the National Galleries of Scotland
(comprising the National Gallery of Scotland, the Scottish National Portrait
Gallery and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art). The National Museum
of Wales (where a major expansion scheme is in progress), in Cardiff, has a
branch at St Fagan’s Castle, where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed, an
Industrial and Maritime Museum in Cardiffs dockland, the Museum of the
Woollen Industry at Drefach Felindre, and the Slate Museum at Llanberis.
Northern Ireland has two national museums: the Ulster Museum in Belfast and
the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum in County Down.
Other important collections in London include the Royal Armouries in the Tower
of London, the Museum of London, Sir John Soane’s Museum, the Courtauld
collection and the London Transport Museum. The Queen’s Gallery in Bucking¬
ham Palace has exhibitions of pictures from the extensive royal collections.
Most cities and towns have museums devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually administered by the local authorities but sometimes by local
learned societies or by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and Cambridge are
rich in museums, many of them associated with the universities, such as the
Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, the oldest in the world, and the
Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. Many private art collections in historic
family mansions, including those owned by the National Trusts, are open to the
public, while an increasing number of open air museums depict the regional life
of an area or preserve early industrial remains (for example, the Weald and
Downland Museum in Sussex, the North of England Open Air Museum in
Durham, and the Ironbridge Gorge Museum in Shropshire). Skills of the past
are revived in a number of ‘living’ museums like the Gladstone Pottery Museum
near Stoke on Trent and the Quarry Bank Mill at Styal in Cheshire. Among the
newest museums are the National Horseracing Museum at Newmarket; the
Jorvik Viking Centre, a reconstruction of the Viking settlement in York; and a
new maritime museum in Portsmouth, housing the restored wreck of the Mary
Rose, the flagship of Henry VIII, which sank in 1545 and was raised in 1982. The
Burrell gallery in Glasgow houses a world-famous collection of tapestries,
paintings and objets d’art. A Museum of the Moving Image, which opened on the
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
437
Crafts
Training in Art
and Design
The Art Market
South Bank of the Thames in 1988, traces the history of film and television and
features displays of moving images ranging from ancient shadow theatre
through to future film and television technologies.
Apart from their permanent collections, most museums and galleries stage
temporary exhibitions on particular themes. In addition, there are a number of
national art exhibiting societies, the most famous of these being the Royal
Academy of Arts at Burlington House. The Academy holds an annual Summer
Exhibition, where the works of hundreds of professional and amateur artists
can be seen, and important exhibitions during the rest of the year. The Royal
Scottish Academy holds annual exhibitions in Edinburgh. There are also
children’s exhibitions, including the National Exhibition of Children’s Art.
Government aid for the crafts, amounting to just over £2 million in 1989—90, is
administered in England and Wales by the Crafts Council. The Council supports
artist craftsmen and women by promoting interest in their work, making it
accessible to the public and encouraging the creation and appreciation of
articles of fine craftsmanship. Grants are available to help with training, setting
up workshops and acquiring equipment. The Council maintains a selective
index of craftsmen and women and a non-selective national register; it also
arranges exhibitions and seminars and circulates information. Crafts magazine
is published every two months. The Council also manages a British crafts shop
at the Victoria and Albert Museum. Funding is given to the Welsh Arts Council
and the regional arts associations in England for the support of crafts, and to
Contemporary Applied Art, a membership organisation that holds exhibitions
and sells work through its London gallery.
Scotland receives a separate government grant which is administered by the
Crafts Consultative Committee of the Scottish Development Agency.
Most practical education in art and design is provided in colleges of art (among
the best known of which are the Slade School and the Royal College of Art, both
in London), further education colleges and private art schools. Four art colleges
in London (Camberwell, Central, Chelsea and St Martin’s) were merged in 1986
with other colleges to form the London Institute. Degrees at postgraduate level
are awarded by the Royal College of Art. Art is also taught at an advanced level at
the four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions.
Courses at universities and polytechnics concentrate largely on academic
disciplines such as the history of art. The leading institutions include the
Courtauld and Warburg Institutes of the University of London and the
Department of Classical Art and Archaeology at University College, London. Art
has a place in all school curricula, and the Society for Education through Art
encourages, among other activities, the purchase by schools of original works of
art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools exhibition.
The Open College of the Arts, launched in 1987, offers correspondence courses
in art and design, painting, sculpture, textiles, photography and creative
writing to people wishing to study at home.
London is a major centre for the international art market, and sales of works of
art take place in the main auction houses (two of the longest established being
Sotheby’s and Christie’s), and through private dealers. Certain items are
covered by export control. These are: works of art and collectors’ items over 50
years old and worth £16,000 or more (£4,000 or more in the case of British
historical portraits): photographic material over 50 years old and valued at £500
or more an item; and documents, manuscripts and archives over 50 years old,
irrespective of value. A licence is required before such items can be exported.
The application for a licence is considered by the Department of Trade and
438
LITERATURE
AND
LIBRARIES
Authors’
Copyright
and
Performers’
Protection
Literary and
Philological
Societies
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Industry, and, if the Department’s expert advisers recommend the withholding
of a licence, the matter is referred to the Reviewing Committee on the Export of
Works of Art. If the Committee considers a work to be of national importance it
can advise the Government to withhold the export licence for a specified time to
give a public museum or art gallery an opportunity to buy at a fair price.
Literature is an important part of the mainstream of the nation’s culture. A
number of literary activities receive public subsidy through the Arts Council of
Great Britain. There are free public libraries throughout the country, private
libraries and several private literary societies. Book reviews are featured in the
press and on television and radio and there are numerous periodicals concerned
with literature. Recognition of outstanding literary merit is provided by a
number of awards, some of the most valuable being the Booker, National Cash
Register and Whitbread prizes. Awards to encourage young writers include
those of the Somerset Maugham Trust Fund and the E. C. Gregory Trust Fund.
Many British writers are internationally recognised and in 1983 the Nobel prize
for literature was awarded to the novelist Sir William Golding. Other well-known
living authors include Graham Greene, Anthony Burgess, Penelope Lively and
Iris Murdoch, while distinguished British poets include Ted Hughes, Geoffrey
Hill, Tony Harrison, James Berry, Gavin Ewart and Elizabeth Jennings. Ted
Hughes is the Poet Laureate, who writes verse to mark royal occasions.
A public lending right scheme, introduced in 1982, gives registered authors
the right to receive payment from a central fund (totalling £4-25 million in
1991—92) for the use of their books borrowed from public libraries. (Payment is
made in proportion to the number of times the authors’ books are lent out.)
The author of any original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is
automatically protected by both domestic legislation and related international
conventions1 from the unauthorised reproduction of the work both before and
after publication. The author of the work is the first owner of the copyright, and
the normal term of copyright in published original works is the life of the author
and a period of 50 years after his or her death.
Fundamental changes in the laws of copyright and performers’ protection
were introduced in the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. Among its
many provisions, this Act reformed and restated the copyright law, defining
copyright as a property right capable, like any other property, of being exploited,
used, bought or sold; and introducing the concept of moral rights whereby
authors have the right to be identified on their works and to object to any
unjustified modifications of them. The Act also introduced a statutory
framework of civil rights to protect performers against the trading in unautho¬
rised recordings of live performance, the term of protection for these rights
being 50 years from the year in which the performance is given.
Societies to promote literature include the English Association and the Royal
Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of Historical,
Philosophical and Philological Studies (the British Academy) is the leading
society for humanistic studies.
Other specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the Biblio¬
graphical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several societies
devoted to particular authors, the largest of which is the Dickens Fellowship.
Various societies, such as the Poetry Society, sponsor poetry readings and
1 A copyright work first published in Britain has automatic copyright in all countries which are
members of the Berne Copyright Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention.
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
439
Libraries
recitals. There are a number of clubs and societies, such as the Poetry Book
Society, which distribute selected new books to their members.
The British Library is the national library of Britain and ranks with the Library
of Congress in Washington and the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris as one of the
world’s greatest libraries. Publishers have a legal obligation to supply the Library
with a copy of each item published in Britain. The Humanities and Social
Sciences division provides comprehensive information and reference services
based on its world-famous collections of some 18 million items of monographs,
manuscripts, maps, stamps, newspapers and recorded sound. The Library’s
exhibition galleries are housed in the British Museum building in Bloomsbury,
London, where many of the Library’s greatest treasures are on permanent
display and temporary exhibitions are mounted regularly.
The Science, Technology and Industry division comprises the Document
Supply Centre in West Yorkshire and the Science Reference and Information
Service in London. The former operates a rapid inter-library lending service
supplying over 3-25 million requests each year, mostly from its own stock of 7
million documents, which includes journals, reports, theses, conference pro¬
ceedings and books. It also has access to many millions of books in other
libraries and is the national centre for inter-library lending within Britain and
between Britain and countries overseas. The Science Reference and Information
Service manages Western Europe’s most comprehensive collection of material on
modern science, technology and commerce, and is also the National Patents
Library. Services offered include document delivery, information services for
business and Japanese material, publications and seminars. Bibliographic
Services process the material deposited with the Library for inclusion in
catalogues, and maintain a machine-readable database of bibliographic records
from which is derived the printed British National Bibliography (which lists new
books and new editions published in Britain) and a range of automated
bibliographic services, including book selection, information retrieval, catalo¬
guing and other technical processes. The Research and Development Depart¬
ment is a major source of funding for research and development in library and
information services. The Library’s new London headquarters is being built, at a
cost of £350 million, at St Pancras. The new building, which will come into use
from 1993, will provide over 300 km (186 miles) of storage shelving, up to 12
specialist and generalist reading rooms, as well as greatly improved facilities for
the public, including exhibition galleries, lecture and conference halls and an
education service.
The National Libraries of Scotland and Wales, the Bodleian Library of Oxford
University and the Cambridge University Library can claim copies of all new
British publications under legal deposit. The first phase of a new building for
the National Library of Scotland was opened in September 1989. Costing £11-5
million, it provides 49 km (30 miles) of storage shelving and accommodates a
map library, lending services and the Scottish Science Library.
Some of the national museums and government departments have important
libraries. The Public Record Office contains the records of the superior courts of
law and of most government departments, as well as famous historical
documents. The Scottish Record Office in Edinburgh serves the same purpose.
Besides a number of great private collections, such as that of the London
Library, there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions.
Examples are the libraries of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the
Commonwealth Trust (formerly the Royal Commonwealth Society), the Royal
Geographical Society, the British Theatre Association, the Royal Academy of
Music, the National Library for the Blind and the Book Trust.
440
University
Libraries
Special
Libraries
Public
Libraries
Historical
Manuscripts
Books
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The university libraries of Oxford and Cambridge are unmatched by those of the
more recent foundations, although the combined library resources of the
colleges and institutions of the University of London total 9 million volumes, the
John Rylands University Library in Manchester contains 3-4 million volumes,
Edinburgh 2 million, Leeds 1-8 million, and Birmingham, Glasgow, Liverpool
and Aberdeen each have over 1 million volumes. Many universities have
important research collections in special subjects; examples include the Barnes
Medical Library at Birmingham and the British Library of Political and
Economic Science at the London School of Economics.
Numerous associations and commercial and industrial organisations operate
library and information services. Although most of these are primarily intended
for use within the organisation, many special libraries can be used, by
arrangement, by people interested in the area covered, and the specialist
publications held are often available for inter-library lending.
Local library authorities have a duty to provide a free lending and reference
library service in their areas, and Britain’s network of libraries has a total stock
of 137 million books. About one-third of the total population are members of
public libraries. Some areas are served by mobile libraries, and domiciliary
services cater for people unable to visit a library. Many libraries have collections
of records, audio- and video-cassettes, and musical scores for loan to the public,
while a number also lend from collections of works of art, which may be originals
or reproductions. Most libraries hold documents on local history, and nearly all
provide children’s departments, while reference and information sections and
art, music, commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more
specific demands in these fields. The information role is one of increasing
importance for many libraries, and greater use is being made of information
technology, including microcomputers and reference databases.
The Government remains committed to providing a free basic library
service—the borrowing and consultation of books and other printed materials—
but believes there is scope for greater private sector involvement. In April 1988 it
made available £250,000 a year over three years for an incentive funding scheme
to encourage new developments and increase efficiency in public library services
in England: priority is given to projects involving collaboration with other
libraries and the private sector.
Legislative proposals to give public library authorities wider powers to charge
for some services, such as research services and the lending of non-printed
materials, including cassettes and records, are before Parliament.
The Government is advised on library and information matters by four library
and information services councils or committees, representing England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland, respectively.
The Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts maintains a national register
of archives and advises owners, assists researchers and co-ordinates the
activities of all bodies working in the field. In March 1989 the Government
announced support of £300,000 over three years towards the establishment of a
national manuscripts conservation fund, whose purpose is to provide assistance
to record offices, libraries and other owners of manuscripts and archives open to
the public.
In 1988 British publishers issued nearly 62,000 separate titles. Of these about
47,470 were new titles and the remainder reprints and new editions. The British
publishing industry devotes much effort to developing overseas markets, and
the value of exports of British books in 1988 amounted to over £548 million. The
PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
441
industry is also distinguished for its interest in new technological develop¬
ments, including electronic publishing and the development of software for
educational and other purposes.
Among the leading organisations representing publishing and distribution
interests are the Publishers Association, which has 200 members, and the
Booksellers’ Association. The Publishers Association, through its associated
body the Book Development Council, has been active in promoting the export of
British books world-wide.
The British Council publicises British books overseas through its 116
libraries in over 77 countries, participation in international book fairs and a
programme of travelling exhibitions. The Council also publishes a monthly
periodical, British Book News.
The Book Trust, whose membership includes authors, publishers, book¬
sellers, librarians and readers, encourages an interest in books and arranges
exhibitions throughout Britain.
The Press
More daily newspapers, national and regional, are sold per person in Britain
than in most other developed countries. On an average day two out of three
people over the age of 15 read a national morning newspaper; about three out of
four read a Sunday newspaper. Three out of four adults regularly read a paid-for
regional or local newspaper as well as a free local paper. National papers have a
total circulation of 14-8 million on weekdays and 18-1 million on Sundays,
though the total readership is considerably greater. There are about 130 daily
(Monday to Saturday) and Sunday newspapers, 1,800 weekly newspapers
(including business, sporting and religious newspapers) and some 7,000
periodical publications.
The press caters for a variety of political views, interests and levels of
education. There is no state control or censorship of the press, but it is subject
to the general laws on publication (see p 452). Newspapers are almost always
financially independent of any political party; where they express pronounced
views and show obvious political leanings in their editorial comments, these
derive from proprietorial and other non-party influences. Nevertheless, during
general election campaigns many newspapers recommend their readers to vote
for a particular political party. Even newspapers which espouse strong political
views in their editorial columns include feature and other types of articles by
authors of a variety of political persuasions. In order to preserve their character
and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are governed by various
trustee-type arrangements. Others have management arrangements to ensure
their editors’ authority and independence.
Working practices have undergone profound changes throughout the news¬
paper industry in response to the challenges posed by the new computer-based
technology and the need to reduce costs; using computerised technology can
reduce the initial capital outlay required to produce new papers.
Newsprint, about two-thirds of which is imported, forms roughly 20 per cent
of average national newspaper costs; labour represents about 55 per cent.
Revenue from sales accounts for varying proportions of income; many news¬
papers and periodicals derive considerable earnings from their advertising.
Unlike most of its European counterparts the British press receives no
subsidies and relatively few tax and postal concessions. Newspaper and maga¬
zine sales (but not advertising receipts) are zero-rated for value added tax.
Newspapers registered with the Post Office receive a concession on postal rates,
and there are concessions on ‘per-word’ rates for international press telegrams
and photo-telegrams. Like all postal customers, publishers can obtain reduc¬
tions in charges for regular bulk postings.
In discussions on a ‘new world information and communication order’ Britain
has opposed measures designed to increase governmental regulation of the
media or to limit the free flow of information. At the same time, it has reaffirmed
its willingness to support efforts to improve communications systems in the
developing world.
Ownership of the national, London and regional daily newspapers is concen¬
trated in the hands of a number of large press publishing groups (the groups
444
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National
Press
controlling the national press are listed in Table 53). There are, in addition,
some 350 independent regional and local newspaper publishers.
Although most enterprises are organised as limited liability companies,
individual and partner proprietorship survives. The large national newspaper
and periodical publishers are major corporations with interests ranging over the
whole field of publishing and communications; some have shares in indepen¬
dent television and radio companies while others are involved in industrial and
commercial activities.
The law provides safeguards against the risks inherent in undue concentra¬
tion of the means of communication. For instance, if it appears that newspaper
shareholdings in independent television or independent local radio companies
have led or are leading to results contrary to the public interest, the Independent
Broadcasting Authority can, with the consent of the Home Secretary, notify the
companies that their programmes may cease to be transmitted. There are
additional controls over newspaper interests in cable television services. In
addition, it is unlawful to transfer a newspaper or newspaper assets to a
proprietor whose newspapers have an average daily circulation amounting, with
that of the newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies without the
written consent of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. Except in
certain limited cases, consent may be given only after the Secretary of State has
referred the matter to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and received its
report.
In a White Paper on broadcasting published in November 1988, the Govern¬
ment has outlined new proposals for preventing excessive cross-media
ownership.
Twelve morning daily papers and nine Sunday papers (see Table 53) circulate
throughout most parts of Britain, and are known as national newspapers.
Formerly they were produced in or near Fleet Street in London with, in some
cases, northern editions being printed in Manchester. All of the national papers
have now moved their editorial and printing facilities to other parts of London
(including the Docklands) or away from the capital altogether. Today, a new
national newspaper launched in 1986, is printed at Poyle (Middlesex) and
Manchester. The Independent, which also began publishing in 1986, uses
printing presses in Bradford, Northampton and Portsmouth. Scottish editions
of The Sun, The Times, News of the World and The Sunday Times are printed in
Glasgow. In an attempt to improve distribution and sales in Western Europe,
editions of the Financial Times are printed in Frankfurt and in Roubaix,
northern France, while both The Guardian and The Independent print interna¬
tional editions in Frankfurt.
Several newspapers have had very long and distinguished histories: for
example, The Observer, first published in 1791, is the oldest national Sunday
newspaper in the world, and The Times, one of the most influential of all
newspapers and Britain’s oldest daily national newspaper, celebrated its two-
hundredth anniversary in 1985. A new quality Sunday paper, The Sunday
Correspondent, was launched in September 1989, and The Independent plans
to start publishing a Sunday edition in January 1990.
The leading Scottish papers. The Scotsman and the Glasgow Herald, have a
considerable circulation outside Scotland.
National newspapers are often thought of as either ‘quality’ or ‘popular’ papers
on the basis of differences in style and content. Quality newspapers are directed
at readers who want full information on a wide range of public matters and are
prepared to spend a considerable amount of time reading it, while popular
newspapers appeal to people wanting news of a more entertaining character,
presented in a more concise form and with ample illustrations. At present, all
THE PRESS
445
Table 53: National Newspapers
Title and foundation date
Controlled by
Circulation3
average
Jan.—June
1989
National dailies
‘Populars’
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Star (1978)
Morning Star (1966)
The Sun (1964)
Today (1986)
‘Qualities’
Financial Times (1888)
The Daily Telegraph (1855)
The Guardian (1821)
The Independent (1986)
The Times (1785)
National Sundays
‘Populars’
News of the World (1843)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
Sunday Sport (1986)
The Mail on Sunday (1982)
The People (1881)
‘Qualities’
Sunday Telegraph (1961)
The Observer (1791)
The Sunday Times (1822)
United Newspapers 1,589,306
Associated Newspapers Group 1,750,303
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 3,199,103
United Newspapers 912,372
Morning Star Co-operative Society 28,000
News International 4,173,267
News International 588,653
Pearson 199,275
The Daily Telegraph 1,113,033
The Guardian and Manchester
Evening News 438,732
Newspaper Publishing 405,423
News International 441,342
News International 5,294,317
United Newspapers 1,943,089
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 3,012,143
Apollo 530,090
Associated Newspapers Group 1,961,506
Mirror Group Newspapers (1986) 2,660,177
The Daily Telegraph 656,120
Lonrho International 693,939
News International 1,317,865
a Circulation figures are those of the Audit Bureau of Circulations (founded in 1931 and consisting of publishers,
advertisers and advertising agencies) and are certified average daily or weekly net sales for the period. The circula¬
tion figure of the Morning Star is otherwise audited.
quality papers are broadsheet in format and all popular papers, with the
exception of the Sunday Express, tabloid. Five dailies and three Sundays are
usually described as quality newspapers. Today, the Daily Mirror, the Sunday
Mirror and The People are printed in full colour, while a number of papers
produce colour magazines as part of the paper. Several of the Sunday news¬
papers (and some of the dailies on Saturday) publish leisure sections with
articles on travel, food and wine, and other leisure topics.
There is a growing market for news and information in the electronic media,
and quality papers like the Financial Times provide material for use on
databases and videotext services such as Prestel. The Times supplies a news
service to Sky Television, a direct broadcasting by satellite company under the
same ownership.
The total circulation of national newspapers amounted to 33 million in 1988
(the same as in 1978).
446
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Regional
Newspapers
England
Wales
Scotland
Northern
Ireland
The regional newspapers of England (outside London, around 90 morning or
evening dailies and Sundays and some 750 newspapers appearing once or twice
a week) provide mainly regional and local news. The daily newspapers also give
coverage of national and international affairs. Generally, regional evening
newspapers are non-political, while the morning newspapers adopt a more
positive political stance and tend to be independent or conservative in
outlook.
Of the morning papers the Yorkshire Post (Leeds) and the Eastern Daily
Press (Norwich) each have a circulation of over 90,000, and two provincial
Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun (Newcastle upon Tyne) and the Sunday
Mercu/y (Birmingham)—sell 116,000 and 155,000 copies respectively. Circula¬
tion figures of evening papers start at about 11,000 and most are in the 20,000
to 100,000 range; those with much larger sales include the Manchester Evening
News (277,000), the Birmingham Evening Mail (220,000), Wolverhampton’s
Express and Star (240,000) and the Liverpool Echo (200,000). Weekly papers are
of mainly local appeal and are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most
have circulations in the 5,000 to 60,000 range.
There is one London evening newspaper, the Evening Standard (with a
circulation of 479,000). A number of evening newspapers are published in the
outer metropolitan area. The hundred or so local weeklies include papers for
every district in Greater London, often in the form of local editions of an
individual paper.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, published in Cardiff,
with a circulation of 77,000 throughout Wales. In north Wales the Daily Post,
published in Liverpool, gives wide coverage to events in the area. A new Sunday
newspaper — Wales on Sunday — also published in Cardiff, with a circulation of
85,000, was launched in March 1989. Evening papers published in Wales are
the South Wales Echo, Cardiff; the South Wales Argus, Newport; the South
Wales Evening Post, Swansea; and the Evening Leader, Wrexham. Their circula¬
tion range is between 27,000 and 95,000. North Wales is also served by the
Liverpool Echo, while the Shropshire Star covers parts of north and mid-Wales,
and there is coverage to a smaller extent by the Manchester Evening News.
The weekly press (some 70 publications) includes English-language papers,
some of which carry articles in Welsh; bilingual papers; and Welsh-language
papers. Welsh community newspapers receive an annual grant as part of the
Government’s wider financial support for the Welsh language.
Scotland has six morning, six evening and four Sunday newspapers. The
morning papers, with circulations of between 87,000 and 773,000, are The
Scotsman (published in Edinburgh); the Glasgow Herald-, the Daily Record
(sister paper of the Daily Mirror); the Dundee Courier and Advertiser; the
Aberdeen Press and Journal; and the Scottish Daily Express (printed in
Manchester). The evening papers have circulations in the range of 12,000 to
174,000 and are the Evening News of Edinburgh, Glasgow’s Evening Times,
Dundee’s Evening Telegraph, Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the Paisley Daily
Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail,
the Sunday Post, the Scottish Sunday Express (printed in Manchester), and a
quality broadsheet paper, Scotland on Sunday, which was launched in 1988.
The national Sunday newspapers The Observer and The Sunday Times carry
Scottish supplements.
Local weekly newspapers number more than 140.
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening and three Sunday
papers, all published in Belfast, with circulations ranging from 41,000 to
THE PRESS
447
Free
Distribution
Newspapers
Ethnic Minority
Publications
The Periodical
Press
141,000. They are the News Letter (unionist), the Irish News (nationalist), the
evening Belfast Telegraph, the Sunday News, Sunday Life and Sunday World
(Northern Ireland edition). The News Letter, established in 1737, is the oldest
English-language newspaper in the world. There are about 45 weeklies. News¬
papers from the Irish Republic, as well as the British national press, are widely
read in Northern Ireland.
About 1,000 free distribution newspapers (mostly weekly and financed by
advertising) are now published in Britain; over half of them are produced by
established newspaper publishers. They have enjoyed rapid growth in recent
years and now have an estimated total weekly circulation of about 41 million.
Europe’s first daily free distribution paper, the Daily News (published four
days a week), was launched in Birmingham in 1984.
Some 100 newspapers and magazines are produced by members of the ethnic
minorities, about 60 of which are intended for the Asian community. Most are
published weekly or monthly. They include the Asian newspapers The Daily
Jang, New Life and Asian Times-, and The Weekly Gleaner—a local edition of the
Jamaican Gleaner—and West Indian Digest. The Voice and Caribbean Times are
aimed at the black population in general, as is the magazine Root; Chic is a
fashion and beauty magazine. An Arabic daily, Al-Arab, is also produced in
Britain.
The 7,000 periodical publications are classified as ‘consumer general interest’,
‘special interest’ and ‘business-to-business’. There are also several hundred
‘house magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business houses or
public services for the benefit of their employees and/or clients and some 150
free consumer magazines. Directories and similar publications number more
than 2,000. The ‘alternative’ press comprises several hundred further titles,
most of them devoted to radical politics, community matters, religion, the
occult, science or ecology.
Consumer general and specialist periodicals include magazines for a wide
range of interests: women’s magazines; publications for children; religious
periodicals; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport, motoring, garden¬
ing, teenagers and pop music; hobbies, humour and retirement; computer
magazines; and the publications of learned societies, trade unions, regiments,
universities and other organisations. In recent years several women’s magazines
from overseas have built up large circulations; Prima and Best, for instance,
each sell around 850,000 copies, while Bella is also widely read.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are: Radio Times and TV Times,
which carry details of the week’s television and radio programmes on BBC and of
television programmes on independent television, respectively, each of which
has a circulation of around 3 million, and Woman’s Weekly, Woman’s Own,
Woman, Weekly News (which sells mainly in Scotland) and My Weekly, with
circulations in the 500,000 to 1 • 1 million range. Woman's Realm and Chat have
circulations of 536,000 and 415,000 respectively. Of monthly magazines Read¬
er’s Digest has the highest circulation (1-6 million). The leading journals of
opinion are The Economist, an independent conservative publication covering a
wider range of topics than its title implies; the New Statesman and Society,
which reviews social issues, politics, literature and the arts from an independent
socialist point of view; the Spectator, which covers much the same subjects from
an independent conservative standpoint; Tribune, which represents certain
left-wing views within the Labour Party; and New Scientist, which reports on
science and technology in terms the non-specialist can understand. Articles and
features relating largely to BBC and independent television and radio program-
448
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
New
Printing
Technology
mes appear in The Listener. Punch, traditionally the leading humorous periodic¬
al, and Private Eye, a satirical fortnightly, also cover public affairs. Financial
Weekly and Investors Chronicle are tv/o of a number of periodicals for people
with business and investment interests. Weekly ‘listings’ magazines, including
Time Out and City Limits, provide details of cultural and other events in London
and other large cities.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, generally appeal to the
more serious reader. Business, scientific and professional journals, publication
of which ranges from twice weekly to quarterly, are an important aspect of
British publishing and business communication, many having a considerable
circulation overseas. There are about 3,500 publications covering business and
industrial affairs.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout Britain. In Wales there
are also several monthly and quarterly journals published in both Welsh and
English; in Scotland there are three monthly illustrated periodicals, a weekly
paper devoted to farming interests, a number of literary journals and numerous
popular magazines; and Northern Ireland has weekly, monthly and quarterly
publications covering business, professional and leisure interests.
The heavy production costs of newspapers and periodicals continue to encour¬
age publishers to look for ways of reducing these costs, often by using computer
systems to control editing and production processes. The ‘front end’ or ‘single
stroking’ system, for example, allows journalists or advertisement staff to input
‘copy’ directly into a video terminal, and then by pressing a button to transform
it automatically into computer-set columns of type. Although it is possible for
these columns to be assembled electronically on a page-sized screen, turned into
a full page, and made automatically into a plate ready for transfer to the printing
press, at present very few such systems are in operation. Most involve the
production of bromides from the computer setting, which are pasted up into
columns before being placed in a plate-making machine. The most advanced
systems present opportunities for reorganisation which have implications
throughout a newspaper office and may give rise to disputes over manning levels
and other industrial relations problems. Generally, and most recently in the case
of national newspapers, the introduction of computerised systems has led to
substantial reductions in workforces, particularly, but not solely, among print
workers.
All the national newspapers utilise computer technology, while its use in the
provincial press, which has generally led the way in adopting new techniques, is
widespread. Journalists type articles directly into, and edit them on, computer
terminals; colour pictures and graphics are entered into the same system
electronically. News International, publisher of three daily and two Sunday
papers, has at its east London headquarters more than 500 computer terminals,
one of the largest systems ever installed at one time anywhere in the world. The
Financial Times opened a new printing plant in London’s Docklands in 1988
with about 200 production workers, compared with the 650 employed at its
former printing facility in the City of London.
Other national papers have moved into new computer-based printing plants
outside Fleet Street. Where printing plants are some distance from editorial
offices, pages for printing are sent by facsimile machine from typesetter to print
plant.
Other technological developments include the use of full-colour printing, and
a switch from traditional letterpress printing to the web-offset litho or plastic-
plate processes. The new Docklands plant of the Associated Newspapers Group
uses flexography, a rubber-plate process.
THE PRESS
449
News Agencies The four principal news agencies in Britain are: Reuters, an international news
organisation registered in London, the Press Association, the Exchange Tele¬
graph Company and Extel Financial.
Reuters is a publicly owned company, employing some 10,000 full-time staff
in 81 countries. It has almost 1,200 journalists, over 840 of whom work outside
Britain. The company’s worldwide communications network makes use of
satellites, cables and microwave radio, and is connected to computerised
message-handling systems and data banks located around the world. Services
include general news for the media delivered by teleprinter or fed directly into
clients’ computers, and specialised economic news and information services for
business delivered through video terminals, by teleprinter or by direct computer
feed. Reuters serves subscribers in 158 countries, including financial institu¬
tions, commodities houses, traders in currencies, equities and bonds, news¬
papers, radio and television stations, and news agencies.
In 1985 Reuters launched its own world service of news pictures, having in
the previous year acquired United Press International’s news pictures business
outside the United States.
The Press Association, the British and Irish national news agency, is co¬
operatively owned by the principal daily newspapers of Britain outside London,
and of the Irish Republic. It provides national and regional newspapers and
broadcasting services with a complete service of home news, including general
and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all types of financial, commercial and
sports news, and includes in its services to regional papers the world news of
Reuters and Associated Press. News is teleprinted from London, certain items
being available in Dataformat, as camera-ready copy. Its ‘Newsfile’ service
provides general news, sports and foreign news on screen to non-media as well
as media clients by means of telephone and viewdata terminals. Also available on
screen is the ‘Esmerk’ service, an international digest of business information.
The photographic department provides newspapers and broadcasters with a
daily service of pictures from Britain and overseas; these are wired to the
regional press. The NewsFeatures service supplies reports of local or special
interest and provides exclusive rights to syndicated features. There is also a
dial-in graphics facility as well as extensive cuttings and photograph libraries.
The Exchange Telegraph Company has the largest sports news agency in
Britain, providing sports coverage to national and evening newspapers, tele¬
vision and radio, as well as domestic and overseas news agencies. The Racing
News Service is supplied to all betting shops in Britain and the Irish Republic
and provides a full news and information service about race meetings, including
running commentaries from many meetings.
Extel Financial supplies information and services to British and international
financial institutions. Based in London, it has a network of offices in Europe
and the United States and representatives in Japan and South-East Asia. Data
are collected from all the world’s stock exchanges, from companies and from the
international press. The agency is a major source of reference material on
companies and securities; it supplies a comprehensive range of data products on
international financial matters; and provides specialised services by computer
to banks, insurance companies and other institutions. Up-to-the-minute busi¬
ness and company news is provided by the agency’s specialist financial news
service.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by Associ¬
ated Press and United Press International, which are British subsidiaries of
United States news agencies.
A number of other British, Commonwealth and foreign agencies and news
services have offices in London, and there are minor agencies in other cities,
mostly specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical require-
450
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Training for
Journalism
Press
Institutions
ments. Syndication of features is not as common in Britain as in some
countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which represents
the principal regional press organisations, sets and conducts examinations, and
organises short training courses for journalists.
The two main methods of entry into newspaper journalism are selection for a
one-year NCTJ pre-entry course at a college of further education or direct
recruitment by a regional or local newspaper. Both categories of entrant take
part in an apprenticeship scheme consisting of ‘on-the-job’ training, and
block-release courses are provided for those who have not attended a pre-entry
course. There are similar courses for press photographers. Postgraduate
diploma courses in journalism are provided at the University of Wales College of
Cardiff, the City University, London, and Lancashire Polytechnic, Preston.
Courses are provided by the Newspaper Society Training Service for regional
newspapers in such subjects as newspaper sales, advertising, industrial rela¬
tions and management.
Specialist training courses for journalists from developing countries are
offered by the Thomson Foundation in Cardiff. The Foundation also conducts
training courses in developing countries and provides consultants to assist
newspapers and magazines in such areas as advertising, management, circula¬
tion and the introduction and operation of new technology. It runs an inter¬
national journalism training centre in collaboration with Xinhua News Agency
in Peking.
The Periodicals Training Council is the official training organisation in
periodical publishing. It offers a wide range of short courses covering manage¬
ment, editorial work, advertisement sales and circulation sales. It has special
responsibility for editorial training and administers an industry-wide editorial
training scheme for those already in employment. The postgraduate courses in
journalism at the University of Wales College of Cardiff and the City University,
London, offer periodical journalism options, and the London College of Printing
provides postgraduate courses and General Certificate of Education Advanced
level courses in periodical journalism. Reed Business Publishing, one of the
largest publishing companies, runs an in-company training course for suitable
candidates from the general public on a fee-paying basis.
Under the Harry Brittain Memorial Fellowship Scheme, administered by
the Commonwealth Press Union, several young Commonwealth journalists
each year spend three months working and studying in Britain, while the
Reuter Foundation, established in 1982, awards six fellowships each year to
journalists from developing countries to study at Oxford, Stanford and
Bordeaux universities.
Annual Student Media Awards are presented jointly by The Guardian news¬
paper and the National Union of Students to students in higher education who
have excelled in college press, television and radio journalism.
The most important employers’ organisations are the Newspaper Publishers
Association, whose members publish national newspapers in London and
Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which represents the regional, local and
London suburban press; the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society, which repre¬
sents the interests of daily and Sunday newspapers in Scotland; the Scottish
Newspaper Publishers’ Association, which represents the owners of weekly
newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern Ireland Newspapers, whose mem¬
bers are the proprietors of weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland; and the
Periodical Publishers’ Association, whose membership embraces the majority of
independent publishers of business, professional and consumer journals.
THE PRESS
451
The Press
Council
Advertising
Practice
Organisations representing journalists are the National Union of Journalists,
with some 33,000 members, and the Institute of Journalists, with about 2,500
members. Two main printing unions are concerned with the press: the Society
of Graphical and Allied Trades (SOGAT) '82, with about 190,000 members, and
the National Graphical Association 1982, with around 130,000 members, about
one-sixth of whom work on newspapers.
The Guild of British Newspaper Editors is the officially recognised profes¬
sional body for newspaper editors. It has approximately 400 members and aims
to maintain the professional status and independence of editors, to defend the
freedom of the press, and to improve the education and training of journalists.
The British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to
which most editors of house journals belong. The Association of British Editors,
representing the whole range of media including radio, television, newspapers
and magazines, was established in 1984.
The main aim of the Foreign Press Association, founded in 1888, is to help the
correspondents of overseas newspapers in their work by arranging press
conferences, tours, briefings and a range of other facilities.
The Press Council is a voluntary and non-statutory body founded by the
newspaper industry in 1953, on the recommendation of the first Royal Commis¬
sion on the press, to safeguard the freedom of the press and to ensure that it
conducts itself responsibly. It comprises equal numbers of press and non-press
members with an independent chairman. Its full aims are to: preserve the
established freedom of the press; maintain the character of the press in
accordance with the highest professional and commercial standards; keep
under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of information of
public interest and importance; deal with complaints about the conduct of the
press or the conduct of individuals and organisations towards the press; report
on developments in the press which may tend towards greater concentration or
monopoly; make representations on appropriate occasions to the Government,
the United Nations and press organisations abroad; publish its adjudications
and periodic reports recording its work; and review from time to time develop¬
ments in the press and the factors affecting them.
Dealing with complaints from the public about the content and conduct of the
press is the Council’s best-known function. It has no power to impose penalties
on publications which it has found guilty of malpractice, but relies on the
sanction of adverse publicity. It can censure newspapers, magazines, editors
and journalists, and issues adjudications which the editor of the newspaper or
magazine criticised by the Council has a moral obligation to publish in full. The
Council sometimes initiates inquiries into aspects of press conduct without first
receiving public complaints. Its annual reports include press statistics and
articles on the structure of leading press groups.
In February 1989 the Press Council began reviewing its role and function, and
has invited interested parties to comment.
Advertising practice in the press (and in the cinema and on posters) is regulated
and controlled by the Advertising Standards Authority, an independent body
which aims to promote and enforce the highest standards of advertising in the
interests of the public and the industry, in particular through the British Code
of Advertising Practice. The objects of the code are to ensure that advertisements
are legal, decent, honest and truthful; that they are prepared with a sense of
responsibility to the consumer; that they conform to the principles of fair
competition as generally accepted in business; and that no advertisement brings
advertising into disrepute or reduces confidence in advertising as a service to
industry and the public.
452
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Press and
the Law
The Authority’s main activities are monitoring advertisements for their
compliance with the code; initiating modifications to the code; and dealing with
complaints received direct from members of the public. Its main sanction is the
recommendation to media that advertisements considered to be in breach of the
code should not be published. It also publishes regular reports on the results of
its investigations, naming the companies involved. The Director General of Fair
Trading has the power to seek a court injunction to prevent the publication of a
misleading advertisement.
The press generally has the same freedom as the individual to comment on
matters of public interest. There are no specific press laws, but certain statutes
include sections which apply to the press. There is a legal requirement to
reproduce ‘the printer’s imprint’ (the printer’s name and place of publication) on
all publications, including newspapers. In addition, publishers are legally
obliged to deposit copies of newspapers and other publications at the British
Library and to make annual returns to Companies House in the rare circum¬
stances in which a newspaper is not printed and published as a joint stock
company. Other provisions relate to the extent of newspaper ownership in
television and radio companies; the transfer of newspaper assets; restrictions on
reporting certain types of court proceedings and on publishing material likely to
stir up racial hatred; the right of press representatives to be admitted to
meetings of local authorities; restrictions on the publication of advertisement
and investment circulars (which are governed by Acts dealing with the publica¬
tion of false or misleading descriptions of goods and services and with fraud) and
of advertisements for remedies for certain diseases, which are covered by public
health legislation; agreements between British Telecom and newspaper
proprietors on telegraphic communications, which must comply with tele¬
graphs legislation; restrictions on certain types of prize competition; and
copyrights, which come under copyright laws.
Of particular relevance to the press are laws such as those on contempt of
court, official secrets, libel and defamation. A newspaper may not publish
comments on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice
the courts’ reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings, nor
may it publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence
the result. The unauthorised acquisition and publication of information from
state and official sources is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts 1911 and
1989. Newspapers are also liable to proceedings for seditious libel and incite¬
ment to disaffection. Most legal proceedings against the press are libel actions
brought by private individuals. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publishers,
printer and distributor of the newspaper, as well as the author, may all be held
responsible. An independent inquiry has been set up by the Government to
consider strengthening existing measures to protect individual privacy from the
activities of the press and recourse against the press for individual citizens.
Government officials and representatives of the media form the Defence, Press
and Broadcasting Committee, which has agreed that in some circumstances the
publication of certain categories of information might endanger national secur¬
ity. Details of these categories are contained in Defence Notices (D Notices)
circulated to the media, members of which are asked to seek advice from the
Secretary of the Committee, a retired senior military officer, before publishing
information in these areas. Compliance with any advice offered by the Secretary
is expected but there is no legal force behind it and the final decision on whether
to publish rests with the editor, producer or publisher concerned.
Television and Radio
Broadcasting is based on the tradition that it is a public service accountable to
the people through Parliament. Two public bodies—the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC) and the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA)—provide
television and radio services throughout the country. In Wales the Welsh Fourth
Channel Authority is responsible for programmes on one television channel. The
authorities work to broad requirements and objectives defined by Parliament,
but are otherwise independent in the day-to-day conduct of business.
Independence carries with it certain obligations over programmes and
programme content. Programmes must display, as far as possible, a proper
balance and wide range of subject matter, impartiality in matters of controversy
and accuracy in news coverage, and must not offend against good taste. Codes of
guidance on violence in television programmes, particularly during hours when
large numbers of children are likely to be viewing, are operated by both
authorities.
A new Broadcasting Standards Council has been set up to act as a focus for
public concern about the portrayed of violence and sex, and about standards of
taste and decency, in television and radio programmes and in video recordings;
it is drawing up a code of practice on these matters. The Council monitors
programmes, examines complaints and undertakes research. The Government
proposes to give it statutory powers under which the BBC and other broadcast¬
ing regulatory bodies would be required to implement the Council’s code of
practice and broadcasters would be obliged to publish its findings on complaints
in whatever form the Council deemed appropriate; programmes broadcast to
Britain from abroad would be monitored by the Council and anyone in Britain
considered to be sustaining unacceptable overseas satellite services receivable in
Britain could be prosecuted for a criminal offence.
A code of advertising standards and practice is operated by the IBA. (The BBC
does not broadcast advertisements.) A complaints commission deals with
allegations of unfair treatment or infringement of privacy in programmes.
Publicly available video recordings are classified according to their suitability for
different audiences.
As well as regulating broadcasting generally, the Home Secretary is answer-
able to Parliament on broad policy questions, and may issue directions on a
number of technical and other matters. Since October 1988, for example, the
BBC and the IBA have been prohibited from broadcasting direct statements
made by representatives of Northern Ireland terrorist organisations and their
supporters (during election campaigns the policy is modified).
Television viewing is by far the most popular leisure pastime in Britain: nearly
everyone watches television, average viewing time per person being about 25
hours a week. About 50 per cent of households have two or more receivers. The
growth in use of video-cassette recorders and equipment (including home
computers) for playing television games has for many people increased the
choice of entertainment available in the home. Some 55 per cent of households
rent or own a video-cassette recorder. Practically every home has a radio set, and
car radios and portable sets have made radio a major daytime diversion.
Britain is one of the world’s foremost exporters of television productions; in
1988 overseas earnings of the television companies amounted to £128 million.
British television productions continue to win large numbers of international
awards.
454
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Future of
Broadcasting
The British
Broadcasting
Corporation
In November 1988 the Government issued a White Paper, Broadcasting in the
’90s: Competition, Choice and Quality, containing proposals for creating a
broadcasting framework conducive to greater competition and wider choice for
viewers and listeners while safeguarding and encouraging quality and diversity
as well as high standards of taste and decency. In keeping with its general
deregulation policies, it envisages substantial liberalisation and more reliance
on the consumer, but at the same time retaining important positive program¬
ming obligations. The proposals are designed to build on Britain’s rich
broadcasting heritage and to take advantage of major technological advances in
order to develop services determined by consumer demand rather than
government regulation. If the framework receives legislative approval, the
Government believes that there will be opportunity for a great increase in the
number of television and radio channels, particularly at local level. Clear rules
would be laid down to limit excess concentration of ownership and excessive
cross-media ownership.
The Government plans to introduce greater competition in the terrestrial
broadcasting transmission system.
The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by Royal Charter and by
a Licence and Agreement. The Corporation’s board of 12 governors, including
the chairman, vice-chairman and national governors for Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland, is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the Government
and has ultimate responsibility for all aspects of broadcasting. Committees
advise it on a wide range of matters, including the social effects of television,
religious broadcasting, music, agriculture, schools broadcasting, further educa¬
tion, programmes for ethnic minorities, science and engineering, and charitable
appeals. The governors appoint the Director-General, the Corporation’s chief
executive officer, who heads the BBC’s board of management, which is in charge
of the daily operation of the services.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
control the policy and content of television and radio programmes intended
primarily for reception in their areas. Local radio councils, representative of the
local community, advise on the development and operation of the BBC’s local
radio stations.
In March 1989 the BBC issued new guidelines to programme makers offering
practical advice across the whole range of programming, including the
presentation of news and political issues.
The domestic services of the BBC are financed principally from the sale of
television licences. Households with television must buy an annual licence
costing £22 for black and white or £66 for colour. Over 19 million licences were
current in February 1989, of which about 17-5 million were for colour. Licence
income is supplemented by profits from trading activities, including television
programme exports, sale of recordings and publications connected with BBC
programmes, hire and sale of educational films, film library sales, and
exhibitions based on programmes. More than two-thirds of expenditure on
domestic services relates to television. The BBC meets the cost of its local radio
stations, while some local education authorities help to make educational
programmes.
The BBC’s World Service is financed by a grant-in-aid from the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office.
Under the White Paper’s proposals, the BBC would continue in its public
service broadcasting role, providing high-quality programmes with wide appeal
that educate, inform and entertain. For some time to come it would be financed
largely by the licence fee and the government grant for the World Service, but
would be encouraged to continue developing alternative forms of funding.
FARMING
Four stamps depicting the main areas of food
production were issued by the Post Office to
commemorate the centenary of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the 150th
anniversary of the Royal Agricultural Society and
the Royal International Agricultural Show.
Courgettes on an organic farm in Wales: organic food
is becoming increasingly available in response to
consumer demand.
GLASGOW: EUROPEAN CITY OF CULTURE 1990
Chinese ceramics from the
Burrell Collection, which is
housed in a £20-5 million
modern museum.
Historic listed buildings have
been converted into the Princes
Square shopping centre. Many of
the details, such as the glass
etchings, were crafted by hand,
and the scheme won an award
from the Royal Institute of British
Architects.
The innovative Scottish architect and artist
Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868-1928)
designed the Glasgow School of Art, which
was completed in 1909.
The Mackintosh Room at the Glasgow
School of Art displays some of the
characteristic features of the artist’s
design.
CRAFT INDUSTRIES
There has been a return to traditional
techniques in the manufacture of
keyboard instruments. These upright
pianos made by Laurence and Nash in
West Yorkshire are used as ‘warm-up’
instruments by concert pianists at
London’s Promenade Concerts.
R. Wilkinson and Son, south London,
is believed to be the last company in
the world to offer the cutting skills of
edge glass cutters, and the only
company to hand-build chandeliers. It
also restores and repairs antique
chandeliers, and manufactures small
items like cut-glass decanters.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
455
The
Independent
Broadcasting
Authority
The Programme
Companies
including subscription and night-time ‘downloading’ services (using vacant
night hours on television to provide programmes for specialist audiences—see
p 459).
The IBA’s constitution and finances are governed by statute. Its 12 members
(three of whom have responsibility for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) are
appointed by the Home Secretary. The IBA does not produce radio or television
programmes; these are provided by independent programme companies on a
regional basis and by the Channel Four Television Company (a wholly owned
subsidiary of the IBA). The IBA’s main functions are to appoint the companies,
supervise programme arrangements, control advertising, and build, own and
operate transmitting stations. Its chief executive officer, the Director-General, is
supported by a headquarters and regional office staff covering all technical and
administrative services.
The IBA is advised by a General Advisory Council, by Scottish, Northern
Ireland and Welsh committees, and by committees on educational broadcasting,
religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and advertising. A specialist panel
advises on advertisements of a medical nature. Local committees advise on local
radio services.
The IBA’s finance comes from annual rental payments made by the television
and radio programme companies for the use of its transmitters. The television
programme companies are also liable to pay the IBA a levy related to their profit
for transfer to government funds. For the period January 1990 to December
1992, the Government has decided that the levy will be raised both from profits
and from net advertising revenue, so as to promote greater cost consciousness
among independent television contractors and to ensure an adequate return to
the Government.
Fifteen independent (ITV) companies hold contracts to provide programmes in
the 14 independent television regions (two companies share the contract for
London, one providing programmes during weekdays and the other at the
weekend). A contract to supply a national early morning television service,
transmitted on the ITV network, is held by an additional company. The
companies operate on a commercial basis, deriving most of their revenue from
the sale of advertising time. The financial resources, advertising revenue and
programme production of the companies vary considerably, depending largely
on the size of population in the areas in which they operate. Although
newspapers may acquire an interest in programme companies, there are
safeguards to protect the public interest.
In consultation with the IBA, each company plans the content of the
programmes to be broadcast in its area. These are produced by the company
itself and by other programme companies or bought from elsewhere. There are
controls on the number of television programmes which may be bought from
abroad. The five largest companies, serving London, north-west England, East
Midlands, West Midlands and Yorkshire, provide more programmes for broad¬
cast elsewhere on the national network than do the smaller ones. A common
news service is provided 24 hours a day by Independent Television News (ITN), a
non-profit-making company in which all the programme companies are
shareholders. Negotiations for the supply, exchange and purchase of program¬
mes and their co-ordinated transmission through the independent television
network take place largely on the Network Programme Committee, which
consists of representatives of all the programme companies and of the IBA.
Similar principles apply to independent local radio. The programme com¬
panies are under contract to the IBA, operate under its control and are financed
by advertising revenue. News coverage is supplied as a common service by
Independent Radio News.
456
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Television
There is provision in the planned legislation for the replacement of the IBA
(and the Cable Authority—see p 457) by a new Independent Television Commis¬
sion, which would supervise, with a ‘light touch’, all commercial television
services. It would set programming requirements, award franchises by competi¬
tive tender and regulate licensees; however, it would not be involved in detailed
scheduling of programmes. Additionally, the Commission would enforce rules
designed to limit cross-media ownership and excessive concentration of
ownership.
Four television channels are in operation. BBC 1 and BBC 2 are operated by the
BBC; ITV is controlled by, and Channel 4 is owned by, the IBA; all four channels
broadcast on 625 lines ultra-high frequency (uhf). About 99 per cent of the
population live within range of transmission.
The BBC and ITV have accepted a government target that, by 1993, 25 per
cent of their original programme output should be acquired from independent
producers. Both the BBC and the commercial television companies enter into
co-production agreements with overseas television corporations in order to
make new programmes economically.
Apart from a break during the second world war the BBC has been making
regular television broadcasts since 1936. Over 120 hours of programmes are
transmitted by BBC 1 and almost 102 by BBC 2 every week; all BBC 2
programmes and the majority of those on BBC 1 are broadcast on the national
network. Approximately 60 per cent of the BBC’s home-produced network
programmes for 1988-89 were produced in London.
Through co-ordinated planning of its two services the BBC caters simul¬
taneously for people of different interests. While both services cover the whole
range of television output, BBC 1 presents more programmes of general interest,
such as light entertainment, sport, current affairs, children’s programmes and
outside broadcasts, while BBC 2 places greater emphasis on minority interests,
but also provides documentaries, travel programmes, serious drama, music,
programmes on pastimes and international films. On BBC 1 the daytime
schedule consists of an early morning television service of news, information
and light entertainment from Monday to Friday, as well as a full schedule of
programmes catering for many interests throughout the rest of the morning and
afternoon seven days a week.
The first regular ITV programmes began in London in 1955. On average each
of the 14 ITV areas transmits some 136 hours of television programmes a week,
nearly two-fifths of them comprising informative programmes—including news,
documentaries, and programmes on current affairs, education and religion. ITV
programmes are broadcast 24 hours a day in all parts of the country.
Almost three-quarters of programmes are produced by the programme
companies. A national early morning television service on ITV transmits over
three hours of news, information, current affairs and light entertainment daily.
Channel 4, which began broadcasting in 1982, provides a national television
service throughout Britain, except in Wales, which has a corresponding service
(Sianel 4 Cymru—S4C—see below). The IBA must ensure that programmes on
Channel 4 are complementary to those of ITV, catering for tastes and interests
not normally catered for by the original independent service. It must present a
suitable proportion (about 15 per cent) of educational programmes, encourage
innovation and experiment, and include a substantial proportion of pro¬
grammes from independent producers. An early morning news and current
affairs service was launched in April 1989. Channel 4 broadcasts for approx¬
imately 100 hours a week, about half of which are devoted to informative
programmes. It transmits late-night programmes until 03.00 hours seven days a
week. The service, both nationally and in Wales, is financed by subscriptions
TELEVISION AND RADIO
457
Teletext
Cable
Services
from the programme companies in return for advertising time in fourth channel
programmes broadcast in their own regions. In Wales programmes on the fourth
channel are run and controlled by the Welsh Fourth Channel Authority,
appointed by the Home Secretary. The Authority is required to ensure that a
significant proportion (in practice some 23 hours a week) are in Welsh and that
those broadcast between 18.30 and 22.00 hours are mainly in Welsh. At other
times the Welsh fourth channel shows national Channel 4 programmes.
Under the White Paper proposals, the ITV channel would be renamed Channel
3 and would be less closely regulated than at present. It would continue to offer
varied programming, and, in common with all other commercial television
services, would be subject to consumer protection obligations. The new channel
would be regionally based and franchises would be awarded by competitive
tender to applicants satisfying programming requirements, which would
include an obligation to provide a reasonable proportion of programmes of high
quality and for the first time a statutory requirement to present programmes
made in and about the region. Channel 4 and S4C’s distinctive remit to screen
diverse programmes would be enhanced, and their advertising sold separately
from that on Channel 3.
A new national terrestrial television channel—Channel 5—covering 65 to 70
per cent of the population would be established during 1993. Franchises would
be awarded by competitive tender and the channel would be financed by
advertising and/or subscription.
The proposed legislation would provide for the development of local television
services using cable and microwave transmission systems and in some cases
carrying over 30 channels.
The BBC and the 1BA each operate a teletext service, offering constantly updated
information on a broad variety of subjects, including news, sport, travel
information, local weather conditions and entertainment. The teletext system
allows the television signal to carry additional information which can be selected
and displayed as ‘pages’ of text and graphics on receivers equipped with the
necessary decoders. Both Ceefax, the BBC’s service, and the IBA’s Oracle service
have a subtitling facility for certain of their programmes for people with hearing
difficulties. The proposed Channels 3 and 5 would be obliged to offer a subtitling
service for some of their programme schedules.
Radio teletext, pioneered in Britain by the IBA and independent radio, uses
spare capacity on VHF/FM frequencies to provide up-to-the-moment financial
information in London on hand-held receivers.
The Government intends to put in place a regulatory structure to ease the
development of new teletext services.
Until recently, a small proportion of households with television sets received
their television services by cable. The vast majority of cable systems have been
used solely to relay broadcast television and radio services in order to improve
reception quality, to avoid ‘screening’ by buildings or the local topography, or
because external aerials are not allowed on some residential buildings.
Under the Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 a more general expansion of
non-broadcast cable television services was permitted and a national Cable
Authority was established to issue licences, supervise programme services and
promote cable development. It is intended that cable investment should be
privately financed; that regulation should be as light as possible to allow the
development of a wide range of services and facilities, and flexible enough to
adapt to changing technology; and that there should be certain safeguards for
existing broadcasting services. In 1983 licences were awarded to 11 cable
systems to serve as pilot projects, and some existing cable operators, formerly
relaying broadcast services, have been licensed to offer additional services on
458
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Broadcasting
by Satellite
Radio
their existing systems. By March 1989 the Cable Authority had awarded a
further 22 cable franchises and had advertised an additional 18 new franchises.
The new broadband cable systems at present carry up to 30 television
channels, including terrestrial broadcasts, satellite television, channels deli¬
vered by videotape and local services; some also provide their own telephone
services, home shopping and other interactive services.
In March 1989 over 1 -5 million homes were capable of receiving non-broadcast
cable services. The number of homes receiving such services was 275,000. Cable
operators are represented by the Cable Television Association.
Eleven British-based satellite television channels have been set up to supply
programmes to cable operators in Britain and, in many cases, throughout
Europe. While some offer general entertainment, others concentrate on specific
areas of interest, such as sport, music and children’s programmes.
Since February 1989 direct broadcasting by satellite, by which television
pictures are transmitted directly from space into people’s homes, has been
available throughout Britain from the privately financed Astra satellite, which
transmits four channels covering light entertainment, news, feature films and
sport on behalf of Sky Television; the signals are receivable on small dish aerials.
The IBA has appointed a programme contractor, British Satellite Broadcasting,
for the five satellite broadcasting channels allocated to Britain by international
agreement. It is expected that five separate programme services devoted to news
and sport, feature films, children’s programmes, popular music and general
entertainment will be on the air by mid-1990. They will be commercial services
funded by advertising and subscription.
BBC Radio has four national channels. Radio 1 FM broadcasts rock and pop
music (FM stereo is available in two-thirds of Britain), while Radio 2 transmits a
broad range of popular music and light entertainment 24 hours a day and is the
principal channel for the coverage of sport. Although Radio 3 broadcasts mainly
classical music, it also presents drama, poetry and short stories, talks and
documentaries, and Test match cricket (on medium wave only). Radio 4 is the
main speech network, providing the principal news and current affairs service,
as well as drama, comedy, documentaries and panel games; it also carries
parliamentary coverage and live relays of major public events. The BBC plans to
launch Radio 5, which will be devoted to sport and education, in 1990 or soon
after.
There are 36 BBC local radio stations serving England and the Channel
Islands, and regional and community radio services in Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland, as well as 62 ILR (independent local radio) areas throughout
Britain. Further BBC and ILR stations are planned. About 90 per cent of the
population is served by BBC or ILR stations. Broadcasts provide a comprehen¬
sive service of local news and information, music and other entertainment,
education, consumer advice and coverage of local events, and offer listeners a
chance to air their views, often by using the phone-in technique.
More than 300 hospitals and many universities have closed-circuit radio
stations. The organisers of sporting events can apply for licences to transmit
their own radio broadcasts locally supplying information and commentaries.
Under the Government’s proposed legislation the BBC would continue to
broadcast nationally programmes of a public service nature but up to three
additional national commercial radio services not subject to public service
obligations would be assigned by competitive tender to promote greater choice
and competition. A new tier of independent community or special interest local
stations would also be established. As a step towards the new arrangements, the
Government has given approval for the issue of contracts for 20 new community
radio stations under existing legislation.
TELEVISION AND RADIO
459
Educational
and Special
Interest
Broadcasting
BBC
World
Service
A new radio authority would take over responsibility for independent radio
from the IBA and would supervise with a light touch. Strict controls on the
limits of ownership of local and national radio would be imposed by the
Government in the interests of a competitive radio broadcasting market. New
proposals have been announced to deter illegal (‘pirate’} broadcasters.
Both the BBC and the IBA broadcast educational programmes for children and
students in schools of all kinds, as well as for pre-school children, and for adults
in colleges and other institutions and in their homes. Broadcasts to schools
cover most subjects of the curriculum, while education programmes for adults
cover many fields of learning, vocational training and recreation. Supporting
material, in the form of books, pamphlets, filmstrips, computer software, and
audio and video cassettes, is available to supplement the programmes. The BBC
broadcasts television and radio programmes made specially for students of the
Open University, most of whose undergraduate courses contain video and audio
components, some of them on cassette for use with correspondence texts. The
BBC Open University Centre also produces educational and training audio¬
visual materials in collaboration with external agencies such as the Department
of Trade and Industry, the Department of Education and Science and the
Engineering Industry Training Board. The Open College, a new initiative in
vocational training, was launched in 1987; it transmits courses on Channel 4
ranging from basic literacy and numeracy to high-level technological studies.
In 1988 the BBC started broadcasting a night-time medical television service
for doctors; a specially adapted video recorder is needed to receive the service.
Permission has been granted to the BBC to operate a night-time television
service aimed at the business community. It is planning to develop other
specialist television services for the professions, business and industry.
Under the White Paper proposals, the BBC would be expected to continue to
provide programmes for schools and to contribute to the operation of the Open
University. The proposed Independent Television Commission (see p 455) would
also have a duty to offer schools programmes on independent television.
The BBC World Service broadcasts by radio world-wide, using English and 37
other languages, for over 770 hours a week. The main objectives are to give
unbiased news, reflect British opinion and project British life, culture and
developments in science and industry. News bulletins, current affairs pro¬
grammes, political commentaries and topical magazine programmes form the
main part of the output, with a full sports service, music, drama and general
entertainment. Regular listeners are estimated to number 120 million.
The languages in which the World Service broadcasts and the length of time
each is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart from this the BBC
has full responsibility and is completely independent in determining the content
of news and other programmes. A plan to improve audibility is in progress.
There are broadcasts by radio for 24 hours a day in English, which are
supplemented at peak listening times by programmes of special interest to
Africa, South Asia and the Falkland Islands. Plans to broadcast a televised
service are being considered by the BBC.
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are re-broadcast by the radio
services of many countries. Re-broadcasting involves direct relays from BBC
transmissions and the use of recorded programmes supplied through the BBC
Transcription Service. There are some 2,500 re-broadcasts weekly of World
Service programmes in about 50 countries. The Transcription Service offers
programmes to about 100 countries.
The BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most extensive
language-teaching undertaking in the world. English lessons are broadcast daily
by radio with explanations in 28 other languages, and recorded lessons are
460
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
COI Overseas
Radio and
Television
Services
Advertising
Parliamentary
and Political
Broadcasting
supplied to numerous stations free of charge. English by Television programmes
are also shown in more than 100 countries. There is a wide range of printed and
audio material accompanying these programmes.
Another part of the World Service, the Monitoring Service, listens to and
reports on foreign broadcasts, supplying a daily flow of significant news and
comment from overseas to the BBC and the Government. This information is
also sold to the press, to companies, to academic staff and public bodies.
Radio for overseas is also produced by the radio services of the Central Office of
Information (COI). A wide range of recorded material is sent to radio stations in
over 100 countries. COI television services provide material such as
documentary and magazine programmes for distribution to overseas stations.
The BBC does not give publicity to any firm or organised interest except when it
is necessary in order to make effective and informative programmes. It must not
broadcast any commercial advertisement or any sponsored programme; it may,
however, cover sponsored events.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television at the beginning and
end of programmes as well as in breaks during programmes; advertisers are not
permitted directly to influence programme content or editorial control. Adver¬
tisements must be clearly distinguishable and separate from programmes, and
the time given to them must not be so great as to detract from the value of the
programmes as a medium of information, education or entertainment. Advertis¬
ing is limited to seven and a half minutes an hour between 18.00 and 23.00
hours, with the overall amount of advertising throughout the day normally
restricted to seven minutes an hour. The IBA’s Oracle teletext service (see p 457)
carries paginated advertisements. Independent local radio stations are normally
limited to a maximum of nine minutes of advertising each hour. The IBA has a
code governing standards and practice in advertising on television and radio
and giving guidance on the types and methods of advertisement which are
prohibited; this includes advertising with a political or religious object or for
cigarettes or betting. Advertisements may not be inserted in certain types of
programme, such as broadcasts to schools. A comparable code has been adopted
by the Cable Authority, which is responsible for advertising control and policy
on cable television. Both the IBA and the Cable Authority have the power to
prevent transmission of advertisements which they consider misleading. The
IBA has endorsed the Principles for Advertising by Direct Satellite Broadcasting
which have been drawn up by the European Broadcasting Union. There are
plans to give the proposed Independent Television Commission powers compar¬
able to those of the IBA and the Cable Authority. The Broadcasting Standards
Council’s code of practice (see p 453) would cover advertisements.
The Government has no general privileged access to radio or television but
government publicity material to support non-political campaigns may be
broadcast on independent radio and television. This is prepared through the
COI and broadcast and paid for on a normal commercial basis. Short public
service items, concerning health, safety and welfare, are also produced by the
COI for free transmission by the BBC and independent television and radio.
The proceedings of the Houses of Parliament are recorded round-the-clock by the
BBC for its parliamentary sound archive. Broadcast reporting of the House of
Commons and its committees consists of sound recordings used in television
and radio news and current affairs programmes, either live or more usually in
recorded and edited form. Sound and picture recordings of the proceedings of
the House of Lords are televised or broadcast on radio.
In 1988 the House of Commons voted to allow televising of its proceedings for
TELEVISION AND RADIO
461
Audience
Research
Technical
Developments
a trial period, and this is likely to start in November 1989. Proceedings will be
recorded by an independent company appointed by a new House of Commons
broadcasting unit, which will make television pictures available to the BBC,
Independent Television News (ITN) and other approved broadcasters for use in
news and current affairs programmes. Television reporting of the proceedings
will be subject to strict rules about what can be shown; coverage will be overseen
by a select committee of the House of Commons.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are transmitted periodically on radio
and television under rules agreed between the major political parties, the BBC
and the IBA, and there are special arrangements for the period following the
announcement of a general election.
Both the BBC and the IBA are required to keep themselves informed on the state
of public opinion about the programmes (and, in the case of the IBA, the
advertising) they broadcast. This is done through the continuous measurement
of the size and composition of audiences and their opinions of programmes. For
television, this work is undertaken through the Broadcasters’ Audience
Research Board, which is owned jointly by the BBC and the IBA. Information is
collected from a panel of about 3,000 homes throughout the country selected to
be representative of all private households in Britain with a television set. Meters
attached to each television set and linked to a central computer are used to
record times of viewing, numbers of viewers and programmes watched. Regular
surveys are conducted by both the BBC and the IBA to gauge audience opinion
on television and radio services, and public opinion is further assessed by both
bodies through the work of their many advisory committees, councils and
panels (whose members are drawn from a wide cross-section of the public); the
regular holding of public meetings to debate services; and careful consideration
of correspondence and telephone calls from listeners and viewers.
One of the most important recent developments in television has been in news
coverage, where compact electronic cameras have replaced film cameras,
eliminating the need for film processing and enabling pictures to be transmitted
directly to a studio or recorded on video tape on location. Other advances include
the adoption of digital video tape recorders, the increasing use of computer-
aided equipment for picture generation and manipulation, the utilisation of
portable satellite links to transmit pictures from remote locations to studios,
and the introduction of stereo sound based on the BBC’s NICAM 728 digital
system. The Radio Data System, which was developed for the British market by
the BBC and is being adopted throughout Europe, offers automatic radio tuning
and station identification, especially useful for car radios. The IBA is in the
process of equipping its television networks for digital stereo sound. It is also
engaged in the further development of digital techniques for studio applications
and inter-city links, and a study of the future use of satellites for broadcasting
which has included the development of a new MAC/packet family of transmis¬
sion systems for use on future direct broadcast satellites and for distribution on
cable networks. The European Broadcasting Union has recommended the
MAC/packet family system as the standard for Europe, and the Government has
endorsed D-MAC as the system for British direct broadcasting by satellite.
The IBA has contributed to the development of an enhanced MAC system
capable of providing wide-screen pictures with a definition of about 1,000 lines,
fully compatible with conventional MAC transmissions.
The BBC and IBA co-operated in the development of teletext, and more than 30
million teletext sets in 30 countries are based on the British system. British
Telecom’s public viewdata service, ‘Prestel’, offers a broad range of information
transmitted via the telephone and viewed on the television screen.
462
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
International
Relations
The Government has authorised British Telecom, in conjunction with several
British telecommunications firms, to transmit television pictures over a
fibre-optic communications network in a field trial. British Telecom has also
demonstrated a method of transmitting television using radio signals with
extremely short wavelengths.
The BBC and the IBA (together with the Independent Television Association) are
active members of the European Broadcasting Union. This body manages
Eurovision, the international network of television news and programme
exchange, and is responsible for the technical and administrative arrangements
for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes and news over the Eurovision
network and intercontinental satellite links; it also maintains a technical
monitoring station where frequency measurements and other observations on
broadcasting stations are carried out. The Union provides a forum linking the
major public services and national broadcasters of Western Europe and other
parts of the world and co-ordinates co-operation in radio and television.
Co-operation between governments takes place within the Council of Europe
(linking 23 countries) and the European Community (comprising 12 member
states). Britain has signed a Council of Europe Convention on the regulation of
broadcasting across frontiers. Rules have been devised covering programme
standards, advertising, sponsorship and a number of other matters. Under
these, programmes must not be indecent, contain pornography, give undue
prominence to violence or be likely to incite racial hatred; nor should
programmes unsuitable for children be broadcast at a time when they can be
expected to be watching. A comparable European Community directive on
cross-border broadcasting has been approved by member states.
Visnews is the largest television news agency in the world, supplying world
newsfilm to 425 broadcasters in 85 countries and running bureaux in 29 major
cities throughout the world. The BBC and Reuters are shareholders in the
company. Worldwide Television News, owned by Independent Television News,
the American Broadcasting Company and Channel 9 in Australia, supplies news
services to 1,000 broadcasters in 75 countries. Both agencies provide services
via the Eurovision network and by satellite.
The BBC and the IBA are associate members of the Asian Pacific Broadcasting
Union, and the BBC also belongs to the Commonwealth Broadcasting Associa¬
tion (CBA), whose members extend to one another such facilities as the use of
studios, recording channels and programme contributions.
The BBC provides technical aid, particularly in training the staff of other
broadcasting organisations throughout the world; members of its staff are
seconded for service overseas.
The Government finances a number of overseas students on broadcasting
training courses at the BBC, the British Council (which a,ims to promote a wider
knowledge of Britain and the English language abroad and to develop closer
cultural relations between Britain and other countries) and the Thomson
Foundation Television College in Glasgow, which sends lecturers and arranges
courses overseas.
The BBC and the IBA participate in the work of the International Telecom¬
munications Union, the United Nations agency responsible for regulating and
controlling all international telecommunications services (including radio and
television), allocating and registering all radio frequencies and promoting and
co-ordinating the international study of technical problems in broadcasting.
The BBC and the IBA are also represented on the United Kingdom Committee of
the International Special Committee on Radio Interference.
Sport and Recreation
The British invented and codified the rules of many of the sports and games
which are now played all over the world, and there is widespread interest in most
kinds of sport throughout the country. Large crowds attend occasions such as
the football and rugby league Challenge Cup Finals at Wembley Stadium,
international rugby union matches at Twickenham, Murrayfield and Cardiff
Arms Park, the Wimbledon lawn tennis championships, the classic horse races.
Grand Prix motor racing and international cricket matches. Extensive coverage
on television (3,240 hours in 1988, compared with 2,850 in 1987) has helped to
generate interest in a wide variety of sports and recreations including basket¬
ball, darts, snooker, ice skating, skiing and athletics, while American football
and baseball are becoming known to the British public through televised
transmissions from the United States. The advent of direct broadcasting by
satellite and the greater availability of cable are increasing televised coverage of
sport substantially. The satellite service Sky Television has a channel devoted to
sport operating seven days a week, while Screensport, a cable service, also
broadcasts sporting events daily.
Levels of participation in sport have been rising, due mainly to the increase in
leisure time and facilities, greater mobility and improvements in living stan¬
dards. A growing awareness of the importance of regular exercise for good health
has been reflected in the upsurge of interest in jogging, keep fit and dance-
related forms of exercise. It has been estimated that 25 million people over the
age of 13 regularly take part in sport or exercise, men outnumbering women.
Walking is by far the most popular recreation, followed by swimming, football,
golf, keep fit and yoga, athletics, angling, squash, badminton and cycling. Other
widely practised spare-time physical activities include gardening and ‘do-it-
yourself’ repair and improvement work.
The Government has long recognised the importance of physical recreation for
the health and general welfare of the community; the social role that sport can
play has become more important at a time of rapid change in work and leisure
patterns. In addition, success in sport is thought to enhance Britain’s interna¬
tional status and prestige. The ten-year strategy for the development of sport in
England drawn up by the Sports Council in 1982, and reviewed in 1988, is to
encourage further increases in participation, particularly among young people
and women; to provide adequate facilities for the whole community, especially in
the inner cities and in deprived rural areas; and to continue to encourage high
standards of performance. Similar strategies are being followed by the Sports
Councils for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The Sports Council’s ‘Action
Sport’ programme, designed principally to encourage socially disadvantaged
people to take up sport and recreation, has been managed in partnership with
local authorities, many of which have gone on to provide their own schemes
without Sports Council financial support; 80 schemes are still running with the
aid of Sports Council funding. The Council has also supported initiatives aimed
at strengthening links between football clubs and their local communities.
‘What’s Your Sport?', a campaign to increase participation in sports, was
launched by the four Sports Councils in 1987. A major review of sport and
recreation provision in inner cities was undertaken in 1988 by a government-
appointed group of business people, athletes and sports administrators.
464
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Drug Misuse
Spectator
Violence
In 1987 the Government initiated a public debate on the future direction of
official sports policy. It posed the questions of whether a correct balance was
being achieved between funding sporting excellence and encouraging wider
participation, and whether enough was being done to promote private sector
investment in sport, especially through corporate sponsorship.
The problem of drug-taking in sport in order to achieve improvements in
performance unfairly has been a cause of concern both to the Sports Councils
and to the governing bodies of sport. A campaign to tackle the problem,
launched by the Sports Council, led to the introduction of a new drug testing
regime in 1988; this provides for random testing of competitors in and out of
competition (testing out of competition does not apply in Scotland) by indepen¬
dent sampling officers, and the publication of adverse findings. The Sports
Council finances the analysis of samples taken in Britain and some from abroad,
and funds research into methods of detection for new drugs that unfairly aid
performance.
The Government and the Sports Council also took firm action at international
level by supporting the adoption of a Council of Europe Anti-Doping Charter in
1984 and by chairing an international working party to examine ways of
promoting effective anti-doping measures. In 1989 Council of Europe member
countries agreed a new European Convention to tackle the problem of drug
abuse in sport.
Spectator violence associated with football (and other sports) both in Britain and
overseas has been a subject of widespread concern, and the Government has
worked closely with the football authorities and the governments of other
European countries to combat the problem. After serious disturbances involving
English supporters at the European Cup Final in Brussels in 1985 which led to
the deaths of 38 spectators, an indefinite ban on English clubs taking part in
European competitions was imposed by the Union of European Football Associa¬
tions (UEFA). Britain has signed a Council of Europe Convention, adopted in
1985, which is designed to eliminate spectator violence at all sporting events,
including football; the British Government also supports new measures being
considered by the Council of Europe member nations to combat spectator
violence. Legislation introduced in Scotland in 1980, and in the rest of Britain in
1985, restricts the sale of alcohol in football grounds and bans its sale on
transport to matches. It is an offence to take cans or bottles into grounds.
Under new public order legislation, the courts have powers to ban convicted
hooligans from football matches, and a new offence of disorderly conduct has
been created to cover behaviour which, while not in itself violent, causes
unnecessary distress to others. Possession of smoke bombs and fireworks at or
on entry to a football ground has also become an offence. Greater use is being
made of closed-circuit television, and most Football League clubs in England and
Wales had introduced partial membership schemes for home spectator accom¬
modation at their grounds by the beginning of the 1987-88 season.
Following extensive violence involving English supporters during the Euro¬
pean championships in the Federal Republic of Germany in 1988, the Govern¬
ment plans to reinforce existing measures for controlling football hooliganism. It
is examining how best to enforce restrictions on the sale of alcohol in the vicinity
of football grounds, and applications from local authorities to restrict or prevent
consumption of alcohol in public places are being studied. Legislative proposals
are before Parliament to introduce by spring 1990 a compulsory national
membership scheme for controlling admission to, and thereby excluding known
hooligans from, designated football matches in England and Wales and to
prevent convicted hooligans from attending matches held outside England and
SPORT AND RECREATION
465
Gleneagles
Agreement
ORGANISATION
AND
PROMOTION
Sports Councils
Wales; consideration will be given to extending the scheme to Scotland and
Northern Ireland should the need arise.
A new National Football Intelligence Unit was set up in October 1989 to
co-ordinate police intelligence about football hooligans and to strengthen liaison
with overseas police forces.
In accordance with the statement on apartheid in sport, agreed by the Common¬
wealth heads of Government at Gleneagles in Scotland in 1977, the Government
seeks to discourage sporting contacts with South Africa and withholds any form
of support for such contacts; however, it has no powers to prevent these contacts
if an individual sportsman or sportswoman or the governing body of the sport
concerned chooses to ignore its advice.
Government policy on sport, active recreation and children’s play is co-ordinated
in England by the Minister for Sport (a Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
at the Department of the Environment). The Secretaries of State for Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland have similar responsibilities in their countries.
Responsibility for the organisation and promotion of sport is largely decentral¬
ised, and many sports and recreation facilities are provided by local authorities.
The Government gives financial and other assistance through a number of
official bodies and schemes. This ‘arm’s length’ principle of funding safeguards
the long-established independence of sports organisations in Britain. Some of
these bodies, such as the Sports Councils and the Countryside Commissions,
have specific responsibilities for sport and/or recreation, and help other public
and private bodies make facilities available. Others, like the Forestry Commis¬
sion, the British Waterways Board and the Nature Conservancy Council, provide
recreational amenities in addition to their main functions.
Individual sports are run by over 370 independent governing bodies, whose
functions usually include drawing up rules, holding events, regulating mem¬
bership, selecting and training national teams and promoting international
links. There are also organisations representing people who take part in more
informal physical recreation, such as walking and cycling.
A National Coaching Foundation has been established to improve the know¬
ledge and practice of coaching. Its work complements that of the four Sports
Councils and the governing bodies of sports.
Government assistance for the development of sport in Great Britain is channel¬
led through three independent bodies—the Sports Council (for England and for
general matters affecting Britain as a whole), the Sports Council for Wales and
the Scottish Sports Council. In Northern Ireland the Department of Education
makes direct grants towards the capital cost of facilities to local authorities and
voluntary sports bodies; the Sports Council for Northern Ireland has limited
grant-making powers. The Councils will allocate government funds amounting
to about £52 million in 1989-90. They make grants for sports development,
coaching and administration to the governing bodies of sports and other
national organisations, and administer the national sports centres. Grants and
loans are also made to voluntary organisations and local authorities (and, in
some cases, to commercial organisations) to help them to provide sports
facilities. The Sports Council assists British representatives at international
sports meetings and encourages links with international and overseas organisa¬
tions. All four Councils have information centres providing data on a wide range
of sports topics. The Sports Council consults with the Central Council of
Physical Recreation, comprising members of the national governing and repre¬
sentative bodies of sport and physical recreation in England; the equivalent
bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are the Scottish and Welsh
Sports Associations and the Northern Ireland Council of Physical Recreation.
466
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ten regional councils for sport and recreation in England, on each of which
sporting, recreational, educational, and local authority interests are repre¬
sented, advise on investment in and the planning of sporting and recreational
facilities and the promotion of sport.
About 70 per cent of the Sports Council’s budget is directed at increasing the
range and quality of participation by the general public; an objective is to
encourage 1 -25 million more women and three-quarters of a million more men to
take part in sport over the next five years. The Sports Council is exploring ways
of attracting greater private sector investment in sport, including the use of
incentive funding schemes whereby public money is used to generate revenue
from private sources.
Sheffield is to host the World Student Games in 1991 with financial assist¬
ance from the Sports Council.
Countryside
Commissions
British
Waterways
Board
The British
Olympic
Association
Children’s
Play
Two Countryside Commissions (one for England and Wales, the other for
Scotland) are responsible for conserving and enhancing the natural beauty and
amenity of the countryside, and encouraging the provision and improvement of
facilities for open-air recreation. Government support in 1989-90 amounts to
£22 million for the Countryside Commission for England and Wales, of which
about one-half will be spent on recreation. The Commission has launched a
series of policy initiatives aimed at increasing people’s enjoyment of the
countryside. These focus on the maintenance and sign-posting of public
footpaths and other ‘rights of way’ and the development of long-distance routes,
while rural communities are encouraged to build up local facilities which
promote public enjoyment of the countryside. These initiatives operate along¬
side established policies for grant aiding the provision by local authorities and
private bodies of country parks, picnic sites and informal recreation facilities. In
Northern Ireland the Ulster Countryside Committee advises the Department of
the Environment on the preservation of amenities and the designation of ‘areas
of outstanding natural beauty’.
The British Waterways Board is a publicly owned body responsible for the
management and development of much of Great Britain’s inland waterways,
which are preserved primarily for leisure use (and for freight transport). Many
leisure and recreational pursuits are practised on the canals and in the docks
and waterside buildings; these include angling and numerous types of sailing
and boating.
The British Olympic Association, founded in 1905, is the national Olympic
committee for the United Kingdom and its primary function is to organise the
participation of British teams in the Olympic Games. The Association comprises
representatives of the 29 governing bodies of those sports in the programme of
the Olympic Games (summer and winter). It determines the size of the British
teams, raises funds, makes all arrangements and provides a headquarters staff
for the management of the teams. It has established the British Olympic Medical
Centre, which provides a medical back-up service for competitors before and
during Olympic Games. The Association has an education programme aimed at
encouraging interest in the Olympic Games and fostering the aims and ideals of
the Olympic movement in Britain.
In 1988 the British Olympic Association, the Sports Council and the Central
Council of Physical Recreation agreed to form the British International Sports
Committee to co-ordinate and promote British interests at international sport¬
ing forums.
The Minister for Sport has responsibility for co-ordinating policy on children’s
play. The Department of Education and Science is concerned with play in
SPORT AND RECREATION
467
The National
Playing Fields
Association
Sport for
People with
Disabilities
schools, and the Department of Health with play for the under-fives. The Sports
Council supports a central service to assist voluntary organisations to develop
opportunities for children’s play and recreation, and is responsible for the
National Children’s Play and Recreation Unit. The latter is government-financed
and aims to create a national focus for developing policy, practice and provision
to underline the significance of children’s play.
The National Playing Fields Association is a charity with a Royal Charter, whose
purpose is to promote the provision of recreation and play facilities for all age
groups. It aims to preserve, improve and acquire playing fields, playgrounds and
playspace, and to specialise in the play and recreation needs of children and
young people, in particular those with special needs. There are affiliated
associations in the counties of England and Wales and branches in Scotland and
Northern Ireland.
Opportunities exist for people with disabilities to take part in a wide variety of
physical and sporting activities. The structure of sport for disabled people is
undergoing change. There are national disability sports organisations repre¬
senting the seven main disability groups, but the trend is towards sports-
specific governing bodies; for example, the Riding for the Disabled Association
caters for some 23,000 riders and the British Disabled Water Ski Association
offers training and competition to an increasing number of skiers. The govern¬
ing bodies of able-bodied sport are becoming more involved in disabled sport,
particularly in the training of coaches. The British Paralympic Association,
which liaises closely with the British Olympic Association, looks after the
preparation and training of paralympic and other international teams.
The British Sports Association for the Disabled aims to encourage and provide
opportunities for people with disabilities to take part in all forms of sport and
physical recreation. Sports clubs for disabled people throughout Britain are
affiliated to the Association, which helps to organise sporting and physical
activities at all levels. As well as offering advice to local clubs and groups, the
Association arranges conferences, seminars and coaching courses. The Scottish
Sports Association for the Disabled, the Welsh Committee on Sport for the
Disabled and the Northern Ireland Sports Association for the Disabled have
similar co-ordinating roles in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
In the last few years greater emphasis has been placed on providing for people
with a mental handicap, and on non-competitive activities including outdoor
pursuits; evidence of the latter is seen in the growing number of specialist
centres, such as those run by the Calvert Trust. More and more community
facilities are becoming available and a significant programme of disabled
awareness courses is offered to professional and voluntary staff.
Britain has continued to play an active part at international level since Sir
Ludwig Guttmann initiated sport for paraplegics and established the first sports
stadium in the world designed for people with disabilities at Stoke Mandeville in
Buckinghamshire in 1969. At the Paralympic Games in Seoul, Korea, held in
1988, the British team gained 62 gold, 67 silver and 53 bronze medals, finishing
third in the overall medals table.
In August 1989 the Government published a major report calling for a
reorganisation of the structure of sport for people with disabilities. Under this,
disabled sportsmen and sportswomen would be integrated into able-bodied
sport and the governing bodies of sport would assume responsibility for all
participants in their sport, whether able-bodied or disabled. Disabled athletes
would also be encouraged to participate in sporting events either in direct
competition with able-bodied athletes or in parallel events.
468
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Private
Sponsorship
PROVISION OF
FACILITIES
Increasing numbers of sports receive financial sponsorship from commercial
organisations, and its importance as a source of funding is recognised by the
Government and the Sports Councils. The estimated value of commercial
sponsorship was £180 million in 1988. Sponsorship may take the form of
financing specific events, or of grants to individual sports organisations or
sportsmen and sportswomen. The Sports Aid Foundation and Sports Aid Trust
raise and distribute funds from industry, commerce and private sponsors in
order to assist the training of talented individuals; grants are awarded on the
recommendation of the governing bodies of sport. The Scottish and Welsh
Sports Aid Foundations and the Ulster Sports and Recreation Trust fulfil similar
functions. Sponsorship advisory services are run by the Sports Councils and the
Central Council of Physical Recreation.
Successive governments have negotiated voluntary agreements with the
tobacco industry to regulate tobacco companies’ sponsorship of sport, the last
one having come into force in 1987. This is designed to bring about a reduction
in spending by tobacco firms on sports sponsorship and introduces a ceiling on
promotional activity. It prohibits sponsorship of events where a majority of the
participants are under 18 years of age or which are designed to appeal mainly to
spectators under 18. The depiction of any participants in a sport in media
advertising is not permitted, and strict controls are imposed on siting of signs at
televised events and on the size of health warnings on these signs.
Local authorities are major providers of land and large-scale facilities for
community recreation: their estimated expenditure on sport and recreation
amounted to about £1,000 million in Britain in 1987—88. Provision of facilities
was substantially increased in the 1970s to meet the growing demand and to
encourage expansion of participation. The facilities provided include parks,
lakes, playing fields, sports halls, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools,
gymnasiums and sports centres catering for a wide range of activities.
The Government is instituting competitive tendering for the management of
local authority sports and leisure facilities to make them more cost-effective and
responsive to consumer demand. School and college facilities are to be exempted
from competition, and councils will retain controls over pricing, admission and
opening hours.
Increased emphasis is being placed on the need to provide new and improved
sports facilities in areas of urban deprivation. A broad range of sports and
recreational projects in urban areas have been supported under the Govern¬
ment s Urban Programme, while the Derelict Land Grant scheme provides
funding towards sports and recreational facilities on reclaimed sites.
Recreational facilities are also made available by local sports clubs. Some cater
for indoor recreation, but more common are those providing sports grounds,
particularly for games such as cricket, football, rugby, hockey, tennis and golf.
Many clubs linked to business firms cater for sporting activities. Commercial
facilities include tenpin bowling centres, ice and roller-skating rinks, squash
courts, golf courses and driving ranges, curling rinks, riding stables, marinas
and, increasingly, fitness centres. The Civil Service sports club, with a mem¬
bership of 250,000, has extensive facilities at its disposal for a large number of
sports.
Publicly maintained schools must provide for the physical education of their
pupils. All (except those solely for infants) are expected to have a playing field or
the use of one, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium. Some have other
amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls designed for dance
and movement. Sports and recreation facilities are also provided at institutions
of higher and further education (some of which have departments of physical
education), and there are centres of sporting excellence’, often at universities
SPORT AND RECREATION
469
Sports Centres
POPULAR
SPORTS AND
RECREATIONS
and other colleges, which enable selected young athletes to develop their talents
and which cater, where appropriate, for their educational needs.
To achieve the maximum use of sports facilities, the Government and the
Sports Councils are encouraging greater community use of sports halls and
other facilities owned by schools, colleges and other public and private sector
institutions, including football clubs. The Education (No 2) Act 1986 contains a
provision aimed at encouraging the wider adoption of schemes allowing com¬
munity use of school facilities outside school hours.
Safety at sports grounds and stadiums is governed by legislation, and
following the fire at Bradford City Football Ground in 1985 in which 56 people
died and the disaster at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, in April 1989,
when 95 spectators were crushed to death, safety standards are being streng¬
thened. The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 is designed to
improve provisions for the safety of spectators at sports grounds and indoor
sports premises. It empowers local authorities to restrict or ban the admission of
spectators to sports grounds where there is a serious risk to safety, and requires
them to arrange for the inspection of designated football, rugby and cricket
grounds with stands for over 500 spectators. Indoor sporting events may only
take place after the inspection of premises by local authority safety experts.
The interim report of an independent inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy
has recommended that numbers of spectators be reduced and that all those
responsible for controlling crowds exercise greater vigilance and control in the
interests of safety.
Five national sports centres, four in England and one in Wales, are run by the
Sports Council, and offer a range of competition and training facilities. As well
as offering residential courses for national teams, coaches and enthusiasts from
all over Britain, the centres are used extensively by local sports clubs and the
local community. Combined facilities for a number of sports are provided at
three of the centres: Crystal Palace in south-east London, Bisham Abbey in
Buckinghamshire and Lilleshall in Shropshire. Crystal Palace provides major
competition venues for athletics and swimming and a variety of indoor sports,
and Lilleshall houses the training school of the Football Association. The other
two are specialist centres: the National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont,
Nottinghamshire, which caters for rowing, canoeing and water-skiing; and the
Plas-y-Brenin National Centre for Mountain Activities in north Wales. The
Sports Council for Wales runs the National Sports Centre for Wales in Cardiff
and the National Outdoor Pursuits Centre at Plas Menai in north Wales. The
Scottish Sports Council operates three national sports training centres: Glen-
more Lodge near Aviemore for outdoor pursuits, Inverclyde at Largs for general
sports, and a national water sports training centre on Great Cumbrae Isle in the
Firth of Clyde. The Sports Council for Northern Ireland operates one national
facility, the Northern Ireland Mountain Centre at Tollymore in County Down.
There are some 1,500 swimming pools and 2,000 sports centres serving local
rather than national needs; in Northern Ireland there has been a major
development of multi-purpose centres. Several privately run centres cater for
specialised interests, such as the British Equestrian Centre, run by the British
Horse Society, and the Ludwig Guttmann Sports Centre for the Disabled at
Stoke Mandeville.
Some of the major sports and recreations in Britain are described below. The
increased provision of sports centres has improved opportunities for participa¬
tion in indoor sports such as basketball, volleyball, fencing, judo, karate and
other martial arts, gymnastics, squash, table tennis and shooting. Almost all
outdoor sports have continued to gain in popularity, including high-risk’
470
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Angling
Association
Football
Athletics
activities such as rock-climbing and sub-aqua diving. The number of people
enjoying the recreational amenities of the countryside, rivers and coastline is
similarly growing.
Sportsmen and sportswomen may be professionals (paid players) or amateurs.
Some sports—such as rugby union, hockey and rowing—are amateur, but in
others the distinction between amateur and professional status is less strictly
defined, or does not exist. The Amateur Athletic Association, for example, allows
payments to be made into trust funds held by many top-ranking athletes.
The most popular country sport is fishing, and there are about 4 million anglers
in Britain. Many fish for salmon and trout, particularly in the rivers and lochs of
Scotland and in Wales, but in England and Wales the most widely practised form
of fishing is for coarse fish such as pike, perch, carp, tench and bream. There are
separate organisations in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland for
game (salmon and trout), coarse and sea fishing clubs, which are co-ordinated
in England and Wales by the National Anglers’ Council. The National Federation
of Anglers in England organises national championships for coarse fishing and
enters a team in the world angling championships. In 1987 and 1988 England
won the world team event. Freshwater fishing usually has to be paid for: most
coarse fishing is let to angling clubs by private owners, while trout and salmon
fishermen may rent a stretch of river, join a club, or pay for the right to fish by
the day, week or month. Coastal and deep-sea fishing are free to all (apart from
salmon and sea trout fishing, which is by licence only).
The largest spectator sport and one of the most popular participation sports,
association football was first developed and codified in England during the
nineteenth century, and is controlled by separate football associations in
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England over 335 clubs are
affiliated to the English Football Association (FA) and 42,000 clubs to regional or
district associations. The full-time professional clubs in England and Wales
belong to the Football League (92 clubs) and in Scotland to the Scottish Football
League (38 clubs); the clubs play in four divisions in England and Wales and
three in Scotland. In Northern Ireland, 14 semi-professional clubs play in the
Irish Football League. During the season, which lasts from August until May,
attendances at over 2,000 English league matches total about 18 million. The
Football Association, founded in 1863, and the Football League, founded in
1888, were both the first of their kind in the world.
The annual competitions for the FA Challenge Cup, the Littlewoods Challenge
Cup (formerly the League Cup), the Scottish FA Cup, the Skol Cup (formerly the
Scottish League Cup), the Irish Cup and the Welsh FA Cup are organised on a
knock-out basis, and the finals are played at Wembley Stadium, London, at
Hampden Park, Glasgow, at Windsor Park, Belfast, and on a two-match home
and away basis in Wales.
The Sports Councils have made grants to a number of clubs and local
authorities to enable them to modernise or expand football facilities in areas of
urban deprivation. Grants for various improvements such as all-weather pitches
are also made throughout Britain by the Football Associations and the Football
Trust, a body financed by the football pools (see p 479) companies; the Football
Grounds Improvement Trust is specifically concerned with ground safety.
Amateur athletics is governed in England by the Amateur Athletic Association
(which, formed in 1880, was the first national governing body for athletics) and
by the Women’s Amateur Athletic Association. Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland have their own associations. International athletics and the selection of
British teams are the concern of the Amateur Athletic Association, which also
SPORT AND RECREATION
471
Highland
Games
Badminton
Basketball
Billiards and
Snooker
administers coaching schemes. For the Olympic Games and the world and
European championships one team represents the United Kingdom.
Athletics is attracting increasing numbers of participants, both men and
women, in part because of the success of British competitors and the wide
coverage of athletics events on television.
Many British athletes, especially middle-distance runners, have enjoyed dis¬
tinguished reputations: in 1954, for example. Dr Roger Bannister became the
first man to run a mile in under four minutes. More recently British athletes won
six silver and two bronze medals at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, Korea,
while the British men’s team finished third behind the United States and a team
representing Europe at the World Cup in Barcelona in September 1989. In
September 1989 Britain had one world champion (Fatima Whitbread in the
women’s javelin), while Britons held world records in the 800 metres (Sebastian
Coe), the mile (Steve Cram) and the decathlon (Daley Thompson).
Scottish Highland Games, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting
the weight and throwing the hammer), dancing and piping competitions take
place, attract large numbers of spectators from all over the world. Among
better-known Highland Games are the annual Braemar Gathering, the Argyll¬
shire and Cowal Gatherings and the meeting at Aboyne.
The origins of badminton are not clear. The sport takes its name from the Duke
of Beaufort’s country home, Badminton House, where badminton was first
played in the nineteenth century. The Badminton Association of England, which
together with the Scottish, Welsh and Irish Badminton Unions today organises
the sport in Britain, was formed in 1893 and the first tournament was promoted
five years later. Badminton expanded rapidly in the 1970s and is played in a
variety of locations from sports centres to village halls; at least 2-5 million people
are estimated to play the game in Britain, about 1 million of them regularly.
Some 6,250 clubs are affiliated to the four governing bodies and the Badminton
Association of England organises the All England Championships each year.
The England women’s team won a silver medal, and the men’s a bronze at the
1984 world team championships. The English team (men and women) are
reigning Commonwealth Games champions. Darren Hall was the winner of the
men’s European championships in 1988.
Basketball is played in Britain, mainly indoors, by both men and women. There
are about 1,100 registered clubs and the sport is played in most secondary
schools and many other institutions; in all, over 1 million people participate and
its popularity has been increasing rapidly. The English Basket Ball Association
is the governing body of the sport in England, and there are similar associations
in Wales, Scotland and Ireland. The leading English and Scottish clubs play in
the Carlsberg and National Basketball Leagues and the main events of the
year are the Coca-Cola National Cup Finals held at London Arena, and the
Carlsberg Basketball Championships staged at the National Exhibition Centre,
Birmingham.
The character of the present game of billiards was established in Britain at the
end of the seventeenth century. Snooker, a more varied game invented by the
British in India in 1875, has greatly increased in popularity and become a major
spectator sport as a result of widespread television coverage of the professional
tournaments. It is estimated that between 7 and 8 million people now play the
game. British players have an outstanding record in snooker and the major
professional championships have been largely dominated by them. The main
tournament is the annual Embassy World Professional Championship, held in
472
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Bowls
Boxing
Chess
Sheffield; British winners of this event include Steve Davis (1981, 1983, 1984,
1987, 1988 and 1989), Joe Johnson (1986), Dennis Taylor (1985) and Alex
Higgins (1972 and 1982).
The controlling body for the non-professional game is the Billiards and
Snooker Control Council, which holds the copyright of the rules. The World
Professional Billiards and Snooker Association is responsible for professional
players, and it organises professional events. An increasing number of women
are playing billiards and snooker; their representative body is the World Ladies
Billiards and Snooker Association.
Bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. The game of lawn
bowls is played on a flat green; in the Midlands and north of England and in
north Wales a variation called crown green bowls is played, so named because
the centre of the green is higher than its boundaries. Lawn and crown green
bowls are mainly summer games; in winter indoor bowls, played on synthetic
greens, is growing in popularity. Once regarded as a pastime for the elderly,
bowls is increasingly played by adults of all ages. About 4,000 lawn bowling clubs
are affiliated to the English, Scottish, Welsh and Irish (Northern Ireland Region)
Bowling Associations, which, together with the Women’s Bowling Associations
for the four countries, play to the rules of the International Bowling Board. Other
associations, including the English Bowling Federation, are not under the
Board's control. The British Crown Green Bowling Association is the governing
body of crown green bowls, and has 2,500 affiliated clubs.
The outstanding player is David Bryant, who has won six world singles
championships.
Boxing in its modern form, which has been adopted in many overseas countries,
dates from 1865, when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules
eliminating much of the brutality that had characterised prize-fighting and
making skill the basis of the sport. Boxing is both amateur and professional,
and in both strict medical regulations are observed.
All amateur boxing in England, including schoolboy, club, association and
combined services boxing (in the armed forces), is controlled by the Amateur
Boxing Association. England is divided into eight associations and Scotland and
Wales have separate associations; Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish
Boxing Association. The associations organise amateur boxing championships
as well as training courses for referees, coaches and others, and teams take part
in international meetings including the Commonwealth Games and European
and world championships. Boxing is an Olympic sport; Richard Woodhall won a
bronze medal in the light middleweight class at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Professional boxing is controlled by the British Boxing Board of Control. The
Board appoints inspectors, medical officers and representatives to ensure that
regulations are observed and to guard against overmatching and exploitation.
British boxing has a distinguished record and at various times British boxers
have held European, Commonwealth and world championship titles: Dave
McAuley is the International Boxing Federation (IBF) world flyweight champion
and Glenn McCrory holds the IBF world cruiserweight title.
Chess is increasing in popularity and England now ranks second among
chess-playing nations (Scotland, Wales and Ireland are separately represented),
having taken silver medals at the last three chess Olympics. There are local chess
clubs and leagues throughout the country and the game is widely played in
schools and colleges. Important domestic competitions include the British
Championships (for all ages), the National Club Championships, the County
Championships and the Leigh Grand Prix. Britain now hosts more major
SPORT AND RECREATION
473
Cricket
Curling
Cycling
international chess events than ever before, recent events including the Pilking-
ton Glass World Championships quarter- and semi-final matches in 1988 and
1989. The Hastings Chess Congress, dating back to 1895, is the world’s longest
running annual international chess tournament. The governing bodies of the
game are the British Chess Federation (responsible for England and for
co-ordinating activity among the home nations), the Scottish Chess Association
and the Welsh and Ulster Chess Unions.
Cricket is among the most popular of summer sports and is sometimes called the
English national game, having been played as early as the 1550s. Among the
many clubs founded in the eighteenth century was the Marylebone Cricket Club
(MCC), which continues to frame the laws of the game. The Club is based at
Lord’s cricket ground in north London, the administrative centre of the world
game. Men’s cricket in Britain is now governed by the Cricket Council,
consisting of representatives of the Test and County Cricket Board (representing
first-class cricket), the National Cricket Association (representing club and
junior cricket), the Minor County Cricket Association, the Scottish Cricket
Union, the Irish Cricket Union and the MCC.
Cricket is played in schools, colleges and universities, and in most towns and
villages amateur teams play weekly games from late April to the end of
September. Throughout Britain there is a network of league cricket contested by
teams of Saturday afternoon players.
The main competition in professional cricket is the Britannic Assurance
County Championship of three-day and four-day games played by 17 county
teams, which also take part in three one-day competitions—the Benson and
Hedges Cup, the National Westminster Bank Trophy, and the Refuge Assurance
League, played on Sundays. Some of the best supported games are the annual
series of five-day Cornhill Insurance Test matches played between England and a
touring team from Australia, India, New Zealand, Pakistan, Sri Lanka or the
West Indies. A team representing England usually tours one or more of these
countries in the British winter. Texaco Trophy one-day international games also
attract large crowds. A World Cup competition takes place every four to five
years, with some of the smaller cricketing nations as well as the major countries
competing; India and Pakistan jointly staged the last one in 1987.
Cricket is also played by women and girls, the governing body being the
Women’s Cricket Association, founded in 1926. Women’s cricket clubs have
regular local fixtures, usually played at weekends, and may participate in an
outdoor national knockout tournament and an indoor league competition. The
game is also played at county, national and international levels; Test match
series and other matches are played by England against Australia, India, New
Zealand and the West Indies.
The ice sport of curling originated in Scotland, where it is played by men and
women almost exclusively indoors. The governing body of the sport in Scotland
is the Royal Caledonian Curling Club, which was formed in 1838; it has over
20,000 members. Curling is played in 18 other countries, including England
and Wales.
Since the 1970s there has been a substantial resurgence of interest in cycling,
both as a means of transportation and as a sport and recreation, and this has led
central and local government to make greater provision for cycling. Cycling
activities include road and track racing, cycle speedway, time-trialling, cross¬
country racing, touring, bicycle polo and bicycle moto-cross.
The British Cycling Federation acts as the governing body for cycling as a
sport, while the Cyclists’ Touring Club, formed in 1878, is the national
474
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Darts
Field Sports
Golf
Hockey
(Field and
Indoor)
association for recreational cycling and represents cyclists’ interests in general.
The Scottish Cyclists Union controls the sport in Scotland.
The Scottish cyclist Robert Millar won the Kellogg’s Tour of Britain in 1989.
Darts, an indoor game which has its origins in medieval archery, is played
mainly in public houses as a casual recreation to accompany drinking. It has
gained in popularity as a result of widespread television coverage of the
professional game. It is estimated that nearly 5 million people play the game
regularly. Darts is organised in Britain by the British Darts Organisation, which
forms part of the World Darts Federation; its rules have become the code for the
world sport. The Organisation arranges events in Britain which bring entrants
from as many as 47 countries. Every two years a World Cup tournament takes
place; England won the 1987 competition, held in Copenhagen. The main
individual title in the game is the Embassy World Professional Championship.
British players have dominated the event and in 1989 the title was won by Jocky
Wilson.
British field sports include hunting (on horseback and on foot), fishing,
shooting, stalking, falconry and coursing. Fox hunting on horseback with a
pack of hounds is the most popular British hunting sport, and there are over
370 packs of hounds of all kinds in Britain.
Game shooting as an organised sport probably originated in the early part of
the nineteenth century, and takes place in many parts of Britain. Game consists
of grouse, black-game, ptarmigan, partridge and pheasant, species which are
protected by law during a close season when they are allowed to breed on
numerous estates supervised by gamekeepers. It is necessary to have a licence to
kill game and a certificate issued by the police to own a shot-gun.
The British Field Sports Society looks after the interests of all field sports.
Public opposition to field sports is not inconsiderable and is organised through
such bodies as the League Against Cruel Sports.
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the Royal
and Ancient Game. The oldest golf club in the world is the Honourable Company
of Edinburgh Golfers. The Royal and Ancient Golf Club, the ruling authority of
the sport for most of the world, is situated at St Andrews on the east coast. Golf
is played throughout Britain and there are golf courses in the vicinity of most
towns, a few of them owned by local authorities. The main event of the British
golfing year is the Open Championship, one of the world’s leading tournaments;
other important events include the Walker Cup match for amateurs and the
Ryder Cup match for professionals, which are played between Great Britain and
Ireland and the United States and Europe and the United States respectively.
Among the leading British professional players are Nick Faldo, Sandy Lyle, Ian
Woosnam and Sam Torrance. In 1987 Laura Davies became the first British
woman to win the United States Open Championship. Sandy Lyle and Nick
Faldo were winners of the United States Masters golf tournament in 1988 and
1989 respectively.
Variants of hockey have been played in Britain for at least five centuries, and
some, like hurling in Ireland and shinty in Scotland, are still played. The modem
game was started in the nineteenth century by the Hockey Association (of
England), which was founded in 1886 and acts as the governing body for men’s
hockey. There are similar associations in Scotland, Wales and Ireland. Through¬
out Britain there are some 800 hockey clubs, many of which have junior
sections; large numbers of schools also play the game (600 are affiliated to the
Hockey Association). Cup competitions and leagues are played at national,
SPORT AND RECREATION
475
Ice Skating
Judo
Keep Fit
Motor and
Motor-cycle
Sports
divisional or district, and club levels both indoors (six-a-side) and outdoors, and
there are regular international matches.
The controlling body of women’s hockey in England is the All England
Women’s Hockey Association (founded in 1895), to which are affiliated some
1,000 clubs and about 2,400 schools; there are similar associations in Scotland,
Wales and Ireland. County, club and school championships for both outdoor and
indoor hockey are played annually in England. The first international women’s
hockey match took place in 1896; there are regular international matches, one of
which is played each year at Wembley Stadium.
Men’s and women’s hockey are Olympic sports, and the British men’s team
won a gold medal at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Ice skating became popular in Britain in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries and takes three main forms: ice dancing, figure skating and speed¬
skating. The governing body for the sport is the National Skating Association of
Great Britain, founded in 1879, to which the Northern Ireland Skating Associa¬
tion is affiliated. Participation in ice skating is concentrated among the
under-25s. There are over 40 ice rinks in Britain, a small number compared with
many other European countries. In spite of this, British couples have won the
world ice dance championship 17 times, and Jayne Torvill and Christopher
Dean were world ice dance champions for four successive years between 1981
and 1984, European champions in 1981, 1982 and 1984, and gold medal
winners at the Sarajevo winter Olympic Games in 1984.
Judo, a modern combat sport derived from the ancient Japanese arts of ju-jutsu,
is growing rapidly in popularity in Britain, both as a sport and general fitness
training method and as a self-defence technique. Men and women take part in
judo at all levels. Dennis Stewart won a bronze medal in the under 95 kg class at
the 1988 Olympics. Recent leading British exponents of the sport include Karen
Briggs, Brian Jacks, Neil Adams, Neil Eckersley, Ann Hughes and Diane Bell.
More than 1,200 judo clubs are registered with the British Judo Association,
which is the official governing body of the sport throughout Britain.
Other martial arts, such as karate, kung fu and aikido, are attracting increas¬
ing numbers of participants.
Keep fit classes aim to improve stamina, strength and suppleness through a
variety of fitness and creative movement activities. The Keep Fit Association,
formed in 1956, receives funding from the Sports Council to promote physical
fitness and a positive attitude to health in England. Its national certificated
training scheme for keep fit teachers is recognised by local education authorities
throughout Britain.
Motor racing and rallying, and motor-cycle racing, are popular spectator sports
in Britain. The governing body for four-wheeled motor sport is the RAC [Royal
Automobile Club] Motor Sports Association. The Association issues competition
licences for a variety of motoring competitions and organises both the Lombard
RAC Rally, an event in the contest for the World Rally Championship, and the
Shell British Grand Prix, held at the Silverstone racing circuit as part of the
Formula One World Motor Racing Championship.
British car constructors including Lotus, McLaren and Williams have enjoyed
outstanding successes in Grand Prix racing, and Britain has had six world
champion motor racing drivers; Nigel Mansell and Derek Warwick are among the
most successful of current drivers. Other popular types of motor-car sport
include autocross, drag racing and karting.
476
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mountaineering
and Rock-
Climbing
Racing
Riding
Motor-cycle sport, governed by the Auto-Cycle Union in England and Wales
and the Scottish Auto-Cycle Union and Motor Cycle Union of Ireland (in
Northern Ireland), caters for all forms of competition on two or three wheels,
from low-speed trials to Grand Prix road racing. The major events of the year are
the Isle of Man TT races, the British Road Race Grand Prix and other world
championship events for trials, moto-cross, speedway and track racing. The
Auto-Cycle Union provides off-road training by approved instructors for riders of
all ages.
The popularity of mountaineering and rock-climbing has increased steadily.
Clubs in the British Mountaineering Council and the Mountaineering Council of
Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport, number 330, ranging from
national clubs such as the Alpine Club (founded in 1857, the oldest moun¬
taineering club in the world) and the Scottish Mountaineering Club to small
regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. The National Centres for Mountain
Activities, run by the Sports Council, are at Plas-y-Brenin in north Wales,
Glenmore Lodge, near Aviemore, in Scotland and Tollymore in Northern Ireland.
A number of local education authorities and national bodies such as the
Outward Bound Trust have also established mountaineering training centres.
The most popular areas in Britain for climbing include the Peak District of
Derbyshire, the Lake District, Snowdonia in north Wales and the Western
Highlands of Scotland.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring mountain ranges
and climbing many of the great mountains of the world, achieving, for example,
the first ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865, Everest in 1953, Kangchenjunga in
1955, Everest by its south-west face in 1975, the west wall of Changabang in
1976, Kongur in 1982 and Jitchu Drake in 1988.
British rock climbers have long been recognised as among the foremost in the
world; in recent decades Joe Brown, Don Whillans, Ron Fawcett, Jerry Moffatt
and Johnny Dawes have all pioneered difficult routes.
Horse racing takes two forms—flat racing (throughout the year, as from October
1989), and steeplechasing and hurdle racing (normally from August to early
June). The Derby, run at Epsom, is the outstanding event in the flat racing
calendar. Other classic races are: the Two Thousand Guineas and the One
Thousand Guineas, both run at Newmarket; the Oaks, run at Epsom; and the St
Leger, run at Doncaster. The most important steeplechase and hurdle race
meeting is the National Hunt Festival Meeting held at Cheltenham in March. The
Grand National, run at Aintree near Liverpool, is the world’s best-known
steeplechase and dates from 1837.
The Jockey Club administers all horse racing in Britain. Its rules are the basis
of turf procedure and it also licenses racecourses. Racing takes place on most
days (excluding Sundays) throughout the year and about 12,500 horses are in
training. British thoroughbreds continue to be a source of the world’s best
bloodstock.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare (one of Britain’s most
popular spectator sports) takes place at 83 tracks licensed by local authorities.
Meetings are usually held two or three times a week at each track with at least
ten races a meeting. The rules for the sport are drawn up by the National
Greyhound Racing Club, the sport’s judiciary body. The Stewards of the Club are
also responsible for overall administration and organisation. The representative
body is the British Greyhound Racing Board.
Horse riding takes a number of forms ranging from recreational riding to show
jumping. The art of riding is promoted by the British Horse Society, which is
SPORT AND RECREATION
477
Rowing
Rugby Football
concerned with the welfare of horses, road safety, bridleways and training. It
runs the British Equestrian Centre at Stoneleigh in Warwickshire. With some
46,000 members, the Society is the parent body of the Pony Club and the Riding
Club movements, which hold rallies, meetings and competitions culminating in
annual national championships. Horse trials are held during the spring and
autumn under the auspices of the Society. Three-day events (comprising
dressage, cross-country riding and showjumping) held each year include those
at Badminton (Avon), Windsor (Berkshire), Bramham (West Yorkshire),
Burghley House (Lincolnshire) and Blair Castle (Perthshire, Scotland).
Show jumping is regulated and promoted by the British Show Jumping
Association, which has over 16,000 members and some 1,900 shows affiliated to
it. The major show jumping events each year include the Royal International
Horse Show at the National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham, the Horse of the
Year Show at Wembley in London, the Olympia International Show Jumping
Championships in London and the Hickstead Derby at Bolney in West Sussex.
The authority responsible for equestrian competitions (other than racing) at
international level is the British Equestrian Federation, which co-ordinates the
activities of the British Horse Society and the British Show Jumping Associa¬
tion. British equestrian teams have an outstanding record in international
competitions. The British three-day event team gained a silver medal at the 1988
Olympic Games, while Ian Stark won the silver medal and Virginia Leng, winner
of the 1989 Badminton Trials, won the bronze medal in the three-day individual
competition.
Rowing is taught in many schools, colleges and rowing clubs (including women’s
clubs) throughout Britain. The governing body of the sport in England is the
Amateur Rowing Association, and there are similar bodies in Scotland, Wales
and Ireland. There are about 500 rowing clubs, and each year in excess of 300
regattas and head races are held in England, Wales and Scotland under
Association rules.
The University Boat Race (between eight-oared crews from Oxford and Cam¬
bridge), which had its one hundred and fiftieth anniversary in 1989, has been
rowed on the Thames almost every spring since 1836. The Head of the River Race
(also on the Thames) is the largest assembly of racing craft in the world, with
more than 420 eights racing in procession. At the Henley Regatta in Oxford¬
shire, founded in 1839, crews from all over the world compete each July in
various kinds of race over a straight course of 1 mile 550 yards (about 2-l km).
The National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, near Nottingham, has
a rowing course of Olympic 2,000-metre standard, as does Strathclyde Park in
west-central Scotland. Britain won the gold medal in the men’s coxless pairs and
a bronze in the men’s coxed pairs events at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Rugby football takes its name from Rugby School, in Warwickshire, where it is
believed to have originated in 1823. Since 1893 the game has been played
according to two different codes: rugby union (a 15-a-side game) is played by
amateurs and rugby league (a 13-a-side game) by professionals as well as
amateurs. Rugby union is played under the auspices of the Rugby Football
Union in England and similar bodies in Wales, Scotland and Ireland. Important
domestic competitions include the league, divisional and county championships
in England, the national club knock-out competitions in England and Wales and
the Scottish League Cup Championship. The Five Nations Tournament between
England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland and France takes place each year and there
are overseas tours by the national sides and by the British Lions, a team
representing Great Britain and Ireland. In 1987 teams from 16 countries
478
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Sailing
Skiing
Squash Rackets
Sub-Aqua
competed for the first time in a world cup competition held in Australia and New
Zealand; the next one will be staged in Britain and France in autumn 1991.
Rugby league is played mainly in the north of England. At present it is
enjoying unprecedented popularity as a spectator sport. The governing body of
the professional game is the Rugby Football League, which sends touring teams
representing Great Britain to Australia, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea;
annual matches are also played against France. The Challenge Cup Final, the
major club match of the season, is played at Wembley Stadium in London. The
amateur game is governed by the British Amateur Rugby League Association;
matches between England and France take place each year and there are tours to
Australia and New Zealand. A national league consisting of ten leading clubs was
launched in 1986, and a second division came into existence in 1989.
Sailing has always been popular in Britain, and the Royal Yachting Association
(RYA) has more than 1,500 affiliated clubs and classes. Over 1,000 practical or
shore-based teaching centres offer RYA and RYA Scotland courses in sailing,
windsurfing and navigation and over 50,000 people attend each year. One of the
world’s principal regattas takes place each summer at Cowes, and major events
are held at other sailing centres. British sailors have undertaken many notable
voyages. Sir Francis Chichester was the winner of the first single-handed
transatlantic race in 1960 and made a solo circumnavigation of the world in
1966—67. The first non-stop solo circumnavigation was achieved by Robin
Knox-Johnston in 1968. Mike McIntyre and Biyn Vaile won a gold medal in the
‘Star’ class in the 1988 Olympics.
Board sailing, recognised as a type of yachting, has grown rapidly in popu¬
larity since its introduction into Britain in 1974.
When there is sufficient snow, skiing takes place in several parts of Britain. The
governing body of the sport is the British Ski Federation and there are separate
national councils. Skiing in Scotland has become very popular, especially at the
winter sports centres established in the Cairngorms, Deeside, Glencoe and
Glenshee, where ski-runs equal to those in other areas of Europe have been
developed. Ski-lifts, ski-tows and professional instruction of a high quality are
now available. There are also some 115 artificial ski-slopes throughout Great
Britain. Interest in cross-country skiing has been increasing. There are nearly
300 ski clubs in Britain, and it is estimated that about one and a half million
people take part in the sport.
Squash rackets originated at Harrow School in the 1850s. There are separate
governing bodies for England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland. The governing body
in England for men’s and women’s squash is the Squash Rackets Association,
formed in 1989. Squash enjoyed a period of very rapid growth during the 1970s
and remains a popular sport. There are 9,000 squash courts in England, and the
estimated number of players in Britain is 3 million. The main tournament held
in Britain is the British Open Championship. England currently holds the world
title for women’s team squash, and Martine le Moignan is the present women’s
world champion.
Underwater activities are varied and include exploratory diving (for example,
wreck and reef diving), snorkel diving and underwater photography. The British
Sub-Aqua Club is the governing body for all underwater activities and promotes
underwater exploration, science and sport. The Club is the largest of its kind in
the world, with some 34,000 members and more than 1,000 branches in Britain
and overseas.
SPORT AND RECREATION
479
Swimming
Tennis
Tenpin
Bowling
GAMBLING
Swimming is enjoyed by millions of people in Britain, many of whom learn to
swim at public baths, schools or swimming clubs. Instruction and coaching are
provided by qualified teachers who hold certificates awarded by the Amateur
Swimming Associations in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
(Northern Ireland forms part of the Irish Amateur Swimming Association) to
which nearly 2,000 clubs are affiliated. The Associations also control swimming,
diving, synchronised swimming and water polo championships and competi¬
tions. For major international competitions, such as the Olympic Games and the
World and European Championships, England, Scotland and Wales compete
together as one team under the auspices of the Amateur Swimming Federation
of Great Britain. At the 1988 Olympics, Britain won a gold, silver and bronze
medal. The British swimmer Adrian Moorhouse broke the 100-metre breast¬
stroke world record in August 1989.
The modem game of tennis originated in England in 1872 and the first
championships were played at Wimbledon in 1877. The controlling body in
Great Britain, the Lawn Tennis Association, was founded in 1888; Northern
Ireland forms part of the Irish Lawn Tennis Association. The main event of the
season is the annual Wimbledon fortnight, widely regarded as the most impor¬
tant tennis event in the world; this draws large crowds, with the ground at the
All England Club accommodating around 30,000 spectators. There are also
national and county championships and national competitions for boys’ and
girls’ schools. International events include the Davis Cup and European Cup for
men and the Federation Cup and European Cup for women. Women from
Britain and the United States compete annually for the Wightman Cup.
Tenpin bowling is played at some 1,500 indoor bowling centres throughout
Britain. More than 25,000 people belong to the sport’s governing body, the
British Tenpin Bowling Association.
Various forms of commercial betting and gaming are permitted in Britain under
strict regulations. In 1987-88 the total money staked (excluding gaming
machines) was £5,125 million.
Betting takes place mainly on horse or greyhound racing, and on football
matches (usually through football pools). Racing bets may be made at race¬
courses and greyhound tracks, or through some 10,000 licensed off-course
betting offices which take nearly 90 per cent of the money staked. A form of pool
betting (totalisator betting) is organised on course by the Horserace Totalisator
Board (HTB). Bookmakers and the HTB contribute a levy to the Horserace
Betting Levy Board, which promotes the improvement of horse racing and
breeding and the advancement of veterinary science. Gaming includes the
playing of casino and card games, gaming machines and bingo. There are 116
licensed casinos operating in Britain, 21 of them in London. An estimated
5 million people (mainly women) play bingo in commercial bingo halls.
In addition, legislation allows local authorities and certain other bodies to
hold lotteries.
Appendix 1
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p). There
are seven coins: £1; 50p; 20p; lOp; 5p; 2p and Ip.
Bank of England notes are issued for sums of £5, £10, £20 and £50.
Metric Conversions for British Weights and Measures
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
12 inches =
3 feet =
1,760 yards =
1 inch
1 foot
1 yard
1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
2 pints
4 quarts
8 gallons
8 bushels
1 pint
= 1 quart
= 1 gallon
= 1 bushel
= 1 quarter
16 oz
14 lb
112 lb
20 cwt (2,240 lb)
2,000 lb
2-54 centimetres
30-48 centimetres
0-914 metre
1 -609 kilometres
1 square inch
= 1 square foot
= 1 square yard
= 1 acre —
= 1 square mile =
= 0-568 litre
= 1-136 litres
= 4-546 litres
= 36-37 litres
= 2-909 hectolitres
1 ounce (oz)
1 pound (lb)
1 stone (st)
1 hundredweight (cwt)
1 long ton
1 short ton
6-452 square centimetres
929-03 square centimetres
0-836 square metre
0-405 hectare
2-59 square kilometres
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6-35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
1-016 tonnes
0-907 tonne
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Measures and
Weights
(Use the figures in the central column with those to the left or right, depending
on which conversion is required. For example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and
1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
Metres
Yards
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
Hec¬
tares
Acres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
0-394
0-787
1-181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
3- 150
3-543
3-937
0-914
1- 829
2- 743
3- 658
4- 572
5- 486
6- 401
7- 315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11- 265
12- 875
14-484
16-093
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
0-405
0-809
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-768
22-239
24-711
482
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kilo- Av.
grammes Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
•722
175
•629
•082
•536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
36-368
40-914
45-460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
1- 255
2- 511
3- 766
5- 021
6- 277
7- 532
8- 787
10- 043
11- 298
12- 554
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-797
1- 593
2- 390
3- 186
3- 983
4- 780
5- 576
6- 373
7- 169
7-966
Thennometrical Table
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit
100° Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit
To convert °Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by 5/9;
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by %, then add 32.
Bank and Public Holidays
Monday 1 January
Tuesday 2 January
Monday 19 March
Friday 13 April
Monday 16 April
Monday 7 May
Monday 28 May
Thursday 12 July
Monday 6 August
Monday 27 August
Tuesday 25 December
Wednesday 26 December
in Britain, 1990
New Year’s Day
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Bank Holiday (Northern Ireland only)
Good Friday
Easter Monday (England, Wales and
Northern Ireland only)
Early May Bank Holiday
Spring Bank Holiday
Orangeman’s Day (Northern Ireland only)
Bank Holiday (Scotland only)
Summer Bank Holiday (England, Wales
and Northern Ireland only)
Christmas Day
Boxing Day
Appendix 2
Guide to Sources
The principal official periodical sources used in the preparation of this edition are given below:
Chapter 1
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Land and People
Social Trends, Population Trends, Regional Trends, General Household Survey, Family Expendi¬
ture Survey
Overseas Relations
British Aid Statistics, British Overseas Aid, Arms Control and Disarmament Quarterly Review,
Developments in the European Community
Defence
Statement on the Defence Estimates
Justice and the Law
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales; Criminal Statistics, Scotland
Education
Education Statistics for the United Kingdom
Planning, Housing and Urban Regeneration
General Household Survey, Housing and Construction Statistics
Environmental Protection
Digest of Environmental Protection and Water Statistics
National Economy
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book'), Employment Gazette
Framework of Industry
United Kingdom National Accounts (the Blue Book'), British Business
Manufacturing and Service Industries
Report on the Census of Production, Monthly Digest of Statistics, Employment Gazette, British
Business
Energy and Natural Resources
Digest of United Kingdom Energy Statistics, Development of the Oil and Gas Resources of the
United Kingdom (the Brown Book'), United Kingdom Mineral Statistics
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Annual Review of Agriculture
Transport and Communications
Transport Statistics, Great Britain
Employment
Employment Gazette, New Earnings Survey
Public Finance
Financial Statement and Budget Report, The Government’s Expenditure Plans (the public
expenditure White Paper)
484
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Chapter 20
Chapter 24
Overseas Trade
Monthly Review of External Trade Statistics, United Kingdom Balance of Payments (the Pink
Book’), British Business
Television and Radio
BBC’s Annual Report and Accounts, ISA’s Television and Radio and Annual Report and Accounts
Full purchasing details of British Government publications can be obtained from the annual list
Government Publications issued by Her Majesty’s Stationeiy Office (HMSO), which has agents
overseas. The list includes all Bills and Acts of Parliament and the official parliamentary report
Hansard, White Papers, annual reports, reports of official committees and most publications of
government departments including the Central Statistical Office, which publishes a Guide to
Official Statistics. HMSO also sells in Britain many titles published by international organisa¬
tions such as the United Nations, the European Community and the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
A Catalogue of British Official Publications not Published by HMSO, published by Chadwyck-
Healey, lists the more specialised departmental publications. Details of this and other commercial
publications are available from bookshops or, overseas, from the British Council.
Index
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where they are
matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the relevant subject
headings.
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
A 
Abortion 149
Accidents 72, 333-4
fire casualties 72
road 333—4
Administrative tribunals 135—6
Advertising 292, 451—2
broadcasting 460
industry 292
press, practice 451—2
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 416
Advisory bodies 53
Advisory, Conciliation and
Arbitration Service 370
Aerospace industry 279—81
Agriculture 54, 58, 59, 80, 317—327,
419-20
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 326-7, 419—20
Agricultural Development and
Advisory Service 325
and Fisheries, Department of, for
Scotland 58
animals 318—20,
diseases, control of325—26
welfare 319—20
Common Agricultural Policy 322—3
crofts 324
crops 320
Department of (Northern Ireland) 59
diseases and pests, control of 325—6
European Community policies 80
exports 321—2
farming 317—18
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 54
food irradiation 321
government policy 322—5
grants and subsidies 323
horticulture 320
land use 317
livestock 318—20
cattle 318—19
pigs 319
poultry 319
sheep 318—19
welfare 319—20
marketing 322
co-operatives 322
organic farming 320-1
pesticides 326
plant diseases and pests,
control of 326
price guarantees 323
production 318—21
professional, scientific and technical
services 325
protection of countryside 324
research 326—7, 419—20
smallholdings 324
tenancy legislation 324
veterinary medicinal products 326
Aid to developing countries 83-^t, 86,
96-100
bilateral aid 96—7
European Community 83-4
financial aid 97
multilateral aid 99
official and other flows 96
projects 97—8
technical co-operation 86, 98—9
voluntary agencies 99—100
AIDS152-3
Aircraft 107, 279-81, 345-9
aerospace industry 279—81
civil 345—9
military 107
Alcoholic drinks 281—3
Alcoholism 151—2
Ambulance services 147
Ancient monuments 213—14
Arbitration Committee, Central
370
Architecture 199
Armed forces 104—7
Arms control and
disarmament 90-2
486
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
chemical and biological weapons 91—2
conventional weapons 92
nuclear weapons 90—1
Army 106
combat forces 105—6
see also Defence
Arts 54, 425-41
administration 425—6
and design, training 437
and Libraries, Office of 54
art market 437—8
British Council 428
broadcasting and 428
centres 428
community arts 427—8
Councils 427
crafts 437
dance 430,431—2
drama 429—30
ethnic minorities 428
festivals 428—9
films 432-4
finance 426—7
government policies 425
literature and libraries 438—41
local arts councils 428
museums and art galleries 435—7
music 430—1, 432
opera 430-1, 432
promotion of 425—41
Regional Arts Associations 427
visual 434—8
Atomic energy
see Nuclear energy
Auction houses 293
B 
Balance of payments 406—9
capital flows 407
external assets and liabilities 408-9
Bank of England 386-7
Banking 385—91
see also Financial institutions
Beverages industry 281-3
Birth rates 21—2
Blood transfusion 147
Books 440-1
Botanical gardens 422
Britain 1—4, 21—32
economic and social pattern 26-32
historical outline 2
physical features 1—2
population 21—5
social framework 21—32
see also England, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and Wales
British Airways 346
British Broadcasting Corporation
454-5, 456-7, 458-60
see also Broadcasting
British Coal Corporation 303
British Council 74—5, 428
British Film Institute 433—4
British Nuclear Fuels 309
British Olympic Association 466
British Rail 336—41
British School Technology 182-3
British Technology Group 265
see also Science and technology
British Telecom 349—51
see also Telecommunications
Broadcasting 352, 428, 453—62
advertising 460
arts, broadcasting of 428
audience research 461
British Broadcasting
Corporation 454—5, 456—7, 458—60
radio 458—9
television 456—7
World Service 459—60
cable services 352, 457—8
educational 459
Independent Broadcasting
Authority 455—6,
programme companies 455—6
television 456-7
international relations 462
parliamentary 460-1
policy 454
political 460-1
satellite broadcasting 458
technical developments 461
Budget 377—8
Building
see Construction industry
Building societies 207-8, 390-1
Bus services 335—6
Business and Technician
Education Council 190
Business services 292-3
c 
Cabinet 51
meetings 51
Office 52
Cable TV 352, 457-8
INDEX
487
Cancer screening 153—4
Capital 379, 381, 407
flows 407
taxes on 379, 381
see also Taxation and duty
Cars
see Motor vehicles
Catering trades 291—2
Central Statistical Office 57
Ceramics 274
Channel Islands 4
historical outline 4
Charities 421
research sponsored by 421
Chemicals industry 270—3
Children 130-1, 148, 159-61,
168, 171, 185, 434, 466-7
child benefit 168
childcare 159—61
adoption 161
custodianship 161
children’s play 466-7
films for 434
health services for 148, 185
in trouble 130—1
Churches 227-31, 232
Anglican Communion 229
co-operation among 232
England, Church of 228—9
Free Churches 229—30
non-Christian religious
communities 231—2
Roman Catholic Church 231
Scotland, Church of 229
City Action Teams 200
City Grant 201
Civil aviation 345—9
air traffic 345—6
airports 347—9
development 348—9
ownership and control 347—8
Authority 345
government responsibilities 345
helicopters 347
navigation services 347
safety 347
structure of airline industry 346
British Airways 346
traffic control 347
Civil defence 109—10
Civil engineering 286—7
overseas consultancy 287
Civil Service 59—63
central management 61—2
conditions of service 63—4
Diplomatic Service 62
political and private activities 63
promotion 63
recruitment and training 62-3
security 63—4
structure 61—2
Clothing industry 283-4
Coal 257, 303-5
British Coal Corporation 303
consumption 305
development 303—5
European Coal and Steel
Community 257
industry 303—5
production 303
research 305
Commission for Racial
Equality 31—2
Commodity, shipping and freight
markets 396—7
Commons, House of
see Parliament
Commonwealth 54, 84—8
consultation 85—8
dependencies 87—8
Foreign and. Office 54
organisations 87
Secretariat 86
technical co-operation 86
Communications see Post Office and
Telecommunications
Companies 250, 261—2, 294, 379, 394
advertising 292
company law 261—2
computer services 292
corporation tax 379
factoring 394
management consultancy 292
market research 292—3
small firms 250
Competition policy 135, 257—60
anti-competitive practices 259
European Community policy 259
financial services 259
monopolies and mergers 258—9
Restrictive Practices Court 135
restrictive trade practices 259—60
Comptroller and Auditor
General 376-7
Computers 182, 292
in schools 182
services 292
Confederation of British
Industry 366
Conference centres 293
488
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Conservation 213—18, 324—5, 422,
466
agriculture and protection of
countryside 324—5
ancient monuments 213—14
architectural standards 199
areas 213—14
areas of outstanding natural
beauty 216
coastal 215
Countryside Commissions 215—16,
466
derelict land, reclamation 204
environmental improvement 218
green belts 215
historic buildings 213—14
national parks 216
national scenic areas 216
nature conservation 217—18
open country 216—17
public rights of way 216-17
registers of unused and under-used
land 204
tree preservation 214r-15
World Heritage Sites 218
zoological gardens 422
Construction industry 285-7
civil engineering projects 286—7
housing construction 286
overseas construction 287
research and advisory services 287
structure 286
Consumer protection 260-1
consumer advice and information 261
Copyright, authors’ 438
Coroners’courts 124
Council for National Academic
Awards 189
Countryside Commissions 215-16,
466
Courts 58, 119-24, 133-6
civil 133-6
coroners’ 124
criminal 119-24
grant of bail by 119—24
Restrictive Practices Court 135
Scottish Courts Administration 58
Crafts 437
Crime 111-32, 138-9
criminal courts 119-24
appeals 121-2
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 113—14
criminal justice 111-32
criminal proceedings, aid in 138-9
criminals, treatment of 124—32
prevention 113
statistics 112-13
Crown Office 59
Crown Prosecution Service 55
Crown, The
see Monarchy and Royal family
Cultural and social life 10-11, 12-13,
15-16, 19-20
HM Customs and Excise 55, 381-2
duties 381—2
D 
Dance 430, 431—2
dance and mime companies 432
training 432
Defence 55, 101—10, 413-14
armed forces 104—5
Army 106
civil 109-10
combat forces 105—6
commitments outside NATO area
103-4
contribution to NATO 102-3
Europe and NATO 103
finance 107
military balance in Europe 101
Ministry of 55
NATO co-operation 109
NATO strategy 101—2
Northern Ireland 104
organisation and management
107-8
overseas commitments 103—4
personnel 104—5
procurement 108—9
production 109
research and development 108,
413-14
reserve and auxiliary forces 105
Royal Air Force 107
Royal Navy 105—6
sales 109
Strategic Defence Initiative 108
strategic nuclear forces 105
see also North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Dependencies 87-8
Deposit-taking institutions 387—91
Design 252-3, 437
industrial 252—3
training in 437
Development see Economy
INDEX
489
and Regional development
Diplomatic Service 62
Disabled people 157—8, 168—9, 361,
467
benefits and pensions 168—9
employment services for 361
social services for 157—8
sport for 467
Discount houses 390
Divorce 22—3
Drama 429—30
amateur theatre 430
professional theatre 429
training 430
young people, theatre for 430
Drugs 149—50, 464
drug abuse in sport 464
E 
East—West relations 81, 88-9
Berlin 90
CSCE 89-90
Economy 7—10, 11, 14—15, 19—20,
26-32, 59, 233—41, 243-5
background 233—7
economic growth 234
employment 235
innation and competitiveness 234
investment 235
oil, offshore 236—7
output, industrial 234—5
productivity 235, 244
trade 235—6
economic and social pattern 26—32
Economic Development, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 59
government policy 237—9
economic management 238—9
exchange rate 237
fiscal policy 237—8
monetary policy 237
supply side policies 238
national income and
expenditure 239—41
see also Balance of payments.
Industry, Public finance, and
Trade, overseas
Education 55, 58, 59, 129, 154,
173-96, 252, 415-16, 420-1, 430,
432, 437, 459
administration 176
adult and continuing 191—2
aids in 185
and Science, Department of 55,
415-16
art and design 437
Business and Technician Education
Council 190
careers education and guidance
185
Council for National Academic
Awards 189
curriculum 180—2
dance 432
Department of (Northern Ireland) 59
drama 430
educational broadcasting 459
English (as foreign language)
teaching 194
examinations, secondary school
183-4
examining bodies 189—90
film production 434
finance 176—7
health 154
industry links, and 175—6
information technology in schools 182
management development 248-9
music 432
Open University 188—9
overseas links 192—5
English (as foreign language)
teaching 194
exchanges 194—5
overseas students in Britain
193—4
policies 173—6
polytechnics 189
post-school 185—92
prison, education in 129
records of achievement 184
reforms 174—5
religious 183
research on 192
schoolchildren, health and welfare
185
schools 177—80
Scottish Education Department 58
special educational needs 180
standards of 184—5
students 187, 193
teacher training 190-1
teachers 180, 190—1, 192
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 182
universities 187—8, 415—16
Vocational Qualifications, National
Council for 189
490
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
youth service 195—6
see also Students, Training and
Universities
Elderly people 157, 165—7
retirement pension 165—7
social services for 157
Elections 39—40, 65—6
local government 65—6
parliamentary 39-^40
Electrical engineering 274—6
Electricity supply industry 305— 11
consumption 306
generation 306—8
nuclear energy 308—10
research 310—11
structure 305—6
Electronic engineering 274—6
Employers’ organisations 366—7
Confederation of British Industry
366-7
Employment 55, 78, 169, 235,
355-372
additional benefits 367—8
conditions of 367—8
Department of 55
earnings 367
employee share schemes 367
Employment Training 358—9
equal opportunities 369
European Community policies 79
health in 370—2
holidays 368
industrial relations 362—5
law 365-6, 368-9, 369-70, 371-2
pattern of 355
safety in 370—2
services 361—2
sickness benefit 168—9
trade unions 363—5
training services 356-61
business growth 359
Enterprise Allowance Scheme 359
National Training Task Force 358
Training and Enterprise Councils
358
Youth 359
trends 235
unemployment 169, 355—6
work, hours of 368, 355—6
see also individual industries,
Employers’ organisations. Industrial
relations, Trade unions and
U nemploymen t
Energy 55, 295—316
coal 303—5
consumption 296, 300, 301—2, 305,
306
Department of 55
efficiency 296—7
electricity 305—11
gas 300-3
natural resources, 295—316
Offshore Supplies Office 297
oil 297-300
policy 295—6
renewable sources 311—12
see also Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Gas, Nuclear energy and
Petroleum
Engineering 249, 274-7, 277-8, 279,
286-7, 417
civil engineering proiects 286—7
Council 249
electrical 274—7
electronic 274—7
instrument 274—7
marine 279
mechanical 277—8
Science and Engineering Research
Council 417
see also individual industries
England 1-2, 5-11, 120, 121-2,
130-1, 133, 136-7, 228-9, 314-15,
446
Church of 228—9
civil courts 133
appeals 133
criminal courts 120, 121—2
appeals 121—2
criminal prosecutions 120
cultural and social life 10-11
economy 7—11
government 7
historical outline 2—3
law, government responsibility in
administration of 136—7
regional newspapers 446
water resources 314—15
young offenders, treatment of 130-1,
132
Enterprise Initiative 201, 249—50
Enterprise zones 201
Environment 26—7, 55, 60, 79—80,
213-27, 324-5, 419, 466
agriculture and protection of
countryside 324—5
air, control of pollution of 223-6
architecture 199
coast 215
conservation 213—18
INDEX
491
Countryside Commissions 215—16,
466
Department of 55
Department of (Northern Ireland) 60
environmental improvement 218
European Community policies 79—80
green belts 215
housing 26—7, 206—12
land 204, 220
Natural Environment Research
Council 419
nature protection 217—18
noise 226
open country 216—17
pollution control 218-26
public rights of way 216—17
radioactive waste disposal 226
radioactivity 226
recycling and materials reclamation
220
research 226
sea, control of pollution in 222—3
trees and woodland 214—15
water quality 221—2
See also Planning, Housing, Urban
Regeneration
Equal opportunities 30, 369
Ethnic minorities 30—1,369,
428, 447
arts of 428
employment 369
publications 447
see a/so Race relations
European Community 75—84, 156,
172, 256-7, 259, 322-3,
328-9, 392, 404-5
Common Agricultural Policy 322—3
competition policy 259
European Coal and Steel Community
257
European Investment Bank 257
European Regional Development Fund
256
finance 77
fisheries policy 328—9
health arrangements 156
institutions 76—7
insurance, directives 392
interned policies 78—81, 156, 172,259
agriculture 80
employment 79
environment 79—80
fisheries 80—1
industry 78—89
monetary 78
single market 78
transport 78
political co-operation 81-4
Afghanistan 82
aid 83-4
Central America 82
East—West relations 81
Middle East 81-2
South Africa 82
terrorism and crime 82—3
trade 83, 404—5
regional policy and aid 256—7
social security 172
trade policy 83, 404—5
Exchange 396
foreign exchange market 396
Excise duties
see Taxation and duty
Exhibition and conference
centres 293
Expenditure 239-41, 374-7, 381-2
personal 240—1
public 239, 241,374-7
taxes on 381—2
see also Public expenditure
Exports 55, 405, 406
controls 405
credit insurance 405
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department) 55, 406
see also individual industries
and Trade, overseas
F 
Factoring companies 394
FamiUes 144, 159, 171
family credit 171
health services for 144
social services for 159
Family planning 149
Farming see Agriculture
Films 293, 432-4
British Film Institute 433—4
children’s 434
cinema licensing 434
film classification 434
government support 433
industry 293
training in production of 434
videos 434
Finance and Personnel, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 60
492
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Financial institutions 207-8, 257,
385-97
Bank of England 386—7
British overseas banks 390
building societies 257, 290-1
commodity, shipping and freight
markets 296—7
deposit-taking institutions 387—91
discount houses 390
euromarkets 395—6
European Investment Bank 257
factoring companies 394
finance houses 393
financial futures 396
financial markets 394—6
financial services 259, 385—6
supervision 385—6
foreign exchange market 396
insurance companies 393
investing institutions 391—3
investment and unit trusts 393
leasing companies 393—4
London gold market 396
merchant banks 389
money markets 395
National Savings Bank 391
overseas banks 389-90
pension funds 392—3
retail banks 387—9
assets 388
branches and accounts 388
deposits 388
payment systems and services
388-9
securities markets 395
Stock Exchange, International 394-5
venture capital companies 394
see also Insurance
Fire services 71—2
fire casualties 72
fire losses 72
fire prevention 71-2
research 72
special services 72
Fisheries 327—9
administration 328
European Community policy 328-9
farming 328
fleets 328
freshwater 329
landings 327
limits 328
research 329
Food 154, 155, 281-3, 318-21,
321-2,326-7,419-20
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 326-7, 419-20
exports 321—2
home production 318-21
industries 281—3
irradiation 321
marketing 322
research 326-7, 419-20
safety of 155
Footwear industry 283-4
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
55
Forestry 329-30
Commission 330
Northern Ireland 330
policy 330
replanting 330
research 330
Freight services 334-5, 339-40,
343-4, 344, 346
Fuel see Coal, Electricity supply
industry, Energy, Gas, Nuclear
energy and Petroleum
G 
Gambling 479
Gas 55, 297,
Office of Gas Supply 55, 297, 300-3
offshore 297, 300-3
consumption 301—3
production 301
research 303
structure 300—3
transmission and storage 301
Government 7, 11, 13-14, 16-18,
33-72
advisory bodies 53—4
Cabinet 51
meetings 51
Office 51
composition 48—9
departmental ministers 50
junior ministers 50
Lord Chancellor and Law Officers
50
Ministers of State 50
non-departmental ministers 50
Prime Minister 49—50
departments of 52—60
functions 54—60
information services 54
see also Civil Service, Local
government. Ministers, Monarchy,
INDEX
493
Parliament, Public expenditure and
Public finance
Great Britain see Britain, England,
Scotland and Wales
Green belts 215
H 
Handicapped people
see Disabled people
Health 55, 58, 60, 129, 141-56, 154,
370-2,418
AIDS 152-3
and Safety Commission 371
and Safety Executive 371—2
and Social Services, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 60
arrangements with other countries
156
centres 145
Department of 54
diet and 154
district nurses 144
education 154
employment, health in 370-2
environmental 154—5
family practitioner services 144
group practices 145
infectious diseases, control of 153
midwives 144
National Health Service 141—56
administration 142—3
finance 143—4
health service commissioners 143
hospitals and specialist services
145—55
primary health care 144—5
specialist services 145—55
organ transplants 146
parents and children 148
primary health care 144—5
prisoners, health services for 129
private medical treatment 146
professions 155—6
rehabilitation 147
research 155, 418
safety of medicines 155
schoolchildren, health services for 185
Scottish Home and Health
Department 58
smoking and 150-1
visitors 144
see also Safety
Health and Safety Commission 371
Health and Safety Executive 371-2
Historic buildings 213—14
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of
Pollution 220
Home and Health Department,
Scottish 58
Home Office 55
Horticulture 320
Hospices 147—8
Hospitals 145—55
and specialist services 145—55
rehabilitation 147
Hotels and catering 291—2
House of Commons 39
see also Parliament
House of Lords 38—9
see also Parliament
Housing 26-7, 169-71, 206-12, 286,
390-1
administration 207
associations 210
benefit 169—71
building societies 207—8, 390—1
construction 286
home ownership 207—8
mortgage loans 207—8
improvements 210—11
privately rented 209
public sector 208—9
Human fertilisation and embryology
148-9
Human rights 18-19, 93—4
I 
Immigration 25—6
Imports 405
controls 405
see also Trade, overseas
Income 36, 169, 239-41, 367, 368,
378-9
Manpower Economics, Office of 368
national, and expenditure 239—41
personal, and expenditure 240-1
royal 36
sources of 241, 367
support 169
taxes on 378—9
Independent Broadcasting Authority
455-6
programme companies 455—6
Industrial relations 362—5, 365—6,
370
494
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration
Service 370
Central Arbitration Committee 370
collective bargaining 362
joint consultation 362
legislation 365—6
Manpower Economics, Office of 368
trade unions 363—5
wages councils 368
Industry 57, 58, 59, 78-9, 129,
234-5, 241, 243-65, 267-94, 414-
15,421,448
British Technology Group 265
construction industry, 285—7
Department for Scotland 58
deregulation 250—1
design 252—3
development agencies 256
Economic Development, Department
of (Northern Ireland) 59
European Community and 78—9,
256-7
government policies for 248-9,
249-57
gross domestic product, by industry
241
industrial and intellectual property,
protection of 262
industrial associations 247
industrial awards 254
industrial design 253
industrial financing 247—8
industrial output 234
industrial performance 243-5
innovation, research and 262-5
investment in 235, 244—5, 247-8
management development and
industrial training 248—9
manufacturing 267-85
nationalised industries 246-7
organisation 245—9
prison industries 129
privatisation 251
productivity 235
profitability 244
quality and standards 253
regional development 254-7
research and innovation 262-5,
414-5,421
rural industries 256
science parks 421
service industries 287-94
small firms 250
technical and vocational training 252
technological advance 269-70, 448
Trade and. Department of 57,
414-15
see also individual industries.
Employment, European
Community and Research
and development
Inflation 234
Information, Central Office of 56
Inland Revenue, Board of 56
see also Taxation and duty
Inner cities see Urban Regeneration
Inspectorate of Pollution, Her
Majesty’s 220
Instrument engineering 274-5
Insurance industry 391-2
brokers 392
companies 391—2
European Community directives 392
Lloyd’s 392
International Stock Exchange
see Stock Exchange, International
Investment 235, 244-5, 247-8,
257, 391-3, 408-9
European Investment Bank 257
in industry 235, 244—5, 247—8
investing institutions 391—3
insurance companies 391—2
pension funds 392—3
unit trusts 393
overseas 408—9
Invisible trade 402—4
see also Trade, overseas
Ireland: historical outline 3—4
Iron and steel 257, 273
European Coal and Steel Community
257
products 273
Isle of Man 4
historical outline 4
J 
Jewry 231
Judges 137
Justice 111-36
and the law 111—39
civil 132—6
criminal 111—32
Crown Prosecution Service 55
L 
Land 1-32, 204, 220, 317
and people 1—32
pollution control 220
INDEX
495
reclamation 204
registers of unused and under-used
land 204
use 204, 317
Law 43-5, 50, 56, 111-39, 261-2,
324, 365-6, 369, 452
administration of the 136—9
agricultural holdings 324
centres 139
civil courts 132—6
appeals 133
civil justice 132—6
civil proceedings 134—5
legal aid 138
company 261—2
coroners’courts 124
criminal courts 119—24
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Scheme 113—14
criminal justice 111—32
criminal trials 123
jury 123—4
legal aid 138—9
employment 365—6, 369
government responsibilities,
in administration of 136
judges 137
legal aid, advice and assistance
138-9
legal profession 137—8
legislative proceedings,
parliamentary 43—5
delegated legislation 45
Officers 50
Officers’ Department 56
press, legal requirements 452
prosecution 119—20
reform 139
terrorism, measures to combat
114-15
trade unions, legal framework 365—6
Learned societies 422—3
Leasing companies 393—4
Leather industry 283-4
Legal profession 137—8
Leisure trends 32
Libraries 54, 438—40
Arts and, Office of 54
public 440
special 440
university 440
Life, expectation of 22
Literature 438—40
literary and philological societies
438-9
Living standards 27—9
Lloyd’s insurance market 392
Local government 64—72, 208—9
authorities, types of 64—5
complaints system 70—1
elections 65—6
finance 68—70
capital expenditure 69
comm uni ty charge 70
control of 70
current expenditure 67—8, 68—9
loans 70
new arrangements 70
rates 69-70
functions and services 66—7
housing 208—9
internal organisation 67
officers and employees 68
public access 67
London 392, 394—5, 396
Financial Futures Exchange,
International 396
gold market 396
Lloyd’s insurance market 392
Stock Exchange, International 394—5
Lord Advocate’s Department 59
Lord Chancellor’s Department 56
Lords, House of
see Parliament
Lorries 334—5
M 
Management consultancy 292
Man-made fibres 270-3
Manpower Economics, Office of 368
Manufacturing 267—87
advanced technology, take-up 269—70
growth 267—9
high-technology industries 269
industries 267—70
structure 267
Marine engineering 279
Market research 292—3
Marriage 22—3
Mechanical engineering 277-8
Medicine and medical equipment
155,418-19
medical research 155
Medical Research Council 418—19
safety of medicines 155
Mental health services 129, 158-9
Merchant banks 389
Mercury 351—2
496
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
see also Telecommunications
Metal manufacture 273—4, 277—8
iron and steel 273—4
metal products 277—8
non-ferrous metals 273—4
Migration 24
Minerals 273—4, 312—14
mineral products 273—4
non-fuel 312—14
exploration 312
production 312—14
Mines and quarries 303—5
coal 303—5
research 305
see also Coal
Ministers 49—52
departmental 50
junior 50
Lord Chancellor and Law Officers 50
ministerial responsibility 52
ministerial salaries 51
non-departmental 50
of State 50
Prime Minister 49—50
Monarchy 33—6
accession 34—5
acts of government 35—6
ceremonial 36
coronation 33—5
royal income and expenditure 36
royal visits 36
succession 34—5
Monopolies and mergers 258-9
see also Competition policy
Motor vehicles 278-9, 291, 382
car tax 382
industry 278-9
retail distribution 291
Museums and galleries 423, 435—7
Museums Association 435-6
national and other collections
436-7
scientific museums 423
Music 430-1, 432
choirs 431
jazz 431
orchestral and choral 430-1
pop and rock 431
training in 432
N 
National Council for Vocational
Qualifications 189
National Health Service 141—56
see also Health
National income 239—41
gross domestic product, by industry
241
National Insurance 165—9
benefits and allowances 165—9
contributions 165, 382
National parks 216—7
National Playing Fields Association
467
National Savings Bank 391
Nationalised industries 246—7
see also individual industries
Nationality 24—5
NATO
see North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
Natural Environment Research
Council 419
Natural resources 295—316
Navy
see Royal Navy
Net public sector debt 384
New towns 199
News agencies 449-50
Newspapers 443—7
see also Press
Non-departmental public bodies 53
North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation 101—3, 109
Britain’s contribution 102—3
co-operation 109
Europe and 103
strategy 101—2
Northern Ireland 16—21, 59—60, 104,
114-15, 120, 122, 127-8, 132, 134,
206, 254, 316, 330, 362, 364, 446-7
civil courts 134
criminal courts 120, 122
cultural and social life 20—1
defence 104
economy 19—20
employment, health and safety in 364
forestry 330
government 16—19
Anglo-Irish Agreemen 117—18
background to civil disturbances
16
direct rule and political initiatives
16-17
human rights and security policy
18-19
government departments 59-60
Agriculture 59
INDEX
497
Economic Development 59
Education 59
Environment 60
Finance and Personnel 60
Health and Social Services 60
industrial development
measures 254
inner cities policy 206
law, government responsibility
in administration of 137
press 446—7
terrorism, measures to combat
114-15
trade unions 364—5
water resources 316
young offenders, treatment of 132
Nuclear energy 308-11
British Nuclear Fuels 309
emergency plans 310
nuclear power programme 308—9
research 309—10
safety 310
Nuclear weapons 90-1, 105
o 
Offenders, treatment of 124—32
children 130—2
custody 124—5
non-custodial treatment 125-7
compensation and reparation 126
community service 126
fines 125
probation 125—6
suspended sentences 126
prisons 127—30
sentencing 124
young adult offenders 132
Offshore Supplies Office 297
Oil
see Petroleum
Old people
see Elderly people
Open University 188-9
Opera 430-1,432
training 432
Ordnance Survey 56
Overseas Development
Administration 56
Overseas relations 73—100
administration 73—4
British Council 74—5, 428
Commonwealth 55, 84—8
development co-operation 95—100
international organisations,
membership of 85, 94—5
international peace and security
88-92
United Nations 92—4
see also European Community
P  
Parliament 37—48, 56, 376—7, 460—1
broadcasting of proceedings 460-1
functions 37
House of Commons 39
House of Lords 38—9
legislative proceedings 43—5
delegated legislation 45
meeting of 37—8
parliamentary committees 45-7
joint committees 46
of the whole House 45
party committees 46—7
select committees 46, 376—7
standing committees 45—6
parliamentary control 47—8
Parliamen tary Commissioner
for Administration 48
Parliamentary Counsel 56
parliamentary electoral system 39—40
parliamentary privilege 48
parliamentary procedure 42—3
political party system 40—1
Parliamentary Counsel 56
Patents 262
Paymaster General’s Office 56
Pension funds 392—3
Pensions 165—7, 168, 171—2
retirement 165—7
war 171—2
widows’ 168
Periodicals 447-8
Petroleum 236, 291, 297-300, 379
consumption 300
land-based oilfields 299
North Sea fields 297—9
offshore 236, 297-9
effect on economy 236
offshore supplies 297
oilfields 297—9
petrol retail trade 291
pipelines 300
refineries 299—300
research 300
revenue tax 379
structure of industry 299
498
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
trade 300
Planning 197—9, 201, 204
development plans 197—8
enterprise zones 201
land registers 204
major schemes 199
new towns 199
public participation 198
simplified planning zones 204
see also Housing, Urban
Regeneration
Police 115-19
authorities and chief constables
115-16
central authorities 116
charging 118—19
common services 117
detention, treatment and questioning
117-18
in Scotland 119
forces 115
grant of bail 119
powers of arrest 117
status and duties 116—17
Political parties 40—2, 460—1
broadcasts 460-1
party system 40-2
Pollution control 218-26
administration 219
air 223-6
acid rain 223—4
chlorofluorocarbons 224—5
climate change 225
nitrogen oxide 224
ozone layer 224—5
sulphur dioxide 223—4
vehicle emissions 224
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate 219—20
land 220
marine 222—3
noise 225—6
radioactive waste disposal 226
radioactivity 226
recycling and reclamation 220
water 220—2
Polytechnics 189
Population 21—5, 30-2, 56
age distribution 23
birth rates 21—2
Censuses and Surveys, Office of 56
distribution 23—4
divorce rates 22—3
ethnic minorities 30-2
immigration 25
marriage rates 22-3
migration 24
mortality, causes of 22
nationality 24—5
sex ratio 23
Ports 341-3
development 343
traffic 342—3
Postal services 353
specialist services 353
Power stations 306-8
Press 443—52
advertising practice 451—2
Council 451
England 446
ethnic minority publications 447
free distribution newspapers 447
institutions 450-1
journalism, training for 450
legal requirements 452
national 444—5
new technology 448
news agencies 449—50
newspapers 443—7
Northern Ireland 446—7
ownership 443—4
periodical 447—8
regional 446—7
Scotland 446
Wales 446
Prime Minister 49-50
Printing and publishing 440-1,448
newspapers, new technology 448
Prisons and prisoners 127—30
discharge and after-care 130
education 129
industries 129
life licence 128
medical service 129
parole 128
privileges and discipline 129
psychological service 129
remission of sentence 127
repatriation 128
welfare 130
Privy Council 48-9
committees 49
Probation 125-6
Procurator General 56
Public expenditure 239, 374—7
audit and examination of 376—7
Comptroller and Auditor General
376-7
Public Accounts Committee 377
cash limits 376
central government financial funds 377
INDEX
499
Estimates 376
reserve 375—6
Public finance 239-41, 373-84
Budget 377-8
government planning 373—4
planning cycle 373—4
public expenditure 239, 374—7
public sector finance 383—4
revenue, sources of 378—83
see also Balance of payments,
Public expenditure and
Taxation and duty
Public sector finance 383—4
net public sector debt 384
Publishing 438, 440, 448-9
authors’ copyright 438
books 440
printing and publishing
industries 440, 448—9
9 
‘Quangos’ 53-4
R 
Race relations 30—2, 369
Commission for Racial Equality 31—2
employment, equal opportunities in
369
Race Relations Act 31
Radio 458-9, 459-60
BBC World Service 459—60
COI Overseas Radio Services 460
see also Broadcasting
Railways 336—41
British Rail’s subsidiary activities 337
Channel Tunnel 340-1
freight 339-40
operations 337
passenger services 337—9
private 340
urban 340
Rates 69—70
Recreation see Sport
Refineries
see Petroleum
Regional development 58, 254—7
assisted areas and related measures
254
development agencies 256
European Community policy and aid
256
European Regional Development
Fund 256
Northern Ireland 254
rural industries 256
Scottish Development Department 58
Religions 227-32
Churches 228—31, 232
co-operation among the churches 232
. Jewry 231
non-Christian religious communities
231-2
Renewable sources of energy 311—12
Research and development 72, 108,
155, 192, 226, 263-5, 287, 300, 303,
305, 309-10, 310-11,316, 326, 329,
330,411-24,461
Agricultural and Food Research
Council 326
broadcasting 461
charitable foundations 421
coal industry 305
construction 287
defence 108
educational 192
electricity supply industry 309—10,
310-11
environmental 226
expenditure 411
fire prevention 72
fisheries 329
food 326
forestry 330
gas supply and use 303
government responsibilities 412—3
industrial 263—5
medical 155
Medical Research Council 418-19
Natural Environment Research
Council 419
nuclear energy 309—10
petroleum technology 300
professional institutions 421—2
Research Councils 417—20
Advisory Board for the 416
Science and Engineering Research
Council 417
astronomy 418
engineering 418
nuclear physics 417—18
space 424
university 420—1
water industry 316
Restrictive Practices Court 135
Retail trades 289—92
hotels and catering 291-2
500
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
trends 290-1
diversification 290
promotions 291
shopping centres 290
technology, use of 291
vehicle and petrol retailing 291
Roads 331-6
developments 332
government responsibilities 332—3
haulage 334—5
international 335
licensing 335
structure of industry 335—6
passenger services on 335—6
safety 333—4
traffic in towns 334
Royal Air Force 107
see also Defence
Royal family see Monarchy
Royal Navy 105—6
see also Defence
Royal Society 422
s 
Safety 71-2, 155, 226, 333-4, 344-5,
347, 370-2
civil aviation 347
employment, safety in 370-2
Northern Ireland 372
fire services 71—2
food, safety of 155
Health and Safety Commission 371
Health and Safety Executive 371-2
medicines, safety of 155
nuclear industry 310
radioactive waste disposal 226
radioactivity 226
roads 333—4
sea, safety at 344—5
Schools 177-85, 430, 432, 434
British School Technology 182-3
careers education and guidance
185
curriculum 180-2
dance schools 432
drama schools 430
educational aids 185
educational standards 185
examinations 183-4
film schools 434
health and welfare in 185
information technology 182
independent 179-80
management of 177—8
nursery 178—9
primary 178—9
records of achievement 184
religious education and collective
worship in 183
secondary 179
special educational needs 180
teachers 180
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 182
see also Education
Science and technology 55, 262-5,
269-70, 291,411-24, 448
Advisory Board for the Research
Councils 416
astronomy 418
botanical gardens 422
British Technology Group 265
Education and Science, Department
of 55, 415-16
government responsibilities 412—13
international co-operation 423—4
learned societies 422—3
newspaper production, new
technology in 448
nuclear physics 417—18
professional institutions 421-2
promotion of 411—24
research and innovation, industrial
262-5
Research Councils 417—20
retail trades, use of technology in 291
Royal Society 422
Science and Engineering Research
Council 417
science parks 421
scientific museums 423
space technology 424
technology and industry 263—4,
269-70, 448
zoological gardens 422
see also Research and development
and Universities
Scotland 3, 13-16, 119, 120,
122, 131-2, 133-4, 137, 205, 216,
219, 229, 315-16, 364-5, 446
Church of 229
civil courts 133—4
criminal courts 119, 120
cultural and social life 15-16
economy 14—15
government 13-14
government departments 57-9
Agriculture and Fisheries 58
INDEX
501
Central Services 58
Crown Office 59
Development 58
Education 58
Home and Health 58
Industry 58
Lord Advocate’s 59
Scottish Courts Administration 59
historical outline 3
inner cities policy 205
law, government responsibility
in administration of 137
national scenic areas 216
police 119
press 446
trade unions 364—5
water resources 315—16
young offenders, treatment of 131-2
Sea 222-3, 344-5
marine pollution, control of 222-3
safety at 344—5
transport 343—5
Serious Fraud Office 56
Service industries 287—94
advertising 292
auction houses 293
business services 292—3
computing services 292
distribution 288
exhibition and conference centres 293
film and TV 293
hotel and catering 291—2
management consultancy 292
market research 292—3
petrol retailing 291
retail trades 289—92
tourism 294
vehicle retailing 291
wholesale trades 288—9
Shipbuilding and marine engineering
279
Shipping 341-3, 343-45, 396-7
cargo services 343—4
commodity, shipping and freight
markets 396—7
merchant shipping legislation 344
passenger services 344
ports 341—3
safety 344—5
Simplified planning zones 204
Small firms 250
Smoking 150-1
Social fife 10-11, 12-13, 15-16,
20-1
Social security 56, 164—72
arrangements with other countries
172
benefits 165—69, 169—71
contributions 165
Department of 56
family credit 171
housing benefit 169—71
income support 169
National Insurance 165—9
reform 164—5
taxation 171—2
war pensions 171
see also Children, Disabled people,
Employment, Health, Housing,
National Insurance, Pensions and
Women
Social services 60, 156—63
Health and, Department of
(Northern Ireland) 60
personal 156—61
children 159—60
disabled people 157—9
elderly 157
families 159
mentally ill people 158—9
people with mental handicaps 158
social workers 161
voluntary 161—3
Social welfare 141-72
see also Health, Social security.
Social services and Voluntary social
services
Solvent abuse 150
Space activities 424
Sport 463-79
British Olympic Association 466
children’s play 466—7
Countryside Commissions 466
disabled people, sport for 467
drug misuse in 464
facilities, provision of 468—9
gambling 479
Gleneagles agreement 465
National Playing Fields Association
467
organisation and promotion 465-8
popular sports 469—79
angling 470
association football 470
athletics 470—1
badminton 471
basketball 471
billiards and snooker 471—2
bowls 472
boxing 472
502
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
chess 472—3
cricket 473
curling 473
cycling 473-4
darts 474
field sports 474
golf 474
Highland Games 471
hockey 474—5
horse racing 476
ice skating 475
judo 475
lawn tennis 479
motor sports 475—6
mountaineering and rock climbing
476
racing 476
riding 476—7
rowing 477
rugby football 477-8
sailing 478
skiing 478
snooker 471—2
soccer 470
squash rackets 478
sub-aqua 478
swimming 479
tenpin bowling 479
tennis 479
private sponsorship 468
spectator violence 464
sports centres 469
Sports Councils 465—6
Standards 253-4
measurement 253—4
quality and 253-4
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 57
Steel see Iron and steel
Stock Exchange, International 394-5
Students 187, 193
overseas, in Britain 193
T 
Tariffs and Trade, General
Agreement on 404
Taxation and duty 171, 378—82
capital gains tax 381
car tax 382
corporation tax 379
customs duties 381
excise duties 381—2
income tax 378-9
inheritance tax 379—80
petroleum revenue tax 379
social security benefits and 171
stamp duty 382
value added tax 381
Teachers 180, 190-1, 192
teaching methods 192
training 190—1
Technology
see Science and technology
Telecommunications 57, 349—53
British Telecom 349—51
general services 350-1
international services 351
network modernisation 350
Cable and Wireless 352
Mercury 351—2
mobile communications 352
Office of 57, 349
Television 293, 456—8
cable 457—8
industry 293
satellite television 458
see also Broadcasting
Terrorism 82—3,114—15
Textiles 270-3, 283-4
industries 283—4
man-made fibres 270—3
Theatre see Drama
Tobacco industry 281—3
Tourism 294
Trade, overseas 57, 83, 235-6, 300,
399-409
and Industry, Department of 57
balance of payments 406—9
commodity composition 399-401
controls on 405
ECGD (Export Credits Guarantee
Department) 406
European Community policy 83
export promotion services 406
General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade 404
geographical distribution 401—2
government services 405—6
invisible 402—4
oil 300
policy 404—5
single European market 404
trends 235—6
visible 399—402
see also Balance of payments,
European Community, Exports,
Imports and Visible trade
Trade unions 363-6
legal framework 365—6
INDEX
503
Northern Ireland 364—5
Scotland 364—5
Trades Union Congress 364
see cdso Industrial legislation
Training 62, 182, 190-1, 248-9,
356-61, 430, 432, 434, 437, 450
Agency 357
Business Growth 359
Civil Service 62
dance 432
dramatic 430
Employment Training 358—9
Enterprise Councils, and 358
film production 434
journalism 450
musical 432
National Task Force 358
operatic 432
services 356—61
teachers 190—1
technical and vocational 248—9
Technical and Vocational Education
Initiative 182
visual arts and design 437
vocational qualifications 356—60
youth 359
Transplant surgery 146
Transport 57, 78, 278-9, 279-81
331-49
air 345—9
bus services 335—6
Channel Tunnel 340—1
Department of 57
equipment manufacturing 278-9,
279-81
European Community policies 78
Eurotunnel Services 341
inland 311—41
merchant shipping legislation 344
passenger services 335—6, 337—9, 344
policy 345
ports 341—3
railways 336—41
urban 340
roads 331—6
haulage 334—5
safety measures 333—2, 344—5, 347
shipping 343—5
taxis 336
traffic in towns 334
waterways, inland 341
see also Civil aviation, Waterways,
inland, Ports, Railways, Roads,
and Shipping
Travel see Tourism
HM Treasury 57
Solicitor’s Department 56
u 
Ulster see Northern Ireland
Unemployment 169, 355—6, 356—61,
362
benefit 169
careers service 362
employment services 361
Enterprise Allowance Scheme 359
incentives to work 361—2
Jobclubs 361
Restart Programme 359
services for people with disabilities
361
Unit trusts 393
United Nations 92—4
economic and social affairs 94
human rights 93—4
international peace and security 93
Universities 187—9, 420—1, 440
libraries 440
Open University 188—9
research 420—1
Urban Development Corporations
201
Urban Programme 200
Urban Regeneration 199—206
City Action Teams 200
City Grant 201
Enterprise Initiative 201
Garden Festivals 204
Northern Ireland 206
Scotland 205
Task Forces 200-1
Urban Development Corporations 201
Urban Programme 200
see also Planning, Housing
V 
Venture capital companies 394
Visible trade 399—402
commodity composition 399—401
geographical distribution 401—2
see also Trade, overseas
Visual arts 434—8
crafts 437
museums and art galleries 435—7
training in 437
504
BRITAIN 1990: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary social services 161—3,
195-6
organisations 162—3
young people 196
youth services 195—6
w 
Wages councils 368
Wales 2-3, 11-13,57, 120, 121,
130-1, 133, 136, 205-6, 314-15, 446
civil courts 133
criminal courts 120, 121
criminal prosecutions 120
cultural and social life 12—13
economy 11—12
government 11
historical outline 2—3
urban regeneration policy 205—6
law, government responsibility in
administration of 136
press 446
water resources 314—15
Welsh Office 57
young offenders, treatment of 130—1
War pensions 171-2
Water resources 221—2, 314—16
development projects 316
England and Wales 314—15
water and sewage companies 315
supplies 315
Northern Ireland 316
pollution control 221—2
research 316
Scotland 315—16
Waterways, inland 341
Welsh Office 57
Wholesale trades 288—9
Widows 168
Women 29-31, 153, 165-8,369-70
benefits and pensions 165—8
cancer screening 153
equal opportunities 29—31, 369—70
World Heritage Sites 218
Y 
Youth 132, 359, 430
theatre for 430
training services 359
young adult offenders 132
Youth service 195—6
organisations 196
voluntary service 196
workers 196
z 
Zoological gardens 422
Acknowledgments for photographs
National Trust for Scotland (between pp 70 and 71). Kim Taylor/Bruce Coleman
(facing p 135). British Petroleum (facing p 231). Philip Sayer (facing p 326).
Balfour- Beatty (between pp 326 and 327). Barnet Saidman (facing p 327).
Woodmansterne (between pp 454 and 455).
Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
Dd 290439 Cl00 12/89
Ullapool
Inverness
<le of Lochalsh
Sfdeen
:ort William
Perth
jrwick-upon-Tweed
lawick
ioleraii
Dumfrie!
fonderry
A6
allymena
iraer
Penrith
Darlingtr
Dungannon.
Worki
Enniskill
'Armagh#' M'2
Barrow-in-Furne:
Burnley
Blackpool
■W§h^ster #
jjiS* Sheffiel
Stoke
Shrew;
Leicesti
Birmindbai
Northan^to!
L6ton
Colchester
Oxfordl
. Swindj
Readii
,0atwick
Southampton
Plymoi
Motorways and major trunk roads
Motorways
under construction
proposed ihuihium
Other trunk roads
Note: Many existing motorways have
widening schemes in construction
or under preparation.
Shetland
Islands
Orkney
Islands
Thurso
^St Andrews
tie upon Tyne
ierland
Holyhe
arwich
Milford H
# Dover
blkestone
0
20 40 60 miles
Major conservation
and recreation areas
National Parks
Forest Parks
Areas of
Outstanding
Natural Beauty
(National Scenic
Areas in Scotland)
Heritage Coast
(Coastal Conservation
Zones in Scotland)
National Trails
World Heritage Sites
Way r*'* ^
C Yorkshire
\ Dales
Pennine f
\Way
Way
l Peak
District
Pembrokeshire
Coast
la's Dyke/ D
* Path l
I
rw A L E ss
ENGLAND
\
Peddars Way\ The
"BSS \BroadsJ
' (SeRia l
protested <
Brecon
Beacons
’ Pembrokeshire
‘'Y Coast Path
Ridgeway,
O /
Somerset and North Devon
Coast Path    
r I p
 Exmoor
□a
North Downs
Way^^.——
_ Dorset
Dartmoor Coast Path
__South Downs Way
.USouth Devon
Coast Path
0 20 40 60 80 100 km
20
40 60 miles
0
Now in its 41st edition, this well-known handbook
is prepared by the Central Office of Information
with the co-operation of other government depart¬
ments and many national organisations. Updated
every year to include all the latest facts and figures
on most aspects of our way of life, Britain 1990
looks at history, politics and law, economic and
social affairs, arts and sport. Illustrated with colour
plates, maps and diagrams, it’s an invaluable
source of information for visitors as well as a
useful reference work for residents.
£14.50 net
